<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa027)  [Next](psa029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

Psalm 28. The godly Jew pleads, in the time of trouble come on the
nation, that he may not be confounded with the wicked. If Jehovah did
not appear in his behalf, so much was he in the same distress with them,
death would drag him into its jaws. He looks for judgment on the wicked.
They slight Jehovah. Jehovah should reward their doings. The psalm
furnishes to the remnant not only the cry, but the prophetic witness
that Jehovah has heard it. The heart trusts in Jehovah, had found help,
and thus joy and praise. Then Messiah is fully joined with the
righteous. Jehovah is their strength, He is Messiah's. This once
settled, the prophetic desire of the godly, according to the Spirit of
Christ, expresses itself that Jehovah should have His people and bless
His inheritance (for the faith of covenant blessing and relationship
runs through all this part of the Psalms), that He should also feed them
and lift them up for ever. Deliverance, blessing, feeding, and unaltered
exaltation, such are the fruits looked for of Jehovah's coming in power.

In Psalms 25, 26 we have seen the great moral principles of trust in
Jehovah (even when confessing sins) and integrity In these last we have
more the personal sense of condition, and way or ground of relationship
with God, beautifully shown in the first part of Psalm 27 in the one
desire of the heart; and in the second part, in the touching plea, You
taught me to seek Thy face; my heart, in those times of divine
instructions, said, I will seek it: Lord, will you turn it away now that
I am in trouble, when You taught me to seek and trust it? The truth is
the same, but in the first part it is the one moral desire of the heart;
in the last, the exhortation of God to do it becomes a resource to the
soul. Jehovah Himself is their refuge, and has taught them to look for
it.

In Psalm 28 the pressure of evil is more felt, and coming judgment and
the separation of the remnant looked for. This separation characterizes
the whole testimony of God connected with the coming of Messiah, a
circumstance which will aid us in seeing the unity of the remnant in the
mind of God. Not only was it prophetically announced, as in Isaiah 65,
but John the Baptist characterizes the coming of Messiah by it, their
being children of Abraham being of no avail ([Mat
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009).md); as indeed it spiritually took
place: only that He being rejected and not yet coming in power, they
were then added as "the saved," [Act
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047.md), to the assembly. For that,
however, Peter takes it up ([Act
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040).md). The Lord Himself receives them
as His sheep (John 10). Paul rests his argument in Romans 11 upon it
too.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 29](psa029.md)

</div>
