<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa118)  [Next](psa120) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)

Psalm 119 is in general the law written in the heart. This gives it an
important place in the series of psalms. It is found distinctly
connected too with Israel's sorrows in the last days and their previous
departure from God. The different divisions of the psalm show, I think,
each a different phase of the exercises of heart connected with the law
being written on it, though the general principle runs of course through
it. I will very briefly notice the main bearing of each.

The first part presents to us naturally the great general principle. It
is the third general "Blessed is the man" the return of the soul in
trial and distress to the great truth of Psalm 1, where the effect is
seen under the immediate government of God. Psalm 32 gives the
blessedness of forgiveness; this, of the walk with God on the return of
the wanderer in spite of all difficulties and contempt. We have indeed
another special blessing at the end of the first book, where Christ is
so fully brought in. In the last psalm of that book he is pronounced
blessed who understands His position, be it in Himself or in those who
walk in His footsteps; for the first psalm supposed blessedness under
the government of God, making good all His will towards the just, and
the reverse seemed to be true. In fact, as we know, to man's eye this
wholly failed (bringing in a heavenly and divine righteousness and
redemption). Hence true blessedness was shown in discerning, in
understanding, the position in which that true blessed One was as
rejected by men that true poor man taking Himself practically the place
He describes as blessed, as we have seen in the sermon on the mount,
while the great truth of the law in the heart is laid down. Yet the
circumstances also come out in this first part "forsake me not utterly."

Secondly the word associates with God. Not only is one blessed who keeps
it, but it is cleansing: the desire of the heart is positively fixed on
it (see the connection of Jehovah and His word, [Psa
119:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010)).

In the third part we find very distinctly the leaning on divine mercy in
trial, connected with the law in the heart. The godly Israelite looks to
Jehovah's bountiful dealing, but with a view to hearty obedience ().
Verse 19 ([Psa 119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019)) shows his
state; Verse 21, ([Psa 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021)), as we
have seen in all this book, Jehovah's intervention, already known in
deliverance, though not in complete blessing; Verses 22-23, ([Psa
119:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#022)), the contempt the poor
remnant undergo. Jehovah's law had been his delight and comfort under
it.

In the fourth part the trial is more inward. His soul is cleaving to the
dust, but he looks to divine relief according to the word. His desire
looks to the effect of that living water from God. He has been open
before Godhas declared his own ways: so it ever is. He desires all way
of evil to be removed by God from him. He has held fast by the word
looks that God should not put him to shame. But he is looking for
enlargement of heart, that he may run freely in God's ways. Such is the
sure effect when under the discipline of God. A soul who has found
delight in His will and holiness is yet looking to run in liberty.
Though in the heart, the word here referred to is more of an outwardly
expressed will, like Zacharias and Elizabeth, a beautiful moral
expression of the remnant. With the Christian it will be more absolute
and inward, more holiness than testimonies (though it may begin by them
perhaps), whether in his first divine calling or under discipline. It is
for him walking in the light as God is in the light not the "ordinances
and commandments of Jehovah." Yet it is in principle essentially the
same. To apply this psalm directly is to lower the divine standard of
thought for the saint now. But the nature of the moral exercise may be
most instructively used; just as subjection and confidence in trial is
always right, though the forms of it in the Jew are wholly below the
Christian's (compare with this Philippians, where we have Christian
experience).

The fifth part looks for divine guidance and teaching in the ways and
law of God; the sixth, for manifest mercies in that path, that he may
have courage before adversaries and hold fast the law of God. In the
seventh, having been quickened by the word, he reckons on it, for God
had caused him to trust it as His; so that now he leans on all its
assurances. In troubles, when there was no outward cheering of nature,
it sustained his heart. This brings him to the eighth. Jehovah was thus
his portion. He had sought Him, judged himself, turned his feet to
Jehovah's testimonies. He reckoned on Him, and would thank Him in the
secret watches of the night, when his heart was left to itself. He was
the companion of those that feared Jehovah. This brightens up his
thoughts, and he sees His power in mercy around. This is a beautiful
picture of the working of the heart.

The ninth brings out the circumstances of the psalm. In the comfort of
the last part he can look with God's eye and mind at these
circumstances. These are much before our view (that is, feelings about
them) in this part of the psalm. Jehovah has already dealt well with him
according to His word, and he looks for divine teaching to understand
the mind of God well. He had been under discipline: but before this he
had gone astray, but now had got into the spirit and path of obedience.
He sees the proud lying against him, and their heart fat as grease (no
link in state or obedience with Jehovah); and sees how good it was to
have been afflicted, that he might learn Jehovah's statutes. Nothing
marks more the setting right of the soul than thisthe turning to
Jehovah's will "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?"and counting all
good that leads to this, and gives God's will as authority, and morally
its place in the heart.

The tenth part has two main thoughts. Jehovah is his Creator has formed
him. He looks to Him to guide His own poor creature as a faithful
Creator. Those that fear Jehovah will be glad when they see Him, because
they hope in His word. Secondly, he knows that thus in very faithfulness
He has caused him to be afflicted, and now looks for mercies to come
unto him, and the proud to be ashamed, and that those that fear Jehovah
may turn to him. All this is linked with soundness in Jehovah's
statutes.

In the eleventh the cry becomes more urgent. He is under the pressure of
trial, his soul fainting for deliverance looking for Jehovah to execute
judgment, for he is walking in Jehovah's precepts. And the proud
persecute him wrongfully they heed not Jehovah nor His law.

But, twelfth, creation is a witness to the abiding faithfulness of God;
His word is settled in heaven, where nothing can reach or shake it. But
for Jehovah's law, which sustained his heart, he had perished in the
pressure of affliction. In truth, how precious to have the word in such
a world! We have more than commandments. But we can say, I have seen an
end of all perfection. Another and more confident thought grows up out
of all this exercise "I am thine."

In the thirteenth he expresses his own internal delight in Jehovah's
law, and its effect in spiritual intelligence.

In the fourteenth it guides his path. Afflicted and oppressed, he looks
for comfort to Him whose judgments he has taken as his path in spite of
enemies and their snares.

The fifteenth gives the horror of vain thoughts, and looking to God as
his hiding-place, with his rejection of evildoers. He looks to Jehovah
to uphold him, that he may not be ashamed in his hope; and looks with
solemn trembling on the sure judgment of the wicked.

In the sixteenth he presses more earnestly the interference of Jehovah
in deliverance. The way in which the wicked have made void Jehovah's law
only makes him cling the closer to it. It was time for Jehovah to work.

The following parts all bring out the effects of his strong attachment
to Jehovah's law and testimonies, its value in every aspect for his
heart; the trial he was in still in this path of righteousness; and how
he would walk in Jehovah's ways when set free; his grief at
transgressors. He looks for teaching, quickening, keeping; and recalls
the everlasting character of God's testimonies; so that he held fast,
though oppressed by the wicked.

The last part is more general as a closing one, though in the same
spirit. It sums up, so to speak, the whole. It desires that the cry of
the oppressed delighter in the law may come up before Jehovah; asks for
understanding according to His word for deliverance according to it; and
assures praise when taught His statutes. His tongue will speak of His
word. He has the sense of their righteousnesslooks for the hand of
Jehovah to help, because he has chosen His precepts. Jehovah's salvation
has been longed for (man not trusted in). Jehovah's law has been his
delight, not his own will, nor the prosperous man's ways. He looks for
life, that he may praise, and that Jehovah's judgment may help him; for
the power of death and evil was before him. He owns finally his having
gone astray, and looks for Jehovah as the Shepherd of Israel to seek
him, for he has not forgotten His commandments. Such is the moral state
of Israel in the last days when (in their land, I apprehend) the law is
written in their heart, but full deliverance and final blessing are not
come. The psalm is, in fact, the moral development of the hearts of
those that fear God in the circumstances prophetically brought out in
Psalm 118.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 120](psa120)

</div>
