<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa106)  [Next](psa108.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 107](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001.md)

BOOK 5 - Psalms 107-150

In the fifth Book the people are looked at as brought back, and a
general survey of God's ways taken, with a kind of divine commentary on
it all, ending, as all His ways surely will, in praise.

Psalm 107 is a kind of heading or introduction to all this. It
celebrates the enduring of God's mercy for ever that blessed formula of
faith in the unchanging goodness of Jehovah in all ages from the display
of grace in David's time. It is restored Israel's part especially to
chant it. The psalm celebrates the two parts of that deliverance in
which the mercy has been shown. They are redeemed from the hand of the
enemy; they are gathered back from east, west, north, and south. This is
the double character of the restoration of Israel deliverance in the
land, and the gathering from amongst the heathen on every side. But the
proper theme of the psalm is the goodness of Jehovah. The various
circumstances of deliverance of every kind (and that as an answer to the
cry of distress of man who has brought himself low by his folly) are
gone through, with the desire that men would praise Jehovah for His
goodness, His wonderful works for the children of men. Israel is he in
whom it may be fully learnt. It goes on to their chastisement in the
land after their return, but adds the complete ruin of the pride of men
as the result. He pours contempt on princes, and sets the poor on high
from affliction, giving him families like a flock. The great result of
God's government is then shown: the righteous rejoice; all iniquity has
its mouth stopped. Whoso is wise and will consider these ways of God
will understand the lovingkindness of Jehovah. It is to be remarked how
entirely the goodness of God, here rehearsed, is shown in temporal
things. It does not for that cease to be His goodness and to have its
sweetness, but it gives very clearly the character of the ground on
which these teachings go.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 108](psa108.md)

</div>
