<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa114)  [Next](psa116) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 115](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#001)

Psalm 115 gives the true and full ground of this deliverance as seen in
the heart of faith. It is not that they, but that Jehovah may be
praised, specially in His mercy, and then His faithfulness to promise.
The godly one, that is, the Spirit, then refers to that cry which was
the bitter grief spoken of in Joel, and referred to in Psalms 42, 43.
Why should the heathen say, Where is now their God? So in the same
spirit Moses "the Egyptians shall hear of it, and what wilt thou do to
thy great name?" What a blessed boldness of faith! This character of
sorrow shows, how it was on the cross and in those last sorrows that
Christ came into this character of sorrow. For the Jews practically said
this to Him then, but never could have done so before. The believing
Israelite's answer is, Our God is in heaven.

He then contrasts Him with idols. And Israel, the house of Aaron, and
all that fear Jehovah, are called to trust Him. This last would open the
door to all Gentiles who sought Jacob's face. It then recites, what we
have seen to be the ground these psalms go on, that He had been mindful
of, and would bless them; yea, increase them more and more, them and
their children. They were the blessed of Jehovah, the maker of heaven
and earth. Heaven was His, the earth had He given to men. This marks how
distinctly the earthly blessing is the scene before us, for He has not
given us the earth, but the cross in it; and heaven, and what is there,
as our own things. We seek the things which are above, not the things
which are on the earth. So, in even almost a stronger manner, the dead
do not praise Jehovah; but we (says the Spirit in them) will praise from
this, the time of their final deliverance, for evermore. We say "to
depart and to be with Christ is far better."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 116](psa116)

</div>
