<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa117)  [Next](psa119.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#001.md)

Psalm 118 is also, though not formally so, rendering praise and
thanksgiving as promised, connected with, or rather founded on, the
known formula His mercy endureth for ever. The same that in Psalm 115
were called to trust in Jehovah are now called to praise Him. From Verse
5 ([Psa 118:5-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005).md) the Holy Spirit
speaks in the person of delivered Israel, and speaks of this
faithfulness of Jehovah, and now, He being on their side, man need not
be feared; Jehovah is better than man, Jehovah better than princes.
Verses 10-18 ([Psa 118:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010).md) unfold
the circumstances and dealings through which Israel has passed. All
nations had compassed them; in Jehovah's name he would destroy them.
They are quenched as fire. Verse 13, ([Psa
118:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#013).md), the enemy had thrust sore at
them that they might fall; Jehovah helped them. The result in rejoicing
and joy is chanted in Verses 14-17 ([Psa
118:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014).md). Another aspect of their
trial is given in Verse 18 ([Psa
118:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#018).md). It was withal Jehovah's
chastening, and He had chastened them sore, but not given them over to
death, which was the power of the enemy for them. Thus we have the full
character of trial, as we have seen it even in Job: instruments, men,
even all nations; next, the enemy by them, and acting on the spirit,
thrusting sore at the soul; but behind it, and before it too, is God
chastening, but not giving over. This is full of instruction for us in
many circumstances we pass through, where all these elements are found
in what we are passing through.

Now the gates of righteousness are open before Israel. The turning to
this at once, as the result of trial, is beautiful: he will go in and
praise Jehovah. It is withal the gate of Jehovah, and the righteous
enter into it. Israel there will praise, for Jehovah has heard him and
become his salvation; but further and deeper truth comes out here. There
is no restoration of Israel without Messiah, and Israel now owns Him
once despised. "The stone which the builders rejected is become the head
of the corner. This is Jehovah's doing, and it is marvelous in our
eyes." We see, in the expression "our eyes," who is the real speaker,
and, though the voice had been one, who they are that now take part in
the psalm of praise. This is the day Jehovah has made; it is His day,
the blessing of His people in connection with Messiah, and His people
rejoice in it. And now they cry, Hosanna to the Son of David, the
Jehovah of Israel; and say, Blessed be he that comes in His name. This
gives us the witness from the Lord's own teaching, who it is that speaks
in the psalms, and to what time it applies; for the house was left
desolate, and they were not to see Him again till they said, Blessed be
he that cometh. So that it is Israel, that is, the remnant, who speak,
and in the day of their repentance, under grace, when they are to see
Messiah again. They bless Him that comes out of the house of Jehovah.
Jehovah is the God of strength, He has given Israel light; and now
worship and sacrifice are offered to Him that has delivered and blessed.
Now they say, Thou art my God, and praise and exalt Him.

The psalm closes with the well-known Verse ([Psa
118:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#029).md) of Israel's thankful praise:
"Give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his mercy endureth for
ever," with which it had commenced. Thus the spiritual apprehension of
God's dealings, the coming to worship Jehovah in righteousness, and the
owning the despised and rejected Messiah, are all unfolded in connection
with the deliverance and blessing of Israel, and the full manifestation
of Jehovah's nature and character. Various Verses of this psalm are
quoted at the close of the Savior's trials; no psalm indeed so often, as
connecting Him with the sorrows of, and promises to, Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 119](psa119.md)

</div>
