<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev005)  [Next](rev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001)

What is to follow on earth now begins, when the seals are opened. It
will be remarked here, that John, standing in the ruin of the assembly,
gives prophetically all that passes from that failure till Christ comes
in Chapter 19. There is no ascension no rapture, save as far as Chapter
12 gives both together.

The first seals are simple; nor have I anything to offer very new upon
them: first, imperial conquests then wars, then famine, then pestilence,
carrying with it what Ezekiel calls God's four sore plagues (sword,
famine, pestilence, and the beasts of the earth). They speak of the
providential course of God's dealings, and hence the four beasts call
attention to it; but they have God's voice in them, the voice of the
Almighty: that, the ear of him who has the Spirit hears. These complete
providential plagues, as spoken of in scripture. Then direct judgments
follow; but these are what we may call preparatory measures.

I have to notice that in the full plagues of Verse 8 ([Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008)) the whole Roman earth is not
included. It is a fourth, not a third. The plagues too, note, are
limited in extent of sphere, not universal.

The saints are those whom God is really thinking of, and they come in
remembrance before other scenes are brought out. Those who had been
martyred for the word of God and their testimony demand how long before
they were avenged; for we have ever to do here with a God of judgment.
Their being under the altar means simply that they had offered their
bodies, as sacrifices for the truth, to God. The white robes are the
witness of their righteousness God's declared approval of them; but the
time for their being avenged was not yet. I do not think giving white
robes is resurrection. The first resurrection is sovereign grace, giving
us the same place with Christ ("for ever with the Lord "), consequent on
His work and His being our righteousness, which is alike to all of us.
White robes thus conferred are the recognition of the righteousness
('dikaioomata") \[See Note \#12\] of the saints hence are seen in
Chapter 19 at His appearing. "They shall walk with me in white, for they
are worthy." I am not denying that we are made clean, and our robes
white in the blood of the Lamb. But, even where this is said in Chapter
7, I think it refers especially to the way they have been associated by
faith with the suffering position of Christ. Here white robes are given
them their service owned; but, for avenging, they must wait till a new
scene of persecution had brought them companions who had to be honoured
and avenged like them. Still this marks progress, and finds its causein
the dealing of God to bring about this new state of things, which issues
in final judgment and setting aside of evil. Here the judgments are
providential.

The next thing to the claim for avenging is the breaking up of the whole
system of earthly government, and the terror of all on earth. How
clearly we see here that we are in a scene of judgment, and that God is
a God of judgment! The desires of the saints are like the desires of the
Psalms. We are not with children before the Father, with grace, with the
gospel, and the assembly; but with Jehovah, where God is a God of
judgment, and by Him actions are weighed. We are on Old Testament
ground, that is, prophecy, not grace to the wicked, though judgment
brings in blessing.

The opening of the sixth seal brings an earthquake, that is, a violent
convulsion of the whole structure of society. All the governing powers
are therein visited; and, seeing all subverted, small and great think
(with bad consciences as they have) that the day of the Lamb's wrath is
come. But it is not, though preparatory judgments with a view to His
kingdom are there. But God thinks too of His saints on earth (where we
must remember, the assembly is never now seen) before the scenes which
follow, whether judgments on the Roman earth or the special workings of
evil, to secure and seal them for that day.

Note \#12

It is very possible that the plural " righteousnesses " is a Hebraism
for righteousness. It is a common case in moral things. At any rate it
is of the saints.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 7](rev007)

</div>
