<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev011)  [Next](rev013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001.md)

Chapter 12 gives us a brief but all-important summary of the whole
course of events, viewed, not in their instruments on earth or the
judgment of these, but the divine view of all the principles at work,
the state of things as revealed of God. The first symbolical person,
subject of the prophecy and result of all God's ways in it, is a woman
clothed with the sun, having a crown of twelve stars, and the moon under
her feet. It is Israel, or Jerusalem as its centre as in the purpose of
God (compare [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md) and [Psa
87:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#006).md). She is clothed with supreme
authority, invested with the glory of perfect administration in man, and
all the original reflected glory of this under the old covenant, under
her feet. She was travailing in childbirth, distressed, and in pain to
be delivered: on the other hand Satan's power in the form of the Roman
Empire, complete in forms of power, seven heads, but incomplete in
administrative supremacy ten, not twelve horns. But Satan, as the open
infidel enemy of God and God's power in Christ, sought to devour the
child as soon as born, who was to have the rule of the earth from God.
But the child, Christ, and the assembly with Christ, is caught away to
God and His throne does not receive the power yet, but is placed in the
very source of it from which it flows. It is not the rapture as regards
joy; for it goes back to Christ Himself, but the placing Him and the
assembly in and with Him, in the seat from which power flows for the
establishment of the kingdom. There is no time for this: Christ and the
assembly are all one. But the woman the Jews, after this fly into the
wilderness, where God has prepared a place for them, for the half-week.

The assembly, or heavenly saints, (as Christ, note,) go up to heaven to
be out of the way. The Jews, or earthly ones, are protected by
providential care upon earth. This gives the whole state of things, and
those in view in this scene, and their respective places. She that is to
have glory and hold power in the earth is cast out. The child that is to
have power, in and from heaven, is previously taken up there. This makes
the position very clear.

The historical course of events is now pursued, the child being supposed
to be already caught up. There is war in heaven; and the devil and his
angels are cast out, and have no more place there. This brings out yet
more clearly the distinction of the heavenly saints and the Jewish
remnant. The heavenly ones had overcome the accuser by the blood of the
Lamb, and the word of their testimony; the woman's seed have the
commandments of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, that is, the
Spirit of prophecy. What they have of God in the word is according to
the Old Testament.

But, to follow up the latter part of the Chapter, a loud voice proclaims
in heaven that the kingdom of our God and the power of His Christ is
come the testimony still of the second Psalm; only as yet it was only
proclaimed from heaven, where the power of the kingdom was already made
good by the casting down of Satan. Satan's anti-priestly power was over
forever. King and prophet he might yet put on; but his heavenly place
was past. The saints of the heavenlies had overcome him by that which
made their conscience and their title to heaven good the blood of the
Lamb, and the word of their mouth, God's sword by the Spirit and gave up
their lives to the death. The heavens and the dwellers there could now
rejoice; but it was woe to the inhabiters of earth and sea; for the
devil had come down, knowing he had but a little time left. I think
Verse 11 ([Rev 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#011).md) implies that
there are saints killed after the rapture, who yet belong to heaven. If
there were such killed because of their faithfulness, were they not
taken up, they would lose earth and heaven, though more devoted than
those who had earth. We see them moreover in Chapter 20 in the first
resurrection. The souls under the altar also had to wait for others
their brethren who had to be killed, as they were; and we are to note
here that those celebrated as happy are the slain ones, none others. Yet
it is before the last three years and a half.

So that we have these three parties in view: the voice of those in
heaven; (our) their brethren who had overcome; and those who would be in
the three years and a half of Satan's rage, which had not yet begun.
Now, if the man-child in heaven be, as we have considered it, Christ and
the raptured saints, the voice would be that of those already there,
\[See Note \#14\] and all self evident: the raptured saints associated
with Him celebrate the casting down of the accuser and the deliverance
of those who belonged to heaven, calling them "our brethren" the
brethren whose conflict with the accuser was over, as he was now cast
down, but who had had to resist him as a heavenly potentate, an
anti-priest, all which part is mystery for John and those who now would
be in trial, when he would act with rage on earth, as king and prophet.
For the dragon, cast to the earth and unable to accuse in heaven or
oppose saints having a heavenly calling (and the priesthood refers to
such, not to union), persecutes the Jews, and seeks to destroy their
testimony; but God gave, not power of resistance the Lord must come to
deliver but power to flee and escape and find refuge where she was
nourished the whole half-week out of the serpent's reach. He seeks to
pursue; wings he has none: but he uses a river, the movements of people
under the influence of special motive and guidance, to overwhelm the
woman. But the earth, this organized system in which men live, swallowed
the waters up. This influence was in vain was not met by an army, a
counter-power, but was nullified. There was such a disposition or course
of the earth as neutralized the effort wholly. So God ordered in His
providence; and the dragon turned to persecute individually the faithful
remnant of the seed the Jews who held fast by the word.

Note \#14

I do not continue to put the voice as Christ's. The application to Him
is too questionable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 13](rev013.md)

</div>
