<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](jde001)  [Next](rev001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to Revelation

As regards Peter and Paul, we have scriptural authority for regarding
them as the apostles respectively of the circumcision and of the
uncircumcision. Peter and the twelve remained at Jerusalem when the
disciples were scattered, and, continuing (though God was careful to
maintain unity) the work of Christ in the remnant of Israel, gathered
into an assembly on earth the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Paul,
having received the ministry of the assembly, as of the gospel to every
creature under heaven (Colossians 1), as a wise master-builder, lays the
foundation. Peter sets us off as pilgrims on our journey to follow
Christ risen towards the inheritance above. Paul, in the full
development of his doctrine (though owning this, as in Philippians 3),
shews us the saints sitting in heavenly places in Christ, heirs of all
which He is heir of. All this was dispensational, and it is full of
instruction. But John holds a different place. He does not enter on
dispensation; nor, though once or twice stating the fact (as [Joh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md); [Joh
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001.md); [Joh
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024.md); [Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017).md), does He take the saint, nor
even the Lord Himself, up to heaven. Jesus, for him, is a divine Person,
the Word made flesh manifesting God and His Father, eternal life come
down to earth. The Epistle of John treats the question of our partaking
of this life, and its characters.

But at the close of the Gospel, after stating the sending of the
Comforter on His going away, Christ opens to the disciples (though in a
mysterious way) the continuation of God's dealings with the earth, of
which John ministerially is the representative, linking the
manifestation of Christ on earth at His first coming with His
manifestation at His second; Christ's Person, and eternal life in Him,
being the abiding security and living seed of God, when dispensationally
all was corrupted, and in confusion and decay. If all were in disorder
outwardly, eternal life was the same.

The destruction of Jerusalem formed a momentous epoch as to these
things, because the Jewish assembly, formed as such at Pentecost, had
ceased (nay, it had even before); only the judicial act was then
accomplished. Christians had been warned to leave the camp. The breach
of Christianity with Judaism was consummated. Christ could no longer
take up the assembly, established in the remnant of the Jews, as His own
seat of earthly authority. \[See Note \#1\] But alas! the assembly, as
Paul had established it too, had already fallen from its first estate
could in no sense take up the fallen inheritance of Israel. All seek
their own, says Paul, not the things of Jesus Christ. All they of
Asia-Ephesus, the beloved scene where all Asia had heard the word of God
had forsaken him. They who had been specially brought with full
intelligence into the assembly's place could not hold it in the power of
faith. Indeed, the mystery of iniquity was at work before this, and was
to go on and grow until the hindrance to the final apostacy were
removed.

Here, in this state of universal declension and ruin John's ministry
comes in. Stability was in the Person of Christ, for eternal life first,
but for the ways of God upon earth too. If the assembly was spued out of
His mouth, He was the faithful witness, the beginning of the creation of
God. Let us trace the lines of this in his gospel. In John 20, as else
where noticed in detail, we have a picture of God's ways from the
resurrection of Christ till we come to the remnant of Israel in the
latter days, represented by Thomas's look on the pierced One and
believing by seeing. In chapter 21 we have, besides the remnant, the
full millennial gathering. Then at the close of the chapter, the special
ministry of Peter and John is pointed out, though mysteriously. The
sheep of Jesus of the circumcision are confided to Peter; but this
ministry was to close like Christ's. The assembly would not be
established on this ground, any more than Israel. There was no tarrying
here till Christ came, \[See Note \#2\] Peter's ministry in fact was
closed, and the circumcision assembly left shepherdless, before the
destruction of Jerusalem put an end to all such connection for ever.
Peter then asks as to John. The Lord answers, confessedly mysteriously,
but putting off, as that which did not concern Peter who was to follow
Him, the closing of John's ministry, prolonging it in possibility till
Christ came. Now, in fact, the Bridegroom tarried; but the service and
ministry of John by the word (which was all that was to remain, and no
apostle in personal care) did go on to the return of Christ.

John was no master-builder like Paul had no dispensation committed to
him. He was connected with the assembly in its earthly structure like
Peter, not in the Ephesus or heavenly one; He was not the minister of
the circumcision, but carried on the earthly system among the Gentiles,
only holding fast the Person of Christ. His special place was testimony
to the Person of Christ come to earth with divine title over it power
over all flesh. This did not break the links with Israel, as Paul's
ministry did, but raised the power which held all together in the Person
of Christ to a height which carried it through any hidden time, or
hidden power, on to its establishment over the world at the end; it did
not exclude Israel as such, but enlarged the scene of the exercise of
Christ's power so as to set it over the world, and did not establish it
in Israel as its source, though it might establish Israel itself in its
own place from a heavenly source of power.

What place does the assembly then hold in this ministry of John, found
as it is in the Book of Revelation? None in its Pauline character, save
in one phrase, coming in after the Revelation is closed where its true
place in Christ's absence is indicated. ([Rev
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017).md) We have the saints at the time,
in their own conscious relationship to Christ, in reference, too, to the
royal and priestly place to His God and Father, in which they are
associated with Himself. But John's ministerial testimony, as to the
assembly, views it as the outward assembly on earth \[See Note \#3\] in
its state of decay Christ judging this and the true assembly, the
capital city and seat of God's government over the world, at the end,
but in glory and grace. It is an abode, and where God dwells and the
Lamb. All this facilitates our intelligence of the objects and bearing
of the book. The assembly has failed; the Gentiles, grafted in by faith,
have not continued in God's goodness. The Ephesian assembly, the
intelligent vessel, and expression of what the assembly of God was, had
left its first estate, and unless it repented, the candlestick was to be
removed. The Ephesus of Paul becomes the witness on earth of decay and
of removal out of God's sight, even as Israel had been removed. God's
patience would be shewn towards the assembly as it had been towards
Israel; but the assembly would not maintain God's testimony in the world
any more than Israel had. John does maintain this testimony,
ministerially judging the assemblies by Christ's word, \[See Note \#4\]
and then the world from the throne, till Christ comes and takes to
Himself His great power and reigns. During this transition dealing of
the throne the heavenly saints are seen on high. When Christ comes, they
come with Him.

The first part, then, of the Epistles of John is the continuation, so to
speak, of the Gospel before the last two dispensational chapters; the
Revelation, that of these last two chapters (20-21), where, Christ being
risen and no ascension given, the dispensational dealings of God are
largely intimated in the circumstances which occur; while it is shewn at
the same time that He could not personally set up the kingdom then. He
must ascend first. The two short epistles shew us that truth (truth as
to His Person) was the test of true love, and to be held fast when what
was anti-christian came in; and the free liberty of the ministration of
the truth to be held fast against assumed ecclesiastical or clerical
authority, as contrasted with the assembly. The apostle had written to
the assembly. Diotrephes rejected free ministry.

I now turn to the book itself.

Note \#1:

This was morally true from Acts 3, where the Jewish leaders refuse the
testimony to a glorified Christ who would return, as they had rejected a
humbled One. Acts 7, by the mouth of Stephen, closes God's dealings with
them in testimony, and the heavenly gathering begins, his spirit being
received on high. The destruction of Jerusalem closed Jewish history
judicially.

Note \#2:

Paul, of course, is no way noticed. For him the assembly belonged to
heaven was the body of Christ, the house of God. He was a builder.

Note \#3:

And hence in particular assemblies, which of course could be judged and
removed. There is another point of divine wisdom here. Though we have I
doubt not, the whole history of the assembly to its end in this world,
it is given in facts then present, so that there should be no putting
off the coming of the Lord. So, in the parables, the virgins who go to
sleep are the same that wake up; the servants that receive the talents
are the same found on the Lord's return, though we know ages have passed
and death come in.

Note \#4:

And hence in particular assemblies, which of course could be judged and
removed. There is another point of divine wisdom here. Though we have I
doubt not, the whole history of the assembly to its end in this world,
it is given in facts then present, so that there should be no putting
off the coming of the Lord. So, in the parables, the virgins who go to
sleep are the same that wake up; the servants that receive the talents
are the same found on the Lord's return, though we know ages have passed
and death come in.

Note \#5:

Note this immensely important principle: the church judged by the word,
not the church a judge; and the individual Christian called to give heed
to this judgment. The church (I use the word designedly here as used to
claim this authority) cannot be an authority when the Lord calls me, if
I have ears to hear, to hear and receive the judgment pronounced by Him
on it. I judge its state by the words of the Spirit, am bound to do so:
it cannot be an authority therefore on the Lord's behalf over me in that
state. Discipline is not in question here, but the church as wielding
authority.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 1](rev001.md)

</div>
