<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev016)  [Next](rev018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md)

The characters of Babylon are first portrayed. Like the beast, she is
only one thing in the judgment but morally she is more important than
all the rest. The general character is the great active idolatress that
has gained influence over the mass of the nations; next, that the kings
of the earth have lived in guilty intimacy with her, seeking her favors,
while those that dwell on the earth have lost their senses through her
pernicious and inebriating influence. This is the general idea first
given, a character plain enough to mark the Roman or Papal system.

But more details follow. There was a woman, a religious system, sitting
on an imperial beast full of names of blasphemy, having the form which
marked it Roman. The woman was gorgeously and imperially arrayed, had
every human glory and ornament on her, and a rich cup of prostituting
yet gross idolatries in her hand. "Abominations are simply idols; "
filthiness of her fornication," all the horrible corruption that
accompanies it. Her cup was full of them. She was in the desert; no
springs of God were there. It was not, so to speak, God's land, no
heavenly country. To spiritual understanding she bore on her forehead
her character (yet one known only when spiritually known), of the great
city of corruption, source of all seduction to men and of all idolatry
in the earth: such was Popery. But this was not all. All the blood of
the saints was found in her: she was the persecuting murderess of those
God delighted in, and who bore witness to Jesus. \[See Note \#16\] The
prophet was astonished for it was what the church had come to.

The angel then describes the beast on which she rode. It had been,
ceased to exist, and then it comes up again from direct diabolical
sources comes up out of the abyss. The renewed Roman Empire, which had
disappeared, is blasphemous and diabolical in nature, and in this
character goes to destruction: yet all but the elect on the earth will
be in admiration of it when they see the beast that was, is not, and
shall be present. Of itself this marks the Roman or Latin Empire, only
that it will reappear more formally. But Rome is more distinctly marked.
It is the city of the seven hills. Nor was this even all. It was the
existing authority in the time of the prophecy: five of its governing
powers had fallen; one was there; there was then one yet to come for a
short space, and then the beast out of the abyss, the last diabolical
state of the empire, would appear, and it would be destroyed. The last
however is not a new form; it is one of the seven, though an eighth. My
impression is, that the first Napoleon and his brief empire is the
seventh, and we have now to wait for the development of the last. The
beast, though imperial, has ten horns, ten distinct kingdoms. They have
their power, and for the same period, with the beast. But they all give
their power to the beast, and make war against Christ, the rejected One
on earth; but He shall overcome them. For, despised as He may be,
supreme authority is His, and there are others coming with Him, not
merely angels but called ones, His saints.

Details are then added. The waters are explained as peoples, multitudes,
nations, and tongues masses of populations in their diverse divisions.
Next the ten horns, the kingdoms which are associated with the beast,
and the beast (for so it is to be read) hate the whore and eat her flesh
and burn her with fire (first, take all her substance and fatness, and
then destroy her); for they are to give their kingdom to the blasphemous
beast until God's words are fulfilled. And then we are expressly to\] d
that the woman (not " the whore " the last is her corrupt idolatrous
character but the "woman"), who as riding the beast was to be such, is
Rome. All this Chapter 17 is description.

Note \#16

It is important to remark that formal religion, which rests on ancient
claims as established, and which is left behind as to the truth by
others who have received it, is the regular habitual instigator of
persecution, though others may be the persecutors. So it was with the
Jews, so in the Imperial history of the world. It always becomes false
as regards truth, though it may retain some and important truths. The
truths which test theheart and its obedience are not there.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 18](rev018.md)

</div>
