<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev020)  [Next](rev022.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001.md)

But there was a new heaven and a new earth; but no more sea no
separation, nor part of the world not brought into an ordered earth
before God. Here we do not find any mediatorial kingdom. The Lamb is not
in the scene. God is all in all. No sorrow or crying more, no earthly
people of God distinct from the inhabiters of the earth. These are God's
people, and God is with them Himself, but withal His tabernacle is with
them. This is the holy city, the New Jerusalem. The assembly has her own
character, is the habitation of God in a special way, when the
unchanging state comes, and all is made new. God is the end, as the
beginning. Him that is athirst now God will refresh with the fountain of
the water of life the overcomer shall inherit all things. The world for
the Christian is now a great Rephidim. This is the twofold portion of
the final blessedness: he shall have God for his God, and be His son.
Those who feared this path did not overcome the world and Satan but had
walked in iniquity would have their part in the lake of fire. This
closes the history of God's ways.

What follows is the description of the heavenly city, as before we had
that of Babylon. Its heavenly character and millennial connection with
the earth is revealed. One of the seven angels, as in the case of
Babylon, comes to shew the prophet the bride, the Lamb's wife. The
result of judgment on the earth is the introduction of better and higher
blessings. The prophet is taken, like Moses, to see the scene of
promise, and sees New Jerusalem descending out of heaven from God. This
was its double character from God, divine in its origin, and also
heavenly. (Compare [Co2 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001).md) It might
be of God and earthly. It might be heavenly and angelic. It was neither:
it was divine in origin and heavenly in nature and character. It was
clothed with divine glory: it must be as founded on Christ's work. It
was transparent jasper, jasper being used as a symbol of divine glory.
([Rev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003).md) It is secure, having a wall
great and high. It has twelve gates. Angels are become the willing
doorkeepers of the great city, the fruit of Christ's redemption work in
glory. This marked the possession too, by man thus brought in the
assembly to glory, of the highest place in the creation, and
providential order of God, of which angels had previously been the
administrators. The twelve gates are full of human perfectness of
governmental administrative power. The gate was the place of judgment.
Twelve, we have often seen,denotes perfection and governmental power.
The character of it is noted by the names of the twelve tribes. God had
so governed these. They were not the foundation; but this character of
power was found there. There were twelve foundations, but these were the
twelve apostles of the Lamb. They were, in their work, the foundation of
the heavenly city. Thus the creative and providential display of power,
the governmental (Jehovah), and the assembly once founded at Jerusalem,
are all brought together in the heavenly city, the organized seat of
heavenly power. It is not presented as the bride, though it be the
bride, the Lamb's wife. It is not in the Pauline character of nearness
of blessing to Christ. It is the assembly as founded at Jerusalem under
the twelve the organized seat of heavenly power, the new and now
heavenly capital of God's government. They had suffered and served the
Lamb in the earthly, and under Him founded the heavenly. It is alike
vast and perfect, and all measured and owned of God. It is not now a
remnant measured; it is the city. It has not divine perfectness (that
could not be), but it has divinely given perfectness. It is a cube,
equal on every side, finite perfection. So the wall (they are merely
symbols) was perfect, 12 x 12. The wall which secured it was the divine
glory. As it is written of the earthly Jerusalem, "Salvation hath God
appointed for walls and bulwarks."

The city was formed, in its nature, in divine righteousness and holiness
gold transparent as glass. That which was now by the word wrought in and
applied to men below, was the very nature of the whole place. (Compare
[Eph 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)..md) The precious stones, or
varied display of God's nature, who is light, in connection with the
creature (seen in creation, Ezekiel 28; in grace in the high priest's
breast-plate), now shone in permanent glory, and adorned the foundations
of the city. The gates had the moral beauty, which attracted Christ in
the assembly and in a glorious way. That on which men walked, instead of
bringing danger of defilement, was itself righteous and holy; the
streets, all that men came in contact with, were righteousness and
holiness gold transparent as glass.

There was no concealment of God's glory in that which awed by its
display no temple where men approached but where they could not draw
nigh where God was hidden. The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb were its
temple. They were approached in their own nature and glory, surrounded
only by that fully displayed.

Nor was there need of created light here; the glory of the divine nature
lighted all, and the Lamb was the light-bearer in it.

Note here, we have not the Father as the temple. It is the revealed
dispensational Ruler, the true God and the Lamb who has made good His
glory. This was the character of the city.

The vision goes on to shew its relationship to those on the earth, and
its inhabitants: a seeming inconsistency, but no real one; for the city
is viewed as the estate of the bride. Where the inhabitants are spoken
of, it is the individual blessing. The nations, spared in the judgments
on earth, walk in the light of it; the world does, in a measure, in that
of the assembly now, Then the glory will be perfect. The city enjoys the
direct light within; the world transmitted light of glory. To it the
kings of the earth bring their honour and glory. They own the heavens
and the heavenly kingdom to be the source of all, and bring there the
homage of their power. Night, there is not there, and its gates are ever
open; no defense against evil is needed, though divine security leaves
no approach to evil. The kings themselves bring their willing homage to
it. But the glory and honour of the Gentiles is brought to it too.
Heaven is seen as the source of all the glory and honour of this world.
Hence these are now true. Nothing defiling enters there, nor what
introduces idols and falsehood. Neither man's evil nor Satan's deceit
can exist or produce any corruption there. How often, when any thing
good is set up now, the considerate heart knows that evil will enter,
and Satan deceive and corrupt! There we have the certainty that this can
never be. It was not merely the absence of evil, but the impossibility
of its entrance, which characterised the holy city. There was that
which, having its source in perfect grace, involves all blessed
affections in connection with the Lamb in those within the city. Those
only whose names were in the Lamb's book of life found place in the
city.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 22](rev022.md)

</div>
