<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev019)  [Next](rev021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001.md)

We now come, evil power having been set aside, to the exercise of
judicial authority in peace; and this is conferred on the saints. The
prophet does not merely see the thrones as set in Daniel 7., but sitters
on them too. Besides all to whom judgment is given in general, two
special classes are mentioned, because they might seem to be too late,
or to have lost their part: those beheaded (after theassembly was gone,
for it is the Revelation-period we have to do with) for the witness of
Jesus; and those who had not worshiped the beast. (Compare Chapter [Rev
6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009.md); [Rev
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015)..md) These, as well as previously
departed saints, had their part in living and reigning with Christ a
thousand years. But those who were not Christ's, the rest of the dead
did not live again till the thousand years were over. \[See Note \#20\]
These were finally delivered from the second death. The first death they
had undergone, the natural wages of sin, but in faithfulness; in the
second death, the final judgment against sin, they would have no part.
It could have no power over them. On the contrary, they had special
relationship with God and Christ, they were priests of God and of
Christ, and would reign with Him a thousand years. They also are priests
and kings. Note how God and Christ are here united in one thought, as
continually in the writings of John. Thus the beast and the false
prophet are in the lake of fire, their armies slain, and Satan bound in
the abyss, and the risen saints are priests to God and Christ, reigning
with Christ a thousand years. The details and effects, mark, are not
given here. The object is to give the place of the saints, and
especially of the sufferers, during the time of this book. The rest come
in as a general fact, there were sitters on thrones of judgment; but the
faithful of the prophecy are specially mentioned.

When the thousand years are finished, Satan is let loose again. He comes
up on the earth, but he never gets up to heaven again. But the nations
are tested by his temptation. Not even having seen Christ and enjoyed
the fruits of His glory no mere means can secure the heart of man, if it
is to be depended upon; and men fall, in number as the sand of the sea,
into Satan's hands as soon as tempted; enjoying blessing, where
unfaithfulness would have been present loss (perhaps cutting off) and
there was nothing to tempt them, but unfaithful as soon as they are
tempted, as soon as the heart is tried. It was the last and needed trial
of man; needed because they could not have finally enjoyed God with
natural hearts, and the natural heart had not been tested where present
blessing was on the side of owning a present, visible, glorious Christ.
The deceived multitude, not limited now to a third of the earth or a
special prophetic district but taking in the breadth of the earth, went
up against the camp of the saints, and surrounded it and the beloved
city, Jerusalem. It is remarkable here, there is no special presence of
Christ amongst them. They are left apparently to be surrounded by their
enemies. The Lord has allowed all this testing separation of personal
faithfulness. Had He appeared of course these hostile crowds could not
have come up, nor would the thorough trial of the heart have proved the
faithfulness of the saints, who would not follow the seductions of
Satan. They are pressed upon and surrounded by the enemy, but faithful.
Once this separation and full testing had been accomplished, God's
judgment fell on them from heaven, and destroyed them. The devil was
then cast into the lake of fire, where the beast and the false prophet
were already, where they are tormented for ever and ever.

This closed the exercise of wrath, of the destruction of hostile power a
wondrous scene that God should have enemies in this world! Now judicial
power, as such, seated in its own right, comes in. It may be remarked,
that the exercise of this on the quick, forms no part of the contents of
this book. The hostile power of the beast was destroyed by Him who
judges and makes war, the heavenly saints having been taken to glory.
The crowds of apostates at the end of the thousand years are destroyed
by fire from heaven. But the judgment of Matthew 25 is not found here,
unless there be a possible connection with the judgment of [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004.md).

There now comes the judgment of the dead. There no coming here. A great
white throne is set; judgment is carried on according to the purity of
God's nature. It was no dealing with the earth, or the power of evil,
but with souls. Heaven and earth all mere scenes of judgment disappear.
The secrets of men's hearts are judged by Him who knows them all. Heaven
and earth flee away before the face of Him that sat on the throne, and
the dead, small and great, stand before the throne. Judgment was
according to works, as it was written in the books of record. Still
another element was brought into view. Sovereign grace alone had saved
according to the purpose of God. \[See Note \#21\] There was a book of
life. Whosoever was not written there was cast into the lake of fire.
But it was the finally closing and separating scene for the whole race
of men and this world. And though they were judged every man according
to his works, yet sovereign grace only had delivered any; and whoever
was not found in grace's book was cast into the lake of fire. The sea
gave up the dead in it; death and hades, the dead in them. And death and
hades were put an end to for ever by the divine judgment. The heaven and
earth passed away, but they were to be revived; but death and hades
never. There was for them only divine destruction and judgment. They are
looked at as the power of Satan. He has the power of death and the gates
of hades; and hence these are for ever destroyed judicially. They will
never have power again. They are personified; but of course there is no
question of tormenting them or of punishment: when the devil himself is
cast in, there is. But death was not then destroyed; for the wicked dead
had not been raised for judgment. Now they had; and the last enemy is
destroyed. The force of the image, I doubt not, is that all the dead now
judged (the whole contents of hades, in whom the power of death had
been) were cast into the lake of fire, so that death and hades, which
had no existence but in their state, were entirely and judicially ended
by their being cast in. The saints had long before passed out of them;
but they subsisted in the wicked. Now these were, consequent on the
judgment of the white throne, cast into the lake of fire the second
death. The limit and measure of escape was the book of life.

Note \#20

It may be noted here that, according to the true reading, the living and
reigning is certainly resurrection. "The rest of the dead lived not
until," and etc.; so that it is clearly used here for resurrection, as
the following words confirm: "This is the first resurrection."

Note \#21

Thus purpose and man's responsibility are never confounded, but, from
the two trees of the garden on, are in juxtaposition; life brought into
connection with responsibility in the law, responsibility being put
first, and thus proof given that man cannot stand before God; but the
question is solved only in Christ, who bore our sins, died for us to
sin, and is life. Counsels and promise of life in Christ come first,
then responsibility in the creature on earth, then grace making good
counsels, in righteousness, through the cross.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 21](rev021.md)

</div>
