<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev004)  [Next](rev006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001.md)

In the next Chapter we find the Lamb. A book was in the right hand of
Him who sat on the throne. It was counsels, wielded by His power. Who
could open them and bring them forth to execution? Who had the title to
do so? None in heaven or earth but One. The elders explained to the
prophet who mourned that the ways of God should be shut up, that the
mighty One of Judah, the true source of all promises to David, had
prevailed to open it and loose the seals. This was the Lamb, the
rejected Messiah. He was more than this, as the Chapter goes on to shew;
but He is this. The rejected Messiah was in the midst of the divine
throne; and within all the displays of providence and grace the living
creatures and elders stood a Lamb as it had been slain. He had the
fullness of power over the earth seven horns as of God, and the seven
Spirits of God for government, according to God's perfection, of all the
earth. When He has taken the book, the living creatures and elders fall
down before Him with golden censers full of the prayers of the saints.
They are priests here.

Now a new song is sung to celebrate the Lamb. What seemed His dishonour
and rejection on earth was the ground of His worthiness to take the
book. He who at all suffering and cost to Himself had glorified all that
God was, was able and worthy to unfold what made it good in the way of
government. It was not the government of Israel, but of all the earth;
not merely earthly chastisements according to God's revelation of
Himself in Israel, but the display in power of all God was in the whole
earth. He who had glorified all He was, and redeemed, by the gospel of
what He was through His death, out of all the earth, was the fit One to
bring it forth in power. He does not yet come forth; but His work is the
worthy instrument, the divine motive, for the display of it all. He can
unlock the seals of God's ways and mysteries. I read the passage thus: "
Thou wast slain, and hast redeemed to God, by thy blood, out of every
kindred, &c., and hast made them unto our God kings and priests, and
they shall reign over the earth." Thus it is not any particular class,
but the value of the act which is the motive of praise, and all being
confided to Him.

Here the angels come in to praise, not in the fourth Chapter. I can
hardly doubt that a change in administrative order takes place here.
Until the Lamb took the book, they were the administrative power; they
were the instruments through which what the four living creatures
symbolized was exercised in the earth. "But unto the angels hath he not
put into subjection the world to come, whereof we speak." Hence, as soon
as the Lamb appears and takes the book, as soon as the idea of
redemption is brought in, the living creatures and elders are brought
together, and the angels take their own place apart. Like the living
creatures before, they give no reason for their praise. As the heads of
creation as to their nature, they celebrate with all creatures the title
to glory of the Lamb and His own worthiness, ascribing praise to Him
that sits on the throne and to the Lamb for ever and ever. The four
living creatures, that is, all the exercise of God's power in creation
and providence, join their Amen, and the elders worship God in the
excellency of His being. But the living creatures and elders are joined
([Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008).md) in falling down before the
Lamb. I do not think they are meant to be distinguished in the latter
part of the Verse, \[See Note \#11\] but merge in the elders,
symbolizing different service but not now two classes. Verse 9 ([Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009).md) is the general fact; not "they
sung," but " they sing." This takes place in heaven; but those named are
in the mind in a general way. Thus the source of what follows, the
throne, and the persons engaged in heaven before God in all that passes,
are displayed: whence the judgment flows, who surround the throne of God
above, and who is in it, have been brought before us; the heavenly
scene, and choir, and assistants.

Note \#11

That is, "echontes" does not apply to elders only.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 6](rev006.md)

</div>
