<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom011)  [Next](rom013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)

The apostle resumes the thread of his instructions, by taking up as he
does in all his epistles the moral consequences of his doctrine. He
places the believer at the outset on the ground of God's mercy, which he
had fully developed already. The principle of grace that saves had been
established as the basis of salvation. The ground of all christian
morality is now laid in this fundamental principle: to present our
bodies as a sacrifice, living, holy, acceptable to God an intelligent
service, not that of the hands, not consisting in ceremonies which the
body could perform a simple but deep-reaching and all-efficacious
principle. This was for man personally. As to his outward relationships,
he was not to be conformed to the world. Neither was this to be an
outside mechanical nonconformity, but the result of being renewed in
mind, so as to seek for and discern the will of God, good and acceptable
and perfect; the life being thus transformed.

This connects itself with the end of Chapter 6. It is not those sitting
in heavenly places, imitators of God as dear children, but men on earth
set free by the delivering power of redemption and grace, yielding
themselves up to God to do His will. The exhortation follows the
character we have seen to be that of the epistle.

Thus the christian walk was characterised by devotedness and obedience.
It was a life subjected to the will of another, namely, to the will of
God; and therefore stamped with humility and dependence. But there was
absolute devotedness of heart in self-sacrifice. For there was a danger,
flowing from the power that acted in it, of the flesh coming in and
availing itself of it. With regard to this, every one was to have a
spirit of wisdom and moderation, and to act within the limits of the
gift which God had dispensed to him, occupying himself with it according
to the will of God; even as each member has its own place in the body,
and should accomplish the function which God has ascribed to it. The
apostle passes on insensibly to all the forms which duty assumes in the
Christian, according to the various positions in which he stands, and to
the spirit in which he ought to walk in every relationship.

It is in Chapter 12 only that the idea of the assembly as a body is thus
found in this epistle; and that, in connection with the duties of the
members individually duties that flowed from their positions as such.
Otherwise it is the position of man in his individual responsibility
before God, and this met by grace, and then the delivered man, that is
set before us in the Epistle to the Romans. The directions given by the
apostle extend to the Christian's relationship with the authorities
under which he is placed. He recognises them as accomplishing the
service of God, and as armed with authority from Him, so that resisting
them would be resisting that which God had established. Conscience
therefore, and not merely force, constrained the Christian to obey. In
fine he was to render to every man that which was due to him in virtue
of his position; to leave nothing owing to any one, be it of whatever
character it might excepting love a debt which never can be liquidated.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 13](rom013)

</div>
