<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom013)  [Next](rom015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001.md)

From the beginning of Chapter 14 to the end of Verse 7 in Chapter 15
another point is taken up, to which the different positions of the Jew
and Gentile gave rise. It was difficult for a Jew to rid himself of the
sense of difference between days and between meats. A Gentile, having
abandoned his whole religious system as idolatrous, held to nothing.
Human nature is liable in this respect to sin on both sides a want of
conscience, an unbridled will, and a ceremonial conscience. Christianity
recognises neither of these things. It delivers from the question of
days and meats by making us heavenly with Christ. But it teaches us to
bear with conscientious weakness, and to be conscientious ourselves.
Conscience cannot has not a right to prescribe a new thing to us as a
duty, but it may, through ignorance, hold to a traditional thing as
obligatory. In reality we have entire liberty, but we ought to bear with
weakness of faith in another, and not put a stumbling-block in his way.
The apostle gives three directions in this respect: First, to receive
the weak, but not for the discussion of questions that have to be
settled; second, not to judge our brother, since he is Christ's servant,
not ours; and every one must give account of himself to God; third, to
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves; to walk
in the spirit of love, and, if we are in a higher state, to shew it by
receiving one another, as Christ has received us, to the glory of God,
which eclipses man and his petty superiorities, and which kindles
charity and makes it ardent, earnest in seeking the good of others
taking us so out of self, and beyond little things, that we are able to
adapt ourselves to others, where the will of God and His glory are not
in question.

Many important principles are brought forward in these exhortations.
Every one shall give account of himself to God. Everyone, in these
cases, should be fully persuaded in his own mind, and should not judge
another. If any one has faith that delivers him from traditional
observances, and he sees them to be absolutely nothing as indeed they
are let him have his faith for God, and not cause his brother to
stumble.

No one lives to himself, and no one dies to himself; we are the Lord's.
The weak then regard the day for the Lord's sake; the others do not
regard it because of the Lord. This is the reason therefore for not
judging. He whom I judge is the Lord's. Therefore also I should seek to
please my brother for his edification he is the Lord's; and I should
receive him, as I have been received, to share in the glory of God which
has been conferred on him. We serve Christ in these things by thinking
of the good of our brother. As to the energy of a man's faith, let him
have it between himself and God. Love is the ruler for the use of his
liberty, if it is liberty, and not the bondage of disregarding. For the
converse of this principle, when these observances are used to destroy
liberty in Christ, see Galatians 4, where the apostle shews that, if the
observance is taught as a principle, it is really turning back to
Paganism.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 15](rom015.md)

</div>
