<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom002)  [Next](rom004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)

Having established the great truth that God required real moral
goodness, he considers the position of the Jews. Could they not plead
special divine favour? Was there no advantage in Judaism? Surely there
was, especially in that they possessed the oracles of God. The ways of
God were full of blessing in themselves, although that did not change
the immutable truths of His nature. And if many among them had been
unbelieving, this did not alter the faithfulness of God; and the fact
that the unbelief of many did but the more demonstrate the faithfulness
of God, who remained the same whatever they might be, took nothing from
the claims of righteousness. Unbelievers should be punished according to
what they were; it would but magnify the unfailing faithfulness of God,
which never failed, however unavailing it might be for the mass of the
nation. Otherwise He could judge no one, not even the world (which the
Jew was willing to see judged); for the condition of the world also
enhanced and put in evidence the faithfulness of God towards His people.
If then the Jew had advantages, was he therefore better? In no wise: all
were shut up under sin, whether Jew or Gentile, as God had already
declared. \[See Note \#10\]

The apostle now cites the Old Testament to prove this with regard to the
Jews, who did not deny it with regard to the Gentiles which he had
already also shewn. The law, says he, belongs to you. You boast that it
refers to you exclusively. Be it so: hear then what it says of the
people, of yourselves. It speaks to you, as you acknowledge. There is
not then one righteous man among you on whom God can look down from
heaven. He quotes [Psa 14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002); [Isa
59:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007), to set forth the judgment
pronounced on them by those oracles of which they boasted. Thus every
mouth was shut, and all the world guilty before God. Therefore it is
that no flesh can be justified before God by the law; for if the world
in the midst of darkness wallowed in sin, by means of the law sin was
known.

But now, without law, apart from all law, a righteousness that is of God
has been manifested, the law and the prophets bearing witness to it.

Hence then we find not only the condition of the Gentiles and of the
Jews set forth, together with the great immutable principles of good and
evil, whatever might be the dealings of God, but the effect of the law
itself, and that which was introduced by Christianity as regarded
righteousness, altogether outside the law, although the law and the
prophets bore witness to it. In a word, the eternal truth as to sin and
as to the responsibility of man, the effect of the law, the connection
of the Old Testament with Christianity, the true character of the latter
in that which relates to righteousness (namely, that it is a thing
entirely new and independent), the righteousness of God Himself-the
whole question between man and God, with regard to sin and
righteousness, is settled, as to its foundation, in these few words. The
manner of its accomplishment is now to be treated of. \[See Note \#11\]
It is the righteousness of God by faith in Jesus Christ. Man has not
accomplished it, man has not procured it. It is of God, it is His
righteousness; by believing in Jesus Christ participation in it is
obtained. Had it been a human righteousness, it would have been by the
law which is the rule of that righteousness a law given to the Jews
only. But being the righteousness of God Himself, it had reference to
all; its range embraced not the one more than the other. It was the
righteousness of God "unto all." A Jew was not more in relation with the
righteousness of God than a Gentile. It was in fact universal in its
aspect and in its applicability. A righteousness of God for man, because
no man had any for God, it was applied to all those who believe in
Jesus. Wherever there was faith, there it was applied. The believer
possessed it. It was towards all, and upon all those who believed in
Jesus. For there was no difference: all had sinned, and outside the
glory of God, \[See Note \#12\] deprived of that glory, were justified
freely by His grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
Whether a Jew or a Gentile, it was a sinful man: the righteousness was
the righteousness of God; the goodness of God was that which bestowed
it, redemption in Christ Jesus the divine means of having part in it.
\[See Note \#13\] Before the accomplishment of this redemption, God, in
view of it, had in patience borne with the faithful, and His
righteousness in forgiving them was now clearly manifested. But,
further, the righteousness itself was manifested: we come to Christ as a
propitiatory that God has set forth before men, and we find on it the
blood which gives us free access to God in righteousness, God whose
glory is satisfied in the work that Christ Jesus has accomplished, His
blood upon the mercy-seat bearing witness thereof. It is no longer
"forbearance" righteousness is manifested, so that God is seen to be
righteous and just in justifying him who is of faith in Jesus. Where
then is boasting? For the Jews boasted much in reference to the Gentiles
self-righteousness always boasts: it is not a law of works that can shut
it out. Man justifying himself by his works would have something to
boast in. It is this law of faith, this divine principle on which we are
placed, which shuts it out: for it is by the work of another, without
works of law, that we through grace have part in divine righteousness,
having none of our own.

And is God a limited God \[See Note \#14\] the God of the Jews only? No,
He is also the God of the Gentiles. And how? In grace: in that it is one
God who justifies the Jews (who seek after righteousness) on the
principle of faith, and since justification is on the principle of faith
the believing Gentiles also by faith. Men are justified by faith; the
believing Gentile then is justified. With regard to the Jew, it is the
principle which is established (for they were seeking the
righteousness). With regard to the Gentile, since faith existed in the
case supposed, he was justified, for justification was on that
principle.

Is it then that faith overturned the authority of law? By no means. It
established completely the authority of law; but it made man participate
in divine righteousness, while acknowledging his just and total
condemnation by the law when under it a condemnation which made another
righteousness necessary, since according to the law man had none had
none of his own. The law demanded righteousness, but it shewed sin was
there. If righteousness which it demanded had not been necessary, when
it failed to produce it in man, there was no need of another. Now faith
affirmed this need and the validity of man's condemnation under law, by
making the believer participate in this other righteousness, which is
that of God. That which the law demanded it did not give; and even,
because it demanded it, man failed to produce it. To have given it would
have effaced the obligation. God acts in grace, when the obligation of
the law is fully maintained in condemnation. He gives righteousness,
because it must be had. He does not efface the obligation of the law,
according to which man is totally condemned; \[See Note \#15\] but,
while recognising and affirming the justice of that condemnation, He
glorifies Himself in grace by granting a divine righteousness to man,
when he had no human righteousness to present before God in connection
with the obligations imposed on him by the law. Nothing ever put divine
sanction on the law like the death of Christ, who bore its curse, but
did not leave us under it. Faith does not then annul law; it fully
establishes its authority. It shews man righteously condemned under it,
and maintains the authority of the law in that condemnation, for it
holds all who are under it to be under the curse. \[See Note \#16\] The
reader will remark that what is distinctly set forth to the end of this
third Chapter is the blood of Christ as applying itself to the sins of
the old man, hence making forgiving a righteous thing, and the believer
clear from sins, because cleared by Christ's blood. This met all the
guilt of the old man.

We now enter on another aspect of that which justifies, but still proves
sins; not yet, however, putting us in a new place that of resurrection,
in connection with, and consequent on, this.

Note \#10

Note here a very important principle, that there are positive advantages
of position, where there is no intrinsic change. Compare [Rom
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017), and 1 Corinthians 11.

Note \#10

[Rom 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021) reverts in fact to [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); what comes between is the
demonstration of the ground of [Rom
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018), which made the righteousness of
Verse 17 imperatively necessary.

Note \#12

Remark here how, God being revealed, sin is measured by the glory of
God. We are so used to read this that we overlook its force. How strange
to say, "and come short of the glory of God!" Man might say, Why, of
course we have; but, morally speaking, this has been revealed, and if
one cannot stand before it, according to it, we cannot subsist before
God at all. Of course it is not of His essential glory all creatures are
short of that, of course but of that which was fitting for, according
to, could stand in, His presence. If we cannot stand there, fitly "walk
in the light as God is in the light," we cannot be with God at all.
There is no veil now.

Note \#13

To shew how complete is this instruction of Paul's, I give here a
summary of its elements. In itself it is the righteousness of God,
without law, the law and the prophets bearing witness to it: as to its
application, the righteousness of God by faith in Christ Jesus unto all,
and upon all them that believe. Christ is proposed as the propitiatory
by faith in His blood, to shew forth this righteousness by the remission
of past sins (of the Abrahams, etc.) according to the forbearance of
God; but to shew it forth in the present time, in order that He may be
just, and justify those who believe in Jesus.

Note \#14

See here again how God is brought out in Himself. Compare [Mat
15:19-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019).

Note \#15

The law is the perfect rule of right and wrong for every child of Adam
in itself, though only given to the Jews. But it was not arbitrary. It
took up all the relationships in which men stood, gave a perfect rule as
to them, and the sanction of God's authority to them, with a penal
sanction. But now we have something much higher, not what man ought to
be, but God Himself glorified.

Note \#16

Hence those who put Christians under law do not maintain its authority;
for they hold them exempt from its curse, though they break it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 4](rom004)

</div>
