<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom006)  [Next](rom008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001.md)

We have considered the effect of the death and resurrection of Christ
with reference to justification and to practical life. In the early part
of the epistle (to Chapter 5:11) He has died for our sins. From Chapter
5:12, He having died, we reckon ourselves dead to sin and alive to God
through Him. Our state as under the two heads, Adam and Christ, has been
discussed. Another point remained to be treated of by the apostle the
effect of this last doctrine upon the question of the law. The
Christian, or, to say better, the believer, has part in Christ as a
Christ who has died, and lives to God, Christ being raised from the dead
through Him. What is the force of this truth with regard to the law (for
the law has only power over a man so long as he lives)? Being then dead,
it has no longer any hold upon him. This is our position with regard to
the law. Does that weaken its authority? No. For we say that Christ has
died, and so have we therefore; but the law no longer applies to one
that is dead.

In bringing out the effect of this truth, the apostle uses the example
of the law of marriage. The woman would be an adulteress if she were to
be to another while her husband was alive; but when her husband is dead
she is free. The application of this rule changes the form of the truth.
It is certain that one cannot be under the authority of two husbands at
once. One excludes the other. The law, and Christ risen, cannot be
associated in their authority over the soul. But in our case the law
does not lose its force (that is, its rights over us) by its dying, but
by our dying. It reigns over us only while we live. It is with this
destruction of the bond by death the apostle began. The husband died,
but in application it is annulled by our dying. We are then dead to the
law by the body of Christ (for we have to do with a Christ risen after
His death), that we should be to Him who is raised from the dead, in
order that we should bear fruit for God; but we cannot belong to the two
at once.

When we were in the flesh when, as man, any one was held to be walking
in the responsibility of a man living in the life of nature, as a child
of Adam, the law to him was the rule and perfect measure of that
responsibility, and the representative of the authority of God. The
passions which impelled to sin acted in that nature, and, meeting with
this barrier of the law, found in it that which, by resisting it,
excited the will, and suggested, even by the prohibition itself, the
evil which the flesh loved and which the law forbade; and thus these
passions acted in the members to produce fruit which brought in death.
But now he was outside its authority, he had disappeared from its
pursuit, \[See Note \#35\] being dead in that law to the authority of
which we had been subjected. Now to have died under the law would have
been also condemnation; but it is Christ who went through this and took
the condemnation, while we have the deliverance from the old man which
is in death. Our old man is crucified with Him, so that it is our
deliverance to die to the law. It did but condemn us, but its authority
ends with the life of him who was under that authority. And being dead
in Christ, the law can no longer reach those who had been under it: we
belong to the new husband, to Christ risen, in order that we should
serve in newness of spirit, the goodwill of grace in our new life, and
as the apostle will afterwards explain, by the Holy Ghost \[See Note
\#36\] not in the bondage of the letter.

This is the doctrine. Now for the conclusions that may be deduced from
it. Is the law, then, sin, that we are withdrawn from its authority? By
no means. But it gave the knowledge of sin, and imputed it. For the
apostle says, that he would not have understood that the mere impulse of
his nature was sin, if the law had not said, Thou shalt not covet. But
the commandment gave sin occasion to attack the soul. Sin, that evil
principle of our nature, \[See Note \#37\] making use of the commandment
to provoke the soul to the sin that is forbidden (but which it took
occasion to suggest by the interdiction itself, acting also on the will
which resisted the interdiction), produced all manner of concupiscence.
For, without the law, sin could not plunge the soul into this conflict,
and give the sentence of death in it, by making it responsible in
conscience for the sin which, without this law, it would not have known.
Under the law lust acted, with the conscience of sin in the heart; and
the result was death in the conscience, without any deliverance for the
heart from the power of concupiscence.

Without the law, sin did not thus agitate a will which refused
submission to that which checked it. For a barrier to the will awakens
and excites the will: and the conscience of sin, in the presence of
God's prohibition, is a conscience under sentence of death. Thus the
commandment, which in itself was unto life, became in fact unto death.
"Do this and live" became death, by shewing the exigencies of God to a
sinful nature whose will rejected them, and to a conscience which could
not but accept the just condemnation.

A man walks in quiet indifference, doing his own will, without knowledge
of God, or consequently any sense of sin or rebellion. The law comes,
and he dies under its just judgment, which forbids everything that he
desires. Lust was an evil thing, but it did not reveal the judgment of
God; on the contrary, it forgot it. But when the law was come, sin (it
is looked at here as an enemy that attacks some person or place),
knowing that the will would persist and the conscience condemn, seized
the opportunity of the law, impelled the man in the direction contrary
to the law, and slew him, in the conscience of sin which the law forbade
on the part of God. Death to the man, on God's part in judgment, was the
result. The law then was good and holy, since it forbade the sin, but in
condemning the sinner.

Was death then brought in by that which was good? \[See Note \#38\] No.
But sin, in order that it might be seen in its true light, employed that
which was good to bring death upon the soul; and thus, by the
commandment, became exceedingly sinful. In all this, sin is personified
as some one who seeks to kill the soul.

Such then was the effect of the law, that first husband, seeing sin
existed in man. To bring this out more plainly, the apostle communicates
his spiritual apprehension of the experience of a soul under the law.

We must remark here, that the subject treated of is not the fact of the
conflict between the two natures, but the effect of the law, supposing
the will to be renewed, and the law to have obtained the suffrage of the
conscience and to be the object of the heart's affections a heart which
recognises the spirituality of the law. This is neither the knowledge of
grace, nor of the Saviour Christ, nor of the Spirit. \[See Note \#39\]
The chief point here is not condemnation (although the law does indeed
leave the soul under judgment), but the entire want of strength to
fulfil it, that it may not condemn us. The law is spiritual; but I, as
man, am carnal, the slave of sin, whatever the judgment of my inward man
may be: for I allow not that which I do. That which I would I do not;
and that which I hate I practise. Thus loving and thus hating, I consent
to the law that it is good. It is not that I do the evil as to moral
intent of the will, for I would not the evil which I do; on the contrary
I hate it. It is the sin then that dwells in me, for in fact in me (that
is, in my flesh the whole natural man as he is) there exists no good,
for even where there is the will, I do not find the way to perform any
good. Power is totally wanting.

In Verse 20 ([Rom 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#020).md) the apostle,
having this explanation, lays stress upon the I and me. "If that which I
myself would" (we should read), and "It is no longer myself that does
it, but the sin that dwelleth in me." I find then evil present with the
myself which would do good; for, as to the inward man, I delight in the
law of God. But there is in me another constant principle which wars
against the law of my mind, which brings me into captivity to this law
of sin in my members. So that, whatever my desires may be, the better
even that they are, I am myself a miserable man. Being man, and such a
man, I cannot but be miserable. But, having come to this, an immense
step has been taken.

The evil here spoken of is the evil that is in our nature, and the want
of power to get rid of it. The forgiveness of sins hadbeen fully taught.
What distresses here is the present working of sin which we cannot get
rid of The sense of this is often a more painful thing than past sins,
which the believer can understand as put away by the blood of Christ.
But here we have the conscience of sin still in us, though we may hate
it, and the question of deliverance is mixed up with our experience, at
least till we have learned what is taught us in this part of the
epistle, to judge the old man as sin in us, not ourselves, and reckon
ourselves dead. Christ, through whom we now live, having died, and being
a sacrifice for sin, our condemnation is impossible, while sin is
condemned and we free through "the law of the Spirit of life in him." It
is not forgiveness, but deliverance, sin in the flesh being condemned in
the cross.

Under divine grace the renewed man learned three things. First, he has
come to the discovery that in him, that is, in his flesh, there is no
good thing; but, secondly, he has learned to distinguish between
himself, who wills good, and sin which dwells in him; but, further, that
when he wills good, sin is too strong for him. Having thus acquired
knowledge of himself, he does not seek to be better in the flesh, but
deliverance, and he has it in Christ. Power comes after. He is come to
the discovery and to the confession that he has no power. He throws
himself upon another. He does not say, How can I? or, How shall I? but,
Who shall deliver me? Now it was when we were devoid of all strength
that Christ died for the ungodly. This want of strength is discovered;
and we find grace at the end, when with regard to what we are, and to
all hope of amelioration in ourselves, grace is our only resource.

But happily, when we cast ourselves upon grace, there is nothing but
grace before us. Deliverance is accomplished by our not being alive in
the flesh at all: we have died away from it, and from under the law,
which held us in bondage and condemnation, and we are married to
another, Christ raised from the dead; and as soon as the distressed soul
has said, "Who shall deliver me?" the answer is ready, "I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord." The answer is not, He will deliver.
Deliverance is already accomplished: he gives thanks.

The man was wretched in conflict under law, without knowledge of
redemption. But he has died in the death of Christ out of the nature
which made him so; he has quite done with himself. The deliverance of
God is complete. The two natures are still opposed to each other, but
the deliverance is not imperfect. This deliverance wrought of God, and
the progress of its manifestation, are developed in the next Chapter.

We may here remark that the apostle does not say, "We know that the law
is spiritual, and we are carnal." Had he done so, it would have been to
speak of Christians, as such, in their proper and normal condition. It
is the personal experience of what the flesh is under law, when the man
is quickened, and not the state of a Christian as such before God.
Observe, also, that the law is looked at from the point of view of
christian knowledge "we know" when we are no longer under it, and when
we are capable of judging concerning its whole import, according to the
spirituality of him who judges: and who sees also, being spiritual, what
the flesh is; because he is now not in the flesh, but in the Spirit.
\[See Note \#40\] Literally, this passage is not the condition of anyone
at all; but principles opposed to each other, the result of which is
laid open by supposing a man under the law: the will always right, but
good never done, evil always. Nevertheless to the conscience this is the
practical condition of every renewed man under the law. We may remark
one other important principle. Man in this condition is entirely taken
up with himself; he desires good, he does not perform it, he does that
which he would not. Neither Christ nor the Holy Ghost is named. In the
normal condition of a Christian, he is occupied with Christ. But what is
expressed in this seventh Chapter is the natural and necessary result of
the law, when the conscience is awakened and the will renewed. For to
will is present with him. But he is under law, sees its spirituality,
consents to it, delights in it after the inner man, and cannot perform
what is good. Sin has dominion over him. The sense of unanswered
responsibility, and the absence of peace, cause the soul necessarily to
turn in upon itself. It is taken up entirely with self, which is spoken
of nearly forty times from Verse 14 ([Rom
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014).md). It is well to be so, rather
than to be insensible. It is not peace.

This peace is found elsewhere, and it is in this; when reduced to the
consciousness of one's own inability to do good towards God, one finds
that God has done for us the good which we need. We are not only
forgiven but delivered, and are in Christ, not in the flesh at all.

The conflict goes on, the opposition between the two natures continues,
but we give thanks to God through our Lord Jesus Christ. \[See Note
\#41\] Remark here that deliverance is only found when there is the full
conviction of our incapacity and want of power, as well as of our sins.
It is much more difficult to arrive at this conviction of incapacity
than at that of having sinned. But the sin of our nature its
irremediable perversity, its resistance to good, the law of sin in our
members is only known in its legal gravity by experience of the
uselessness of our efforts to do well. Under the law the uselessness of
these efforts leaves the conscience in distress and bondage, and
produces the sense of its being impossible to be with God. Under grace
the efforts are not useless, and the evil nature shews itself to us
(either in communion with God, or by downfalls if we neglect communion)
in all its deformity in presence of that grace. But in this Chapter the
experience of sin in the nature is presented as acquired under the law,
in order that man may know himself in this position may know what he is
as regards his flesh, and that in fact he cannot succeed in this way in
coming before God with a good conscience. He is under the first husband;
death had not yet severed the bond as to the state of the soul.

We must now remember that this experience of the soul under the law is
introduced parenthetically, to shew the sinful condition to which grace
applies and the effect of the law. Our subject is that the believer has
part in the death of Christ and has died, and is alive through Him who
is risen; that Christ, having by grace gone under death, having been
made sin, has for ever done with that state in which He had to do with
sin and death in the likeness of sinful flesh; and having for ever done
with all that was connected with it, has entered by resurrection into a
new order of things a new condition before God, totally beyond the reach
of all that to which He had subjected Himself for us, which in us was
connected with our natural life, and beyond reach of the law which bound
sin upon the conscience on God's part. In Christ we are in this new
order of things.

Note \#35

It is thus, I doubt not, that this passage should be read. My reader may
perhaps find "the law being dead." The expression, "dead to that wherein
we were held," alludes to Verse 4 ([Rom
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004).md), where it is said, "ye died to
the law." Christ under the law died under its curse. To be in the flesh
is to live under the responsibility of a man in his natural life a child
of fallen Adam. In that life (unless it is lawless) the law is the rule
of human righteousness. We must not confound the flesh being in the
Christian with a man being in the flesh. The principle of the old life
is still there, but it is in no way the principle of his relationship to
God. When I am in the flesh, it is the principle of my relationship with
God; but, its will being sinful, it is impossible that I should please
God. I may seek for righteousness in it it will be on the ground of law.
But the Christian is dead by Christ to all that state of things does not
live of that life; his life is in Christ, and he has received the Holy
Ghost. The flesh is no longer the principle of his relationship with
God; on that ground he has owned himself lost. Elsewhere we learn that
he is in Christ on the ground upon which Christ is before God. The Holy
Ghost, as we shall see, places him there in power by faith, Christ being
his life.

Note \#36

He does not say here by the Spirit, because he has not yet spoken of the
gift of the Holy Ghost in virtue of the work of Christ. He only speaks
of the manner, the character, of the service rendered.

Note \#37

It will be remembered that all through this part of the epistle (that
is, from Chapter 5:12) we have to do with sin, not with sins.

Note \#38

Sin and death are correlative. The law is introduced in order to make
manifest through the offence what they both are. The apostle first asks,
"Is the law sin?" since its result was death to man. God forbid! but it
gave the knowledge of sin, and wrote death upon the soul through
judgment, man being a sinner. The second question is, "The law being
thus good in itself, has it become death to me?" No. It is sin which (in
order that it might appear in all its enormity) has slain me, using the
law as a means, in my conscience. It found in man's condition the means
of perverting this good thing, and making it death to him.

Note \#39

There is also conflict, when the Holy Ghost dwells in us. Galatians 5
speaks of this. "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit," etc. But then we
are not under the law, as the apostle goes on to say, "If ye are led by
the Spirit, ye are not under the law." Here the person spoken of is
under the law: everything is in connection with the law. The law is
spiritual; we consent to the law, we delight in the law. Neither Christ
nor the Spirit is mentioned until the question of deliverance comes in.

Note \#40

This gives the key to this alas! because souls are not free much spoken
of passage. It is not the present experience of any one, but a delivered
person describing the state of an undelivered one. An undelivered person
could not speak exactly thus, because he is uneasy as to the result for
himself. A man in a morass does not quietly describe how a man sinks
into it, because he fears to sink and stay there; when he is out, he
describes how a man sinks there. The end of Romans 7 is a man out of the
morass shewing in peace the principle and manner in which one sinks in
it. All this part of the epistle is more complicated than what precedes
Chapter 5:12, because our own experience is in conflict withwhat faith
teaches us to say. If through grace I am forgiven and justified, there
is no contradiction in my experience. It is what God has done for me
outside myself. My debt is paid. But if I am to say, I am dead to sin,
my experience contradicts it. Hence we have no rest in this respect,
till we give up self or flesh as wholly bad and irremediable, and learn
that, consequent on redemption, we are not in the flesh at all. Compare
Chapters 7 and 8.

Note \#41

The last Verse of Chapter 7 ([Rom
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025).md) speaks of the abstract mind and
character of the opposed natures; one the mind, however, and purpose of
heart in the renewed man; the other, the fact of flesh being there, one
"I myself," the other "my flesh." So the "I" is right; only it is not
considered under the law or the contrary.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 8](rom008.md)

</div>
