<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ruth Index](rut.md)  
  [Previous](rut001)  [Next](rut003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 1 through 4.

The Book of Ruth tells us also of the days of the judges, when there was
no king in Israel; but it shews us the fair side of those days, in the
operations of the grace of God, who (blessed be His name!) never failed
to work in the midst of the evil, as also in the steady progress of
events towards the fulfilment of His promises in the Messiah, whatever
may have been the simultaneous progress of the general evil. Ruth, a
stranger seeking shelter by faith under the wings of the God of Israel,
is received in grace, and the genealogy of David, king over Israel
according to grace, is linked with her. It is the genealogy of the Lord
Jesus Himself after the flesh.

This book appears to me to set before us in type, the reception in grace
of the remnant of Israel in the last days, their Redeemer (the kinsman,
who has the right of redemption) having taken their cause in hand.
Eli-Melech (which signifies God the King) being dead, Naomi (my delight,
my pleasure) becomes a widow, and eventually loses her children also.
She typifies the Jewish nation, who, having lost her God, is like a
widow and has no heir. Yet there shall be a remnant, destitute of all
right to the promises (and therefore prefigured historically by a
stranger), who will be received in grace (similarly to the Gentiles and
the assembly \[See Note \#1\] )-who will faithfully and heartily
identify itself with desolate Israel; for Ruth clave to her and to her
God (see [Rut 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#016).md). God will own this
remnant, which, poor and afflicted itself, will in heart obey the
commands given to the people. Naomi, who in her destitution is a type of
the nation, acknowledges her condition: she calls herself Mara
(bitterness). He who was nearest of kin, who would willingly have
redeemed the inheritance, refuses to do so, if Ruth must be taken with
it. The law was never able (nor the assembly either) to re-establish
Israel in their inheritance, nor to raise up in grace the name of the
dead.

Boaz (in him is strength), upon whom the remnant had no direct claim
(and who typifies Christ risen, in whom are the sure mercies of David),
undertakes to raise up the name of the dead, and to re-establish the
heritage of Israel. Acting in grace and in kindness, and encouraging the
patient humble faith of the remnant, the meek of the earth, he shews
himself faithful to fulfil the purpose and the will of God with respect
to this poor desolate family. Nothing can be more touching and exquisite
than the details given here. The character of Ruth, this poor woman of
the Gentiles, has great beauty. "Naomi took the child that was born to
her, and laid it in her bosom"; and they said, "There is a son born to
Naomi." In fact the heir of the promises will be born unto Israel as a
nation, although the fulfilment of the promise affects the remnant only,
which, fully identifying itself with the interests of God's people, has
sought neither the rich nor the poor, but, in faith and obedience, has
kept the testimony of God amongst the people in the path appointed by
Him.

Thus, if on one side the Book of Judges shews us the falling away of the
people of Israel, and their failure under responsibility, even when God
was their helper, on the other side this touching and precious book sets
before us, as the dawn of better things, grace acting in the midst of
difficulties, securing the fulfilment of promise, and embellishing this
scene of misery and sin by lovely and beautiful instances of faith,
precious fruits of grace, whether in weakness and devotedness, or in
strength and kindness, and always in accordance with the perfect will of
God, and assuring by this touching history, as a type, the full
restoration of Israel to blessing according to promise. It is a
refreshing and lovely picture in the midst of the hard-mindedness and
sorrows of Israel.

In the succeeding books we shall see prophecy, and the history of God's
dealings, developing the body of events which tended to the fulfilment
of His designs, the first principles, the elements, of which are laid
down in that which is shewn us in this. For Ruth furnishes a kind of
intermediate link between the fall of Israel under God's immediate
government, and the future fulfilment of His purposes. Prophecy, which
unfolds these purposes and gives moral proof of this fall, begins with
Samuel: we learn this from the apostle Peter, and that Christ is the
object of prophecy (see [Act 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#024).md).
Eli, the last judge and priest, departs; his family is to be cut off;
the ark of the covenant is taken by the Philistines; and Samuel,
consecrated to God in a new and extraordinary manner, comes in with the
special testimony of the Lord.

Note \#1

Compare [Mic 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003.md), last part.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 3](rut003.md)

</div>
