<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1018)  [Next](sa1020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 18 and 19.

But when Christ makes Himself known, the remnant (which Jonathan
represented) loves Him as his own soul, and this beloved one becomes the
object of his whole affection. This does not however, in its bearing, go
beyond the personal reign of Christ. Jonathan represents the remnant
which has loved Him in humiliation. As to this world, it is so always;
there is a remnant who love Christ, and desire His kingdom, although it
will put an end to the economy in which they stand. Of the assembly,
properly so called, there is nothing here. It is a remnant who desire
the coming of Christ. Saul, who sought his own glory and endeavoured to
uphold his house by carnal means, seeks the death of him who is to come
and establish the kingdom. So the Jews with Christ.

The faith of David had rather a different character from that of
Jonathan, although both conquered the Philistines. Jonathan is not
deterred by difficulties: he sees the God of Israel and does the work of
God which Saul neglects. It is the true and energetic faith of God's
people. But David, the king-secretly so indeed, but chosen and
anointed-meets face to face the great enemy of his people in all his
might, the mere sight of whom dismayed the people, who fled before him.
That which distinguishes the faith of Jonathan most touchingly is his
attachment to one who (to judge after the manner of men, as Saul did)
eclipses his glory. But Jonathan is absorbed by his affection for the
one whom God has chosen. He sees in him the true head of Israel-worthy
to be so-who, however despised at the present moment, must prosper and
reign as of God. It was also David's qualities which gained his
affection. It was a personal attachment. He could appreciate David, and
he forgot his own interests in thinking of him. The voice and the words
of David sink deep into his heart, and bind him to the king whom God has
chosen, while unknown, and in spite of everything. Saul, the professed
head of the people, jealous of any one who might displace either himself
or his descendants, is at enmity with David and forsaken of God; he is
the instrument of the enemy against Jehovah's anointed. At length he
falls by the more direct and open power of the enemy of God's people.
Sorrowful end of that which had been a vessel of blessing and an
instrument in the work of God, although but in a carnal way.

God causes David's true glory to outshine the official importance of
Saul. The victories of the former are sung in such a manner as to excite
the king's jealousy. We will now briefly trace the features of David's
faith in these new circumstances. Never does he lift his hand against
Saul; he serves him obediently, he does his duty, and patiently bears
the jealousy and malice which pursue him. Poor Saul! troubled by the
evil spirit, David plays on the harp to soothe him, and Saul seeks to
slay him. David escapes. Saul fears him; for the God by whom he is
himself forsaken is with David. He employs him at a distance from
himself, but where he is more than ever in the view of the people. God
always carries out His purposes in spite of all the carnal precautions
of man. David is prudent. He has the wisdom of God, who is with him in
all his ways. Energetic and unpretending, always successful, he is
beloved by all Israel and Judah, before whom he goes in and out with all
the strength and superiority of faith.

Saul seeks to turn all this to his own account; apparently he honours
David, but he only does so in order to expose him to the enemy and get
rid of him. David abides in his lowliness, and Merab is given to
another. Michal affords Saul a more specious opportunity. As he was only
required to destroy the power of the enemies of God's people, David
accepts Saul's proposal and succeeds. Saul perceives more and more that
Jehovah is with David, and becomes still more afraid of him: sad
development of a sad state of soul! Yet Saul was not deficient in fine
points of natural character, which manifested themselves at times in
better feelings. But God was not in them (chap. 19). Jonathan's
intercession has power over his father, and for a time all is well. But
Saul, being forsaken of God, cannot bear that He should be with David.
War breaks out; and David, God's own instrument in what He does for His
people, defeats the Philistines and drives them away. It will be
observed here, that it is the Philistines who are there, through whom
the power of faith is in question. It is with them that the battle of
God and of faith is fought, that David always succeeded, and that Saul
failed.

Saul is again troubled; and David, who seeks to refresh him, narrowly
avoids being slain. He makes his escape and goes away to Samuel. Remark
here how the grief, which egotism and self-love produce, makes room for
the action of the evil spirit on the soul. The power reappears here,
which, hidden as it was, still governed the fate of Israel. David
recognises it, and, when he can no longer remain with Saul, he does not
seek in anywise to magnify himself by rising up against the outward form
which God had inwardly judged but not destroyed. Instead of opposing it,
he contents himself with acknowledging that manifestation of the power
of God which had placed Saul in his royal position, and from which he
had himself received the testimony and the communication of the strength
and of the will of God; he takes refuge with Samuel. He is pursued
thither by Saul and by his messengers, who, with their master, are
subjected to this same power-a power which does not influence their
hearts or guide their conduct, a power of which Saul had forfeited the
blessing. What a picture of a useless, ruined vessel! sometimes
prostrate under the energy of Satan, sometimes prophesying in that of
God, from whom his heart is far away, by whom he is forsaken. His
outward conduct is not disorderly; he does no harm except when Jehovah's
anointed excites his jealousy and his hatred.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 20](sa1020.md)

</div>
