<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1013)  [Next](sa1015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#001.md)

But faith in God is always blest; and if God has shewn the effect of
unbelief, He also shews its folly, since wherever faith is found, there
all His strength is displayed; and then it is the enemy who is
defenceless. Jonathan makes up his mind to attack the Philistines in the
energy which he derives from faith in God; and if unbelief is manifest
in Saul, the beauty of faith is exhibited in his son. The difficulties
are not lessened. The Philistines are in garrison, and their camp
situated in a place of unusually difficult access, a narrow pathway up
perpendicular rocks being the only means of approach. The Philistines
were there in great number, and well armed. But it is hard for faith to
endure the oppression of God's people by the enemy, and the dishonour
thus done to God Himself. Jonathan endures it not. Where does he seek
for strength? His thoughts are simple. The Philistines are
uncircumcised; they have not the help of the God of Israel. "There is no
restraint to Jehovah to save by many or by few"; and this is the thought
of Jonathan's faith, that fair flower which God caused to blossom in the
wilderness of Israel at this sorrowful moment. He does not think about
himself. Jehovah, says he, has delivered them up to Israel. He trusts in
God, and in His unfailing faithfulness towards His people: his heart
rests in this \[See Note \#1\], and he does not imagine for an instant
that God is not with His people, whatever their condition may be. This
characterises faith. It not only acknowledges that God is great, but it
recognises the indissoluble bond (indissoluble because it is of God)
between God and His people. The consequence is, that faith forgets
circumstances, or rather nullifies them. God is with His people. He is
not with their enemies. All the rest is but an opportunity of proving
the real dependence of faith. Thus, there is no boasting in Jonathan;
his expectation is from God. He goes out and meets the Philistines. He
is there a witness for God. If they are bold enough to come down, he
will wait for them and not create difficulties for himself, but he will
not turn away from those which meet him in his path. The indolent and at
the same time foolish and imprudent confidence of the enemy is but a
sign to Jonathan that Jehovah has delivered them up. Had they come down,
they would have lost their advantage; in bidding him come up, they set
aside the insurmountable difficulty of access to the camp. Happy in
having a faithful companion in his work of faith, Jonathan seeks no
other assistance. He does not talk of the Hebrews; but he says, "Jehovah
has delivered them up into the hand of Israel." He climbs the rock with
his armour-bearer. And in truth Jehovah was with him; the Philistines
fall before Jonathan, and his armour-bearer slays after him. But while
honouring the arm which faith had strengthened, God manifests Himself.
The dread of God took hold of the Philistines, and everything trembles
before the man whom faith (God's precious gift) had led into action.

Faith acts of itself. Saul is obliged to number the people to find out
who is absent. Alas! we are entering into the sad history of unbelief.
Saul endeavours to obtain some directions from the ark, whilst elsewhere
God was triumphing over the enemy without Israel. The tumult of their
defeat continues to increase; and unbelief, which never knows what to
do, tells then the priest to withdraw his hand. The king and the priest
were not the link between God and the people. There was neither the
people's faith in God without a king, nor the king whom God Himself had
given. Here again, instead of Israel (whom Jonathan alone recognised),
we find those whom even the Spirit of God calls Hebrews \[See Note
\#2\], who, although they were "of the fountain of Jacob," are among the
Philistines, content to be at ease among the enemies of God. Now that
the victory is gained, all are glad to share the triumph and pursue the
Philistines.

And poor Saul, what does he do? Never can unbelief-however good its
intentions in joining the work of faith-do anything except spoil it.
Saul speaks of avenging himself on his enemies. Jehovah is not in his
thoughts; he thinks of himself, and hinders the pursuit by his carnal
and selfish zeal. May God preserve us from the guidance and help of
unbelief in the work of faith! God Himself can succour us through every
means; but when man mixes himself up with the work, he does but spoil
it, even when seeking to bring in strength. Saul, at the moment of such
blessing, is zealous to maintain the idea of honouring Jehovah's
ordinances, as he sought to do previously in asking His counsel at the
ark, making much of His name, as though the victory had been due to him,
and it was only some hidden sin which prevented his obtaining an answer
from God. He had nearly put Jonathan to death, through whom God had
wrought. He would discover the sin by bringing in God, who acts indeed,
but only to make manifest the folly of the poor king. Observe that faith
in full energy can thankfully avail itself of the refreshment which God
sets before it in its toilsome course, whilst the carnal zeal of that
which is but an imitation of faith, and which never acts with God, makes
a duty of refusing it. All that Saul can do, when he takes the lead, is
to prevent their reaping the entire fruit of the victory. His
intervention could only spoil the work of others; he has no faith to
perform one himself. Nevertheless God has pity on Israel, and keeps
their enemies in check by means of Saul; for although unbelieving, he
had not yet turned his hatred against God's elect. He was not yet
forsaken of Jehovah.

But this painful and solemn moment is at hand. Meanwhile he strengthens
himself. There was constant war with the Philistines; but Saul, warlike
as he was, could not overcome them, as David or even Samuel did. He
sought carnal means amongst his fellows to attain his object. Observe
here with what frightful rapidity, and how even at once, the enemy gains
the upper hand when we are not walking in the ways of God (compare [Sa1
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#012.md); [Sa1
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#014.md), and [Sa1
13:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#016).md). Observe also that all the
forms of piety and of Jewish religion are with Saul; "Jehovah's priest
in Shiloh ([Sa1 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#003).md), wearing an
ephod," and the ark ([Sa1 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#018).md). He
consults with the priest. He prevents their eating flesh with blood. He
builds an altar. The priest consults God; and, God giving no answer,
Saul is ready to slay Jonathan as guilty, because he had eaten in spite
of the oath. Observe, at the same time, that it is the first altar Saul
had built; that the priest is of the family which God had condemned. He
builds his altar when rejected, and after the outward blessing which God
had given, and which he attributes to himself, although he had only
spoilt it. On the other hand Jonathan's faith acts without taking
counsel of flesh and blood: as the people said ([Sa1
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#045).md), he wrought with God. The
people did not know that he was absent. Happy Jonathan! faith had led
him so far in advance that he did not even hear the senseless curse
which his father invoked on whoever tasted food. The folly of another's
unbelief did not reach him. He was at liberty, as he went along, to
avail himself of the kindness of his God with joy and thanksgiving, and
he pursued his course refreshed and encouraged-happy walk of simplicity
which acts with God! The consideration of these two chapters is very
instructive, as setting before us the contrast between the walk of faith
and that of the flesh, in the position which the latter takes, by virtue
of its profession, in the work of God. It was the first time that Saul
had faced the enemy on whose account God raised him up.

Note \#1

See the same proofs of faith in David, when he went out against Goliath.

Note \#2

This is the more remarkable, because the Spirit calls those who were
with Saul and Jonathan Israelites. This gives special force to the word
"Hebrews," wherever it is found. God does not refuse the name of
Israelite to the most timorous of the people ([Sa1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006).md), but He refuses it to those who
join the Philistines. The idea was lost of the connection between the
people and God. It was a nation like any other.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 15](sa1015.md)

</div>
