<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1004)  [Next](sa1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 4, 5, and 6.

In chapter 4 the enemies of God and of His people display their
strength; the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel. God,
in overruling providence, makes all things concur to bring about the
purposed result. We shall do well to pause a moment here; for the
Philistines are of considerable importance, on account of the part they
take in this history, as the power of the enemy. They appear to me to
represent the power of the enemy acting within the circle of God's
people. They were in the territory of the Israelites-within the land,
and even on this side of the Jordan. They were not, like the Egyptians
or Assyrians, enemies from without. Habitually hostile to Israel, to
those who by God's appointment should have possessed the land of
promise-so much the more dangerous from being always at hand, and
claiming possession of the country, the Philistines set before us in
type the power of the enemy acting from within. I do not mean the flesh,
but the enemy within the pale of the professing church, acting of course
through instruments, the oppressor of God's true people to whom the
promises belong.

Israel, corrupt in all their ways, and daring in their ways with God,
because they had forgotten His majesty and His holiness, seek to
identify Jehovah\* with them in their unfaithful condition, as He had
been in their original state, instead of coming before Him to learn why
He had forsaken His people. God will neither acknowledge nor succour
them. On the contrary, the ark of the covenant, the sign and the seat of
His relationship with the people, is taken. His throne is no longer in
the midst of the people; His tabernacle is empty; all ordered
relationship is interrupted. Where can they offer sacrifice? where draw
nigh to Jehovah their God! Eli, the priest, dies; and his pious
daughter-in-law, overwhelmed by these disastrous tidings, pronounces the
funeral oration of the unhappy people in the name she bestows on that
which could no longer be her joy. The fruit of her womb bears but this
impress of her people's calamity; it is only Ichabod in her sight.

What a blessing to have had through grace the song of Hannah already
given by the Spirit to sustain the faith and hope of the people! All
outward connection is broken; but God upholds His own majesty; and if
unfaithful Israel had not been able to withstand the worshippers of
idols, the God whom Israel had forsaken vindicates His glory, and
proves, even in the heart of their temple, that those idols are but
vanity. The Philistines are obliged to acknowledge the power of the God
of Israel, whom Israel could not glorify. His judgments suggested a
means to their natural conscience which, while proving that the
influence of the almighty power of God is felt even by creatures devoid
of intelligence, causing them to act against their strongest instincts,
manifests also that it was indeed Jehovah, the Omnipotent God, who had
inflicted the chastisement under which they were suffering. God
maintains His majesty even in the midst of Israel. He is no longer among
them securing their promised blessings. His ark, exposed through their
unfaithfulness to the unworthy treatment of the Philistines and of the
inquisitive, becomes (as the token of God's presence) the occasion of
judgment inflicted on the temerity of those who dared to look within it,
forgetful of His divine majesty who made it His throne and kept His
testimony therein. But how often the absence of God causes His value to
be felt, whose presence had not been appreciated! Israel, still deprived
of Jehovah's presence and glory, laments after Him. Let us remark here
that God could not remain among the Philistines. Unfaithfulness might
subject His people to their enemies, although God was there. But, left
(so to say) to Himself, His presence judged the false gods. Association
was impossible; the Philistines desire Him not. You cannot glory in a
victory over One who, when captured, is your destroyer. The Philistines
get rid of Him. Never can the children of Satan endure the presence of
the true God.

Moreover the heart of God is not alienated from His people. He finds His
way back to the people of His choice in a sovereign manner, which proves
Him to be the God of all creation. But, as we have seen, He asserts His
majesty. More than fifty thousand men pay the penalty of their impious
temerity. God returns; but still it needs that He open a way for Himself
after His own purposes and dealings, according to which He
re-establishes His relationship with the people. Thus Samuel appears
again on the scene when, the ark having abode in Kirjath-jearim twenty
years (chap. 7), Israel laments after Jehovah. The ark is not put back
in its place, nor is the original order restored.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 6](sa1006)

</div>
