<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1026)  [Next](sa1028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001)

But David, after all, is only a man; and immediately after this
testimony that God was with him (a testimony that even Saul
acknowledged), his faith fails, and he passes over into the midst of the
enemies of God's people. God, no doubt, makes use of this means to
remove David from peril. But at the same time, he is tried and
chastened, and is exposed to the dreadful necessity of appearing ready
to fight against Israel. There is but One whose perfection and wisdom
were His safeguard in every trial. We may remark that it was immediately
after an evident interposition of God ([Sa1
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#012)) that David's faith fails. It is
the same with Elijah (1 Kings 19). One would say that, in our hearts,
faith exhausts itself by an unusual effort. Faith may carry us through
the crisis; but the heart, which was the vessel of faith, is terrified
by it; whilst in Jesus we find an equability of perfection altogether
divine.

David removes to a distance from the royal city. In the land of the
Philistines he gains their king's favour, not by faith, but by a
prudence inconsistent with truth. It is an unhappy position;
nevertheless, God does not forsake him. He chastises him, and in a
painful manner, but He spares and preserves him. We have seen similar
ways of the Lord in the case of the fugitive Jacob. Achish, who knows
David, wishes to employ him in his service, and David cannot refuse; for
when he who possesses the energy which the Spirit of God imparts by
faith, has placed himself in a false position through unfaithfulness, he
has no power against the one under whose authority he has placed
himself; and if he does not use the energy with which he is endowed in
favour of his protector, he very naturally excites his jealousy. He
would have avoided all this by going to Ziklag, but he could not. God in
His mercy preserved David, but he was now in a sad and false position.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 28](sa1028)

</div>
