<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1012)  [Next](sa1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001)

Saul reigns two years. He then selects three thousand men: two thousand
are with him, and one with Jonathan. Jonathan, a man of faith, acts with
energy against the enemies of God's people, and smites the Philistines;
but the energy of faith, acting (as it always does) in the very
stronghold of the enemy, naturally provokes their hostility. The
Philistines hear of it: Saul is roused to action, and calls together,
not Israel, but the "Hebrews." Let us remark here that there is faith in
Jonathan. The flesh, placed in the position of leader to God's people,
follows indeed the impulse given by faith, but does not possess it; and
the word Hebrews, the name by which a Philistine would have called the
people, indicates that Saul relied on the gathering of the nation as a
constituted body, and understood no better than a Philistine would have
done the relation between a chosen people and God. And this is the
position set before us in the history of Saul. It is not premeditated
opposition to God, but the flesh set in a place of testimony and used in
accomplishing God's work. We see in it a person linked with the
interests of God's true people, doing the work of God according to the
people's idea of their need-a true idea as to their actual need; but he
is one who seeks his resources in the energy of man, an energy to which
God does not refuse His aid when there is obedience to His will, for He
loves His people; but which in principle, in moral and inward motive,
can never of itself go beyond the flesh from which it springs. In the
midst of all this faith can act, and act sincerely, and this is
Jonathan's case. God will bless this faith, and He always does so,
because it owns Him; and in this instance (and it is His gift) because
it sincerely seeks the good of God's people. All this is, in principle,
a kind of picture of the professing church, which in this point of view
anticipates the true reign of Christ, and in this position even fails in
her faithfulness to God. True faith, in the midst of such a system,
never rises so high as the glory of the coming One, the true rejected
David, but it loves Him and cleaves to Him. If the church is merely
professing, she persecutes Christ; but that in her which acts by faith
loves and owns Him, even when He is hunted like a partridge on the
mountains.

Jonathan having thus in faith attacked the Philistines, Saul, who
ostensibly leads the people before God, is put to the proof. Will he
shew himself competent? Will he remember the true principle on which the
blessing of the people rests? Will he act as a royal priest, or will he
acknowledge the prophet to be the true link of faith between the people
and God-a link the importance and necessity of which he ought to have
recognised, since he owed to it his present place and power, and it had
proved to him its own mission and prophetic authority by establishing
his? When the critical moment arrives, Saul fails.

It is worth while to retrace here the tokens of the unbelief of the
flesh. The Philistines are smitten. The nation, active and energetic,
hear of it; nothing could be more natural. Saul has but the same
resource-no call upon God, no cry to Jehovah, the God of Israel; Samuel
does not occur to his faith, although he remembers what Samuel had told
him. If the Philistines have heard, the Hebrews must hear also. Israel
fears; God gives no answer to unbelief when the trial of faith is His
object. Saul calls the people after him to Gilgal, but they were soon
scattered from him at the report of the Philistines having gathered
together. Saul is at Gilgal, and Samuel comes again into his mind. It
was no longer as when the kingdom had been renewed. The circumstances
naturally suggested Samuel as a resource. Saul tarries seven days for
him according to his word. He waits for him long enough to satisfy the
exigence of conscience. Nature can go a long way on this principle; but
it has not that sense of its own weakness, and that all depends on God,
which makes it wait on God, as the alone resource and worker. Then, as
the people once brought the ark into the camp, he offers the
burnt-offering. But, if he had had confidence in God, he would have
understood that, whatever might be the result, he should wait for Him;
that it was useless to do anything without Him, and that he ran no risk
in waiting for Him. A faithful God could not fail him. He had thought of
Samuel, and of his having told him to wait, so that he was without
excuse; he remembered that the guidance and blessing of God were found
with the prophet. But he looks at circumstances: the people are
scattered, and Saul seeks to bring God in by an act of devotion without
faith. It was the decisive moment; God would have confirmed his kingdom
over Israel, would have established his dynasty. But now He had made
choice of another.

Observe here, that it is not through being defeated by the Philistines
that Saul loses the throne. The fault was between himself and God. The
Philistines do not attack him. It is enough for Satan if he succeeds in
frightening us away from the pure and simple path of faith. Samuel
departs after having made known to Saul the mind of God. The Philistines
pillage the land, which is defenceless. The people moreover had neither
sword nor spear. What a picture of the state of God's people! How often
we find that those who profess to be the children of God, to be of the
truth, and heirs of the promises, are unarmed before the enemies who
despoil them!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 14](sa1014)

</div>
