<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1016)  [Next](sa1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001)

The Philistines, that type of the enemy's power, present themselves
again with their champion at their head, against whom no one dares to
fight. David had returned home, and was living in the simplicity of his
usual life. Although that which precedes gives the general idea of the
position in which he had been placed, it appears that David had not
remained long with the king ([Sa1
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#015)). His father sends him to see
his brothers, who are in Saul's army. There he sees the Philistine who
defied the armies of Israel. Jonathan does not appear here. There is but
one who can destroy this champion, who centres in his own person all the
energy of evil. David's faith sees no difficulty in it because he sees
God, and in the enemy an enemy of God without strength. He was but one
of the "uncircumcised"; the rest matters little. In the performance of
his ordinary duties David had already met with difficulties too great
for a full-grown man; yet, although a mere youth, he had overcome them
for a very simple reason-"Jehovah delivered." He had not boasted of this
(it was the fulfilment of his duty); but he had learnt in it the
strength and faithfulness of Jehovah. And this experience is now
repeated. Man's armour is rejected; faith knows it not. God will perform
the work by the most simple means.

David declares wherein his strength consists. "I come to thee in the
name of Jehovah of hosts." He then identifies himself with the people of
God. "All the earth shall know that there is a God in Israel." Remark
how the simplicity of faith rises to the consciousness of power and its
effects in the hands of God ([Sa1
17:46](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#046)). So ever when God leads the
heart. The stone which sinks into the forehead of Goliath deprives him
of strength and of life. David cuts off the head of Goliath with his own
sword, like Him who by death destroyed him that had the power of death.

The whole army of Israel profits by David's triumph. Saul, who had
forgotten him, will not suffer him to go away. Alas! the flesh, and even
the flesh in rebellion, can love Jehovah's elect on account of his
kindness and the relief he ministers; but it knows him not. When he is
doing Jehovah's work, he is as much a stranger to Saul as if they had
never met.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 18](sa1018)

</div>
