<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1008)  [Next](sa1010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 8, 9, and 10.

But faith is not transmitted by succession. Samuel could not make
prophets of his sons. They were no better as judges than Eli's sons had
been as priests, and the people had no faith themselves to lean
immediately upon God. They ask to be made like unto the nations. "Make
us now a king," said they to Samuel. Where was Jehovah? For Israel,
nowhere. But it was evil in the eyes of Samuel, and he prayed unto
Jehovah. While acknowledging that the people had, as usual, rejected
Him, God commands Samuel to hearken unto their voice. Samuel warns them
according to God's testimony, and sets before them all the inexpediency
and consequences of such a step; but the people will not hearken unto
him. God brings to the prophet, through providential circumstances, the
man whom He had chosen to satisfy the carnal wishes of the people. In
all this He judges the people and their king. ("He gave them a king in
his anger, and took him away in his wrath.") But He remembers His
people. He does not forsake them. He acts by Saul on their behalf, while
shewing them their unfaithfulness, and afterwards in cutting off the
disobedient king. Beauty and height of stature distinguished the son of
Kish. But in the signs that Samuel gave him, when he had anointed him,
there was a meaning which should have carried his thoughts beyond
himself. How often there is a meaning, a language, perfectly
intelligible to one who has ears to hear, but which escapes us, because
our gross and hardened heart has no spiritual intelligence or
discernment! And yet all our future hangs upon it. God has shewn our
incapacity for the blessing it involved. Nevertheless the means were not
wanting. Although the significance of this circumstance was less evident
than that of the other signs, yet Rachel's sepulchre should have
reminded Saul, the son and heir according to the flesh of the one who
was born there, that the son of the mother's sorrow was the son of the
father's right hand ([Gen 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018).md).

Now God had not abandoned Israel; faith was still there; men were going
up to God. There were some in Israel who remembered the God of Bethel,
who had revealed Himself to Jacob when he fled \[See Note \#1\], and who
in His faithfulness had brought him back in peace; and God gave Saul
favour in their eyes. The servants of the God of Bethel salute him and
strengthen him on his way. But the hill of God was possessed by the
garrison of the Philistines-another circumstance which, by its
significance, should have gone to the heart of a faithful Israelite who
desired the glory of God and the good of His people. But the sign which
accompanied it made it much more forcible; for the Spirit of Jehovah
came upon Saul in this place, and he was turned into another man, called
therefore to "do as occasion served him, for God was with him" ([Sa1
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007).md) \[See Note \#2\]. It often
happens, that faith sets forth clearly what should be done, while the
heart, waxen fat and unfaithful, does not see it at all. And what do
these signs mean? There are those in Israel who remember the God of
Bethel, and who seek Him-upright and prepared hearts, who know Him as
the resource of faith. But the hill of God, the public seat of His
strength, is in the enemy's hands. Still, if this be so, the Spirit of
God is upon the man who takes cognisance of it, and it is at this very
hill that the Spirit comes upon him. The name of God is also
significative here. It is God abstractedly-God the Creator: God Himself
is in question. The Spirit of Jehovah comes upon Saul, because He
resumes there the course of His relations with Israel.

But Samuel is still the only one whom God recognises as the link between
Himself and the people. It is when Saul has had to do with Samuel, that
he is another man. He must wait for Samuel, that he may know what to do,
and that blessing may rest upon him. He must thus acknowledge that
blessing is connected with the prophet, and not act without him; he must
wait for him with perfect patience (seven days), a patience which,
submitting to God's testimony, will not seek for blessing apart from His
ways.

Here also we see in the Philistines the enemies who put faith to the
proof. We have often enemies over whom we gain an easy victory, and on
whose account we are considered spiritual, yet they are not such as (on
God's part, and it may also be said on their own part) put faith to the
proof. With these patience must have her perfect work. And the
Philistines held this place with respect to Saul. It was all well that
the people should be delivered from their other enemies; but they were
not the ones which were a snare to them, and which manifested the power
of the enemy in the very midst of Israel and the promises. Do spiritual
powers rule over us in the assembly, in the place where the promises of
God should be fulfilled? And what power do we see to overthrow the power
of evil and spiritual wickedness within the borders of the professing
church? It was from the Philistines that Saul should have delivered the
people of God (see [Sa1 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016).md). The
hill of God was in the Philistines' hands (see also [Sa1
14:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#052).md). If Saul had waited for Samuel,
he would have declared unto him all that he should do. Now we shall see
that, two years later, Saul is put to the proof as to this in the
presence of the Philistines; and whatever may have been the delay, the
thing had not been altered; all the intermediate success should have
increased his faith and strengthened him in obedience.

Samuel calls the people together at Mizpeh. There he sets before them
their foolishness in rejecting the God of their salvation. But he
proceeds to the choice of a king, according to the command of God. God
meets the wishes of the people. If the flesh could have glorified God,
nothing was wanting to induce them to trust in Him. God adapts Himself
to them in outward things; and further, as we know, had the people
followed Jehovah, Jehovah would not have forsaken them ([Sa1
12:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020).md). And now that God has set up
a king, those who will not own him are "men of Belial." The people
however scarcely see God in it at all: they only recognise Him in those
things which the flesh can perceive, such as the beauty of the king and
the success of his arms, that is to say, the things in which God suits
Himself to nature, and in which He grants blessing, in order that He may
be known and trusted. In this they rejoice, but they go no farther.
Faith is not of nature.

Note \#1

The God who had said to him in the day of his trouble, when driven out
from before his enemy, that He would not forsake him.

Note \#2

Accordingly it was the Spirit of prophecy, the Spirit which acted in
blessing, which indicated the presence of God, and that to which Saul
should have recourse, even though (yea, because) the hill of God, the
public seat of His authority in Israel, was in the hands of the enemies
of the true people of God. This scene pictured the whole state of
Israel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](sa1010.md)

</div>
