<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2013)  [Next](sa2015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 14 through 20.

David's partiality for Absalom had yet other and more painful results,
and heavy chastisements. It is painful to see the conqueror of Goliath
driven from his home and his throne by his beloved son, and that under
God's hand. For if God had not allowed it, who could have driven God's
elect from the royal seat in which Jehovah had placed him? The sword was
in his house; the word of God, sharper than a two-edged sword. How just
is Jehovah! But whom He loves He chastens. Accordingly, whilst all this
is a manifestation of the righteous rule of God, it is to David an
occasion of deep heart-exercise, and of a more real and more intimate
knowledge of God; for his heart was truly and eternally bound to God, so
that all his sorrows bore fruit, although they were occasioned by his
faults.

In this respect also, although the cause of his grief was so widely
different from that of the Lord's grief, he becomes the type of Christ
in suffering, and the vessel of the expression of His sympathy for His
people. This is even so much more the case, because with a faithful
heart, and in a certain sense with perfect integrity towards God, the
king's faults and transgressions gave rise to those confessions and to
that humiliation which the Spirit of Christ will produce in the remnant
of Israel; so that on the one hand he speaks of his integrity, while on
the other he confesses his faults. Now that is what Christ causes His
people to say, and what He says for them. Nevertheless we must remember
it is not David himself, as a godly man, who speaks in the Psalms; it is
by the inspiration of the Spirit he utters them; and it is a very
precious thing for us that, in circumstances where faith might fail and
the heart be discouraged, the word supplies us with language suitable to
faith, and to faith in one who has perhaps been unfaithful: a precious
testimony that, even in this condition, God does not cast us off, and
that Christ sympathises with us, since He furnishes us with expressions
and sentiments adapted to such a condition.

The Psalms supply this, and in especial suitability to the remnant of
Israel in the last days. They are characterised by integrity of heart
and confession of sin. The Spirit of Christ gives the sentiments, and
assures of His sympathy. Psalm 16 gives us very strikingly this position
of Christ. His goodness extends not to God. It is not His divine place,
"equal with God," which He is taking. He calls Jehovah His Lord; but of
the saints on earth He says, "in whom is all my delight." By His
baptism, which was the expression of this, He connected Himself, not
with Israel in their sin, but with the first movement of the Spirit
responding in the remnant to the condemnation of the people as such.
This is the principle of the Psalms-the upright and faithful man in the
midst of the perverse nation, the object of the counsels and purposes of
God. The book opens with this distinction drawn by God; it next presents
us with the King in Zion according to the decree of God, rejected by the
nation and hated by the heathen who oppress the people. All this
develops itself through a variety of circumstances, and all the
relationships of the remnant are there depicted, as well as all
affections of the heart. All connected with it is gone over by the hand
and the pen of God, and according to the Spirit and the sympathies of
Christ.

Chapter 20 ends this part of David's history, and his history in
general. He is re-established on his throne, and has overcome the
efforts of his enemies and the rebellion of his own people. The order of
his court and officers is restored in peace. Sundry details are added by
the Spirit of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 15](sa2015)

</div>
