<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2000)  [Next](sa2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 1:1</span></span>

The following commentary covers Chapters 1 and 2.

Nevertheless piety, and pious (and hence generous) sentiments, were
genuine in David. He did not pretend to feel for Saul's misfortunes, and
then seize upon the kingdom without regret as soon as Saul had ceased to
exist. David's heart was really melted when he heard of Saul's death.
Woe to the hard-hearted man who, impelled by the hope of reward, thought
to be the bearer of good tidings in announcing it to him. Whatever
Saul's misfortunes, he was the king of Israel to David. Whatever his
faults, he was an unfortunate king. David had been beloved by him, and
had dwelt in his house, where the king's affliction manifested itself,
and commanded the respect of all around him And if Saul had unjustly
persecuted David, at this moment it was readily forgotten. Now that he
has fallen, David will only remember that which can do him honour; and,
above all, that it is Jehovah's anointed, and Jehovah's people, who have
fallen before their enemies. David causes the man to be put to death
who, deluded by selfishness, accused himself of lacking all fear of
Jehovah, all good and generous feeling. For David fears God; and
Jehovah's anointed is precious in his sight. He then pours out his heart
before God in the touching accents of a grief which, in solemn and
affecting language, recalls whatever would exalt Saul, and expresses the
tender and affectionate recollections which his heart suggests.
Beautiful exhibition of the fruits of the Spirit of God! David is in no
wise discouraged, for his faith is in action. If this misfortune grieves
him, it gives him also the opportunity of guarding against a similar
calamity. He bade them teach the children of Judah the use of the bow,
by which weapon Saul was slain. David, still humble, goes on well. He
asks Jehovah if he should go up to Judah, and to which place; and
Jehovah directs him. David testifies also to the men of Jabesh-gilead
his satisfaction at their conduct with respect to Saul.

Nevertheless war has not yet ceased; if not against enemies from
without, it is carried on against those from within. That which was
linked with Saul's fleshly importance cannot support David. All is
however now changed, for Ishbosheth was not Jehovah's anointed, and to
make him king was in fact to rebel against God. David makes war upon him
by his captains.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 2](sa2002)

</div>
