<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2002)  [Next](sa2004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 3 and 4.

Alas! the history of this period plunges us into the ways of man. It is
no longer merely David walking in the path of faith. It is Joab, a
clever, ambitious, bloody-minded, and heartless man. It is Abner, a man
morally superior to Joab, but who fights on fleshly principles as a
party man against the king whom God has chosen. Abner is related to
Ishbosheth as Joab is to David. When his pride has been wounded, he
throws himself into David's interests, and Joab kills him as much from
jealousy as to avenge his brother's death. And wherein is the prowess
and valour of the chiefs of Benjamin and Judah now manifested in this
"field of strong men"? In slaying each other. The Philistines were
forgotten. But the family of Saul were entirely in the wrong. It was
nature which, with its pretended rights, would not submit to God and to
His will. As David now begins to do, so will Christ, the King of Judah,
bring all around into subjection to Himself after He has taken the
throne. It is well however to observe, that David does not appear in all
this. Joab is the actor; and it appears to me, from the details given,
that evil had already begun. I do not see that David had sought counsel
of Jehovah; and Joab had certainly not done so, for he was nothing more
than an ungodly man, who understood that it was more prudent to honour
God, and not to depart too far from Him merely to gratify one's
passions; but this did not preserve him from being at length ensnared in
his own calculations. And, after all, it is not the energy of Joab which
puts the kingdom into David's hands but the wounded pride of Abner, the
chief of Ishbosheth's party, who ends by reaping from men that which he
had sown. But all this is very sad.

By providential means God accomplishes His purposes, and David is
successful. Generally also, in his combats at this period, and in his
exaltation, he typifies the Lord Jesus. And I doubt not that the
establishment of Christ's kingdom will be accomplished in detail after
His appearing; the prophecies of Zechariah and Micah 5 prove this; but,
as a history, we are, as I have said, in the midst of men. In the matter
of Ishbosheth's death David maintains his integrity; and with respect to
Abner's assassination he manifests the sentiments which become a man of
God. Nevertheless [Sa2 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#039.md) exhibits
the weakness of man as the instrument of God's government. David appeals
to the God of judgment. The election of one in whom God's counsels are
accomplished must necessarily take place before his establishment in the
place which Jehovah had appointed. It is still more evident that this
election precedes the rest of the chosen one, and this is true as to
Christ Himself; only He came down into it in grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa2004.md)

</div>
