<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2022)  [Next](sa2024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#001.md)

The following commentary covers Chapters 22 and 23.

The songs that follow contain instruction of deep interest. In chapter
22 David comes forth from his sufferings and his affliction with a song
of triumph and of praise. He had learnt what God was in his sufferings.
He celebrates all that God had been for him, all that he had found Him
to be in his necessities and dangers, the effect of God's power on his
behalf, and the glorious and blessed result of this power. All this is
given in a song, the expression of which will only be fully accomplished
in Christ Himself. In chapter 23 he celebrates his prosperity. But what
a difference! He declares, it is true, what Christ will be when He
reigns; and he does so in language of most attractive beauty, a beauty
which ravishes the mind and transports it into the reign of Christ, that
blessed "world to come of which we speak." But then this sorrowful
thought presents itself-"my house is not so with God."

In the first of these two songs there is something more of profound
interest. David speaks as a prophet; and, as he had done in so many
other instances, he personifies the Lord Jesus, the Lord Jesus in
connection with Israel. This song then sets before us the sufferings of
Christ (as the representative of Israel, and often speaking of the
nation as though it were Himself), sufferings which obtained also other
deliverance of far surpassing excellence, as the cause of the
deliverance out of Egypt and of all Israel's blessings, until the
establishment of Messiah's glory in the age to come. He surrounds the
agony of Christ with the whole history of Israel in salvation and in
blessing, from Pithom and Rameses unto the destruction of the violent
man at the end of days, and the submission of the nations to Messiah's
sceptre; and he gives a voice to their distress in Egypt.

In chapter 23 the covenant is, "all his salvation and all his desire,"
although at that time "he made it not to grow." Judgment must be
executed ere the full blessing he expected could be brought in; and
these thorns of iniquity must be "utterly burned in the same place."
This will take place at the coming of Christ.

If God honours and glorifies David, He does not forget those whom the
energy of David's faith had brought around him. The Holy Ghost
enumerates the mighty men of David, and recounts their deeds of valour
and devotedness-deeds which obtain a name and a place for them when God
writes up the people (Psalm 87). Joab is not among them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 24](sa2024.md)

</div>
