<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2004)  [Next](sa2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

David, the king of Judah in Hebron for seven years and a half, becomes
the king of all Israel upon Ishbosheth's death And now David is no
longer the man of faith who, himself the head of the armies of Israel
walking in dependence upon God, guided the enterprises which the
circumstances of Israel required of faith; but he is a king who can
exalt whom he will The man very soon appears, the energetic man, but not
the man of God. "Whosoever getteth up to the gutter," the king said
should be rewarded; "he shall be chief and captain" ([Sa2
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008)). Joab goes up, and he has natural
claims upon David \[See Note \#1\]. Nevertheless, in the main David is
guided by God, and he takes the city which God had chosen for His throne
upon the earth. It was on this account he could say of those who had it
in possession, "they are hated of David's soul"; for in fact they who
possess the true seat of God's power, the place which He loves, and who,
trusting to their natural strength, resist and scoff at the king whom
God has chosen, are more hateful than any people, and are hated by those
who have the Spirit of the Lord who establishes His throne upon the
earth.

It is well to remark here, that David is a type of Christ in rejection,
and of Christ making war in power for the establishment of the
millennium; as Solomon is of Christ reigning in millennial peace.
David's wars with the Philistines are subsequent to the taking of
Jerusalem, and to the entire subjugation of Israel to David. It is not
David, neither is it Christ reigning over the earth, who takes
Jerusalem. Christ will descend from heaven for the destruction of
Antichrist; but He destroys the enemies of Israel by means of His own
people, after having established His throne in Zion (compare Zechariah 9
and 10). I do not enlarge upon this; I merely point out the grand
features which the word supplies on this subject.

David establishes himself in Zion; he is acknowledged by some friendly
Gentiles; he is conscious too that it was God who made him king. But the
natural heart soon shews itself. Strengthened in his kingdom by Jehovah,
he does what he likes, he follows his own will (compare [Deu
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017)). Nevertheless the consolidation
of his power does not overthrow the hopes of his former enemies \[See
Note \#2\]; it excites their jealousy. They neither know the arm of his
strength, nor the purpose of Jehovah who exalted him. They rush on to
destruction. And now, with the danger that awakens him, we find again
the man of God, the type of the Lord Jesus, inquiring of Jehovah, and
obedient to His word. He gains signal victories under the express
guidance of God, whose strength goes before him and puts his enemies to
flight. Accordingly he gives God the glory.

Note \#1

Joab was evidently clever and enterprising: but it is remarkable that he
is not named among those who distinguished themselves by brilliant
exploits, when individual faith had to fight for God's glory When it is
a question of being chief and captain, a place which David had held till
then, Joab immediately comes forward.

Note \#2

It is evident, from many Old Testament prophecies, that it will be the
same when Christ returns to the earth. And yet at that period, if man
exalts himself, it will be but for sudden destruction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 6](sa2006)

</div>
