<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol007)  [Next](isa000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#001)

Summary to the Song of Solomon

Chapter 8 stands by itself, and appears to me to recapitulate the
principles of the whole book. It returns to the foundation of that which
gave rise to all these exercises. The full satisfaction of all the
desires of the remnant is prophetically announced, and the path of their
affections is marked out. But this picture is drawn for the
encouragement of those who are not yet enjoying it, and expresses the
desire for its accomplishment (giving thus the sanction of God to the
ardent desire of the remnant to possess Christ, and to have full liberty
of communion with Him). The reply teaches, with a clearness that is very
precious, the manner of its accomplishment. The ardent affection of the
loved one is manifested, and the Beloved desires that she may rest in
His love, and enjoy it as long as she will without being disturbed.
Afterwards she comes up out of the wilderness, leaning upon Him. And
where did the Lord awaken her from her sleep? Under an apple-tree (see
[Sol 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003)). From Christ alone she
derives her life. Thus only can Israel give birth to this living
remnant, which, at Jerusalem, shall become the earthly bride of the
great King, which desires to be, and shall be, as a seal upon His heart,
according to the power of a love that is strong as death-that spares
nothing, and yields nothing. The "little sister" appears to me to be
Ephraim, which has never had the same development that Judah received
through the manifestation of Christ, and through all that took place
after the captivity of the ten tribes. For all the moral affections of
Judah were formed on their relationship to Christ, on His rejection, and
on the sentiments which this produced when the Spirit caused it to be
felt (Isaiah 50-53). Ephraim has gone through none of this, but will
enter into the enjoyment of its results. Judah, when perfected, will
enjoy the full favour of the Messiah; their affections having been
formed for Him by all the exercises of heart which they have had with
respect to Him. Christ, in His Solomon character, the glorious King, the
Son of David, and after the order of Melchisedec, has a vineyard as Lord
of the nations or multitudes. He has intrusted it to others, who are to
make Him a suitable return. The vineyard of the bride was at her own
disposal, but all its proceeds shall be for Solomon; and there shall be
a portion for those that kept its fruits-a touching expression of her
relationship to the King. She will have all to be His; and then there
are others who shall profit by it also. The last two Verses ([Sol
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#013)) express the bride's desire
that the Bridegroom may come without delay.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Introduction](isa000)

</div>
