<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol005)  [Next](sol007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#001)

The following commentary covers Chapters 6 and 7.

And this experience makes her understand through grace another aspect of
her relationship, proving a real progress in the intelligence of grace
and condition of heart. It is no longer the desire that seeks possession
of the object for herself, it is the consciousness that she belongs to
Him. "I am my Beloved's." This is a very important progress. The soul
that seeks salvation, that seeks to satisfy newly-awakened affections,
exclaims, as soon as it is assured of it, "My Beloved is mine." When
there has been a deeper experience of self, it recognises itself as
being His. Thus, with respect to ourselves, it is not "We have found him
of whom the prophets did write"; but "We are not our own, for we are
bought with a price." To belong in this manner to Christ, no longer
thinking of self, is the happiness of the soul. It is not that we lose
the sense of the blessedness of possessing the Saviour, but the other
thought, the thought of being His, occupies the first place.

Again the Beloved testifies to the preciousness of the bride in His
eyes. But here also there is a difference. Before, when speaking of her,
He added to the gentleness and beauty of her aspect all the graces which
were seen in her, the honey that flowed from her lips, the pleasant
fruits that were found in her, the sweet odours which He called on the
breath of the Spirit to bring forth. He does not now repeat these
things. He speaks of that which she is for Him. Having described her
personal beauty, His heart dwells on what she is for Himself. "My dove,
my undefiled, is but one." His affection can see no other: none can be
compared with her. There are many others, but they are not the one whom
He loves. The person of the Lord fills the heart that has been brought
back to Him. The look and the graces of the bride are the subject of the
Bridegroom's testimony. Moreover for Him there is no one but her, the
only one of her mother. Thus will it be with the remnant of Israel in
the last days, even as in spirit it is now with us. The reception of
Christ and His union with this remnant at Jerusalem are represented in a
very striking manner in that which follows. It is no longer the Beloved
coming up out of the wilderness-where He had associated His people with
Himself-in glory and in love. It is the bride, fair as the moon and
radiant with glory, who appears on the scene, like an army with banners
displayed. The Beloved had come down to look upon the ripening fruits of
the valley, and to see if His vine flourished. Before He is aware, His
love makes Him like the chariots of His willing people (compare [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)). He leads them in glory and
triumph. He had sought the fruits of grace among them; but, having come
down for this, He exalts them in glory. It is only when His people are
fully established in grace that everything in them will be beauty and
perfection, and that they will recognise that they belong entirely to
Christ, and at the same time that they will entirely possess His
affection. This last thought is the rest of their heart. This is thus
expressed in the third formulary of the experience of this divine song,
if I may coldly so speak, and which gives the full happiness of the
bride, "I am my Beloved's, and his desire is toward me"-the
consciousness of belonging to Christ and that His affections rest on
us-the consciousness that we are the objects of His own affections and
delight. This is most deep and perfect joy. The reader will do well to
weigh these three expressions of satisfaction of heart: the possessing
Christ; our belonging to Him; and this last, with the unspeakable
knowledge that His heart's delight is in us, however much-and it is
surely then it will be felt-all is grace. But (to return to the text)
they can now go forth with Him to enjoy all the blessings of the earth
in the certainty and the communion of His love. What fruits of
gratitude, what peculiar feelings, will be those which the people of
Israel have kept for the Lord alone, which they could never have for any
other, and which, after all, none but themselves could have towards the
Lord, viewed as come on earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](sol007)

</div>
