<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1004)  [Next](th2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001)

The Lord's coming again into this world assumes therefore a very
different character from that of a vague object of hope to a believer as
a period of glory. In Chapter 5 the apostle speaks of it, but in order
to distinguish between the position of Christians and that of the
careless and unbelieving inhabitants of the earth. The Christian, alive
and taught of the Lord, ever expects the Master. There are times and
seasons; it is not needful to speak to him concerning them. But (and he
knows it) the day of the Lord will come and like a thief in the night,
but not for him: he is of the day; he has part in the glory which will
appear in order to execute judgment on the unbelieving world. Believers
are the children of light; and this light which is the judgment of
unbelievers, is the expression of the glory of God a glory which cannot
endure evil, and which, when it shall appear, will banish it from the
earth. The Christian is of the day that will judge and destroy the
wicked and wickedness itself from off the face of the earth. Christ is
the Sun of righteousness, and the faithful will shine as the sun in the
kingdom of their Father.

The world will say, "Peace and safety," and in all security will believe
in the continuance of its prosperity and the success of its designs, and
the day will come suddenly upon them. (Compare [Pe2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003).) The Lord Himself has often
declared it. ([Mat 14:36-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#036); [Mar
13:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#033); [Luk
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#040), &c.; [Luk
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026), &c.; [Luk
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035), &c.)

It is a very solemn thing to see that the professing church ([Rev
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003)) which says that it lives and is
in the truth, which has not Thyatira's character of corruption, is yet
to be treated as the world at least, unless it repents.

We may perhaps wonder to find the Lord saying of a time like this, that
men's hearts will be failing them for fear, and for looking after those
things that are coming on the earth. ([Luk
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026)) But we see the two principles
both security and fear already existing. Progress, success, the long
continuance of a new development of human nature this is the language of
those who mock at the Lord's coming; and yet beneath it all, what fears
for the future are at the same time possessing and weighing down the
heart! I use the word "principles," because I do not believe that the
moment of which the Lord speaks is yet come. But the shadow of coming
events falls upon the heart. Blessed are they that belong to another
world!

The apostle applies this difference of position namely, that we belong
to the day, and that it cannot therefore come upon us as a thief to the
character and walk of the Christian. Being a child of the light he is to
walk as such. He lives in the clay, though all is night and darkness
around him. One does not sleep in the day. They that sleep sleep in the
night: they that are drunken are drunken in the night; these are the
works of darkness. A Christian, the child of the day, must watch and be
sober, clothing himself with all that constitutes the perfection of that
mode of being which belongs to his position namely, with faith and love
and hope principles which impart courage and give him confidence for
pressing onwards. He has the breastplate of faith and love; he goes
straight forward therefore against the enemy. He has the hope of this
glorious salvation, which will bring him entire deliverance, as his
helmet; so that he can lift up his head without fear in the midst of
danger. We see that the apostle here brings to mind the three great
principles of 1 Corinthians 13 to characterise the courage and
steadfastness of the Christian, as at the beginning he shewed that they
were the mainspring of daily walk.

Faith and love naturally connect us with God, revealed as He is in Jesus
as the principle of communion; so that we walk with confidence in Him:
His presence gives us strength. By faith He is the glorious object
before our eyes. By love He dwells in us, and we realise what He is.
Hope fixes our eyes especially on Christ, who is coming to bring us into
the enjoyment of glory with Himself.

Consequently the apostle speaks thus: "For God hath not appointed us to
wrath " (love is understood by faith, that which God wills His mind
respecting us) "but to obtain salvation." It is this which we hope for;
and he speaks of salvation as the final deliverance "by our Lord Jesus
Christ :" and he naturally adds, "who died for us, that whether we wake
or sleep" (have died before His coming or be then alive), " we should
live together with Him." Death does not deprive us of this deliverance
and glory; for Jesus died. Death became the means of obtaining them for
us; and if we die, we shall equally live with Him. He died for us, in
our stead, in order that, happen what may, we should live with Him.
Everything that hindered it is put out of our way and has lost its
power; and, more than lost its power, has become a guarantee of our
unhindered enjoyment of the full life of Christ in glory; so that we may
comfort ourselves and more than that, we may build ourselves up with
these glorious truths, through which God meets all our wants and all our
necessities. This ([Th1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010)) is the
end of the special revelation with regard to those who sleep before the
coming of the Lord Jesus, beginning with [Th1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013).

I would here call the reader's attention to the way in which the apostle
speaks of the Lord's coming in the different Chapters of this epistle.
It will be noticed that the Spirit does not present the church here as a
body. Life is the subject that of each Christian therefore individually:
a very important point assuredly.

In Chapter 1 the expectation of the Lord is presented in a general way
as characterising the Christian. They are converted to serve the living
and true God, and to wait for His Son from heaven. Here it is the object
itself that is presented, the Person of the Lord. God's own Son shall
come, and shall satisfy all the heart's desire. This is neither His
kingdom, nor the judgment, nor even rest; it is the Son of God; and this
Son of God is Jesus, risen from among the dead, and who has delivered us
from the wrath to come; for wrath is coming. Each believer therefore
expects for himself the Son of God expects Him from heaven.

In Chapter 2 it is association with the saints, joy in the saints at the
coming of Christ.

In Chapter 3 responsibility is more the subject responsibility in
liberty and in joy; but still a position before God in connection with
the Christian's walk and life here below. The Lord's appearing is the
measure and test time of holiness. The testimony rendered by God to this
life, by giving it its natural place, takes place when Christ is
manifested with all His saints. It is not here His coming for us, but
His coming with us. This distinction between the two events always
exists. For Christians even and for the church, that which refers to
responsibility is always found in connection with the appearing of the
Lord; our joy, with His coming to take us to Himself.

Thus far then, we have the general expectation of the Lord in Person,
His Son from heaven; love satisfied at His coming as regards others;
holiness in its full value and full development. In Chapter 4 it is not
the connection of life with its full development in our being actually
with Christ, but victory over death (which is no barrier to this); and,
at the same time, the strengthening and establishment of hope in our
common departure hence, similarly to that of Jesus, to be for ever with
Him.

The exhortations that conclude the epistle are brief; the mighty action
of the life of God in these dear disciples made them comparatively
little needed. Exhortation is always good. There was nothing among them
to blame. Happy condition! They were perhaps not sufficiently instructed
for a large development of doctrine (the apostle hoped to see them for
that purpose); but there was enough of life, a personal relationship
with God sufficiently true and real, to build them up on that ground. To
him that hath shall more be given. The apostle could rejoice with them
and confirm their hope and add to it some details as a revelation from
God. The assembly in all ages is profited by it.

In the Epistle to the Philippians we see life in the Spirit rising above
all circumstances, as the fruit of long experience of the goodness and
faithfulness of God; and thus shewing its remarkable power when the help
of the saints had failed, and the apostle was in distress, his life in
danger, after four years' imprisonment, by a merciless tyrant. It is
then that he decides his case by the interests of the assembly. It is
then that he can proclaim, that we ought always to rejoice in the Lord,
and that Christ is all things to him, to live is Christ, death a gain to
him. It is then that he can do all things through Him who strengthens
him. This he has learnt. In Thessalonians we have the freshness of the
fountain near to its source; the energy of the first spring of life in
the believer's soul, presenting all the beauty and purity and vigour of
its first verdure under the influence of the sun that had risen upon
them and made the sap of life rise, the first manifestations of which
had not been deteriorated by contact with the world or by an enfeebled
view of invisible things.

The apostle desired that the disciples should acknowledge those who
laboured among them and guided them in grace and admonished them, and
esteem them greatly for their work's sake. The operation of God always
attracts a soul that is moved by the Holy Ghost, and commands its
attention and its respect: on this foundation the apostle builds his
exhortation. It is not office which is in question here (if such
existed), but the work which attracted and attached the heart. They
ought to be known: spirituality acknowledged this operation of God.
Love, devotedness, the answer to the need of souls, patience in dealing
with them on the part of God all this commended itself to the believer's
heart: and it blessed God for the care He bestowed upon His children.
God acted in the labourer and in the hearts of the faithful. Blessed be
God, it is an ever existing principle, and one that never grows weaker !

The same Spirit produced peace among themselves. This grace was of great
value. If love appreciated the work of God in the labourer, it would
esteem the bother as in the presence of God: self-will would not act.

Now this renunciation of self-will, and this practical sense of the
operation and presence of God, gives power to warn the unruly, to
comfort the fearful, to help the weak, and to be patient towards all.
The apostle exhorts them to it. Communion with God is the power and His
word the guide in so doing. In no case were they to render evil for
evil, but to follow that which was good among themselves and towards
all. All this conduct depends on communion with God, on His presence
with us, which makes us superior to evil. He is this in love; and we can
be so by walking with Him.

Such were the apostle's exhortations to guide their walk with others. As
regards their personal state, joy, prayer, thanksgiving in all things,
these should be their characteristics. With respect to the public
actings of the Spirit in their midst, the apostle's exhortations to
these simple and happy Christians were equally brief. They were not to
hinder the action of the Spirit in their midst (for this is the meaning
of quenching the Spirit); nor to despise that which He might say to
them, even by the mouth of the most simple, if He were pleased to use
it. Being spiritual they could judge all things. They were therefore not
to receive everything that presented itself, even in the name of the
Spirit, but to prove all things. They were to hold fast that which was
good; those who by faith have received the truth of the word do not
waver. One is not ever learning the truth of that which one has learnt
from God. As to evil, they were to abstain from it in all its forms.
Such were the apostle's brief exhortations to these Christians who
indeed rejoiced his heart. And in truth it is a fine picture of
christian walk, which we find here so livingly portrayed in the
apostle's communications.

He concludes his epistle by commending them to the God of peace, that
they might be preserved blameless until the coming of the Lord Jesus.

After an epistle like this his heart turned readily to the God of peace;
for we enjoy peace in the presence of God not only peace of conscience
but peace of heart.

In the previous part we found the activity of love in the heart; that is
to say, God present and acting in us, who are viewed as partaking, at
the same time, of the divine nature, which is the spring of that
holiness which will be manifested in all its perfection before God at
the coming of Jesus with all His saints. Here it is the God of peace, to
whom the apostle looks for the accomplishment of this work. There it was
the activity of a divine principle in us a principle connected with the
presence of God and our communion with Him. Here it is the perfect rest
of heart in which holiness develops itself. The absence of peace in the
heart arises from the activity of the passions and the will, increased
by the sense of powerlessness to satisfy or even to gratify them.

But in God all is peace. He can be active in love; He can glorify
Himself by creating what He will; He can act in judgment to cast out the
evil that is before His eyes. But He rests ever in Himself, and both in
good and in evil He knows the end from the beginning and is undisturbed.
When He fills the heart, He imparts this rest to us: we cannot rest in
ourselves; we cannot find rest of heart in the actings of our passions,
either without an object or upon an object, nor in the rending and
destructive energy of our own will. We find our rest in God not the rest
that implies weariness, but rest of heart in the possession of all that
we desire, and of that which even forms our desires and fully satisfies
them, in the possession of an object in which conscience has nothing to
reproach us and has but to be silent, in the certainty that it is the
Supreme Good which the heart is enjoying, the supreme and only authority
to whose will it responds and that will is love towards us. God bestows
rest, peace. He is never called the God of joy. He gives us joy truly,
and we ought to rejoice; but joy implies something surprising,
unexpected, exceptional, at least in contrast with, and in consequence
of, evil. The peace that we possess, that which satisfies us, has no
element of this kind, nothing which is in contrast, nothing which
disturbs. It is more deep, more perfect, than joy. It is more the
satisfaction of a nature in that which perfectly answers to it, and in
which it develops itself, without any contrast being necessary to
enhance the satisfaction of a heart that has not all which it desires,
or of which it is capable.

God, as we have said, rests thus in Himself-is this rest for Himself. He
gives us, and is for us, this entire peace. The conscience being perfect
through the work of Christ who has made peace and reconciled us to God,
the new nature-and consequently the heart finds its perfect satisfaction
in God, and the will is silent; moreover, it has nothing further to
desire. It is not only that God meets the desires that we have: He is
the source of new desires to the new man by the revelation of Himself in
love. \[See Note \#10\] He is both the source of the nature and its
infinite object; and that, in love. It is His part to be so. It is more
than creation; it is reconciliation, which is more than creation,
because there is in it more development of love, that is to say, of God:
and it is thus that we know God. It is that which He is essentially in
Christ.

In the angels He glorifies Himself in creation: they excel us in
strength. In Christians He glorifies Himself in reconciliation, to make
them the first fruits of His new creation, when He shall have reconciled
all things in heaven and on earth by Christ. Therefore it is written
"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children sons
of God" They have His nature and His character.

It is in these relationships with God or rather it is God in these
relationships with us in peace, in His communion, who develops
sanctification, our inward conformity of affection and intelligence (and
consequently of outward conduct) with Him and His will. "The God of
peace himself sanctify you wholly." May there be nothing in us that does
not yield to this benignant influence of peace which we enjoy in
communion with God! May no power or force in us own anything but
Himself! In all things may He be our all, so that He only may rule in
our hearts! He has brought us perfectly into this place of blessedness
in Christ and by His work. There is nothing between us and God but the
exercise of His love, the enjoyment of our happiness, and the worship of
our hearts. We are the proof before Him, the testimony, the fruit, of
the accomplishment of all that He holds most precious, of that which has
perfectly glorified Him, of that in which He delights, and of the glory
of the One who has accomplished it, namely, of Christ, and of His work.
We are the fruit of the redemption that Christ has accomplished, and the
objects of the satisfaction which God must feel in the exercise of His
love.

God in grace is the God of peace for us; for here divine righteousness
finds its satisfaction, and love its perfect exercise.

The apostle now prays that, in this character, God may work in us to
make everything respond to Himself thus revealed. Here only is this
development of humanity given "body, soul, and spirit." The object is
assuredly not metaphysical, but to express man in all the parts of his
being; the vessel by which he expresses that which he is, the natural
affections of his soul, the elevated workings of his mind, through which
he is above the animals and in intelligent relationship with God. May
God be found in each, as the mover, spring, and guide!

In general the words "soul and spirit" are used without making any
distinction between them, for the soul of man was formed very
differently from that of animals in that God breathed into his nostrils
the breath (spirit) of life, and it was thus that man became a living
soul. Therefore it suffices to say soul as to man, and the other is
supposed. Or, in saying spirit, in this sense the elevated character of
his soul is expressed. The animal has also its natural affections, has a
living soul, attaches itself, knows the persons who do it good, devotes
itself to its master, loves him, will even give its life for him; but it
has not that which can be in relationship with God (alas ! which can set
itself at enmity against Him), which can occupy itself with things
outside its own nature as the master of others.

The Spirit then wills that man, reconciled with God, should be
consecrated, in every part of his being to the God who has brought him
into relationship with Himself by the revelation of His love, and by the
work of His grace, and that nothing in the man should admit an object
beneath the divine nature of which he is partaker; so that he should
thus be preserved blameless unto the coming of Christ.

Let us observe here, that it is in no wise beneath the new nature in us
to perform our duties faithfully in all the various relationships in
which God has placed us; but quite the contrary. That which is required
is to bring God into them, His authority, and the intelligence which
that imparts. Therefore it is said to husbands to live with their wives
according to knowledge," or intelligence; that is to say, not only with
human and natural affections (which, as things are, do not by themselves
even maintain their place), but as before God and conscious of His will.
It may be that God may call us, in connection with the extraordinary
work of His grace, to consecrate ourselves entirely to it; but otherwise
the will of God is accomplished in the relationships in which He has
placed us, and divi ne intelligence and obedience to God are developed
in them. Finally God has called us to this life of holiness with
Himself; He is faithful, and He will accomplish it. May He enable us to
cleave to Him, that we may realise it! Observe again here, how the
coming of Christ is introduced, and the expectation of this coming, as
an integral part of christian life. "Blameless," it says, "at the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ." The life which had developed itself in
obedience and holiness meets the Lord at His coming. Death is not in
question. The life which we have found is to be such when He appears.
The man, in every part of his being, moved by this life, is found there
blameless when Jesus comes. Death was overcome (not yet destroyed): a
new life is ours. This life, and the man living of this life, are found,
with their Head and Source, in the glory. Then will the weakness
disappear which is connected with his present condition. That which is
mortal shall be swallowed up of life: that is all. We are Christ's: He
is our life. We wait for Him, that we may be with Him, and that He may
perfect all things in the glory.

Let us also here examine a little into that which this passage teaches
us with regard to sanctification. It is connected indeed with a nature,
but it is linked with an object; and it depends for its realisation on
the operation of another, namely, of God Himself; and it is founded on a
perfect work of reconciliation with God already accomplished. Inasmuch
as it is founded on an accomplished reconciliation, into which we enter
by the reception of a new nature, the scriptures consider Christians as
already perfectly sanctified in Christ. It is practically carried out by
the operation of the Holy Ghost, who, in imparting this nature,
separates us as thus born again entirely from the world. It is important
to maintain this truth, and to stand very clearly and distinctly on this
ground: otherwise practical sanctification soon becomes detached from a
new nature received, and is but the amelioration of the natural man and
then it is quite legal, a return after reconciliation into doubt and
uncertainty, because, though justified, the man is not accounted meet
for heaven this depends on progress so that justification does not give
peace with God. Scripture says, "Giving thanks to the Father, who hath
made us meet for the inheritance of the saints in light." Progress there
is, but it is not in scripture connected with meetness. The thief was
meet for Paradise and went there. Such views are an enfeebling, not to
say destructive, of the work of redemption, that is, of its appreciation
in our hearts by faith.

We are then sanctified (it is thus the scripture most frequently speaks)
by God the Father, by the blood and the offering of Christ, and by the
Spirit that is to say, we are set apart for God personally and for ever.
In this point of view justification is presented in the word as
consequent upon sanctification, a thing into which we enter through it.
Taken up as sinners in the world, we are set apart by the Holy Ghost to
enjoy all the efficacy of the work of Christ according to the counsels
of the Father: set apart by the communication of a new life, no doubt,
but placed by this setting apart in the enjoyment of all that Christ has
gained for us. I say again, It is very important to hold fast this truth
both for the glory of God and for our own peace: but the Spirit of God
in this epistle does not speak of it in this point of view, but of the
practical realisation of the development of this life of separation from
the world and from evil. He speaks of this divine development in the
inner man, which makes sanctification a real and intelligent condition
of soul, a state of practical communion with God, according to that
nature and to the revelation of God with which it is connected.

In this respect we find indeed a principle of life which works in us
that which is called a subjective state: but it is impossible to
separate this operation in us from an object (man would be God if it
were so), nor consequently from a continual work of God in us that holds
us in communion with that object, which is God Himself. Accordingly it
is through the truth by the word, whether at first in the communication
of life, or in detail all along our path. "Sanctify them through thy
truth; thy word is truth."

Man, we know, has degraded himself. He has enslaved himself to the lusts
of the animal part of his being. But how? By departing from God. God
does not sanctify man apart from the knowledge of Himself, leaving man
still at a distance from Him; but, while giving him a new nature which
is capable of it, by giving to this nature (which cannot even exist
without it) an object Himself, He does not make man independent, as he
wished to be: the new man is the dependent man; it is his perfection
Jesus Christ exemplified this in His life. The new man is a man
dependent in his affections, who desires to be so, who delights in, and
cannot be happy without being so, and whose dependence is on love, while
still obedient as a dependent being ought to be.

Thus they who are sanctified possess a nature that is holy in its
desires and its tastes. It is the divine nature in them, the life of
Christ. But they do not cease to be men. They have God revealed in
Christ for their object. Sanctification is developed in communion with
God, and in affections which go back to Christ, and which wait for Him.
But the new nature cannot reveal an object to itself; and still less,
could it have its object by setting God aside at its will. It is
dependent on God for the revelation of Himself. His love is shed abroad
in our hearts by the Holy Ghost whom He has given us; and the same
Spirit takes of the things of Christ and communicates them to us. Thus
we grow in the knowledge of God, being strengthened mightily by His
Spirit in the inner man, that we may "comprehend with all saints, what
is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and know the love of
Christ which passeth knowledge," and be filled unto the fullness of God.
Thus, " we all with open face beholding the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by the Spirit of the
Lord." "For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also may be
sanctified through the truth."

We see by these passages, which might be multiplied, that we are
dependent on an object, and that we are dependent on the strength of
another. Love acts in order to work in us according to this need.

Our setting apart for God, which is complete (for it is by means of a
nature that is purely of Himself, and in absolute responsibility to Him,
for we are no longer our own, but are bought with a price, and
sanctified by the blood of Christ according to the will of God who will
have us for His own), places us in a relationship, the development of
which (by an increasing knowledge of God, who is the object of our new
nature) is practical sanctification, wrought in us by the power of the
Holy Ghost, the witness in us of the love of God. He attaches the heart
to God, ever revealing Him more and more, and at the same time unfolding
the glory of Christ and all the divine qualities that were displayed in
Him in human nature, thus forming ours as born of God.

Therefore it is, as we have seen in this epistle, that love, working in
us, is the means of sanctification. ([Th1
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#012)) It is the activity of the new
nature, of the divine nature in us; and that connected with the presence
of God; for he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God. And in this
Chapter 5 the saints are commended to God Himself, that He may work it
in them; while we are always set in view of the glorious objects of our
faith in order to accomplish it.

We may here more particularly call the reader's attention to these
objects. They are, God Himself, and the coming of Christ: on the one
hand, communion with God; on the other, waiting for Christ. It is most
evident that communion with God is the practical position of the highest
sanctification. He who knows that we shall see Jesus as He now is, and
be like Him, purifies himself even as He is pure. By our communion with
the God of peace we are wholly sanctified. If God is practically our
all, we are altogether holy. (We are not speaking of any change in the
flesh, which can neither be subjected to God nor please Him.) The
thought of Christ and His coming preserves us practically, and in
detail, and intelligently, blameless. It is God Himself who thus
preserves us, and who works in us to occupy our hearts and cause us
continually to grow.

But this point deserves yet a few more words. The freshness of christian
life in the Thessalonians made it, as it were, more objective; so that
these objects are prominent, and very distinctly recognised by the
heart. We have already said that they are God the Father, and the Lord
Jesus. With reference to the communion of love with the saints as his
crown and glory, he speaks only of the Lord Jesus. This has a special
character of reward, although a reward in which love reigns. Jesus
Himself had the joy that was set before Him as sustainment in His
sufferings, a joy which thus was personal to Himself. The apostle also,
as regarded his work and labour, waited with Christ for its fruit.
Besides this case of the apostle (Chapter 2), we find God Himself and
Jesus as the object before us, and the joy of communion with God and
this, in the relationship of Father and with Christ, whose glory and
position we share through grace.

Thus it is only in the two epistles to the Thessalonians that we find
the expression "to the church which is in God the Father." \[See Note
\#11\] The sphere of their communion is thus shewn, founded on the
relationship in which they found themselves with God Himself in the
character of Father. ([Th1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003), [Th1
1:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#009); [Th1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013); [Th1
4:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015); and here [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023).) It is important to remark, that
the more vigorous and living Christianity is, the more objective it is.
It is but saying that God and the Lord Jesus have a greater place in our
thoughts; and that we rest more really upon them. This Epistle to the
Thessalonians is the part of scripture which instructs on this point;
and it is a means of judging many a fallacy in the heart, and of giving
a great simplicity to our Christianity.

The apostle closes his epistle by asking for the prayers of the
brethren, saluting them with the confidence of affection, and conjuring
them to have his epistle read to all the holy brethren. His heart forgot
none of them. He would be in relationship with all according to this
spiritual affection and personal bond. Apostle towards all of them, he
would have them recognize those who laboured among them, but he
maintained withal his own relationship. His was a heart which embraced
all the revealed counsels of God on the one hand, and did not lose sight
of the least of His saints on the other.

It remains to take notice of one interesting circumstance as to the
manner in which the apostle instructs them. He takes, in the first
Chapter, the truths which were precious to their heart, but were still
somewhat vaguely seized by their intelligence, and as to which they were
indeed fallen into mistakes, and employs them (in the clearness in which
he possessed them himself) in his practical instructions, and applies
them to known and experienced relationships, that their souls might be
well established on positive truth, and clear as to its use, before he
touched on their error and the mistakes they had made. They waited for
His Son from heaven. This they already possessed clearly in their
hearts; but they would be in the presence of God when Jesus comes with
all His saints. This was clearing up a very important point without
directly touching the error. Their heart got straight as to the truth in
its practical application to what the heart possessed. They understood
what it was to be before God the Father. It was much more intimate and
real than a manifestation of terrestrial and finite glory. Further they
would be before God when Jesus came with all His saints: a simple truth
which demonstrated itself to the heart by the simple fact that Jesus
could not have some only of His assembly. The heart seized this truth
without an effort; yet in doing so it was established, as was the
understanding also, in what made the whole truth clear, and that in way
of the relationship of the Thessalonians to Christ and those that were
His. The joy even of the apostle in meeting them all (those who had died
consequently, as well as the living) at the coming of Jesus, placed the
soul on an entirely different ground from that of being found here, and
blessed by the arrival of Jesus when they were here below.

Thus enlightened, confirmed, established, in the real bearing of the
truth which they possessed already by a development of it which
connected itself with their best affections and with their most intimate
spiritual knowledge, founded on their communion with God they were ready
with certain fixed basis of truth to enter on and set aside without
difficulty an error which was not in accord with what they now knew how
to appreciate at its just value, as forming park of their moral
possessions. Special revelation made all clear as to details. This
manner of proceeding is very Instructive.

Note \#10

Hence there is the opposite to weariness in the heavenly enjoyment of
God; because He who is the infinite object of enjoyment is the infinite
source and strength of capacity to enjoy, though we enjoy as recipient
creatures.

Note \#11

Perhaps too in connection with their recent deliverance from idols to
the one true God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 1](th2001)

</div>
