<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1.md)  
  [Previous](th1002)  [Next](th1004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001.md)

Now this forced removal of the apostle as the chief labourer, without
weakening the bond between him and the disciples, formed other links
which would consolidate and strengthen the assembly, knitting it
together by that which every joint supplied. This is connected (all
things are but the instruments of the power and wisdom of God) with the
circumstances of which the Acts of the Apostles give us the principal
details.

After the persecutions excited by the Jews the apostle made a short stay
at Thessalonica, and was then obliged to leave that city and go to
Berea. Even there the Jews of Thessalonica followed him, and influenced
those of Berea, so that the Berean brethren had to provide for his
safety. The person to whom they committed him brought him to Athens;
Silas and Timotheus remained at Berea for the moment, but soon at his
command rejoined him at Athens. Meantime a violent persecution raged
against the Christians at Thessalonica, a city of importance, in which,
as it appears, the Jews had already exercised a considerable measure of
influence over the heathen population an influence that was undermined
by the progress of Christianity, which the Jews in their blindness
rejected.

The apostle, learning this state of things from Silas and Timotheus, was
concerned at the danger his new converts ran in being shaken in faith by
the difficulties that beset their path while they were still young in
the faith. His affection would not allow him to rest without putting
himself in communication with them, and already from Athens he had sent
Timotheus to in quire into their condition, and to establish their
hearts by reminding them that while yet with them he had told them these
things would happen. During his absence Paul left Athens and went to
Corinth, where Timotheus again comforted him by the good tidings he
brought from Thessalonica, and the apostle resumed his labors at Corinth
with renewed energy and courage. (See [Act
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005).md)

On the arrival of Timotheus Paul wrote this letter. Timotheus had
informed him of the good state of the Thessalonian Christians that they
held fast the faith, that they greatly desired to see the apostle, and
that they walked together in love. In the midst of his sorrows, and of
the opposition of men in a word, of the afflictions of the gospel the
apostle's spirit is refreshed by these tidings. He is himself
strengthened, for if the faith of the labourer is the means of blessing
to souls, and in general the measure of the outward character of the
work, the faith of the Christians who are the fruit of his labors, and
who correspond to it is in return a source of strength and encouragement
to the labourer; even as their prayers are a great means of blessing to
him.

Love finds in their spiritual welfare both its food and its joy; faith,
that which sustains and strengthens it. The word of God is felt in it.
"I live," says the apostle, "if ye stand fast in the Lord. "What
thanks," he adds, "can we render to God for you, for all the joy
wherewith we rejoice for your sakes before God?" Beautiful and affecting
picture of the effect of the operation of the Spirit of God, delivering
souls from the corruption of the world, and producing the purest
affections, the greatest self-renunciation for the sake of others, the
greatest joy in their happiness divine joy, realised before God Himself,
and the value of which was appreciated in His presence by the spiritual
heart that abode in it, the heart which, on the part of that God of
love, had been the means of its existence.

What a bond is the bond of the Spirit! How selfishness is forgotten, and
disappears in the joy of such affections! The apostle, animated by this
affection, which increased instead of growing weary by its exercise, and
by the satisfaction it received in the happiness of others, desires so
much the more, from the Thessalonians being thus sustained, to see them
again; not now for the purpose of strengthening them, but to build upon
that which was already so established, and to complete their spiritual
instruction by imparting that which was yet lacking to their faith. But
he is, and he ought to be, a labourer and not a master (God makes us
feel this), and he depends entirely on God for his work, and for the
edification of others. In fact years passed away before he saw the
Thessalonians again. He remained a long time at Corinth, where the Lord
had much people; he re-visited Jerusalem, then all Asia Minor where he
had laboured earlier; thence he went to Ephesus, where he abode nearly
three years; and after that he saw the Thessalonians again, when he left
that city to go to Corinth, taking his journey by the way of Macedonia,
in order not to visit Corinth before the restoration of the Christians
there to order.

"God himself " it is thus that the apostle's desire and his submission
to the will of God expresses itself "God himself direct our way unto
you." His desire is not vague. He refers to God as to his Father, the
source of all these holy affections, Him who holds the place of Father
to us, and orders all things with a view to the good of His children,
according to that perfect wisdom which embraces all things and all His
children at once. "Our God and Father himself," the apostle says. But
there is another consideration not, assuredly, in opposition to this,
for God is one, but which has another and less individual character: and
he adds "And our Lord Jesus Christ." Christ is Son over God's house, and
besides joy and blessing and individual affection, there was the
progress, the welfare, and the development of the whole assembly to be
considered. These two parts of Christianity act assuredly upon each
other.

Where the operation of the Spirit is full and unhindered, the well-being
of the assembly and the individual affections are in harmony. If
anything is lacking in the one, God uses the failure itself to act
powerfully on the other. If the assembly as a whole is weak, individual
faith is exercised in a special manner, and more immediately upon God
Himself. There are no Elijahs and Elishas in the reign of Solomon. On
the other hand the watchful care of the assembly by those divinely
engaged in it is the true energy of its spiritual organization,
strengthens the life, and re-awakens the spiritual affections of its
slumbering members. But the two things are different. Therefore the
apostle adds to "our God and Father," "and our Lord Jesus Christ," who,
as we have said according to Hebrews 3, is a Son over His house. It is a
blessing that our path depends on the love of a Father, who is God
Himself, acting according to the tender affections expressed by that
name; and, as to the well-being of the assembly, that it depends on the
government of a Lord like Jesus, who loves it with a perfect love: and
who, although He took such a place, is the God who created all things,
the Man who has all power in heaven and on earth, to whom Christians are
the objects of incessant and faithful care care which He expends in
order to bring the assembly finally unto Himself in glory according to
the counsels of God. \[See Note \#4\] Such then was the apostle's first
wish, and such were they with regard to whom he formed it, Meanwhile he
must leave his beloved Thessalonians to the immediate care of the Lord
on whom he depended (compare [Act
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032).md) To that his heart turns May God
"direct my way to come to you. And the Lord make you to increase and
abound in love one toward another and toward all." And his heart could
present its affection for them, as the pattern of that which they ought
to feel for others. This power of love maintains the heart in the
presence of God and makes it find its joy in the light of His presence
and earnestly desire that all saints may be in His presence, their
hearts fitted for it and there. For God is love, and the exercise of
love in the Christian's heart (fruit of the presence and the operation
of the Spirit) is in fact the effect of the presence of God; and at the
same time it makes us feel His presence, so that it keeps us before Him
and maintains sensible communion in the heart. Love may suffer and
thereby prove its strength, but we are speaking of the spontaneous
exercise of love towards the objects which God presents to it.

Now, being thus the development of the divine nature in us, and the
sustainment of our hearts in communion with God Himself, love is the
bond of perfectness, the true means of holiness, when it is real. The
heart is kept, far away from the flesh and its thoughts, in the pure
light of the presence of God which the soul thus enjoys. For this reason
the apostle prays, while waiting to give them more light, that the Lord
would increase love in them in order to establish their hearts
unblamable in holiness before God even our Father in the presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints. Here we find again the two great
principles of which I spoke at the end of Chapter 1: God in the
perfection of His nature; and the Lord Jesus in the intimacy of His
connection with us God however as Father, and Jesus as Lord. We are
before God, and Jesus comes with His saints. He has brought them to
perfection: they are with Him and thus before God known in the
relationship of Father.

Observe also that everything refers to this hope: it was an actual and
present expectation. If they were converted it was to serve God and to
wait for His Son from heaven. Everything related to that wondrous moment
when He should come. That which holiness was would be demonstrated when
they should be before God, and the saints would be with their Head;
moreover manifested with Him in glory, even as then they should also
fully enjoy the fruit of their labour, and the reward of love in the joy
of all those whom they had loved. \[See Note \#5\] The scene which would
be the consummation of the work is presented here in all its moral
bearing. We are before God, in His presence, where holiness is
demonstrated in its true character; we are there for perfect communion
with God in the light, where the connection of holiness with His nature
and with the manifestation of Himself is apparent; even as this
manifestation is in connection with the development of a nature in us,
which by grace sets us in relationship with Him.

"Unblamable," he says, "in holiness," and in holiness "before God." He
is light. What immense joy, what power, through grace, in this thought,
for the time present, to keep ourselves manifested before Him! But only
love, known in Him, can do this.

But also we add "Our Father." It is a known and real relationship, which
has its own peculiar character, a relationship of love. It is not a
thing to be acquired, and holiness is not the means of acquiring it.
Holiness is the character of our relationship with God, inasmuch as we
have received His nature as His children, and it is the revelation of
the perfection of that nature in Him in love. Love itself has given us
that nature, and has placed us in that relationship; practical holiness
is its exercise in communion with God, having fellowship with Him in His
presence according to the love which we thus know, that is, God Himself
as He has revealed Himself towards us.

But the heart is not alone: there is companionship in this joy and in
this perfection; and above all it is with Jesus Himself. He will come,
He will be present, and not only He who is the Head, but all the saints
with Him will be there also. It will be the accomplishment of the ways
of God respecting those whom He had given to Jesus. We shall see Him in
His glory, the glory which He has taken in connection with His coming
for us. We shall see all the saints in whom He will be admired, and see
them in the perfection which our hearts desire for them now.

Observe also that love makes us rise above the difficulties, the
persecutions, the fears, which the enemy seeks to produce. Occupied with
God, happy in Him, this weight of affliction is not felt. The strength
of God is in the heart; the walk is sensibly connected with the eternal
happiness possessed with Him, and the affliction is felt to be but light
and for a moment. Nor this only; we suffer for Christ's sake: it is joy
with Him, it is intimacy of communion, if we know how to appreciate it,
and all is invested with the glory and salvation that are found at the
end "at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints."

In reading this passage one cannot but observe the immediate and living
way in which the Lord's coming is linked with daily practical life, so
that the perfect light of that day is thrown upon the hourly path of the
present time. By the exercise of love they were to be established in
holiness before God at the coming of Christ. From one day to another,
that day was looked for as the consummation and the only term they
contemplated to the ordinary life of each day here below. How this
brought the soul into the presence of God! Moreover, as I havealready in
part observed, they lived in a known relationship with God which gave
room for this confidence. He was their Father; He is ours. The
relationship of the saints to Jesus was equally known. The saints were
"his saints." They were all to come with Him. They were associated with
His glory. There is nothing equivocal in the expression. Jesus, the
Lord, coming with all His saints, allows us to think of no other event
than His return in glory. Then also will He be glorified in His saints,
who will already have rejoined Him to be for ever with Him. It will be
the day of their manifestation as of His.

Note \#5

It is very striking how holiness here, and manifestation in glory, are
brought together as one thing in scripture, only the veil drawn aside
when the glory is there. Even Christ was declared Son of God with power
according to the Spirit of holiness by resurrection. We beholding the
glory with unveiled face are changed into the same image from glory to
glory. So here; we are to walk in love, to be unblamable in holiness. We
should have said here; but no, the veil is drawn at the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints. In Ephesians 5 He washes us with
the word, to present us a glorious body without spot to Himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 4](th1004.md)

</div>
