<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1005)  [Next](ti2001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#001)

The apostle then goes equally into detail with regard to servants, that
is, slaves. They were to respect their masters, in order that the
doctrine of the Lord should not be blasphemed. When the masters were
believers, there was naturally more familiarity, for they were one in
Christ, and thence the danger (for the flesh is crafty) that the
servants might not treat their masters with the respect due to them. The
apostle guards against this abuse of christian love, and of the just
intimacy and confidence which ought to exist between brethren; but
which, on the contrary, was a motive for the servant to render all
honour to his master, by treating him with more love and with the same
respect.

It was necessary that the apostle should be firm. All other instruction
all refusal to receive the wholesome words of christian doctrine, the
words of Christ and the doctrine which is according to practical
godliness proceeded from the flesh, from human pride in those who wished
to take advantage of godliness, and make it a means of gain. From such
persons Timothy was to turn away. Godliness was indeed gain, if they
were contented with what they had; and the Christian, who does not
belong to this world, if he has food and raiment, ought to be content
therewith. He brought nothing into this world, and will certainly carry
nothing out of it. And the love of money is a root of all sorts of evil.
Seduced by this covetousness, some had wandered away from christian
faith and had pierced their hearts with sorrow. The desire to be rich
was the path of snares and temptation, of foolish and hurtful lusts.
Timothy was to flee these things, as a man of God. This is always the
thought here: he was in the world on the part of God; he represented Him
for his part in the work. He was therefore to follow after other things
than earthly riches the character of a man of God righteousness,
godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness: these were the things which,
in man, presented God to the world and glorified Him.

Meanwhile there was conflict: he must fight the good fight of faith. If
any one represents God in the world, there must be warfare, because the
enemy is there. The energy of faith was also necessary, in order to lay
hold of eternal life in the midst of the seduction and difficulties
which the " things that are seen " presented. God, moreover, had called
Timothy to this, and he had made a good confession before many
witnesses.

Finally, the apostle charges him most solemnly in the presence of God,
the Source of life for all things and of Christ Jesus who had Himself
borne witness without wavering before the powers of this world, placing
him under the responsibility of keeping the commandment without spot,
unrebukable until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It will be noticed here that, as Paul had not spoken in the epistle of
the privileges of the assembly, but of its responsibility, so neither
does he here speak of its being caught up but of its manifestation, when
the fruits of faithfulness (or of failure in it) will be gathered, and
every one be in his place in the visible glory according to his work.
All are like Christ, all enter into His joy; but to sit at His right and
left hand in His kingdom is the portion of those for whom it is prepared
by His Father, who bestows it according to the work which He has granted
each to perform, giving him power to accomplish it, although in grace He
reckons it as our own.

Christ Himself is here viewed as the faithful man ([Ti1
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#013)), whom God will manifest in glory
before all creatures at the time ordained in His counsels.

All here is responsibility before the world, or glory as the result of
that responsibility. The supreme, invisible God is maintained in His
majesty; and He presents the Lord Jesus Christ in the creation as its
centre, and repository of His glory He who dwells in light inaccessible,
whom, in His divine essence, man has not seen and cannot see.

This character of the epistle is very remarkable. Nowhere else is the
inaccessible majesty of God, as God, thus presented. His character is
often the subject of instruction and manifestation. Here He alone has
essential immortality. He dwells in inaccessible light. He is ever
invisible to the eyes of men. He alone has power. He has dominion over
all who reign. It is God in the abstraction of His essence, in the
proper immutability of His being, in the rights of His majesty, veiled
to all men.

Now Christ will be the centre of the visible glory. Having part in the
divine glory before the world was, He displays, in the human nature in
which He took part, this glory, which is rendered visible in Him,
causing His own to participate in His joy and in all that He has in this
character; but here, He is manifested by God, and in order that all
should acknowledge Him. \[See Note \#8\] And it is our responsibility,
faithfulness to which will be manifested in that day, which is here set
before us. However small may be our share of responsibility, it is of
such a God as this that we are the representatives on earth. Such is the
God before whom we are to walk, and whose majesty we are to respect
immediately in our conduct, and also in our relations to all that He has
made.

The apostle concludes his exhortation to Timothy by engaging him to warn
the rich not to rest on the uncertainty of riches, but on the living God
who gives us richly all things to enjoy. It is still the supreme and
Creator-God who is before our eyes. Moreover, they were to be rich in
good works, and ready to give; to be rich in those dispositions which
would be of value, which would lay up a store (this is but a figure)
against the time to come; and to lay hold of that which really is life.
The apostle repeats his urgent exhortation to Timothy to keep that which
had been committed to him, to avoid profane and vain babblings, holding
fast the sound and sanctifying truth, and to have nothing to do with
oppositions of human science, which pretended to penetrate into divine
things as though they were subject to its knowledge. This was the origin
of the fall of many with regard to christian faith.

I do not doubt that, in the manner in which the apostle here sets God
before us, he refers to the foolish imaginations to which, under the
influence of the enemy, men were abandoning themselves. Thus he speaks
of these with relation to the majesty of His Being as the one only God
in whom is all fullness, and with regard to the sobriety of practical
morality, which keeps the heart under the influence of that truth, and
apart from the false and vain speculations in which the pride of man
indulged itself. He maintained souls by the majesty of the only God in
the practical sobriety in which peace dwells.

Soon will the veil be drawn aside by the appearing of Jesus, whom the
Almighty God will display to the world.

Note \#8

In Revelation 19 He is King of kings and Lord of lords. Here He who is
so manifests Him. So in Daniel 7. The Son of man is brought to the
Ancient of days, but in the same Chapter the Ancient of days comes.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 1](ti2001)

</div>
