<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2003)  [Next](tit001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)

Does this perfect and supreme authority of the scriptures set aside
ministry ? By no means; it is the foundation of the ministry of the
word. One is a minister of the word; one proclaims the word resting on
the written word which is authority for all, and the warrant for all
that a minister says, and imparting to his words the authority of God
over the conscience of those whom he teaches or exhorts. There is, in
addition to this, the activity of love in the heart of him who exercises
this ministry (if it be real), and the powerful action of the Spirit, if
he be filled with the Holy Ghost. But that which the word says silences
all opposition in the heart or mind of the believer.

It was thus that the Lord answered Satan, and Satan himself was reduced
to silence. He who does not submit to the words of God thereby shews
himself to be a rebel against God The rule given of God is in the
scriptures; the energetic action of His Spirit is in ministry, although
God can equally act upon the heart immediately by the word itself.
Nevertheless ministry, since the revelations of God were completed,
could not be an authority, or there would be two authorities; and if
two, one must be a needless repetition of the other, or else, if they
differed, no authority at all.

If the revelations were not complete, no doubt there might be more. The
Old Testament left untold the history of Christ, the mission of the Holy
Ghost, the formation of the assembly; because these facts not being yet
accomplished could not be the subject of its historical and doctrinal
instructions, and the assembly was not even the subject of prophecy. But
all is now complete, as Paul tells us that he was a minister of the
assembly to complete the word of God. ([Col
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#025)) The subjects of revelation were
then completed.

Observe, that the apostle insists, as a matter of responsibility, that
Timothy should devote himself to his ministry with so much the more
energy that the assembly was declining, and self-will in Christians was
gaining the ascendancy; not that he throws any doubt upon its being a
constant duty to do so at all times, whether happy or unhappy. The
apostle, as we have seen, has two different periods in view; the decline
of the assembly, which had already begun, and the still worse condition
that was yet future. The special application of the exhortation here is
to the first period. "Be instant," he says, "in season, out of season .
. . for the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine . .
. and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be
turned unto fables."

In how positive and distinct a way the apostle sets the fall of the
assembly before us! Its impaired condition in his day was to him but a
point of progress (according to his judgment in the Spirit) towards a
yet more entire fall; when, although still calling itself christian, the
mass of those who assumed the name of Christ would no longer endure the
sound doctrine of the Holy Ghost. But, come what might, laboring with
patience and diligence and energy as long as they would hearken, he was
to be watchful, to endure afflictions, to seek after souls still
unconverted (a great proof of faith when the heart is burdened with the
unfaithfulness of those within), and fully to exercise his ministry;
with this additional motive, that apostolic energy was disappearing from
the scene. ([Ti2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#006))

But there is yet something to notice at the beginning of this Chapter.
Fullness of grace, it is apparent, does not here characterise the
epistle. His exhortation to Timothy is "before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who will judge the quick and dead at his appearing and his
kingdom." We have already spoken of this: the appearing of Jesus is in
connection with responsibility, His coming is with the object of calling
us to Himself in connection with our privileges. Here it is the first of
these two cases; not the assembly, or the Father's house, but God, the
appearing, and the kingdom. All that is in relation to responsibility,
government, judgment, is gathered together in one point of view. The
apostle however is not speaking, of the assembly, nor does he throughout
the epistle. The assembly moreover as such is not judged; she is the
bride of the Lamb. Individuals are judged. Christendom which bears its
name and responsibility, and necessarily so while the Holy Ghost is here
below, is judged. We are warned of it in Ephesus. (Rev. 2) Nay, judgment
begins there. This is the assembly viewed as the house, not the body.

The portion of the assembly, and even of its members as such, is grace
and not judgment. She goes to meet the Lord before His appearing. Here
the apostle speaks of His appearing and His kingdom. It is as appearing
in glory and clothed with the authority of the kingdom that He exercises
judgment. The presentation of the assembly to Himself completes the work
of grace with regard to that assembly. When the Lord appears, we shall
appear with Him in glory; but it will be the glory of the kingdom (as we
see in the transfiguration), and He will judge the living.

He will maintain the authority of His kingdom, as a new order of things,
for a long period; and judgment will be exercised, if the occasion for
it arises, during its whole continuance, for a king shall reign in
righteousness; judgment and righteousness will be united. Before giving
back this kingdom to God the Father, He judges the dead, for all
judgment is committed to the Son. So that the kingdom is a new order of
things founded on His appearing, in which judgment is exercised. The
kingdom is founded by the exclusion of Satan from heaven. It is
established and its authority put in exercise at the appearing of the
Lord.

The consciousness that this judgment is going to be exercised gives an
impulse to love in the carrying out of ministry, gives it earnestness,
and strengthens the hands by the sense of union with Him who will
exercise it and also by the sense of personal responsibility.

The apostle uses his near departure as a fresh motive to exhort Timothy
to the full exercise of his ministry. His own heart expands at the
thought of that departure.

The absence therefore of apostolic ministry, so serious a fact with
regard to the assembly's position, makes the duty of the man of God the
more urgent. As Paul's absence is a motive for working out our own
salvation with fear and trembling, so is it also a motive for him who is
engaged in the work of the gospel to devote himself more than ever to
his ministry, in order to supply as far as possible the lack of
apostolic service by earnest care for souls, and by instructing them in
the truth that he has learnt.

We cannot be apostles, or lay the foundation of the assembly. This is
already done. But we may build upon that foundation by the truth which
we have received from the apostle, by the scriptures which God has given
us, by an unwearied love in the truth for souls. The foundation is not
to be laid a second time. We give its value to the foundation, we give
it its place, by building upon it, and by caring for the souls and the
assembly, to which apostleship has given an ever-abiding place and
foundation before God. This is what we have to do in the absence of the
gift that lays the foundation.

The character that God appointed has already been stamped on the work:
the one foundation has been laid. The assembly has its one and sole
place according to the counsels of God. The rule given of God is in the
word. We have but to act as the apostle leads according to the impulse
already given by the Spirit. We cannot have apostolic authority: no one
is an apostle in any such sense. This could not be, because we do not
lay the foundation; it would be to deny that which has already been
done. The foundation has been laid. We can labour according to the
measure of our gift; and so much the more devotedly, in proportion as we
love the work which the apostle wrought, and because he is no longer
here to sustain it.

As to the apostle, he had finished his work; if others were unfaithful,
he had been faithful. In the good fight of the gospel of God he had
fought to the end, and successfully resisted all the attacks of the
enemy. He had finished his course: it only remained for him to be
crowned. He had kept the faith committed to him. The crown of
righteousness, that is to say, the one bestowed by the righteous Judge
who acknowledged his faithfulness, was laid up and kept for him. It was
not till the day of retribution that he would receive it. We see
plainly, that it is reward for labour and for faithfulness that is here
meant. This or its opposite characterises the whole epistle, and not the
privileges of grace.

The work of the Spirit through us is rewarded by the crown of
righteousness, and every one will have a reward according to his labour.
Christ brings us all according to the grace of God into the enjoyment of
His own glory to be with Him and like Him. This is our common portion
according to the eternal counsels of God; but a place is prepared by the
Father and given by the Son according to the work wrought by the power
of the Spirit in each believer in his particular position. It is not
Paul only who will receive this crown from the righteous Judge; all who
love the Lord's appearing will appear with Him in the glory that is
personally destined to each, and that is adjudged to him when the Lord
appears. Detached from this world, sensible that it is a perverse and
rebellious one, feeling how much the dominion of Satan burdens the
heart, the faithful long for the appearance of Him who will put an end
to that dominion, to rebellion, oppression and misery, by bringing in in
His goodness although by judgment deliverance, peace, and freedom of
heart, on the earth.

The Christian will share the Lord's glory when He shall appear: but this
world also will be delivered.

We see here too that the privileges of the assembly as such are not the
subject, but the public retribution manifested when Jesus shall appear
to all; and the public establishment of His glory. The heart loves His
appearing; not only the removal of evil, but the appearance of Him who
removes it.

In that which follows we see what progress the evil had already made,
and how the apostle counts upon the individual affection of his dear son
in the faith. Probably there were good reasons for the departure of
many, certainly for that of some; nevertheless it is true that the first
thing that presents itself to the apostle's mind is the departure of
Demas from purely worldly motives. The apostle felt himself isolated.
Not only had the mass of Christians abandoned him, but his companions in
labour had gone away. In the providence of God he was to be alone. He
begs Timothy to come soon. Demas had forsaken him. The rest, from
various motives, had quitted him; some he had sent away in connection
with the work. It is not said that Demas had ceased to be a Christian
had publicly renounced the Lord; but it was not in his heart to bear the
cross with the apostle.

In the midst of these sorrows a ray of grace and light shines through
the darkness. The presence of Mark whose service Paul had formerly
refused, because he had shrunk from the perils of laboring among the
Gentiles and had turned back to Jerusalem is now desired by him, because
he was useful for the ministry. It is most interesting to see, and a
touching proof of the grace of God, that the afflictions of the apostle
and the work of grace in Mark combine to set before us, as faithful and
useful to Paul, the one who once had failed, and with whom the
apostlewould then have nothing to do. We also see the affections and
confidence displayed in the smallest detail of life. Full of power by
the Spirit of God, the apostle is gentle, intimate, and confiding, with
those who are upright and devoted. We see too that at the close of his
life, devoted as he was, the occasion had presented itself for study (in
connection assuredly with his work), and for writing that which he
wished carefully to preserve possibly his epistles.

This has an important place in scriptural instruction with regard to the
life of the apostle. Paul was lost, so to speak, for the greater part,
in the power of the Spirit; but when alone, with sober mind, he occupies
himself intelligently and carefully about the things of God.

He warns Timothy with regard to a man who had shewn his enmity, and puts
him on his guard against him.

We see here also that the epistle bears the character of righteousness,
grace having had its course. "The Lord," he says, " reward him according
to his deeds." As for those who had not courage to stand by him, when he
had to answer as a prisoner, he only prays for them. He had not been
discouraged. His heart, broken by the unfaithfulness of the assembly,
was strong in confessing the Lord before the world, and he can testify
that, if forsaken by men, the Lord Himself stood with him and
strengthened him. That he had to answer before the authorities was but
an occasion to proclaim again in public that for which he was made a
prisoner. Glorious power of the gospel where faith is in exercise! All
that the enemy can do becomes a testimony, in order that the great,
kings, those who were otherwise inaccessible, should hear the word of
truth, the testimony of Jesus Christ.

The faithful witness was also delivered out of the lion's mouth. His
strong and simple confidence counted on the Lord to the end. He would
preserve him from every evil work unto His heavenly kingdom.

lf the time of his departure was at hand, if he had to fall asleep
instead of being changed, he had not ceased to be among those who looked
for the Lord's appearing. Meanwhile he was going to be with Him, to have
a place in the heavenly kingdom.

He salutes the brethren with whom Timothy was connected, and begs him to
come before the winter. We also learn here, that the miraculous power
granted to the apostles was exercised in the Lord's service, and not for
their private interests, nor as their personal affection might suggest;
for Paul had left Trophimus sick at Miletus.

It is evident that this epistle was written when the apostle thought his
departure near at hand and when the faith of Christians had grievously
declined, which was proved by their having forsaken the apostle. His
faith was sustained by grace. He did not hide from himself that all was
going wrong: his heart felt it was broken by it; he saw that it would
grow worse and worse. But his own testimony stood firm; he was strong
for the Lord through grace. The strength of the Lord was with him to
confess Christ and to exhort Timothy to so much the more diligent and
devoted an exercise of his ministry, because the days were evil.

This is very important. If we love the Lord, if we feel what He is to
the assembly, we feel that in the latter all is in ruin. Personal
courage is not weakened for the Lord remains ever the same, faithful,
and using His power for us: if not in the assembly which rejects it, it
is in those who stand fast that He will exercise His power according to
the individual need created by this state of things.

May we remember this. Insensibility to the state of the assembly is not
a proof that we are near the Lord, or that we have confidence in Him;
but in the consciousness of this ruin, faith, the sense of what Christ
is, will give confidence in Him amidst the ruin which we mourn.
Nevertheless it will be observed, that the apostle speaks here of the
individual, of righteousness, of judgement, and now of the assembly. If
the latter is spoken of outwardly as the great house, it contains
vessels to dishonour from which we are to purge ourselves. Yet the
apostle foresaw a still worse state of things which has now set in. But
the Lord can never fail in His faithfulness.

The first of Timothy gives directions for the order of the assembly; the
second, for the path of the servant of God when it is in disorder and
failure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 1](tit001)

</div>
