<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac012)  [Next](zac014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001.md)

In chapter 13 all is cleansed. The fountain is open to the house of
David, whose sin had ruined the people, without abrogating the rights or
weakening the grace of God; and also to the people of Jerusalem, who
were more than partners in the sins of their rulers. Here it is
practical cleansing with water. Faith in Him whom they had pierced was
already in their hearts. The idols and the false prophets, the two chief
sources of the misery of the Jews, should be entirely taken away. No
one, not even the very parents of the guilty, would tolerate these
abominations and deceits. Christ is the pattern, and all shall be judged
of by it. Everything takes its moral character according to the
relationship of the redeemed with Him. This gives occasion to a full
historical development of that which has happened to Him. How He has
been pierced, and its consequences, are detailed with respect to
Jerusalem, Israel, and the world.

The result of this rejection of Christ, the centre of the history of
eternity, of man's connection with God, and the revelation of both-for
this event is here considered in connection with the history of
Israel-is the scattering of the sheep who had been gathered around the
true Shepherd. Nevertheless God stretches out His hand over the little
ones. The result for Judah, when the current of their history shall be
resumed in the last days, is that two-thirds shall be cut off in all the
land (compare [Eze 20:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034.md) with
respect to Israel); and the third that is left shall pass through the
fire, shall call upon the name of Jehovah, and shall be heard. Jehovah
will abolish the name of Lo-ammi-not My people-by saying, It is My
people; and they shall say, Jehovah is my God. This is the definite
result of His dealings with His people; and here especially with Judah,
of whom He had said Lo-ammi, and the remnant of whom He acknowledges as
His people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 14](zac014.md)

</div>
