<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac013)  [Next](mal000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#001.md)

Chapter 14 announces the final events that shall bring in this result,
as chapter 13 had especially detailed that which regarded Christ. The
two subjects of chapter 12 are thus resumed in detail. We may remark
here, that the effect of the staff being broken, which united Judah and
Israel, is here realised. The prophet speaks only of Judah, of the
people who in the land were guilty of rejecting the Messiah, and who
will suffer the consequence of so doing in the land during the last
days, the mass of them at that time joining themselves to Antichrist.
Jerusalem, as we have said, forms the centre of the prophecy. No prophet
could perish outside her borders. What a terrible thing to be outwardly
near God when one is not so inwardly, and when the heart invests itself
with the name of God as with a cloak of pride-as a buckler, so that His
arrows no longer reach the conscience!

Nevertheless, in spite of her pride and her confederacy with evil,
Jerusalem shall be taken in the last days. We have seen, when studying
the other prophets, that this will be the case; and then afterwards,
when again besieged, Jehovah will intervene for the destruction of these
enemies. This is very distinctly announced here. The nations shall be
assembled by Jehovah; the city shall be taken and the houses rifled, and
half the people led captive. Jehovah will then come forth against those
nations, as we read in chapter 12 (compare Isaiah 66 and Micah 4). He
comes in the Person of Christ to the Mount of Olives, whence He
ascended. The Mount of Olives cleaves in the midst, forming a great
valley, spreading terror among the people who are there. But if Jehovah
identifies Himself thus, so to speak, with the meek and lowly Jesus
formerly on the earth, in order that the identity of the Saviour and
Jehovah should be clearly acknowledged, it is not the less true that He
will come from heaven in all His glory (as He Himself predicted, as well
as the prophets beginning with Enoch). The heavenly saints will
accompany Him in His public manifestation to the eyes of an astonished
world. Marvellous glory for those that are His, with whom He will
manifest Himself before all the wicked! For here it is Jehovah's public
coming to the earth, as the righteous Judge, making war upon all that
rebel against Him.

I do not see that the last-mentioned event follows that which precedes
it in the chapter. There is a division in the middle of [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005.md). "And Jehovah my God shall come"
begins a fresh subject, introducing a grand distinct event, which
affects the whole earth in a manner that characterises its future
existence. The presence of Jehovah upon the Mount of Olives renews, we
may say, His visible relationship with Judah. This part of the subject
closes with the words, "Uzziah, king of Judah." That which follows is
intimately connected with the return of Christ to the Jews, in the very
spot from which He left this earth; but it looks at it from a higher
point of view, and takes up the subject of the relationship of Jehovah
with the whole earth, when He comes from heaven with the saints. This is
another part of the subject and a very important one.

The meaning of the rather difficult passage that follows has, I think,
been given, as to its general sense, by Martin in his French
translation. The Hebrew is acknowledged to be obscure. It may be,
perhaps, translated, "there shall not be a precious light \[which\]
shall be withdrawn." It is "a light of preciousness and denseness"; the
last word may be taken for "shall be withdrawn." It shall not be a day
of mingled light and darkness, but a day appointed by Jehovah, a day
characterised by His intervention and His mighty presence, and that
could not be characterised by the ordinary vicissitudes of night and
day; but, at the moment when the total darkness of night might be
expected, there should be light. Living waters should flow from
Jerusalem towards the east and towards the west, into the Dead Sea and
into the Great Sea. The heat of summer should not dry up their source.

Jehovah shall be God over all the earth; there shall be but one Jehovah,
and His name one. It shall be truly one universal religion, the dominion
of the one Jehovah, the God of the Jews, over all the earth. The land
round Jerusalem shall be entirely peopled, and Jerusalem lifted up and
securely inhabited in her place. There shall be no more any destruction
of the city which Jehovah has chosen. A deadly plague shall smite all
those that have fought against her. They shall mutually destroy each
other. Judah shall also fight against them, and their riches shall be
her prey. The remnant that are spared among the nations shall come up to
Jerusalem, to the feast in which the entrance of God's people into their
rest is celebrated. And all shall be holiness; everything in Jerusalem
shall be consecrated to Jehovah.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Introduction](mal000.md)

</div>
