<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zephaniah Index](zep.md)  
  [Previous](zep002)  [Next](hag000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Synopsis of the Books of the Bible*, by John Nelson Darby, \[1857-62\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zephaniah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001.md)

Summary to Zephaniah

Amid this judgment of the nation Jerusalem holds the chief place. In
chapter 3, the Spirit of God, while laying open the iniquity which
occasioned it, turns towards the remnant, and exhorts them to wait upon
Jehovah, since all hope was gone. He enlightens them with respect to His
dealings, and reveals to them in what manner these will result in
blessing to Israel. God had been in the midst of the holy city, now
polluted, but she would not draw near to Him nor obey Him. Her princes
were the violent of the earth, her judges were rapacious, her prophets
vain and treacherous, her priests polluted the sanctuary. Jehovah was
there to shew them their sins and His judgment; but the wicked were
shameless in their iniquity. Doubtless Jehovah had cut off the nations
and made them desolate; but surely Israel, however chastised, would
receive instruction-Jehovah would not be compelled to cut them off. But
they had diligently corrupted all their doing. Because they would not
hearken to Jehovah, who had shewn them such lovingkindness, who had been
so near unto them, Israel, unnamed, sinks to the level of the nations,
who are the objects of the just judgment of God, and the remnant is
called ([Zep 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#008).md) to wait upon Jehovah
alone, who is about to execute this judgment, to await the moment (since
nothing touched the hardened hearts of the people) when Jehovah should
rise up to the prey. Until that moment nothing could be done. Israel
would not hearken. Judgment did not belong to the remnant. And this
judgment alone could put an end to their distress. God would assemble
all the nations to pour His fierce anger upon them-the solemn and
universal testimony of the prophets. But then would He turn to them
\[See Note \#1\] a pure language, that they should call upon the name of
Jehovah to serve Him with one consent. He would also gather together all
the dispersed of Israel from the most distant lands.

Jerusalem should no longer remember her shame; her transgressions should
be entirely blotted out. The proud should be taken away from among her:
a humble and despised people should be in the midst of her, whose refuge
should be Jehovah alone; the little remnant should do no iniquity,
neither should they speak lies. They should feed and lie down in safety;
none should make them afraid. [Zep
3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#014.md) contain a song of praise,
which the Spirit indites and teaches to Zion whom He calls on to sing it
with thanksgivings to Jehovah-who has put away her condemnation for
ever-who is in the midst of her-who rejoices in His love towards her.
All those who had grieved for the reproach of Zion, and who had sighed
for her solemn assemblies, should be gathered together; her enemies
should be destroyed, and her children should have praise and fame in
every place where they had been despised and reproached. Israel should
be a subject of praise among all the nations of the earth.

Note \#1

This is a very clear testimony, when it is that the nations of the earth
learn righteousness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai Introduction](hag000.md)

</div>
