[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index.md) [Buddhist
Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

# Four Short Suttas

### translated by D. J. Gogerly, published posthumously

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# JOURNAL ASIATIQUE

##### OU

## RECUIL DE MÉMOIRES

### D'EXTRAITS ET DE NOTICES

#### RELATIFS A L'HISTOIRE, A LA PHILOSOPHIE, AUX LANGUES ET A LA LITTÉRATURE DE PEUPLES ORIENTAUX

 

### ET PUBLIÉ PAR LA SOCIÉTÉ ASIATIQUE

 

## SIXIÈME SÉRIE

### TOME XX

 

###### \[Paris, L'imprimerie nationale\]

#### \[1872\]

###### {Scanned and edited by Christopher M. Weimer, May 2002}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

## TRADUCTIONS DE GOGERLY.

 

PARABHAVA-SUTTA.

   Thus I heard: when Buddha was once residing at Jetavana, the vihâra
of Anâthapi.n.dika, in the vicinity of the city of Sâvatthi, a certain
deva possessed of pleasing appearance, approached Buddha, after the
expiration of the first ten hours of the night (in the middle of the
night), illuminating the whole Jetavana with his splendour, and having
worshipped him, stood on one side of him (at a respectful distance) and
spoke to him in this stanza:

   1. Who is the person that declines (in prosperity)? Lord Buddha of
the family of Gotama, we have come to you for the purpose of proposing
the question: what is the cause that leads to the decline of prosperity?

   2. The person who advances in prosperity may be easily known, and so
is the person who declines. He who delights (in the performance of the)
ten meritorious acts<span id="page_226_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_226_note_1.md) will attain to
prosperity, while he that entertains an aversion thereto will decline in
prosperity.

   3. We know that this is the first cause which leads men to decline in
prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the second cause which leads to
that result.

   4. If any individual takes delight in wicked men and has an aversion
towards the righteous, and delights in the doings of wicked men, that
will be a cause to bring about his decline in prosperity.

   5. We know that this is the second cause which leads to the decline
of prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the third cause. What is it
that leads to the decline of prosperity?

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

   6. If any individual should be habitually sleepy (whether sitting,
walking, or standing, etc.), be addicted to company, be of malicious
temper, or would not exert himself, that would operate as a cause
towards the decline of his prosperity.

   7. We know that this is the third cause which leads to the decline of
prosperity. Please declare the fourth, O Bhagavâ! What is it that leads
to that result?

   8. If any individual should not support and maintain either of his
parents in their old age, having it in his power to do so, that would
cause the decline of his prosperity.

   9. We know that this is the fourth cause which leads to the decline
of prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the fifth. What is it that
brings about that result?

   10. If any individual utter a falsehood and thereby impose upon a
Samana, a brâhman, or any other description of mendicants, that will
operate as a cause towards a decline of his prosperity.

   11. We know that this is the fifth cause which leads men to decline
in prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the sixth: what is it that
brings about that result?

   12. If any individual possessed of gold in abundance, plenty of
kahapanas, and various kinds of viands, should himself alone enjoy his
wealth, that would be a cause to the decline of his prosperity.

   13. We know that this is the sixth cause which will lead men to
decline in prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the seventh: what is it
that leads to that result?

   14. If any individual disrespect his relations, actuated by too high
an opinion of himself, founded on his superiority in birth, wealth, or
family, it will operate as a cause towards a decline of his prosperity.

   15. We know that this is the seventh cause which leads men to decline
in prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the eighth: what is it that
tends to a decline of prosperity?

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

   16. If any individual becomes a debauchee, a drunkard, or a gambler,
and thereby entirely squanders away his earnings, that will be a cause
to the decline of his prosperity.

   17. We know that this is the eighth cause which leads to the decline
of men' s prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the ninth: what is it
that brings about the decline of prosperity?

   18. If a man not pleased with his wife be constantly seen in the
company of prostitutes and among the wives of others, that is a cause
which would lead to the decline of his prosperity.

   19. We know that this is the ninth cause which leads to the decline
of prosperity of men. O Bhagavâ! please declare the tenth: what is it
that leads to that result?

   20. If any old man take a young woman, with breasts like unto
timba-fruits, for his wife, and break rest from motives of jealousy,
that will operate as a cause towards the decline of his prosperity.

   21. We know that this is the tenth cause which leads men to decline
in prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the eleventh: what is it that
brings about that result?

   22. Should any individual entrust the management of his affairs to a
gluttonous and prodigal woman or man, or place him or her at the head of
his household, that would be a cause to bring about the decline of his
prosperity.

   23. We know that this is the eleventh cause which leads men to
decline in prosperity. O Bhagavâ! please declare the twelfth: what is it
that leads to the said decline?

   24. If any individual is born of royal race, but is deficient in
wealth and full of ambition, aspire to sovereignty here, that is a cause
which will lead to a decline of his prosperity.

   25. Therefore the wise man who has seen well the causes which in this
world lead to the decline of men's <span id="page_229">p. 229</span>
prosperity will lead such a life here as will entitle him to a birth in
heaven.

 

METTA-SUTTA, OR DISCOURSE ON GENTLENESS.

   Thus I heard: Buddha resided in the garden of Anâthapi.n.dika in
Jetavana, near Sâvatthi. He then convoked his priests and said to them:
There are eleven advantages, Priests, resulting from cultivating,
meditating on, becoming accustomed to, led by, established in, following
after, and acting according to a spirit of mildness and freedom from
passion. These eleven are, that he who acts thus sleeps sound, awakes
refreshed, has no evil dreams, is beloved of men, is beloved of demons,
is preserved by the gods, neither fire, poison, nor sword can injure
him, he has constant tranquillity, is of a pleasant aspect, will die in
full possession of his intellectual powers, and hereafter will obtain an
existence in the worlds of Brahma. These are the eleven advantages which
result from cultivating, meditating on, being accustomed to, led by,
established in, following after, and acting according to a spirit of
mildness and freedom from passion.

   When Buddha had thus spoken, the priests were much edified.

 

METTÂNISAMSA-SUTTA, OR ADVANTAGES OF GENTLENESS.

   1. He who never violates friendly feelings<span
id="page_229_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_229_note_1.md), whenever he journeys
from his own residence shall obtain abundance of food, and become the
means of supporting many others.

   2. He who never violates friendly feelings, whether he visits town,
country, or province, he shall be everywhere treated with respect.

   3. He who never violates friendly feelings shall be unassailed <span
id="page_230">p. 230</span> by robbers, shall receive no dishonour from
princes, and shall escape from every enemy.

   4. He who never violates friendly feelings shall return in
tranquillity to his home, rejoice in the assemblies of the people, and
be a chief among his kindred.

   5. He who never violates friendly feelings, exercising hospitality to
others, shall be hospitably treated, honouring others he shall be
honoured himself, and his praises and good name shall be spread abroad.

   6. He who never violates friendly feelings, presenting offerings to
others, he himself shall receive offerings, saluting others he shall
receive salutations, and shall attain to honour and renown.

   7. He who never violates friendly feelings shall shine as the fire,
be resplendent as the gods, and never be deserted by prosperity.

   8. He who never violates friendly feelings shall have fruitful
cattle, abundant crops, and his children shall have prosperity.

   9. The man who never violates friendly feelings, should he fall from
a precipice, from a mountain, or from a tree, when he falls he shall be
sustained (so as to receive no injury).

   10. The man who never violates friendly feelings shall never be
overthrown by enemies, even as the nigrodha-tree, firmly fixed by its
spreading roots, stands unmoved by the winds.

 

KARA.NÎYA-METTA-SUTTA.

THE DISCOURSE NAMED KARA.NÎYA-METTA.

   I declare the Protection (or Paritta) by the power of which the
demons shall display not dreadful sights; by which he who is urgently
occupied by day or night may sleep securely, and sleeping see nothing
evil.

   1. These things must be attended to by the man wise <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span> in securing advantages who desires to
ascertain the path to Nibbâna: Let him be skilful, upright, honest, mild
in speech, gentle, free from arrogance.

   2. Let him be cheerful, contented, unencumbered with business, with
little property, having his passions under control, wise, temperate, not
desirous of obtaining much from those who assist him.

   3. Let him not engage in any law-pursuit for which he might be
censured by the wise! May every being experience happiness, peace, and
mental enjoyment!

   4-5. Whatever sentient being may exist, erratic or stationary, or or
whatever kind, long, or tall, or middle-sized, or short, or stout, seen
or unseen, near or remote, born or otherwise existing, may every being
be happy!

   6. In whatever place they may be, let no one deceive or dishonour
another! Let there be no desire from wrath or malice to injure each
other!

   7. As a mother protects with her life the child of her bosom, so let
immeasurable benevolence prevail among all beings!

   8. Let unbounded kindness and benevolence prevail throughout the
universe, above, below, around, without partiality, anger or enmity!

   9. Let these dispositions be established in all who are awake,
whether standing, walking, sitting or reclining, this place is thus
constituted a holy residence.

   10. If the virtuous man who has not attained to perfection, yet
perceives it, subdues his desire for sensual objects, certainly he shall
not again be a lier in the womb<span
id="page_231_fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#page_231_note_1.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Journals](../index) [Buddhist Articles](../../bud/etc/index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_226">p. 226</span>

<span id="page_226_note_1"></span>[1](#page_226_fr_1.md) Dasa puñña-kiriya.
Vide Clough, Dict. vol. II, p. 262, for the different significations of
this word.

<span id="footnotes_page_229">p. 229</span>

<span id="page_229_note_1"></span>[1](#page_229_fr_1.md) I.e. Who maintains
under all circumstances feeling of universal kindness and gentleness.

<span id="footnotes_page_231">p. 231</span>

<span id="page_231_note_1"></span>[1](#page_231_fr_1.md) That is, he shall
not be born again, but upon death migrate to the highest of the Brahma
worlds, and after residing there the necessary time, cease to exist.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
