<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb08)  [Next](ldjb10) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### CHAPTER VI.

### THE RESTORATION OF NATURE AND THE GENERATION OF MAN.

"<span class="smallcaps">If</span> we speak about heaven and the birth
of the elements, we are then not telling of things that are far away or
foreign to us, but of that which is taking place within our own self,
and there is nothing nearer to us than this birth, for we are therein as
in our own mother. If we speak of heaven, we then speak of our home, of
our own country, wherein the illumined soul can see, even if that
country is hidden before the eyes of the body." (*Principles*, vii. 7.)

The Mosaic account of creation was never intended to be a history of the
creation of the world from the beginning, but it is a history of the
renewal or the restoration of the natural world that was formerly ruled
by Lucifer, and which was thrown into disorder and convulsion by his
desertion from God.

"Before the times of the wrath there were in the locality of this world
the six sourcive spirits generating the seventh in a sweet and lovely
manner, as is even now done in heaven, and there was growing therein not
even a spark of wrath. All that was contained therein was light and
clear, needing no other light, for the fountain of love within the heart
of God was illumining all. Nature was then very ethereal, and everything
therein stood in great power. But as soon as in nature the war with the
proud devils began, everything took another shape and mode of action.
The light became extinguished in the external generation, and therefore
the heat became imprisoned in corporeity and could no

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

longer generate its own life. From this cause death then entered into
nature, and nature degenerated. Consequently another creation of light
had to be inaugurated, and without that the earth would have had to
remain in eternal death." <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) (*Aurora*,
xvii. 2; iv. 15.)

Everything in nature was to bloom out and become newly-born, as may be
seen by beholding minerals and stones, trees, grass, and herbs, and
animals of various kinds, and although all these formations were
perishable and not pure in the sight of God, nevertheless God intended
to extract from them at the end of this time their heart and kernel, and
to separate them from the wrath and death, and then that which had thus
been regenerated was to bloom eternally, and to bear again celestial
fruits outside of and beyond the locality of this world." <span
id="fr_21"></span>[2](#fn_21) (*Aurora*, xxiv. 2 5.)

"The same *sal-nitre*" (the material basis or foundation), "which at the
time of the ignition of the wrath perished in death, has at the time of
regeneration been raised in the flash of fire. It has not become
anything new, but merely another form of corporeity, which is now in a
state of death" (existing relatively to us as gross matter). <span
id="fr_22"></span>[3](#fn_22) (*Aurora*, xxii. 80.)

The outcast spirits, having produced in nature a state of ignition, God
gathered together the essence of that nature, and thereby He withdrew it
from the reach of those powers, putting a stop to their insolence by
means of water. <span id="fr_23"></span>[4](#fn_23)

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

"The outcast spirits were still in the quality of the Father, and
therefore they ignited the quality of nature by means of their
imagination, so that the celestial substance became earth and stones,
and the sweet spirit of the water a burning sky. After this the creation
of this world took place." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 2–8.)

Creation could not take place as long as all the elements were in a
state of revolution; only after the "Spirit of God moved upon the waters
of the deep" could the divine Word take form.

"When the eternal Word moved, because of the malice of Lucifer, and for
the purpose of expelling this evil guest from his residence into eternal
darkness, the essence was rendered compact (coagulated). God was not
willing to leave the manifested powers, wherein Lucifer ruled as a
prince, any longer in his command, but he caused them to enter into a
state of coagulation and spued him out therefrom." (*Mysterium*, x. 13.)

"Therein consists the fall of Lucifer, that he awakened the *mother of
fire* and wanted to rule over the benevolence in the heart of God. This
fire is now his hell; but this hell God has captured by means of
heaven—*i.e.*, the *mother of water*. For while the locality of this
world was to burn on his account in the fire, God moved to create, and
created the water. From this has resulted the ocean and the unfathomable
watery depth. So it was at *Sodom* and *Gomorrha*, for when their sin
was great and the devil resided therein, desirous of maintaining his
power, God permitted that the prince of this world ignited those five
kingdoms with fire and sulphur. But while the devil imagined to be lord
in that place, and to have there his dwelling, God thought of breaking
his pride; He caused water to come there, and thus He extinguished his
glory." <span id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24) (*Threefold Life*, viii.
24.)

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

By His creative will, full of love, God caused the light to arise, and
thus He directed the power of darkness downwards into the depths. Thus,
when the soul of man rises up to eternal freedom, the powers of darkness
disappear in the abyss below.

"The wrath did not touch the heart of God; but His benevolent love
issues from His heart, penetrating into the most external generation of
wrath, and extinguishing the latter. Therefore He said, Let there be
light." (*Aurora*, 85.)

"When God spoke, Let there be light, the holy power which was conceived
together with the wrath, moved, and the power of the devil was entirely
withdrawn from him in its essence." (*Mysterium*, xii. 14.)

"Thus the darkness remained within the quality of the wrath in the
substance of the earth, and within the whole depth of this world; and in
the substance of light, the light of nature from heaven—*i.e.*, out of
the fifth essence, arose that whereof the constellation was created.
This essence is everywhere, in the earth and above the earth." <span
id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) (*Aurora*, xii. 15.)

 

By means of this new creation of the light, the new life had begun to
stir everywhere; but this creation, in accordance with the number of the
divine spirits which were active thereby, arrived at a state of
perfection only on the seventh day. <span id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26)

"When God spoke the word, Let there be light, the essence, the being
within the quality of the light, stirred not only within the earth, but
also within the whole depth, in great power; wherefrom on the fourth

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

day the sun was created—that is to say, *ignited*." Mysterium, xii. 13.)

"When God stirred to create this world, it was not that only one part
moved and the other one rested, but there was all in motion at once."
(*Aurora*, xxii. 122.)

"This motion lasted during six lengths of days and nights, when all the
seven spirits of God were in complete and moving generation, and also
the heart of all spirits, and the sal-nitre of the earth turned around
in that time six times within the great wheel." (*Aurora*, xxi. 123.)

"The day's works refer to the seven qualities, six of them belonging to
the actual regiment, but the seventh, or the essentiality, is that
wherein the others are resting; for these qualities have been spoken out
by God and rendered visible." (*Mysterium*, xii. 2.) <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27)

 

On the second day a separation took place in the power of the light, of
the external material from the inner immaterial water, and the firmament
(that which is firm) was put in the middle between these two.

"The water of life became separated from the water of death; but in such
a way that in the time of this world they are linked together like body
and soul. But the heaven, having been made from the middle-part of the
water, is like an abyss between the two, so that the conceivable water
is a death, but the inconceivable one is the life." (*Aurora*, xxi. 7.)

"The water upon the earth is a degenerated and deadly being, like the
earth herself. This material water, contained within the most external
generation, has been separated from the inconceivable one." (*Aurora*,
xx. 27.)

"The water above the firmament is in heaven, and

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the water below the firmament is the material water." (*Mysterium*, xii.
2 4.)

"The firmament is the connecting link between time and eternity. God
calls it 'heaven,' and makes a distinction between the waters; which is
to indicate that heaven is in the world, but not the world in heaven."
(*Mysterium*, xii. 23.)

Thus the mind of man is the connecting link between the celestial and
terrestrial state. Heaven and happiness may be in his mind, but not his
mind in an external heaven.

 

The spiritual and the material water are not separated from each other
in an external manner, or according to locality, but wherever there is
the material water, there is also the spiritual one, and it comes to aid
the former.

"When I behold the external water, I am forced to say, 'Here in the
water below the firmament is also contained water from above the
firmament.' But the firmament is the middle, and the link (dividing
line) between time and eternity, so that neither one of them is the
other. By means of the external eyes, or the eyes of this world, I see
only the water below the firmament; but the water above the firmament is
that which God in Christ has instituted for the baptism of
regeneration." (*Mysterium*, xii. 26.)

"All the water in this world is degenerated, and therefore the upper
water must come to the aid of the earth, and extinguish her fire and
pacify her, so that the true water may be born." (*Aurora*, xx. 33.)

Divine inspiration must come to the aid of the material thought, so that
heavenly thoughts may be born.

 

On the third day the fiery and the watery essence, the firmament of
heaven and the earth, entered again in Conjunction, and from this there
were born grasses and

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

herbs and trees, and at the same time there were also formed gold and
silver and ores of various kinds. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)

"On the second day God separated the watery and the fiery mercury from
each other, and called the fiery one the firmament of heaven. Then in
the spirit of external nature there originated a male and a female
kind—namely, in the fiery *Mercury* the male, and in the watery the
female one." (*Clavis*, 86.)

"On the third day the fiery and the watery Mercury have again entered in
conjunction and mixture, and then the *sal-nitre* gave birth to grasses
and herbs and trees." (*Clavis*, 88.)

"After God had put heaven between the love and the wrath, for the
purpose of discernment, there on the third day love penetrated through
heaven into the wrath. Then the old and deadened body began to stir and
to feel the anguish of generation; for love is ardent, and it ignited
the fountain of fire, and the latter caused a friction in the acrid and
cold quality of stiffened death, until on the third day the acrid
quality became heated, and thus the acrid earth became moveable.
(*Aurora*, xxv. 29).

"When the light contained in the sweet water penetrated through the
acrid spirit, the lightning flash, having become ignited in the water,
in the acrid, hard, and dead quality, it caused motion in everything,
and thus came movability (life) into existence, not only in the heaven
above the earth, but also at the same time within the earth. Then there
began life to be generated in all things, and from the earth were
produced grass, herbs, and trees, and within the earth there were formed
silver, gold, and metals of various kinds." (*Aurora*, xxi, 132; xx. 6.)

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

As the light could be active only in the corrupted essence, there being
none other, the products formed thereby were of a mixed kind, half good
and half evil.

"When the light appeared again within the external conceivableness, the
Word brought forth life out of death, and the corrupted *sal-nitre*
produced fruits again; but this had to take place in a certain relation
to the depraved state existing in the wrath, and as the external
forthcoming of those fruits took place from the earth, they had to
become evil and good." (*Aurora*, xxi. 19.)

 

Before the ignition of the sun and the stars took place nature was
resting as in a state of death, and the formations proceeding from her
were devoid of the living, growth-producing power.

"Until the third day after the ignition of the wrath of God in this
world, nature remained in anxiety, and was a dark valley in death; but
on the third day, when the light of the stars became ignited in the
water of life, the life broke through death, and the new generation
began." (*Aurora*, xxiv. 41.)

"In the earth there is above all the acrid quality. This contracts the
*sal-nitre* and solidifies the earth, causing it to become a corporeal
being, forming therein also bodies of various kinds, such as rocks,
metals, and manifold roots. When this is formed it has nevertheless no
life to enable it to grow and expand. But when the heat of the sun acts
upon the soil, various formations prosper and grow in the earth."
(*Aurora*, viii. 41.)

Likewise the material and earthly elements in man have no power
themselves to rise superior to their own nature. This they can do in no
other way than by the power of the Divine Spirit.

 

Now the eternal light of God shone into the darkness of this world and
ignited the heat in the firmament or

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

heaven, and thus out of the fire arose the light—that is to say, the sun
and the starry sky.

"After the heaven had been made, for the sake of distinction between the
light of God and the corrupted body of this world, the latter was a dark
valley and without light, and all the powers were captured, as if in
death, and very uneasy until they became kindled in the midst of the
whole body. But when this took place the love in the light of God broke
through that heaven of division and ignited the heat." (*Aurora*, xxv.
68.)

"God, the eternal light and the eternal will, shines within the
darkness, and the darkness has captured the will (received its
activity). In this will arises now the anxiety, and in this is the fire,
and in the fire the light. Thus from the fire the stars have been
produced, and from the power of the heavens the sun." (*Three
Principles*, viii. 22.)

All this takes place in a corresponding manner during the spiritual
regeneration of man.

 

Thereby divine Wisdom has manifested itself, not in an entirely pure,
and therefore not permanent and immutable manner, but nevertheless as in
a clear mirror, and it thereby drove the devil backward deep into his
darkness.

"On the fourth day God, out of His eternal wisdom, created the lord of
the third principle (the visible world), the sun and the stars. Herein
is now truly seen the Godhead and the eternal wisdom of God, as in a
clear mirror. This being, visible before our eyes, is not God Himself,
but a God in the third principle, which will ultimately return to his
ether and take an end." (*Three Principles*, viii. 13.)

"God has made a solid foundation (firmament) called 'heaven,' between
the most external and the most internal generation, between the clear
Godhead and corrupted nature, through which one must break if one wants
to go to God. Of this foundation it is said (*Hiob*. xiv. 15) that

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

even the heavens are not pure before God, but on the day of judgment the
wrath shall be swept therefrom." <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)
(*Aurora*, xx. 41.)

"At the time of creation another light, the sun, was awakened in this
world, it having been corrupted by Lucifer, and thereby the splendour of
the devil was taken away. Thus he has been shut in like a prisoner into
the darkness between the realm of God and the realm of this world, so
that he has no longer anything to rule over in this world, except in the
Turba, wherein is awakened the wrath and anger of God."
(*Menschwerdung*, i. 2.)

 

The sun has been revealed by means of the soul of the world, and is made
of the influences of all the stars. He is also the life of all the
stars. Thus the sun of divine Wisdom in man is representing the
collective knowledge which man has gathered from his experiences, having
as a basis his own divine self-consciousness. Without that
self-consciousness in God all his intellectual acquisitions are merely
vapoury, and will pass away.

"In the soul of the external world, and by means of it, God has awakened
a king, or, as I would wish to call it symbolically, a natural deity,
together with six councillors, to be his assistants, namely, the sun and
the six other planets, which were spoken out of the seven qualities from
the *locus* (seat or centre) of the sun. The sun receives his splendour
from the tincture of the fire-world and the world of light, and is
manifested as a revealed point in relation to the world of fire."
(*Mysterium*, xiii. 16.)

"In the death in the centre—that is to say, in the body or the corporeal
substance of the earth, God has awakened the *tincture*, its lustre,
splendour, and light, wherein is contained the life of the earth; but to
the depth above

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the centre He has given the sun, which is a tincture of the fire, and
which, with its power, reaches into the freedom outside and beyond
nature, and from which nature receives its splendour. He is the life of
the whole circle of stars, and all these stars are His children. Not
that he contains their essences, but their life arose from his centre in
the beginning." (*Threefold Life*, iv. 27.)

"The sun is the heart of all the powers in this world, and is
configurated from the powers of all the stars, while, on the other hand,
he illuminates and vivifies all the stars and powers in this world."
(*Aurora*, vii. 42.)

 

Thus the divine principle in man furnishes the intellect with light and
life in the same sense as the sun reflects his light upon the moon. An
intellect which has been deserted by God will perish after its
accumulated strength is exhausted. Only that which God knows in us
remains permanent.

"The sun is in the midst of the depth, and is, so to say, the light or
heart of the stars, extracted from all their powers by the power of God,
and brought into form Therefore is he the clearest light of all, and by
his lustre and heat he ignites all the stars, each one according to its
own special quality and power." (*Threefold Life*, vii. 40.)

"This is not to be understood as if by calling the sun the centre we
meant to say that all the stars were originated from a central point,
called the 'sun.' The sun is the centre of the powers of the stars, and
the cause why they move in their essence. He unfolds their powers and
puts his power into them, and this power constitutes their heart."
(*Mysterium*, xi. 32.)

 

Especially have the seven planets become objective by means of the sun,
and in accordance with and corresponding to the seven forms of
nature. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

"As the sun is the heart of the life and an origin of all the spirits in
the body of this world, likewise is Saturn a beginning of all corporeity
and tangibility. Thus he does not derive his beginning and descent from
the sun, but his origin is the earnest, acrid, and severe anxiety of the
whole body of this world." (*Aurora*, xxvi. 1.)

"When the light became ignited, the conquered power in the astringency
became Mercury." (*Three Principles*, viii. 24.)

"Mercury is an agitator, sound-maker, ringer; but he leas not yet the
true life. The latter originates in the fire. Thus he desires the fierce
and storming essence, to cause fire to appear, and this is Mars."
(*Threefold Life*, ix. 78.) " When the sun became ignited, the terrible
fire-flash went from the locality of the sun in an upward direction like
a furious stroke of lightning, and this became Mars. He is now there as
a tyrant, a raging element, a mover of the whole body of this world, so
that all life takes its origin of him." (*Aurora*, xxv. 72.)

"As soon as the spirits of motion and life, by means of the ignition of
the water, arose from the locality of the sun, mildness, being the basis
of the water, penetrated, endowed with the power of light, in a downward
direction, after the manner of meekness, and from this the planet Venus
came into existence." (*Aurora*, xxvi. 19–33.)

"When the fiery terror was captured by the light, the light, by its own
power, and being a mild, exalting life, penetrated still higher upwards
into the depth, until it arrived in the hard and cold seat of nature.
There it remained, and from that power the planet Jupiter came into
existence." (*Aurora*, xxv. 76–82.)

"The seventh form is Luna, wherein are contained the qualities of all
the six forms. She is, so to say, the corporeal

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

being of the other forms, all of which throw into her their desire by
means of *Sol*. That which *Sol* (the sun) is spiritually becomes
corporeal in *Luna* (the moon)." (*Signature*, ix. 24.)

 

After the world of stars had begun to exist, the sidereal life appeared
by the power of the former—that is to say, that living organisms were
produced, representing, so to speak, "stars of the various elements."

"The firmament of heaven, having been made from the medium of the water,
this generation penetrates through the external, congealed
generation—that is to say, through death, and brings forth the sidereal
life, such as animals and men, birds, fishes, and worms." (*Aurora*, xx.
60.)

"After God had unfolded the stars and the four elements, there were
produced creatures in all the four elements, such as birds in the
constellation of the air, fishes in the constellation of the water,
animals and four-legged beings in the constellation of earth, and
spirits in that of the fire." <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)
(*Mysterium*, xliv. 1.)

 

These creatures received their spirit from the stars, or rather from the
spirit of this world, but their body they received from the earth.
According to the predominance of the fiery or the watery form, there
resulted also an antithesis of sex.

"By the power of His word, *Fiat*, God caused all beings to come forth
from the matrix of nature on the fifth day, all according to their
qualities; the fishes in the water, the birds in the air, the other
animals upon the earth. They received their corporeity from the
fixedness (rigidity) of the earth, and their spirit from the *Spiritus
Mundi*." (*Grace*, v. 20.)

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

"All creatures have been created of the life below and the life above.
The matrix of the earth gave the body, and the stars the spirit."
(*Threefold Life*, xi. 7.)

"As the spirit of the stars, or the spirit in the fire-form, by the
power of its longing, became mixed with the watery one, there resulted
two senses from one and the same essence. The one, the male, in a fiery,
and the other, the female, in a watery shape (state)." <span
id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32) (*Three Principles*, viii. 43.)

 

Finally, man was created, and out of him there was to come forth a
celestial army, and in the midst of the time its king, in the place of
the outcast Lucifer.

"God willed to create an angelic army. Thus He created Adam, and he was
to generate out of his own body creatures of his own kind; but in the
midst of the time there was to be born out of the body of a man the King
of all men, and He was to take possession of the new kingdom as a ruler
over these created beings, in the place of the degenerated and outcast
Lucifer." <span id="fr_33"></span>[2](#fn_33) (*Aurora*, xxiv. 18.)

Man, however, was to surpass the angels (in perfection), for he was to
be a complete image of divine glory, while the angels have been created
out of only two principles.

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

"Adam was to be a perfect symbol of God, created out of the eternal
*Magia*, the substance of God; he was to be something made out of the
nothing, out of the spirit—the ideal—into the body." (*Menschwerdung*,
i. 5.)

"The angels are created out of two principles, but the soul, with the
body of the outer life, out of three principles. Therefore man is higher
than the angels, provided that he remains in God." (*Forty Questions*,
i. 263.)

"We human beings are a far greater mystery than the angels, and we shall
surpass them in celestial wisdom. They are fire-flames, illumined by the
light of God, but we attain the great fountain of meekness and love
which is welling up within the holy essentiality of God." <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) (*Menschwerdung*, i. 5.)

 

Man comprises all three principles: the principle of darkness or fire,
from which originates his soul; the principle of light, from which his
spirit originates; and the third principle, which is the basic element
of his body.

"In the life of man there are three states to be distinguished from each
other—first, the *innermost*, that is to say, *God being eternally
hidden within the fire;* secondly, the *middle part*, which from
eternity has stood as an *image* or *likeness* in the wonders of God,
comparable to a person seeing himself in a mirror; thirdly, has this
living image received still another mirror in creation wherein to behold
itself, namely, the *spirit of the external world*, or the *third
principle*, which is also a form (state) of the Eternal." (*Threefold
Life*, xviii. 4.)

"The *darkness* in man longing for light is the first

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

principle; the *power of the light* the second; and the *longing power
which attracts* and becomes full (substantial), and whereof the material
body grows, is the third principle." (*Three Principles*, vii. 26.)

"The *soul*, or the first principle, is founded on the fire of eternal
nature; the *spirit*, or the second principle, roots in the light; and
the *body* is the third principle, or the substantiality of the visible
world." <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) (*Tabulæ Principiæ*, 65.)

 

Adam was to rule over all nature, and therefore his body was taken from
all the powers of the external world; but the third principle, as well
as the first one, appeared in him subject to the second, the light.

"If you will behold your own self and the outer world, and what is
taking place therein, you will find that you, with regard to your
external being, are that external world. You are a little world formed
out of the large one, and your external light is a *chaos* of the sun
and the constellation of stars. If this were not so, you would not be
able to see by means of the light of the sun." <span
id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36) (*Mysterium*, ii. 5.)

"If man, as the image of God, is to rule over the fishes and fowls, the
animals, and the whole of the earth, as well as over the essence of all
the stars, then must he be out of all three, for each spirit can rule
only in his mother, wherein he originated." (*Mysterium*, xiv. 8.)

"Terrestrial man had in. his constitution the kingdom of this world, but
there were not ruling in him the four elements (separately); but they
were in one, and the terrestrial order of things was hidden in him. He
was

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

to live in celestial state, and although everything was stirring (alive)
within him, nevertheless he was to rule over the terrestrial anguish
(external consciousness) by means of the celestial quality (inner
consciousness) of the other (second) principle, and to retain dominion
over the kingdom of the stars and elements by means of the Paradisiacal
quality." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 2.)

 

Man must rise, not merely in his imagination, but with his will, above
all that which is earthly, sensual, or merely intellectual, if he
desires to be a power in the kingdom of the Spirit. Thus will the ideal
become real to him.

"Adam's body (the ethereal body of aboriginal man) was created out of
the four elements of external nature, and out of the (essences of the)
stars, by means of the eternal *Fiat*. Thus he was in possession of
divine and terrestrial essentiality; but the terrestrial one was in the
divine one like consumed or impotent (latent). The substance or the
matter from which the body was made or created contained itself also the
first principle within itself, but it was not stirring therein."
(*Menschwerdung*, i. 3, 15.)

"As God resides within Himself and penetrates through all His works,
incomprehensible to the latter, and without His being affected by
anything, likewise His image (man) originated from the pure element. He
also was created in this world; but the kingdom of this world was not to
comprehend him, but he was to rule powerfully in this world by means of
the essences from the pure element." (*Three Principles*, xxii. 15.)

 

The expression that God created man from a clod of clay is not to be
taken in any other sense than that God, by means of desire, drew
together all the terrestrial qualities. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

"If Moses says that God created man out of a clod of clay, and that he
breathed into him the living breath, this is not to be understood as if
God had acted in a personal manner—standing there like a man and taking
up a lump of earth and making a body out of it; but the *Fiat*, that is
to say, the desire of the *Word*, was contained within the
eternally-perceived model of man, which stood in the mirror of wisdom,
and it drew the *Ens* (the principle) of all the qualities of the earth
(matter) into a body, and this was the quintessence made out of the four
elements." (*Grace*, v. 27.)

 

But the essence of the soul, being rooted in that whole, did not become
manifest in man before God awakened it by the breath of His word. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)

"The sourcive spirits within the whole could not become immediately
ignited by the soul, for the soul was only as a seed within the whole,
hidden away with the heart of God in His heaven, until the Creator
expanded the whole by His breath. Then the sourcive spirits ignited the
soul, and then body and soul were living at once. The soul truly
possessed her life before the body existed; but it was within the heart
of God, hidden within the whole in heaven, and was nothing but a holy
seed, a centre of power in God." (*Aurora*, xxvi. 126.)

Neither does at this present day the soul of man manifest divine life as
long as the Spirit of God is only moving upon the surface and does not
stir within the depths.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[123:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_20) "Lucifer" is to be
regarded not as a separate being within this world, but as a power
penetrating the whole of the visible universe, in the same sense as that
universe may now be regarded as being the body of universal spiritual
man.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[123:2](ldjb09.htm#fr_21) In other words, the
tendency of the spiritual principle is to spiritualise and illumine
everything by becoming active therein.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[123:3](ldjb09.htm#fr_22) In the same sense the
power of a seed to develop into a tree may remain latent for many years
until the conditions present themselves for its manifestation.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[123:4](ldjb09.htm#fr_23) Thus the fire of
passion is subdued in man by the "water" of eternal life distilled from
humility, which baptizes the soul and tranquillises the turbulent
elements.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[124:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_24) This goes to show the
intimate relations existing between the spiritual and the material
worlds. There is a "spiritual" and a "material" water, both of which are
merely manifestations of the one element.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[125:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_25) The same takes place
within the heart of man when his mind becomes illumined by the light of
divine wisdom that arises from the divine centre in him.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[125:2](ldjb09.htm#fr_26) The seventh "day" for
our planet is always and nevertheless it has not yet arrived, because
the six days belong to time and the seventh to eternity.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[126:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_27) The six "days" are the
activities of the seven forms of eternal nature, the seventh is their
centre or rest, or the "temperature." In the seventh, "God" appears as
the "Christ." (See *Grace*, iii. 39.)

<span id="fn_28"></span>[128:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_28) Three is the number of
form, and therefore on the third "day," and by means of the third
principle, three dimensional forms (there can be no other) came (and
continue to come) into objective existence.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[131:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_29) Man judges himself.
According to his conscience will turn the scales of the balance. The
judgment-day appears when the judging spirits awaken in him.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[132:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_30) All the illumined
philosophers of the past speak of only seven planets, and if we accept
the possibility of spiritual perception and agree that this <span
id="page_133">p. 133</span> perception was true, then there can be no
more than seven original planets in our solar system, and the remaining
two may be looked upon as excrescences, or shadows, as would also appear
from the maleficent influence of at least one of these, which is known
to astrologers.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[134:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_31) For explicit details
regarding the inhabitants of the elemental world see Paracelsus. The
existence of such beings will become more comprehensible if we remember
that the universe is an organised unity, and that each form therein,
whether it is visible or invisible to us, is nothing but a relative
expanse of manifestation of the consciousness that resides in the All.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[135:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_32) All this refers not
only to beings such as are visible to us, but likewise to such that
exist on other planes of creation, and which can therefore not be seen
with our eyes. There are male and female elemental beings, *moll* and
*dur* accords in music, positive and negative forces in all departments
of nature, from the spiritual down to the most material plane. In all
creatures the will is the executing and female, corporifying, and the
imagination the superintending, directing, male element.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[135:2](ldjb09.htm#fr_33) In regard to the
"stuff out of which man is made," *Theophrastus Paracelsus* says: "It is
an extract of all beings that exist in heaven and upon the earth, of the
souls of all things, all creatures, spirits, elements, and minds,
attracted to a focus by means of the spiritual centre residing within
each form. It is the quintessence of all things, and man is a microcosm,
differing from the macrocosm only in so far as in his constitution the
things which constitute the macrocosm appear in another image, order, or
shape. In him are all the potencies and qualities that exist in the
universe, active or latent. His terrestrial substance is from the earth,
his mental faculties from the universal mind, his worldly wisdom is from
the light of nature; but the divine wisdom in him belongs to God."

<span id="fn_34"></span>[136:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_34) In studying the
"anatomy" and "physiology" of the inner man, it will be necessary to
remember that, in dealing with anthropology and cosmology from a
spiritual point of view, we must be able to discard from our mind all
the vulgar conceptions of what is usually called "matter " by that
science which deals merely with external appearances, and we must look
upon all things as being manifestations of an universal consciousness,
acting upon internal or external planes of existence, while the visible
form is nothing but a passing apparition.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[137:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_35) Man is made out of
will and imagination; in other words, "fire" and "light." The
manifestation of fire and light (thought) produces that which appears to
us as "substance" or "form."

<span id="fn_36"></span>[137:2](ldjb09.htm#fr_36) It is not "man" in the
abstract who recognises anything. It is always a certain principle,
having become active in him, that recognises its own counterpart in
external nature, when it comes in contact with it. Only he in whom is
light can see the light; only the element of love can feel love; only
the divinity in man can know God in and through man.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[138:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_37) Therefore
*Theophrastus Paracelsus* says: "Natural man is made out of the world,
and not the world out of him. He is a child of nature, and has all of
his mother's qualities in himself, neither more nor less. But the true
spiritual man is a son of God. Natural wisdom is not divine, but divine
wisdom is above all."

<span id="fn_38"></span>[139:1](ldjb09.htm#fr_38) And thus at this very
day each person who has not yet begun to be regenerated in the spirit is
in the same condition in which Adam was before the Spirit of God
breathed in him. Man's soul resembles a seed containing the potency of
conscious immortality in an unconscious state. There is nothing immortal
in man except God, and by the awakening of that which is divine in him
attains the self-consciousness of his own immortality.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Man](ldjb10)

</div>
