<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb06)  [Next](ldjb08) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

### CREATION.

<span class="small">Everything we see in nature is manifested truth;
only we are not able to recognise it as such, unless the truth is
manifest within ourselves.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">God</span> is the supreme, fundamental,
universal, self-existent eternal cause; absolute and unimaginable glory,
perfection, goodness, beauty, magnificence, and splendour. He created
everything out of His own self, as there was nothing but Himself to
create from. It is, therefore, logical to suppose that the first powers
which He created and which were nearest to Him must have been divine and
spiritual, all lower existences being more remote from His supreme
state, belonging to a more " material " condition of creation. The same
may be observed in man. His thoughts are nearer to his divine centre and
self than his muscles and bones, and the realm of his soul is nearer to
his spirit than his material body, and the more holy his thoughts the
more will they be capable to communicate with the God in him. Boehme
says:—

"God has created the holy angels, not by means of any substance foreign
to His own self, but out of His own self, out of His power and eternal
wisdom." (*Aurora*, iv. 26.)

Truly, if there was or is nothing but God, it follows that God is the
All, and that there is nothing which is not God. Nevertheless, those
creations of God which are in a certain sense remote from the divine
centre are not divine, and therefore not God.

"It is said that God is everything, that He is in heaven and earth, and
also the external world, and such an assertion is true in a certain
sense; because everything

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

originates in and from God. But of what use is such a doctrine, which is
not a religion? Such a doctrine was accepted by the devil, who wanted to
be manifest and powerful in everything." (*Tilk*., ii. 140.)

Such a system of Pantheism may satisfy the rationalistic reasoner, who
has no power of spiritual perception, but true divine knowledge has
nothing to do with such a Pantheism nor with rationalistic Theism. It
does not admit of a confounding of the terms "God" and the "world." The
universe is not identical with God, neither is the spirit of man
identical with his body. Not even the Christ is identical with God, in
so far as He has become human.

"The external world is not God, and will not be God in all eternity. The
world is merely a state of existence wherein God is manifesting
Himself." (*Stief*., ii. 316.)

 

God is not man.

"There will always a distinction have to be made between the Godhead and
humanity, between the human will and the will of God." (*Stief*., ii.
95.)

The moon has no light of her own; she merely reflects the light of the
sun. Nevertheless the light coming from the moon is not equal to
sunlight. Likewise man's will and consciousness is derived from God; but
for all that it is only human, and not divine.

"If a man says of himself, 'I, the living word of God in this my holy
flesh and bone, say and do this or that,' he then dishonours the sacred
name of God. This is also against the doctrines of the Bible; for
whenever the intellect of a man was selected for the purpose of
prophecy, the prophet did not say, 'I, Mr. So-and-So, say this or that,'
but he said, 'Thus speaks the Lord!' This means that the Lord speaks in
and through such a man, and the latter is His medium and instrument."
(*Stief*., i. 84.)

A man can never be God; not even Christ in His human aspect made ever
any such claims.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

"Christ never said, 'I, in my human selfhood, am the voice of God, I am
speaking as God, in or with God,' &c.; but He said, 'The words which I
speak are the Father's, who lives in me '—that is to say, who lives in
my human or natural self." (*Stief*., i. 94.)

To the blind reasoner God is an universal blind and unconscious power;
the god existing within the imagination of the narrow-minded sectarian
is equally narrow; but to the enlightened, God is a personal
(individual) God and all-loving Father, residing within His own holy
omnipotence, superior to all that can be conceived.

"Do not imagine God to be a blind power, existing and moving in, or
beyond, or above heaven, having neither reason nor knowledge, comparable
to the sun, who runs around in his orbit, sending out light and heat
regardless whether it benefits or harms the earth and her creatures. No!
Not thus is the Father; but He is an omnipotent, all-wise, and
all-knowing God, in Himself good, kind, and merciful, joyful, and even
joy itself." (*Aurora*, iii. 11.)

"If you consider the depth of heaven, the stars, the elements, and the
earth, you will, of course, not grasp with your eyes the pure and clear
Godhead, although God is there and within it; but if you rise up in your
thoughts and direct your mind to God, who in His holiness rules within
the All, you are then penetrating through heaven and grasping the very
sacred heart of God Himself." (*Aurora*, xxiii. 11.)

 

God is not subject to the law of evolution, but the law has its
foundation in Him. God as a Spirit, eternally perfected within Himself,
did not need to create for the purpose of perfecting Himself. There is
no being who can perfect itself by its own power, or give to itself
anything which is not within its reach. The growth of a plant and the
unfoldment of the human soul requires the presence of a superior power.
A God capable to grow

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

would presuppose the presence of a superior God from which to draw
power. Only that which descends from above can rise again upwards, as is
symbolised by the double interlaced triangle.

"Before the time of the creation of heaven, the stars, the elements, and
also before the creation of the angels, there was nothing but Deity,
reproducing itself for ever sweetly and lovely, and conceiving of its
own image." (*Aurora*, xxiii. 15.)

"God did not create for the purpose of perfecting Himself, but to reveal
Himself to Himself in great joy and magnificence. This joy did not begin
with the beginning of creation, but it has been from all eternity a
subjective state in God." (*Signature*, xvi. 2.)

 

God did not make the world out of something intellectually conceivable
or out of something that was not Himself; neither does a man create the
images which constitute his thoughts out of anything outside of his own
mind. Before creation took place it was resting (subjectively) like a
seed in His own completion and perfection, comparable to the imagination
of a marl whose mind rests in a peaceful slumber, while for all that the
divine spirit in him is self-conscious.

"We cannot truly say that this world has been made out of something."
(*Signature*, xiv. 7.)

"We cannot reasonably suppose any formation or differentiation to have
existed in the eternal *One* from which, or according to which
(formation) something could have been made; for if such a form, or
predisposition to making a form, had existed, there would have been
another cause, besides God, from which the form would have resulted, and
then there would have been something else (another god), and not the one
only and eternal God." (Baptism, i. 1.)

"Creation is nothing else but a revelation of the all-essential,
unfathomable God, and whatever exists in His

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

own eternal evolution, which is without a beginning, is also in that
creation. But the latter is in regard to God what an apple that grows
upon a tree is to the tree. The apple is not the tree, but grows out of
the power of the tree. Likewise all things have their origin in divine
desire, and that desire caused them to enter into being. In the
beginning there was nothing to produce them, except the mystery of
eternal generation (evolution)." (*Signature*, xvi. 1.)

"Imagine a mother (a womb) having the seed within herself. As long as
she contains the seed as such, it belongs to herself, but when it
becomes a child then is the seed not hers, but it is the property of the
child. Thus it is with the angels. They have all been configurated out
of the divine seed; but after this has been done, each one has its own
corporeal being to itself." (*Aurora*, iv. 34.)

"The reason why the eternal and unchangeable God has created the world
is an unfathomable mystery; it can only be said that He did it in His
love." (*Hamberger*.)

God, being pure knowledge, does not require to have recourse to
reasoning, for the purpose of attaining an object; He being Himself His
own subject and object, self-sufficient and eternal. We can, therefore,
only say that He creates; because He is an ever-flowing fountain of
love, in the same sense as the sun shines; because he is an everlasting
source of light.

"How it came to happen that God stirred to produce creation, while He
Himself is unchangeable, cannot be discovered, and an attempt to do so
would merely produce a confusion of mind." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 2, 5.)

"We cannot tell how it happened that that which stood eternally in the
essentiality of God entered into motion, because there is nothing that
could have caused God to move, and the will of God is eternal and
unchangeable. We can only say that the *Three* was

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

desirous of having children of its own kind." (*Forty Questions*, i.
273.)

 

The world could not have been made as it exists now, directly out of the
purely divine state of being. In its material aspect it is material and
not spiritual. God is unchangeable and independent of external
conditions (which do not exist for Him); but the manifestations of His
power change according to the conditions that are caused by their mutual
relations. Thus the light of the sun remains always the same; but it
gives various hues to the flowers, according to their own individual
qualities.

"No creature can issue from the purely divine state of being, because
this state has neither cause nor beginning, nor can it be brought into a
beginning." (*Grace*, viii. 45.)

"Within the light and the heart of God, as such, there can be nothing
created; because the light is the end of nature and has no quality.
Therefore it cannot change or be made into anything, but remains for
ever the same in eternity." (*Three Principles*, x. 41.)

Nevertheless it is the Triune God that created all things out of eternal
nature. We may say that the world, as we know it, is constituted
entirely of forms of heat, or of motion, or of electric conditions, or
light, &c., &c. All this is true in so far as it refers to the relations
which it bears towards ourselves. All these powers are only modes of
manifestation of one primordial and originally divine power, namely, the
will of God acting in His own eternal wisdom.

"The eternal Triune God created all things by and through the eternal
Word out of His own self, namely, out of His two aspects or qualities;
out of eternal nature, the fury or *wrath*, and out of His *love;* by
means of which the wrath or "nature" was pacified. Thus He created them,
and caused them to enter into existence." (*Stief*., ii. 33.)

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"The Father, being primordial Will, speaks out all things by means of
the Word, out of the centre of freedom; but the issue from the Father by
means of the Word is the spirit of the power, and this spirit gives form
to that which has been outspoken, so that it appears as a spirit."
(*Threefold Life*, ii. 63).

 

This magic power, or "Word," has been in God from all eternity, and as
such it is God and the "Christ" in its purely divine aspect.

There is not any time during which "God goes to sleep" or loses His
self-consciousness; neither does the idea to create come to Him from
some outside influence; but God beholds the universe from all eternity
in His wisdom as a mirror, and by the act of creation He projects into
objectivity (so to say) the image existing subjectively in Him. It is,
therefore, Nature and not God that goes to rest during the "nights of
creation," in the same sense as the body of a man goes to sleep, while
his spirit remains self-conscious in its own sphere.

"Wisdom is a divine imagination, wherein the ideas of the angels and
souls have been seen from eternity; not as substantial, actual
creatures, but non-essential, like the images in a mirror." (*Clavis*,
x. 5.)

"The likeness of God, having been seen in the wisdom of God from all
eternity, and in which God created Man, was without life and
substantiality before the beginning of the time of this world. It was
merely a reflection of the image wherein God saw how He would be in an
image." (*Stief*., ii. 123).

"Man has not been from eternity; but only like a shadow stood the image,
wherein God in His wisdom knew all things from eternity, in the mirror
of His own wisdom." (*Stief*., ii. 143.)

 

The will of God is only *one;* but by its action within eternal nature a
great many divine powers are produced.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The ideas existing
in the universal mind are innumerable, and therefore there is the
possibility of innumerable different forms coming into existence by the
action of the divine will. There is, however, nothing fully perfect
besides the Godhead, and consequently there exist on all planes beings
of different states of perfection, and capable to become more perfect by
means of the will of God, which is the law of evolution.

"The kinds of creatures are as varied as are the eternal thoughts in the
wisdom of God." (*Three Principles*, ix, 37.)

"As the divine powers are manifold, even innumerable, so there is a
differentiation of ideas and a difference among the angels; in
consequence of which some appear like kings or rulers and others as
servants." (*Theosophic Question*s, v. 9–12.)

"There being nothing perfect except the divine Three, consequently all
things differ from one another, and likewise the angels have different
qualities." (*Threefold Life*, v. 90.)

 

These "angels" (good or evil) are living and conscious powers existing
in nature. Neither the power of God nor any angel, or devil or creature
of any kind, can have any existence outside of Nature, *i.e.*, outside
of the dark fire-ground, the will of God, out of which everything is
born.

"No created spirit can exist without the fire-world. Even the love of
God could not exist, if not the wrath of God, or the world of fire, were
existing in Him; for the wrath or the fire of God is a cause of light,
strength, power, and omnipotence." (Stief. ii. 4.)

"The wrath (the fire) is the root of all things and the origin of all
life; in it is the cause of all strength and power, and from it are
issuing all the wonders (manifestations of power). Without that fire
there would be no consciousness, but everywhere a mere nothing." (*Three
Principles*, xxi. 14.)

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

"No being can be born unless it has within itself the fiery triangle,
*i.e.*, the first three natural forms." (*Grace*, ii. 38.)

Every form is the product or manifestation of a power which is building
up such forms. Without the presence of such a power there could be no
manifestation of it; neither can any form exercise or know any power
except that which resides therein.

Therefore a being incapable of any emotion would be unable to rise above
the sphere of emotions; a being without any energy to commit evil would
have no energy to accomplish anything good.

 

The foundation from which all powers and ideas spring is eternal; but
the created beings as such have a beginning in time.

"Everything has been from all eternity, but merely as ideas, and not as
corporeally existing things. Only incorporeal spirits existed (as ideas)
in eternity, as in a world of magic, where one thing contains the other
in potentiality." (*Forty Questions*, xix. 7.)

"The creation of the angels has a beginning, but not that of the powers
whereof they have been created. The latter are co-eternal with the
eternal beginning." (*Mysterium*, viii. 1.)

"In eternity, in eternal Will, there was a nature, but it existed
therein only as a spirit, and its essentiality was not manifested except
in the mirror of that Will, *i.e.*, in eternal *wisdom*." (*Signature*,
xiv. 8.)

"The *mysterium magnum* is the *chaos* wherefrom originates good and
evil, light and darkness, life and death. It is the foundation or womb
wherefrom are issuing souls and angels and all other kinds of beings,
and wherein they are contained as in one common cause, comparable to an
image that is contained in a piece of wood before the artist has cut it
out." (*Clavis*, vi. 23.)

In the soul of man exists potentially the whole of the

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

universe—heaven and hell, God and the devil, angels and spirits, the
whole of the celestial, terrestrial, and infernal kingdoms, with all
their powers and essences; but unless these powers become manifested as
forms (created beings on the spiritual, astral, or terrestrial plane),
they can have no existence recognisable to his internal senses.

 

Creation was an act of the free will of God, and not induced by any
inferior cause. The will of God would not be divine if it were not free.
It is itself the law, and therefore not subject to " natural law," or
the law of mechanics. Creation took place by means of God unfolding His
eternal nature, whereby through His active love or desire He caused that
which heretofore had been in Him merely as a spirit (subjectively) to
become substantial and corporeal (objective).

"The created world was before the mysterium magnum, for all things were
then in a spiritual condition in wisdom, as in a continual play or
wrestle of love. The one only Will conceived this spiritual form into
the Word, and permitted the intelligence (the separate
consciousness—*i.e.*, the acrid and astringent quality), to act without
restraint, so that each power could enter or build itself a form
according to its own specific quality." (*Grace*, iv. 12.)

"The eternal Mind is always desirous for the power, and the power is the
astringency, and the astringency is the contraction, attraction, or the
eternal *fiat*, which creates and renders corporeal that which the
eternal Will desires in its own benevolence. The Will desires by means
of the keen *fiat* to bring into substantiality (render objective) that
which it beholds in eternal Wisdom." (*Three Principles*, xiv. 74.)

Thus the divine spirit in man, by means of the thoughts of the latter,
brings the powers which exist in his microcosm into shapes which are
objective to him, and which form the soul world wherein he resides.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Creation could, however, become actually complete only by means of the
activity of all the seven divine spirits. It is therefore true that in
one sense it was not God, the primordial Cause, that directly created
the world, but the *elohims* or "powers" that created it by means of the
power received from the fundamental causation.

"The universe with all its beings has been created out of eternal
nature, out of the seven spirits of eternal nature." (*Threefold Life*,
iii. 40.)

"Whenever anything is born out of the divine Essence, it is brought into
form, not merely by one spirit, but by all the seven." (*Aurora*, x. 4.)

"When the Godhead stirred for the purpose of creating a world, it softly
moved within the acrid quality and contracted the latter within the
divine *sal-nitre*." (*Aurora*, xiii. 94.)

 

In the formation of beings, their own spirit co-operates with the
universal Spirit. The universal Life could not produce a tree out of the
four elements if there were not a seed containing the qualities
necessary to grow into a tree. Nevertheless, by the expression "their
own spirit," it is not to be understood as if these spirits were
anything essentially different from God. They are merely individual
centres, receiving their power from the universal Fountain of love.

"Originally the spirit is a magic gush or outburst of fire and desires
for substantiality—that is to say, 'form.' This is then caused by that
desire, and constitutes the corporeity of the spirit, and the spirit is
then called a created being." (*Tilk*. i. 186.)

Every human being has within himself the capacity to create, but not
every one has that power developed. Everybody can imagine, but not every
one is artist enough to bring the objects of his imagination into an
external objective form by painting or sculpture. Likewise every

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

one has good and evil powers within himself, but not every one has his
spiritual strength sufficiently developed to create of them living and
conscious forms.

"The centre of each thing is spirit, co-existing with the Word. The
separation (differentiation) of a thing (by which it distinguishes
itself from other things) is in the quality of its will, by means of
which it assumes a form or state of being according to its own essential
(predominating) desire." (*Letters*, xlvii. 5.)

"Even to-day the act of creation still continues, and it will not end
until the judgment of God arrives. Then will that which has grown in the
holy tree of life become separated from the unholy thistles and thorns."
(*Three Principles*, xxiii. 25.)

"Whether or not God will create something more out of His will after the
end of this time is not perceptible to my spirit, for it does not
penetrate deeper than within its own centre wherein it lives, and
therein is the paradise and the kingdom of heaven." (Principles, ix.
41.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Angels](ldjb08)

</div>
