<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb10)  [Next](ldjb12) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

### CHAPTER VIII.

### NATURE, OR THE THIRD PRINCIPLE.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"The godless seeks for God outside of his own self, and the Christless
sectarians seek for a personal Christ in history; but the man of God and
the true Christian know God and Christ within their own soul."

"We surely believe in a personal and historical Christ; but only after
Christ has become personal in a man will he realise the true nature and
vocation of Jesus the son of Jehovah."—<span
class="smallcaps">Johannes</span>.

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> image of everything that ever existed
was in the light at the time when God began to create a new world. The
external world, to which Adam had become subjected in consequence of his
degradation, has its origin in God's eternal nature and its prototype in
His wisdom, wherein it was spiritually contained from the beginning. We
may compare the external world to the imagery seen upon a screen, upon
which it has been projected by the light of a magic-lantern. The images
represent the world, the pictures on the slide the ether, and the light
itself is the Spirit of God.

"The third principle, the spirit and torment of this world, has been
hidden from eternity in eternal nature, and was discovered by the
light-flaming spirit in God's wisdom and the divine tincture. Then the
Godhead moved according to the nature of the producing mother, and the
great Mysterium was born, wherein was contained everything that is
within the power of eternal nature. This, however, was only a Mysterium,
and had no resemblance to any created being. There everything was as if
(mixed) together, like a cloud of dust." <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) (*Menschwerdung*, i. 1, 10.)

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

"If we rightly consider the creation of this world and the spirit of the
third principle, or the spirit of the great world with its stars and
elements, we find therein the qualities of the eternal world as if in a
state of mixture; wherein Deity willed to manifest the eternal wonders
that were hidden, and to bring them into objective existence." (*Six
Theosophical Points*, ii. 6.)

"The external world, in being born (coming into objectivity), makes for
itself a new *principium* or beginning. The generatrix of the temporal
is a reproduction of the eternal generatrix, time originates in
eternity, and even here eternity, with its wonderful production,
appears, in its powers and capabilities, in an especially temporal form
and shape." <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) (*Mysterium*, vi. 10.)

 

In this external world, called the third principle, there are manifest
two powers—the holy divine power and the power of the darkness. The
latter is even preponderating.

"The third principle, or the visible elemental world, is an issue of the
first and second principles, which is produced by the motion and
outbreathing of divine power and divine will. In it is figured the
spiritual world according to light and darkness, and brought into a
created (objective) condition." (*Tabulæ Principiæ*, 5.)

"The external world has been outbreathed from the holy and from the dark
world. It is, therefore, evil and good, and in love and wrath; but,
compared with the spiritual world, it is only like a smoke or a fog."
(*Mysterium*, iii. 10.)

"The word moved the *Fiat* in all forms of eternal nature, in harmony
with the world of light and the world

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

of darkness; so that the desire after the quality of both worlds entered
into being. This caused good and evil to originate in the essentiality,
and thereby was created the external visible world, with stars and
elements as a particular life." (*Stiefel*, i. 31.)

"This terrestrial world is based upon the world of darkness, and if the
good bad not been also embodied therein, there would be in it no other
doing than that of the world of darkness; but this is prevented by the
divine power and by the light of the sun." <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) (*Six Theosophical Points*, ix. 17.)

"This world is rooted in evil and good, and there can be neither one of
them without the other. But the great misfortune in it is that evil is
preponderating therein over good, and the wrath stronger than love, and
this is due to the sin of the devil and of man, who excited nature by
their perverted desires, so that the world is now powerfully qualified
in wrath, acting like a poison within the body." <span
id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82) (*Mysterium*, xi. 15.)

 

That the darkness has obtained so much power in this world is not the
fault of God, but it is due to Lucifer, who corrupted the primordial
creation, and who in consequence of Adam's fall is now still more
enabled to act within the dark element of nature. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83)

"Within all nature there is a continual wrestling, battling, and
devouring, so that this world may truly be called a

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

valley of sorrow, full of trouble, persecution, suffering, and labour;
for when the spirit of creation went into the middle, it had to form the
world from the midst of the kingdom of hell." (*Aurora*, xviii. 112.)

"Nature, up to the day of judgment, has two inherent qualities; one is
lovely, celestial, and holy, and the other one wrathful and hellish. The
good quality works with great diligence for the purpose of producing
good fruits under the influence of the Holy Spirit, and likewise the
evil quality labours for the purpose of producing evil fruits, receiving
power and incitement thereto by the devil." (*Aurora*, Preface, x. 10.)

"The devil resides in this world, and he continually infests external
nature; but he has his power only in the wrath, in bitter desire." <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) (*Menschwerdung*, i. 2, 4.)

 

God acts with the holy power of his inner world against the corrupting
power of Lucifer, but the external world is not thereby changed in its
own particular essence. <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85)

"The inner world, the world of light, dwells in the external world, and
the latter receives power from the former. She blooms in the external
power, but this power knows nothing of it." (*Six Theosophical Points*,
vi. 2.)

"The powers of eternity work through the powers of time, like the sun
that shines through water, while the water does not apprehend the sun,
but only receives the heat; or, like a fire, which glows in the iron,
but the iron remains iron nevertheless." (*Mysterium*, xii. 20.)

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

"The spiritual world is hidden within the visible elementary world, and
acts through the latter, and by means of the *separator*, or the soul of
the outer world, it shapes itself in all things according to the
character and quality of each thing; but the visible being receives the
invisible one not in its own power, neither does the external thing
become changed into the inner one, but the inner power merely takes
shape therein, as we may see if we observe the growth of herbs, trees,
and metals." (*Contemplations*, iii. 19.)

"We see that the earth has a great hunger and desire after the power and
the light of the sun, and likewise the external being craves for the
interior one. Thereby it receives the form of the latter as a light and
power, without, however, being able to grasp the interior spirit itself;
for the spirit does not dwell in the exterior, but has possession of its
own self in its own interior state." <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)
(*Six Theosophical Points*, vi. 9.)

 

God exercises this blissful power especially by means of the sun, who,
being a true image of the divine heart of love, illuminates all the
visible world, and restrains the wrath of the dark world.

"The Godhead, the divine light, is the centre of all life, and likewise
in the manifestation of God the sun is the centre of life."
(*Signature*, iv. 17.)

"God the Father generates love by means of His heart, and the sun
symbolises His heart. He is in the external world a symbol of the
eternal heart of God, which gives to all beings and existences their
power." (*Signature*, iv. 39.)

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

"God gave to the external world the light, by the out-breathing of His
power through the rays of His light, and with the sun and the moon He
rules within the things of this world. The stars take their light from
the outpoured radiance . of His light, and by means of this very light
God ornaments the earth with beautiful plants and flowers, and makes
glad everything that lives and grows. (*Prayer*, xlvii.)

"This world has a natural God of its own, namely, the sun; but he takes
his being from the fire of God, and this again from the light of God.
Thus, the sun gives his power to the elements, and they give theirs to
the creatures and herbs of the earth." (*Six Theosophical Points*, v.
13.)

"The abyss of hell is in this world, and the sun is the only cause of
the existence of water, and of the fact that the depth above the earth
is lovely, pleasing, mild, and delightful." (*Threefold Life*, vi. 3 6.)

"All that is powerful in the essence of the holy world is hidden in the
wrath and curse of God in the quality of the dark world; but it blooms
by means of the power of the sun and the light of external nature
through the curse and the wrath." <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87)
(*Mysterium*, xxi. 8.)

 

As the sun rules over all the terrestrial world, he must be present in
his essence and power everywhere in that world.

"The sun is not very different from water, for water has the quality and
essence of the sun. Without that the water would not receive the light
of the sun. Although the sun is a body having a form, nevertheless the
essence

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

of the sun is also in water, but not manifest. In fact, we recognise
that the whole world is all *sun*, and the locality of the sun would be
everywhere if God would want to ignite it and cause it to become
manifest, for all existence begins in the light of the sun." <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) (*Six Theosophical Points*, vi. 10.)

"If God would ignite the light by means of the heat, the whole world
would be sun (manifest), for the power of the sun is everywhere, and
before the body of the sun existed the whole locality of the world was
as shining as the sun is at present, but not so insupportable, but mild
and delightful." <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_89) (*Aurora*, xxv.
63.)

 

The planets are also ruled by the sun, from which they receive their
powers, and they communicate these powers in their turn to terrestrial
objects.

"The sun is the centre of the constellation (solar system), and the
earth is the centre of the elements. Both, if compared with each other,
are like spirit and body, or like man and woman. But the constellation
has still another woman, wherein it breeds out its substance, namely,
the moon, she being the wife of all the planets, but especially of the
sun." <span id="fr_90"></span>[3](#fn_90) (*Mysterium*, xi. 31.)

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

"As the stars, full of desire, draw unto themselves the power of the
sun, likewise the sun penetrates also powerfully into the stars, so that
they receive their light from the power of the sun. The stars then send
again their ignited power as their product into the elements." (*Grace*,
ii. 26.)

 

But as the stars have their origin from the world of light and from the
world of darkness, not only the good, but also the evil, existing in the
terrestrial world comes from them.

"With the creation of the constellation good and evil became manifest,
for in them is manifest the wrathful fiery power of eternal nature, as
well as the power of the holy spiritual world, as an outbreathed
essence. Thus there are many dark stars which we cannot see, and there
are many shining ones which we see." <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)
(*Mysterium*, x. 36.)

"The evil, like the good, in all things comes from the stars; and as the
creatures upon the earth are in their qualities, likewise are also the
stars." (*Aurora*, ii. 2.)

"All that lives and exists is awakened and brought to life by the stars,
for they are not only fire and water, but they also possess hardness and
softness, sourness and sweetness, bitterness and darkness, even all the
powers of nature, and everything that is contained in the earth."
(*Threefold Life*, vii. 46.)

"The constellation is the cause of all arts and science, also of all
order and harmony in this world, because it awakens the trees and
metals, enabling them to grow. In the earth is everything that is
contained within the stars;

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

the constellation ignites the earth, and all this taken together is only
one spirit." <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92) (*Threefold Life*, vii.
48.)

In their relations to the earth and the elements, the stars act the part
of a higher, living, and, so to say, male power.

"The stars are a quintessence, a fifth form of the elements, and, so to
say, the life of the four." (*Threefold Life*, vii. 45.)

"The starry sky rules in all creatures as it were in its own property.
This sky is the man, and 'matter,' or the watery form, is his wife, who
gives birth to what heaven creates." <span id="fr_93"></span>[2](#fn_93)
(*Three Principles*, vii. 33.)

"The upper desires the lower and the lower the higher. The hunger of
that which is above is directed powerfully to the earth, and the hunger
of the earth strives for that which is above. Thus, compared with each
other, they are like body and soul, or like man and woman, generating
children with each other." (*Grace*, v. 19.)

 

But it must be understood that there is a distinct life in the earth.
This is proved by her products, and also by her desire for the sun, in
consequence of which she is continually turning around. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[3](#fn_94)

"If you behold the earth and the rocks you will acknowledge that there
is a life in them; for if this were

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

not so, there would be in them neither gold nor silver, and neither
herbs nor grasses." (*Aurora*, xix. 57.)

"Each being desires the other. That which is above desires that which is
below, and the lower desires the higher. Thus the earth is filled with
hunger after the stars and after the *spiritus mundi*, so that they have
no peace." (*Clavis*, 110.)

"The earth is turning around because she has both fires, the hot and the
cold fire, and that which is below always desires to rise upwards
towards the sun, because she receives spirit and power only from the
sun. Therefore she is turning. The fire, her desire for light, is
turning her, for it wishes to be ignited, and to have a life of its own.
Having nevertheless to remain in death, still it desires after the life
above and attracts the latter, and opens its centre for ever to receive
the *tincture* and fire of the sun." <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95)
(*Threefold Life*, xi. 5.)

 

The four elements are actually only qualities of the true one element,
which is hidden behind the external four elements.

"That which we call at present four elements are in fact not elements,
but merely qualities of the one true element." (*Three Principles*, xiv.
54.)

"The quintessence is a paradisiacal substance in the celestial world,
but enclosed in the external world; that is to say, not imprisoned
therein, but only rendered invisible." (*Clavis Specialis*.)

"Fire, air, water, and earth have issued from the centre of nature, and
consisted in the ignition of one substance. Since that ignition took
place they appear in four forms, which are called 'elements;' but they
are still interiorly, and in reality there exists, only one. There are
not four

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

elements in heaven, but only one; but all four states are contained
therein." (*Threefold Life*, v. 105.)

 

From this superterrestrial basis have proceeded the external terrestrial
elements. There was first separated from it the fire, next the air, then
the water, and finally the element of earth. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96)

"The four forms which are hidden within the one true element have become
active by means of the ignition or excitation of the lower principles,
and they now appear in their external substance comprehensible to the
creatures." (*Threefold Life*, v. 105.)

"From the fire originates the air, and from the air the water, and from
the water earth; *i.e.*, a substance which is of an earthly nature, and
thus the elements are merely an external manifestation of the inner
eternal element and an ignited smoke of the latter." (*Mysterium*, vii.
19.)

 

The elements having issued from their original unity, strongly desire
each other, but at the same time there are dissensions and strifes among
them.

"The four elements are only qualities of the one in-differentiated
element. Therefore there is a great anxiety and desire among them. They
constitute interiorly only one sole principle, and therefore they
instinctively long one after the other and each seeks for the inner
principle within each other." (*Clavis*, 106.)

"After from the one element, which has only one single will, the four
elements had originated, which are now existing in one single body,
there is among them much strife and dissension. Heat is against cold,
and

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

fire against water; the air is against earth, and each causes the death
and breaking-up of the other." (*Signature*, xv. 4.)

 

In many of the products of the earth—for instance, in many of the
minerals—the true essence seems to be entirely hidden in death; but in
others, especially in the noble metals and precious stones, it still
manifests its brightness. <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97)

"It seems strange to the reasoning mind, if we observe the earth with
its solid rocks and its rough and harsh appearance, that big rocks and
stones have been created, whereof a part is useless, and which are only
an obstacle for the creatures of this world." (*Mysterium*, x. 1.)

"The terrestrial consciousness corrupted the celestial one, and the
former became the *Turba* of the latter. Likewise, the *Fiat* made the
earth and stones out of the eternal essentiality." (*Menschwerdung*, i.
9.)

"But in the earth we find still another *tincture* hidden away which is
like the celestial one, especially in the precious metals." <span
id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_98) (*Six Theosophical Points*, vi. 2.)

"Gold is nearly related to the divine substantiality or celestial
corporeity. This would be seen if we could dissolve the dead body of the
gold and cause it to become a volatile, active spirit, but this is only
possible by means of the power of God." <span
id="fr_99"></span>[3](#fn_99) (*Signature*, iii. 39.)

"As far as precious stones are concerned, carbuncles, rubies, delphines,
onyx, &c., they have their origin there where the flash of light arose
within love. This flash is born in meekness, and is the heart in the
centre of the

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

sourcive spirits. Therefore are such stones so mild, lovely, and at the
same time so powerful." <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) (*Aurora*,
xviii. 17.)

 

As it is in regard to the mineral kingdom, so it is in regard to the
vegetable and animal kingdoms. There the power of death has also
penetrated into everything; but there also are formations existing which
show a relationship with the paradise.

"Before the fall the paradise was efflorescing through all trees and
through all the fruits which God created for man. But when the earth was
cursed, the curse penetrated into all fruits, and now everything became
good and bad. In all things was death and rottenness, which formerly was
only in the one tree, called the tree of knowledge of good and evil."
(*Threefold Life*, ix. 15.)

"The fruits of the earth are not entirely in the wrath of God, for the
incorporated word, being immortal and imperishable, was blossoming out
again in the body of death, and produced fruits from the mortified body
of the earth." (*Aurora*, xxi. 24.)

"Some animals, especially the tame ones, are closely related to the one
element; others, especially the ferocious ones, have more relationship
with the four elements." (*Three Principles*, xviii. 10.)

"There are poisonous animals and worms grown out of the wrathful
quality, and formed after the centre of the dark world. They love to
dwell only in the dark, and hide themselves away from the sunlight.
Furthermore, there are many creatures which the *spiritus mundi* has
formed out of the realm of phantasy, such as monkeys and certain animals
and birds, who like to play pranks and torment and disturb other
creatures, so that one is the enemy of the other, and they are all
fighting against each other. On the other hand, there are also good and

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

kind creatures, made after the type of the angelic world, such as the
tame animals and birds: among them, however, there are also bad
qualities to be found." (*Grace*, v. 20.) <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101)

 

In each external thing there is hidden an eternal and imperishable
something, which issues again in an ethereal form out of the degraded
body of the terrestrial substance. <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102)

"In each external thing there are two qualities, one originating from
time and the other one from eternity. The first or temporal quality is
manifest, the other one hidden." (*Signature*, iv. 17.)

"In the beings of this world we find everywhere two beings in one—first,
an eternal, divine and spiritual being, and then one that has a
beginning, and is natural, temporal, and corruptible. The outbreathed
desire—that is to say, the love of the divine power for nature,
wherefrom nature and self-will have originated—is longing to get rid of
the natural perverted self-will, and is destined, at the end of time, to
be free of the illusion thus acquired, and to be brought into a clear,
crystalline nature." (*Contemplations*, i. 30.)

"Behold a tree. Outwardly it has a hard and rough shell, appearing dead
and encrusted; but the body of the tree has a living power, which breaks
through the hard and dry bark and generates many young bodies, branches,
and leaves, which, however, all are rooted in the body of the tree. Thus
it is with the whole house of this world, wherein also the holy light of
God appears to have died out, because it has withdrawn into its
principle, and therefore it seems dead, although it still exists in God.
But love ever again and again breaks

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

through this very house of death and generates holy and celestial
branches in this great tree, and which root in the light." (*Aurora*,
xxiv. 7.)

 

All these external formations proceed from the fire-life by means of the
*tincture* and the oily, spiritual quality, which manifests its power
and activity in contrast with the elements. <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_103)

"Each thing is like a fire. However, the torture of the fire is not a
true life, but the tincture that originates from the fire." (*Threefold
Life*, viii. 18.)

"As the spirit is in a thing, so is the *tincture*, for the tincture
issues from the spirit and is its delight." (*Three Principles*, xiii.
45.)

"Where a desire exists there is a fire, for the fire desires
substantiality, so that it may have something to consume. It cannot make
for itself any substantiality, but it makes a *tincture*, and that
tincture produces the substantiality." (*Threefold Life*, viii. 33.)

"The *tincture* produces all colours, because it introduces the quality
of fire and light into the water. Thus it also transforms water into
blood." (*Six Mystical Points*, i. 5.)

"The oily quality is in stones, metals, herbs, trees, animals, and men.
The deadly quality is in the earth, in water, fire, and air. Those four
qualities are, in fact, like a dead body; but the oil therein is a light
or a life, wherefrom results the desire or the growth, the outblooming
from this deadly quality. The oily quality could not, however, be a life
if it were not in the anxiety of death. The latter arouses the former,
and renders it movable, because the oily quality desires to fly from the
anxiety, and to issue from thence, and thereby the growth

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

is caused. Thus death itself has to be a cause of life and motion."
(*Signature*, viii. 5.)

 

The external appearance or *signature* of things is a symbol of what
they actually are in their inner essence, or of what principle is
preponderating in their character, and therein is the basis of the
language of nature.

"All the external visible world, in all its states, is a symbol or
figure of the internal spiritual world. That which a thing actually is
in its interior is reflected in its external character." (*Signature*,
ix. 1.)

"That principle which in the spirit of its action is superior to the
rest, engraves its character principally upon the corporeal being, and
the other qualities are only secondary additions to it, as may be seen
in all living creatures." (*Signature*, ix. 4.)

"The inner form characterises man, also in his face. The same may be
said of animals, herbs, and trees. Each thing is marked externally with
that which it is internally and essentially. For the internal being is
continually labouring to manifest itself outwardly. Thus everything has
its own mouth for the purpose of revealing itself, and therein is based
the language of nature, by means of which each thing speaks out of its
own quality, and represents that for which it may be useful and
good." <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) (*Signature*, i. 11–17.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[164:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_79) The external
consciousness was hidden within the internal one, in the same sense as
the character of a tree is hidden within the seed.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[165:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_80) We find the same
fundamental law in all departments of nature. A new world is only a
"nebular spot," a dust of cosmic matter, as long as it has not formed an
organised centre. Likewise man resembles a "*nebula*" of unlimited
extent, of which only the organised kernel (the physical body) is
visible; and so man begins to exist as a spiritual being only when the
universal Spirit takes form within his soul.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[166:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_81) The visible sun in the
sky is the exterior manifestation of an invisible spiritual power. As
the visible sunlight dries up swamps and destroys impurities, so is the
spiritual sunlight opposed to the evil influences that arise from the
astral plane.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[166:2](ldjb11.htm#fr_82) Nature exists in
universal man, and be is existing in her. Nature receives her
consciousness from man, and as the will in him has become tinctured with
evil desires, so nature—the product of his imagination—became tinctured
with evil likewise.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[166:3](ldjb11.htm#fr_83) Neither Christ, nor
"Lucifer," nor "the Antichrist," is, as the vulgar interpretation has
it, outside of the soul of the world, but a power active within the
latter, in the same sense as a man's disease does not exist outside of
his own body, but within it.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[167:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_84) If it had not been for
Lucifer's seduction and Adam's fall, primordial man would have remained
for ever in blissful ignorance of the lower qualities, in a spiritual
state, which he could not have fully enjoyed, because he did not know
its opposite, namely, suffering. Thus the devil brought suffering into
the world, and is therefore man's benefactor; provided that man learns
by the experience afforded to him in this way, and does not become
absorbed by evil, but conquers it.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[167:2](ldjb11.htm#fr_85) If it were not for the
omnipresent and superior power of good, there would be no possibility
for man to conquer his evil desires. This absolute good is the One,
without which the Two (relative good and evil) could not exist.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[168:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_86) The earth, like every
other cosmic body, is a form of manifestation of will, and has a
sensation of its own. Every part of the earth strives for the full
enjoyment of the beneficent sun-rays, and when arriving at the meridian
it would fain stand still, as if in mute adoration and worship of the
glory of the celestial orb, but is pushed on by those parts that follow.
Thus every part alternatively embraces the sunlight and sinks again into
darkness once during the daily revolution of our planet.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[169:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_87) The world is the body
of universal man; the spiritual sun is his heart, and the moon is the
symbol of his imagination (or fancy). The true meaning of Boehme's
writings, like those of the Bible, will only be understood if we cease
to look upon the cosmos from our limited personal point of view, and, by
becoming identified in our consciousness with the All, realise that the
All is our Self.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[170:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_88) It may be remarked
that at the time of Jacob Boehme it was not generally known that the sun
has a hydrogen atmosphere, nor that water was composed of oxygen and
hydrogen, the most combustible gas.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[170:2](ldjb11.htm#fr_89) The same doctrine
applies to the light of the spirit. The Christ-spirit is everywhere; but
it is not manifest in every person. Little would it benefit the blind to
know of the light merely from hearsay. Little would it profit the
"Christian" if he knew of a historical Christ, and could not perceive
the glory and majesty of the *Atma Buddhi* within his own soul. Boehme
says—

"The light and the power of Christ arises within His children in the
interior foundation and illumines the whole course of their life. Within
this fountain of light is the kingdom of God in man. He who is not in
possession of it cannot bring it into himself by means of any creed,
opinions, or theories; but if he possesses it, then from that fountain
will arise many streams of pure love." (*Communion* v. 18.)

<span id="fn_90"></span>[170:3](ldjb11.htm#fr_90) So with the mind of
man, it being the "constellation of stars, thoughts, and mental powers
wherein he lives," he receives its light from the divine <span
id="page_171">p. 171</span> sun that shines in the centre of his own
being. There are thoughts of which we are conscious, and others which
remain hidden until they are called forth by that power which rests in
the spirit of man.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[171:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_91) This is also asserted
in Sinnett's *Esoteric Buddhism*. Ideas have their regular revolutions
in the mental world, comparable to the planets in the sky. They arise
and disappear from the mental horizon of the individual, and also from
that of humanity as a whole, according to cosmic laws.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[172:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_92) To realise the nature
of the relation existing between the macrocosm and the microcosm, it is
necessary that man should learn to realise his own existence as a
macrocosmic being. Without such a practical realisation, a merely
theoretical study of such mysteries is difficult, and of little use.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[172:2](ldjb11.htm#fr_93) All material forms are
nothing but ultimate expressions of ideas, shaped into forms by thought
and caused to grow and become objective by the power of will which is
inherent in everything.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[172:3](ldjb11.htm#fr_94) There is only one
universal life; but its action becomes differentiated and modified in
each individual form by the qualities of the latter. It then becomes
therein, as it were, a distinct and separate life, differing not in
essence but in quality from that of other forms. This individual life
constitutes the individuality of the form. The external expression which
results from the action of this individual life constitutes the
personality.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[173:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_95) If the whole world is
a manifestation of consciousness, there can be nothing absolutely
unconscious in it. Each thing has its own state of consciousness, but is
not necessarily therefore self-conscious or aware of its own qualities.
If it were so, the world would be a hell.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[174:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_96) The same order may be
observed in the microcosm of man. First comes the desire, which is of a
fiery nature; then the idea, which is still airy and indefinite, but
which becomes concrete as a thought by the aid of the "watery element,"
and ultimately there results the act or the material corporification.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[175:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_97) In the mineral kingdom
precious stones may be compared to the eye in the animal realm, in so
far as the same is said to be the mirror of the soul; *i.e.*, of the
interior quality.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[175:2](ldjb11.htm#fr_98) All forms are
expressions of originally spiritual powers, and the qualities of such
powers are more manifest in precious stones than in any other material
substance.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[175:3](ldjb11.htm#fr_99) For this reason it
requires the possession of divine power to practise alchemy. It is a
divine and not merely a "natural" science.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[176:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_100) For the true
signification and magic powers of precious stones see "*In the Promos of
the Temple of Wisdom*."

<span id="fn_101"></span>[177:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_101) For description of
the elementals inhabiting the astral plane see *Paracelsus*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[177:2](ldjb11.htm#fr_102) The spiritual being
is the one that is not subject to the dissolution of the physical form,
but "reincarnates" periodically; that is to say, it creates for itself
again other forms in which it may find to a certain extent an outward
expression. (Compare *Myster. Magn.*, 29, 45.).

<span id="fn_103"></span>[178:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_103) In other words, each
thing is an expression of will-power. The will alone, however, does not
constitute its true consciousness; the latter results from the action of
the will upon the imagination.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[179:1](ldjb11.htm#fr_104) See *Magic, White
and Black*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Generation](ldjb12)

</div>
