<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb14)  [Next](ldjb16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

### REDEMPTION.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"God lives also in man. Therefore if we are but
seeking and loving our own (true) self, we then love God. That which we
do to each other we are doing to God. He who seeks and finds his brother
and sister has sought and found God. We are in Him all one body with
many members, each of which has its own functions." (*Threefold Life*,
xi. 106.)</span>

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> was the will of God, by means of
becoming Himself human, to reinstate man, who in consequence of his sin
had become degenerated into an earthly being, into the glorious state in
which he had been created originally.

As this statement, on account of the old theological ideas which it is
liable to awaken in the mind, will probably be misunderstood, we will
attempt to express its meaning in different terms. God, the will of
eternal wisdom, willed that His wisdom should become manifest in a human
form, because the universal man, having become absorbed by the
attractions of the sensual plane, had lost that divine state of
consciousness which renders possible the perception of divine truth. As
it is only the truth in man that can know universal truth, and as this
principle of truth had become inactive in him, it was necessary that the
Christ (the Truth, the Life, and the Light) should become active in him,
and by rendering man truthful, self-conscious, and living within the
light, reinstate him in his former position which he occupied in the
macrocosmos before he sank into materiality and degradation <span
id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_189).

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

"The spirit of this world has captured the body <span
id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_190) and rendered it earthly, so as to cause
body and soul to be corrupted. Thus we are no longer in possession of
the pure element necessary for the formation of a (pure) body, but au
outgrowth of the four elements in combination with the influence of the
stars. This body does not belong unto the Godhead. God does not unfold
Himself within an unclean body, but only in holy (regenerated, interior)
man, in the pure image which He created in the beginning. There was then
nothing else to be done than to regenerate that image by means of the
heart and light of God." (*Three Principles*, xxiii. 21.)

"Man must again go out of the spirit of the planets and elements and
enter into a new birth, into the life of God. This the soul cannot
accomplish by her own power, and therefore the life of God out of love
and mercy came to us into the flesh and took our human soul again unto
itself, into the divine life, into the power of the light; so that in
this life we may enter into a new birth and penetrate unto God."
(*Threefold Life*, i, 17.)

"To the human spirit (as such) it was impossible to issue from the
torment of anguish and enter into the region of heaven, and therefore
God had to come again into humanity and aid the human spirit in bursting
the doors of the darkness, so that it may enter within them (clothed) in
divine power." <span id="fr_191"></span>[2](#fn_191) (*Threefold Life*,
xxi. 21.)

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

"Christ came for the purpose of healing the injury which Adam had
suffered when he died relatively to the celestial kingdom. He came to
awaken the inner man who had disappeared in Adam, and to regenerate him
in His power, and to bruise for ever the serpent's head of wrath and
falsehood, (that is to say) to kill the (selfish) terrestrial will."
(*Stiefel*, ii. 168.)

 

To effect this reconstitution the direct action of God upon humanity
would not have been sufficient. Without the incarnation a real union of
God and man, and a resurrection of the latter from death, would not have
been possible. <span id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_192)

"It was the will of God to transmute humanity, after it had become
earthly, again into the celestial quality, to turn the human earth
(material element) into heaven, to make out of the four elements only
one, and to transform the wrath of God in human quality into love. But
the wrath of God, having become ignited in man, was a power of fire and
fury, to resist which, and to transform it into love, it was necessary
that love itself should enter into the wrath and surrender itself wholly
to it. It was not enough for that purpose that God should remain in
heaven (in His own divine self-consciousness), and look lovingly down
upon humanity. This would not have subdued the power of the fury and
wrath, neither would they have entered into a state of love."
(*Signature*, xi. 7.)

"In the holiness of God the human essence could not have been conceived
without the presence of an appropriate medium; the will was separated
from it. Therefore God became man, so that He might endow or bless
humanity with His divinity, and that He may become conceivable to us."
(*Baptism*, ii. 36.)

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

"Before the incarnation took place, the Word could redeem the soul, so
that she could stand the test before the Father in the fire; but not
(the test) in the love and delight before the light of the Holy Trinity.
A rising from the tomb was not thus to be accomplished. If man was to be
raised from the tomb, the Word had first to become man." <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193) (*Three Principles*, xvi. 35.)

"The pious have clothed themselves in Christ before His incarnation in
the covenant of promise, not in substance, but merely in power; not in
the flesh, but merely in the spirit." (*Stiefel*, ii. 442.)

 

In consequence of sin the power of death had become a ruler, and
therefore the Redeemer entered Himself into death for the purpose of
conquering it, and to obtain for us again the fulness of divine
life. <span id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194)

"In consequence of the sin there was no salvation for man; if the
eternal Word and heart of God had not become human and entered into the
third principle, into the human flesh and blood, taking upon itself (the
state of) a human soul, and entering into the death of the destitute
soul, whereby it could take away from death its power and from hell its
terrible sting, and thus conduct the soul out of death and redeem her
from hell." (*Threefold Life*, viii. 39.)

"Adam's soul had turned from God and died relatively to the essentiality
of tile light. Thus the second Adam brought the soul again into the
fire, *i.e.*, into the fountain of wrath, and ignited again the light in
death. Then shone the light again into the darkness, and death died
itself, and for the wrath or hell there was created a plague." (*Tilk*.
i. 513.)

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

"As we had gone out from the freedom of the angelic world and entered
into the dark torture, therefore the power and the word of the light
became man, and led us out of the darkness and through death in the fire
into the freedom of divine life, into the divine essentiality. Therefore
Christ had to die and to enter into the divine essentiality through hell
and through the wrath of eternal nature, and to open a road for our soul
through death and through the wrath, on which we may enter with Him by
means of death into divine life." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 3, 7.)

"When the two kingdoms, the wrath of God and the love of God, were
battling with each other, then appeared Christ as the hero. He willingly
surrendered Himself to the wrath (to the suffering caused by the lower
principles that had been awakened to consciousness in consequence of the
sin), and He extinguished it by His love. He came from God into this
world and took our soul into Himself, so that He might take us out of
the earthly state into Himself and lead us thus into God. He regenerated
us within Himself, so that we would become capable of living again in
God, and that we should put our will into Him. In Him He led us to the
Father, into our first home; that is to say, into the Paradise which
Adam had left." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 11. 6.)

"The Word took our own flesh and blood into the divine essentiality, and
broke the power which held us imprisoned in the wrath of death and fury.
It broke that power on the *Cross;* that is to say, in the centre of
nature (the fourth natural form, whose symbol is the Cross), and ignited
again in our soul (that had become dark) the burning white light-fire."
(*Menschwerdung*, ii. 6, 9.)

"Christ sacrificed our human image to the wrath of His Father, to be
swallowed up in death, and introduced His life into death; but He
manifested His love in that life which death had devoured, and thus He
brought that life out of death by means of His love (with which

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

it had become one and immortal). As a seed sown into the earth must die
(as such and relatively to its form) within the earth, and as by means
of this dying a new body grows, so the corrupted body of Adam had to be
sacrificed to death and to the wrath, and out of the death and wrath
issued the *body of the love of God*." (*Mysterium*, xxviii. 17.)

 

The conquest of the power of death took place, in a certain sense,
already at the time of the overcoming of the temptation of the Redeemer,
which, like that of Adam, was caused by the envy of the devil, but in
which the devil was conquered by the Lord. <span
id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_195)

"Adam was to take possession of the kingly throne of Lucifer, because
the latter had turned away from God. From this results the great envy
and the spite of the devil against mankind. From this also originates
the temptation of Christ in the wilderness, because Christ was to take
possession of the throne which the devil claimed, to break his power,
and to become his judge who was to reject him eternally." (*Grace*, vi.
13.)

"All that which had seduced Adam; and wherein he became imprisoned as in
the death of darkness, was offered to the Saviour at the time of
temptation." (*Signature*, vii. 46.)

"The temptation is the hard fight in the garden of Eden, in which Adam
fell; but the new warrior came out of it victorious, and remained
conqueror." (*Three Principles*, xii. 91.)

"When Christ withstood the temptation in the place of Adam, then the
newly introduced celestial *Ens* broke the sword in the death of the
external body of Christ, and by means of the holy substance it brought
the external body, which He had taken up in Mary and out of her

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

seed, through that sword of the wrath and into the holy state. In this
very power the external body became raised from the dead, and conquered
both, death and the fiery sword." (*Mysterium*, xxiv. 24.)

 

The first factor in the temptation was that Christ was requested to take
earthly food instead of celestial nutriment, and that He should thereby
gratify the desire of His body. <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196)

"After the Spirit of God had led Christ into the wilderness, then was
the devil permitted to approach Him in the kingdom of wrath and to tempt
the second Adam as he had tempted the first one. There was then no
earthly food or drink, and the soul of Christ knew very well that she
was in God, and that she could make terrestrial bread out of stones, as
there was no other bread there. But she did not desire to eat with her
celestial body terrestrial but celestial bread, and to leave the
terrestrial body to its hunger, because the divinity in Christ said,
'Eat of the word of the Lord and you will issue from the earthly man and
rest in the kingdom of heaven; live in the new man, and then the old one
will be dead for the sake of the new.' However, the devil spoke to the
soul: 'Thy earthly body is hungry, and as there is no bread, therefore
make thou bread out of stones.' Then

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

the strong soul in Christ stood there as a warrior and said, 'Man lives
not alone of bread, but of each word that passes through the mouth of
God. Thus he rejected the terrestrial bread and life, and put his
imagination into the word of God and ate of it. Then was the soul alive
in the kingdom of heaven, but the body like one dead; that is to say, it
became the servant of heaven and lost its powerful rule (over the
soul)." (*Three Principles*, xxii. 100–105.)

 

Furthermore, the devil thought of turning the Redeemer away from the
divine will by exciting the spirit of vanity. <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197)

"After the soul of Christ had received the heavenly bread, it was to be
seen whether she would now arise in the power of the fire of vanity, or,
full of humility, behold only the heart and the will of God, and
surrendering herself to it, become an angel of meekness. Herein is seen
the cunning of the devil, because he quotes the Scripture and says, 'The
angels will carry him upon their hands.' This passage has been
misapplied, because it did not refer to the physical body, but to the
soul. This he wanted to introduce into pride, so that it should rely
upon being carried by the angels; but the Redeemer said, 'It is also
written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.' Thus he overcame the
pride of the devil and entered into the humility and love of His
celestial Father." (*Three Principles*, xxii. 108.)

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

Finally, he offered to the Saviour the rule over the external world; but
the Lord did not accept it from the hands of the devil, but from His
celestial Father. <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_198)

"After the devil had thus failed twice, he came forward with the last
powerful temptation (saying) that he would give to Him the whole world
if He would fall down and worship him. Adam already had been anxious to
come into possession of this world, and he wanted to make it his own;
but in doing so he departed from God, and became himself captured by the
spirit of this world. Now the second Adam had to submit to this
temptation of the first Adam. It was to be tried whether the soul would
remain within the new, holy, and celestial man, and live in the grace of
God or in the spirit of this world. But the soul of Christ said to the
devil, 'Depart from me, Satan! for it is written, Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and serve Him alone!' Thus the valiant warrior conquered,
and the devil had to depart; and thus all that is earthly has been
overcome by the Christ. Now the Lord is higher than the moon, <span
id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_199) and takes all the power in heaven and
hell, and is Master over death and life. He now began His sacerdotal
kingdom with signs and miracles. He changed water into wine, made whole
the sick, the blind seeing, and enabled the lame to walk, and even
awakened the dead to life. He now sat in the chair of David, and was the
true priest in the order of Melchisedec." (*Three Principles*, xxii. 3.)

 

But the victory which the Redeemer had gained over Satan at the time of
the temptation could not be sufficient for the purpose of the redemption
of mankind. To that

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

end the complete transmutation, consequently the (bodily) death of the
Lord, had to take place. <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_200)

"When Christ was born the heaven existed within the earth—*of man;* but
this was not sufficient. The two worlds were to wrestle with each other.
Therefore came the temptation, and as the divine world conquered, the
great wonders (of the spiritual world) became revealed in the external
human world. All this, however, could still not be sufficient, because
the human quality was still active in her selfhood (self-consciousness)
within the movable wrath. It was necessary that the human state should
be transmuted into the celestial one, and for that there was no other
way than that the name of Jesus in divine love and celestial
essentiality would give itself wholly to be devoured by the wrath. Thus
the Son was obedient to the wrathful Father, even unto the death on the
Cross." (*Signature*, ii. 12–17.)

 

The physical death as well as the temptation of the Redeemer was caused
by Satan, who for that purpose excited the animosity of the mundane and
clerical authorities against the Lord. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[2](#fn_201)

"Christ said that He was a king of love and Son of God, having come to
save His people from sin. The devil then thought that he would lose his
kingdom, and the authorities thought, 'If this is a king and Son of God,
our supremacy will be at an end;' while the clergy said to themselves,
'He is much too insignificant for us; we want a Messiah who will give us
temporal power and

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

glory; one who will make us rich in the world and give us high places in
society, so that we shall have all the honour of this world. This man we
will not have; He is far too poor for us, and if we were to follow Him
we might lose the favour of the mundane authorities. We will remain in
our glory and power, and do away with this king of beggars and with His
kingdom of love.'" (*Signature*, x. 78.)

 

By means of His corporeal death, the wrath, or that which was in
antagonism to celestial magnificence, was to be taken away from the
external being of the Redeemer. <span id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_202)

"The human fire-life exists in the blood, and therein rules the wrath of
God. Therefore another kind of blood, one that was born from the
love-essence of God, had to be brought within the wrathful human blood.
Both, however, had to enter together into the wrath of death, and thus
the wrath of God had to be extinguished in the divine blood. Therefore
external human nature had to die in Christ, so as to exist no longer in
the quality of the wrath; so that the power of the celestial blood,
namely, the speaking Word, may alone live in external human nature, and
rule in its own divine power in external and internal man; that is to
say, that the sense of the *I* (the selfishness or illusion of isolation
and separateness) cease to exist in humanity; that the Spirit of God
should be all in all, and the personality only His instrument living in
humility." (*Signature*, ii. 10.)

"In the external flesh of the Redeemer was contained the evil part which
came to the surface in Adam when he died relatively to God. Now this
evil product was to be received again within the love of God, as Isaiah
said of Christ, 'He took all our sins upon Him.' Now the cursed Adam was
hanging at the Cross as a curse, but Christ redeemed him by His
innocently suffering pain

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

and shedding of blood. Adam's body died on the Cross, and Christ, born
of Jesus and the sanctified seed of the woman, tinctured (blessed) him
with His dear blood of love." (*Stiefel*, ii. 494.)

"The inner man Christ took our sins upon Him, and left the body, whereon
He had laid the curse of God, hanging at the Cross as a curse of God.
Thus He died, and in His death He spilt His blood, the blood of the holy
man, into the essence of the external man, wherein death resided. But
when this holy blood entered into death (with the external essence),
then became death terrified at this holy life, and the wrath became
terrified by the love, and went down into its own poison, as if killed
or annihilated." (*Stiefel*, ii. 205.)

 

By means of this spiritual death the Lord was to sacrifice entirely to
His celestial Father not only the human self-will (this having been
already accomplished at the temptation), but also His holy
love-will. <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_203)

"When the speaking Word of God in human quality arrested itself in the
Redeemer, then the essentiality which had died in Adam, but became alive
again in the Christ, called out together with the soul, 'My God! my God!
why hast Thou forsaken me?' This means that the wrath of God had entered
through the quality of the soul into the image of the divine
essentiality, and it had absorbed within itself the image of God,
because it was this image that was to bruise within the fiery soul the
head of the wrath of God, and to change its fiery

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

power into the eternal sun-life. As a candle dies in the burning, and as
from this dying issues light and power, so out of the dying and death of
Christ there was to arise the eternal divine sun in human quality. Thus
there was to die in this case not only the selfhood of human quality,
*i.e.*, the self-will of the soul relatively to (its desire to) live in
the power of the fire, and to be lost in the image of love, but this
very image of love had to enter itself into the wrath of death, so that
all would sink down in death, and by means of death and perfect
humility, and in the will and mercy of God, become raised again in
paradisiacal substantiality, so that the Spirit of God might be all in
all." (*Signature*, xi. 87.)

 

In consequence of this sacrifice of the whole of His will, the human
soul-life of the Redeemer did not become annihilated, but it entered
thereby entirely into the divine will. <span
id="fr_204"></span>[1](#fn_204)

"The humanity of Christ gave itself up as a sacrifice to the wrath of
the Father, entering entirely into His fire-essence; but the love-spirit
of God defeated the wrathful essence of the fire, so that it could not
consume humanity (the human quality). It merely took away from humanity
its self-will, and brought it again into the first universal will,
wherefrom the will was (originally) given to man. Thus that same will
came again into the will of the Father as into its first root (fountain
or origin)." (*Mysterium*, xxxix. 24.)

"The doctrine that Christ died a natural death in His human quality must
not be understood as if meaning that His created soul had died, and
still less that He had perished in His aspect as a divine being, or
relatively to His celestial essentiality and celestial tincture. He only
died relatively to His selfhood, *i.e.*, relatively to the will

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

and regimen of the external world which ruled in man. He died relatively
to the self-will and to the self-powers of the created self hood. All
this He gave up entirely into the Father's hands as being the end of
nature, the great mystery of the Father; but not so that it should be
dead, but so that the Spirit of God should be therein all its life, and
the divine regimen exist in the personality of Christ." (*Signature*,
xii. 1.)

 

Neither did the external being of the Redeemer become lost by His
corporeal death, but it entered thereby into its true and exalted
substantiality. <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_205)

"When Christ died He did not throw away the body which had been in His
possession while upon the earth, or left it to be consumed by the four
elements, thus keeping (or taking up) a body entirely foreign (to the
terrestrial form); but He merely laid aside the suffering (the external
consciousness) of this world, and clothed Himself in immortality, so
that His body might live in divine power, and not in the spirit of this
world." (*Three Principles*, xxv. 53.)

"Christ assumed indeed earthly substance, but in His death—that is to
say, as He overcame death—the divine being caused the earthly state to
disappear and took away from it its supremacy. Not that Christ had laid
aside something (which He did not), but so that the external being was
conquered and, so to speak, consumed." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 8, 11.)

"The true essentiality in Christ did not take away the earthly
consciousness, but entered into the latter as its lord and conqueror.
The true life was to be led first

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

into death and the wrath of God. This took place on the Cross, on which
occasion death became destroyed and the wrath imprisoned and
extinguished by love, and thus conquered." (*Menschwerdung*, ix. 16.)

"When Jesus broke up death in (His) humanity and took away the sense of
self, He did then not throw away the human quality wherein dwelt death
and the wrath of God, but He now accepted them to the fullest extent;
that is to say, He only now took the external realm within the interior
one." (*Signature*, xi. 41.)

"The external active and feeling life, wherein the wrath of God was
burning, died, but not in such a way that it would have become a
nothing, but it descended into nothing; that is to say, in this case,
into the will of God, into His acting and feeling. Thereby it became
free of the will of the external world, which will is evil and good, and
it lived no longer within the world and the constellations with the four
elements, but after the nature of the Father and within the pure and
divine element. Thus the true human life came to occupy again the
position which had been lost by Adam, and entered again into Paradise."
(*Signature*, xii. 5.)

 

The earthly being of the Redeemer was sanctified by His celestial blood,
and thereby it was prepared for the resurrection. <span
id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_206)

"When Christ poured out His celestial blood, then the fiery desire
kindled in humanity became transformed into a love-desire, and out of
the anguish of death there was born a joy and strength of divine power."
(*Signature*, xi. 5.)

"When the Son of God poured out His holy blood in Christ, then did the
poison of the wrath in Adam's

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

flesh, soul, and spirit, which He took upon Himself, become sanctified
and transformed into love. Thus the enmity ceased then and there, and
God became *Immanuel;* that is to say, man with God and God with man.
Then the flesh of Adam became tinctured and prepared for the
resurrection." <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_207) (*Stiefel*, ii.
209.)

 

By the power of the glorification at which the Redeemer arrived through
His entering into death He overcame the power of hell, so that now the
life again issued from death. <span id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_208)

"It is erroneous to suppose that the soul of Christ had left the body
and had travelled down to hell, and that it had there, in divine power,
attacked the devils and bound them with chains, and thus destroyed hell.
It is rather to be understood that at the moment at which Christ laid
off the kingdom of this world His soul entered into death and the wrath
of God, and thus was the wrath reconciled in love. Thus the devils and
all the godless souls in the wrath were imprisoned within themselves,
and death was broken up; but the life sprang forth through death."
(*Three Principles*, xxv. 76.)

"Death was wrestling with the external (life of) man, and thought that
now the soul would have to remain in the *Turba;* but there was a
stronger power within the soul, namely, the Word of God. This Word
captured death and destroyed it, and extinguished the wrath. It was a
great poison to hell when the light entered within it, and thus the
Spirit of Christ imprisoned the devil, and led him out of the soul-fire
into the darkness, and locked him up in the darkness, in wrathful
harshness and bitterness." (*Forty Questions*, xxxvii. 13–15.)

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

"By the power of the celestial tincture God ignited the fire that had
become dark within the essence of the soul, so that henceforth that fire
began to burn in white, clear, and majestic power, in light and glory,
and thus the wrath of God became extinguished in the essence of the soul
and was made into love." (*Tilk*. ii. 259.)

"The soul of Christ came with the light of God into the wrath, and then
the devils trembled; for the light imprisoned the wrath, so that it
became a paradise, while the wrath remained in hell. The light closed up
the principle of hell, so that no devil is permitted to show himself in
the light. He is also blind relatively to it, and the light is his
terror and shame." (*Three Principles*, xxv. 79.)

 

Thus, in consequence of the bodily death of Christ, the holy ones of
olden times who had longed for His coming attained resurrection. <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_209)

"The holy ones, having put their faith into the Messiah, received now
the pure element for a new body, according to the promise. For, as the
promised hero entered through life into death, their souls clothed
themselves in the body of Christ as in a new body, and lived in Him
through His power. These were the holy fathers and prophets who in this
world had been anointed in the power of the Word of God with the bruiser
of the serpent's head, and who by its power had prophesied and performed
miracles. They now became alive in the power of Christ." (*Three
Principles*, xxiv. 52.)

"The fathers of the Jews had known Christ not in the flesh, but only in
His prototype, and they had clothed themselves therein only in its power
by means of the first

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

incorporated covenant and word; but now they clothed themselves in His
substance, for all those who had put their faith in Him, and had clothed
themselves in the covenant in spirit, in these the covenant was then
filled with celestial substantiality. Thus there were many who were
raised with Him after His resurrection, and they caused themselves to be
seen at Jerusalem, in testimony that they had been raised up in Christ."
(*Grace*, x. 45.)

 

This conquest of hell and death was accompanied by certain phenomena
upon the earth, indicating the approaching destruction of the whole
terrestrial world. <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_210)

"As the prisons of the dark world were to be destroyed in the death of
Christ, the earth trembled and the sun became darkened, which symbolised
that, as now the eternal light had been born anew, the temporal light
would have to cease to exist." (*Grace*, vii. 8.)

"When the earth received the blood of Christ she trembled and shook, for
the wrath of God was now conquered in her, and there entered into her
the living blood which had come from heaven out of the substantiality of
God." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 10.)

"The wrath of the Father had to consume in death the life of Christ; but
when the wrath had swallowed up the life in death, then the holy life of
the deepest love of God moved in the death and wrath and swallowed up
the wrath. Then the earth began to tremble, and the rocks burst and the
tombs of the holy ones opened." (*Mysterium*, xxviii. 123.)

"After the Father had brought again the soul of the Redeemer, that had
entered into His wrath, into love—

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

that is to say, into the image from Paradise, which had disappeared—then
the world trembled in the terror of death as with a terror of joy, and
that joy entered into the dead bodies of those that had hoped for the
coining of the Messiah, and awakened them to life. It was this very
terror that tore the curtain in the Temple, namely, the veil of Moses,
which hung before the clear face of God, so that man could not see God."
(*Signature*, xi. 71.)

 

The body in which Christ Himself arose from the dead was paradisiacal
and divine, and could not be apprehended by anything of an earthly
nature; but as the terrestrial body was absorbed therein, therefore the
Lord could make Himself visible to His disciples. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[1](#fn_211)

"The body in which Christ became raised from the dead could not be
stopped or arrested by rocks or stones. It passes through all things
without breaking anything; it takes hold of this world, but this world
cannot lay hold of it. Nothing can make it suffer, for in it is all the
fulness of the Godhead." (*Three Principles*, xxv. 87.)

"There was no necessity for the removal of a stone to liberate the body
of the Lord from the tomb. This took place merely to show to the Jews
the folly of their imagining that they could withstand God, and also for
the sake of the weak faith of the disciples, so that they might see that
Christ had in truth been raised up." (*Three Principles*, xxv. 85.)

"Although Christ not always walked visibly among His disciples,
nevertheless He showed Himself often visibly, tangibly, and
substantially to them in the shape of the body which He had occupied
while upon this earth, and which the new body had absorbed, but which

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

it had the power to represent again." (*Three Principles*, xxiv. 97.)

The heaven wherein the Redeemer has entered after His resurrection is
the fulness of divine power, by means of which He is Lord over the
terrestrial world and over the world of hell. <span
id="fr_212"></span>[1](#fn_212)

"The internal foundation of this world, whereof the four elements have
originated, is heaven, and in this internal power Christ rules as true
God and Man in the external world. When He says, 'To Me has been given
all power in heaven and upon the earth,' and also, 'I am with you every
day unto the end of the world;' and furthermore, if it is said of Him,
'He shall rule over His enemies until they are all made to be a
footstool under His feet,' all this refers to His internal kingdom,
because He rules within the internal and over and above the external and
terrestrial, and likewise over the hellish world." (*Baptism*, ii. i,
29.)

 

Thus the Bible history of the life of Christ and the miracles which He
performed, is a description of the processes taking place within the
inner life of the regenerated. In Jesus Christ we behold the antitype of
the one and only Redeemer of the world, as a whole, and of every
separate individual. Every object or person we see in the world is
nothing but a symbol of existing ideas; every event taking place in
external life is the outcome of invisibly acting forces. The historical
correctness of the occurrences described in the Bible may be questioned,
but what they describe are facts known to those who have experienced
them themselves. The truth of the religion of Christ does not depend on
the verification of external historical events; for true

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christianity is
based neither upon a knowledge of cosmology nor upon history, but upon
love.

"The innermost *ground* in man is Christ; but not according to man's
human nature, but according to *His*, the divine quality in His
celestial essence, which He has regenerated. The *second* ground is the
soul, *i.e.*, eternal nature, wherein Christ (the light) becomes
revealed; and the third *ground* is the external man, out of the *limus*
of the earth with the stars and the four elements. In the first ground
is the active life of divine love; in the second is the natural
fire-life of the created soul, wherein God is called a fiery God; and in
the third is the creation of all the qualities wherein Adam stood in the
*temperature*, and which was objectified in the fall." (*Grace*, iv.
37.)

"'Christ' means a penetrator; the act of taking away the power of the
wrath; the illumination of the darkness by light; the transmutation (in
the soul of man), by which the gladness of love rules over the lust of
the fire in its wrathful aspect; the superiority of light over
darkness." (*Signature*, vii. 3 2.)

To "love Christ" means simply to love the divine light of wisdom and
truth, and is practised by being obedient to divine law. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[1](#fn_213)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_189"></span>[242:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_189) If we take of the
history of redemption the ordinary theological view, and regard it as
the work of an extracosmic God, getting offended and <span
id="page_243">p. 243</span> angry, and becoming reconciled by having his
son killed by man, it becomes at once absurd and incredible; but if we
look at it in its true light, namely, as an allegory describing an
intracosmic process going on in the body of macrocosmic and microcosmic
man, it then becomes intelligible. It was not an outside deity, but the
divine will, active within the heart of humanity, that willed that
humanity should be saved by the awakening of the divine will in man, and
the same process takes place even now in the organism of every
individual on entering from spiritual darkness into light.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[243:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_190) The term "body," as
a matter of course, does not refer to the visible form of earth, which
is merely an instrument for its inner inhabitant, but to that principle
of which that form is an external expression.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[243:2](ldjb15.htm#fr_191) In other words,
there is no other way of restoring the order except by means of its
restoration.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[244:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_192) If the light shines
merely upon the surface, it then does not penetrate into the depths. The
will had to become active within the flesh. This divine will is love,
which is substantial and not a mere dream.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[245:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_193) The tombs from which
man must arise are error, passions, and temptations.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[245:2](ldjb15.htm#fr_194) The light could not
have redeemed the darkness in any other way than by entering therein;
neither could anything entirely spiritual and unsubstantial have acted
upon matter.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[247:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_195) Little would it
benefit man to believe that another person overcame his temptations,
while he himself would succumb to his own. He who conquers that which is
mortal in him conquers death.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[248:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_196) The first temptation
which meets every one on the road to regeneration is the hunger of the
lower qualities in him.

"The first cause of real temptation is the transcendent abundant love of
God. The human will refuses to submit itself entirely to the exquisite
grace which offers itself out of divine love, and seeks for its own self
and for the love of that self which belongs to that which is
impermanent. It loves itself and the state of this world better than
God. Here man is tempted by his own nature, which in her centre stands
outside of the love of God, in anguish, combativeness, and dissension,
and in which the devil puts his perverted desires for the purpose of
leading man away from the sublime grace and love of God. Here the dragon
within the soul turns its eyes in vanity towards the world, and shows to
her the glory and beauty of this world, and derides her because she
desires to become another creature. He puts before her the kingdom
wherein she exists and wherein she has her foundation." (*Letters*,
xliii. 3.)

<span id="fn_197"></span>[249:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_197) The second
temptation for the regenerated is spiritual pride.

"The second temptation is, that the soul, after having tasted of divine
love, and having once been illumined, desires to have that light in her
possession, and to act therein in her own power. The fiery nature of the
soul ought to be transformed into a love-fire, and she ought to give up
her natural right. This she does not like to do, but looks about,
prefers to see herself in her own power, which she, however, does not
find. Then the soul begins to doubt the power of grace, for she sees
that she has to desert therein her natural desire and will. She then
trembles, and will not sacrifice to the divine will the rights conferred
upon her by nature and die in the divine will; and she imagines the
light of grace, which acts without such a fierce power, to be a false
light." (*Letters*, xliii.)

<span id="fn_198"></span>[250:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_198) In the regenerating
man the third temptation is, that the soul thinks of employing the
spiritual powers which she has acquired for purposes which are not
divine, namely, for awakening the sourcive spirits of the lower
qualities, and thus of raising her head higher than God, as was the case
with Lucifer.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[250:2](ldjb15.htm#fr_199) The sun of wisdom is
higher than the moon of imagination.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[251:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_200) Thus in each
individual man the overcoming of the temptations on this or that
occasion is not sufficient for permanent salvation; for as long as the
germ of evil exists, it may sprout again. Final safety is attained only
after the battle, when the root of the evil is torn out of the heart.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[251:2](ldjb15.htm#fr_201) A more modern way of
expressing it would be: When the disciple becomes an accepted "*Chela*,"
his evil *Karma* begins to assert itself. In other words, the awakening
of a new life in an organism stimulates also the lower qualities
therein, whether it be a man, a people, or a whole world.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[252:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_202) When that which is
mortal in man dies, that which is immortal in him returns to freedom.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[253:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_203) Thus every one
should sacrifice to God all of his actions, his thoughts, and will; he
should not do anything out of his own power, but out of the power of God
(after he once knows that power). As the physical body, except in a
state of disease (such as spasms, epilepsy, &c.), does not perform any
motions except such as originate in the will of the person, likewise the
regenerated acts only as he is made to act by the God in him. Mortal and
sinful man cannot perform anything really good by his own power; to
attempt it would be a presumption and arrogance; for all that is good
belongs to God; man is merely an instrument for divine power.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[254:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_204) If the self-will is
entirely sacrificed to the divine will in man, then does man's will not
thereby become annihilated, but is itself rendered divine.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[255:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_205) However gratifying
it may be for the curious seeker in history to know whether or when such
an event has actually occurred in the history of the Jewish nation, such
a historical belief would be of little benefit to him if he could not
realise within his own inner consciousness that the death of his mortal
nature cannot cause any loss to that which is immortal in him.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[256:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_206) The earthly body is
those elements in the terrestrial man the ultimate expression of which
is his visible form.

"There are two beings (natures) in man. The spirit-life is directed
inwardly, and the natural life acts in an outward direction." (*Text*.
v. 1.)

<span id="fn_207"></span>[257:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_207) The "flesh of Adam"
is as invisible to us as the spiritual body of Christ. That which we see
with our external eyes is merely an appearance.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[257:2](ldjb15.htm#fr_208) Whenever the light
of Christ in the soul of man penetrates within the interior foundation
of his fiery will, then is that will changed into sweet love, and the
soul enters into freedom from the bondage of self.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[258:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_209) If the purified soul
of man enters into the divine fountain from which she originated,
bringing with her the light which she has gathered unto herself during
her terrestrial existence, then will this be like adding new fuel to the
fire, and a new effulgence of light and glory will take place in the
soul of the world.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[259:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_210) Likewise in each
individual man will the terrestrial light disappear from his view when
the Christ has arisen in him; for the Christ Himself is the Light, and
surpasses the light of external nature. If that divine light arises in
man, then will the celestial spirits that have been dormant in his soul
arise and move and rejoice.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[260:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_211) Neither will any
one's physical body, wherein the inner man is imprisoned as in a tomb,
offer any obstacles for the prisoner to escape, after the latter has
been raised from the darkness of ignorance into the light of spiritual
self-knowledge. Then will the inner sight of the soul be opened and the
rock be rolled away. Then may the inner man go out and visit his
disciples.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[261:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_212) Man, having become
one with the Christ in Humanity, will necessarily partake of His powers
in Divinity. The will of the Father is then his own, and in the Son he
rules as a Lord over the spiritual kingdom, and through the inner world
over the external one.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[262:1](ldjb15.htm#fr_213) "Why does the soul
torment herself and strive in her own power and will, thus augmenting
her torture? The more anxious she is, the greater will be her pain, and
she acquires no rest. A dying plant does not begin to sprout and obtain
sap by its own power, and likewise the soul cannot by her own power
attain the kingdom of God. She ought to do nothing but abandon her own
selfish will, then the evil qualities become weak, and her will returns
to the one from which she came in the beginning. Here God will send His
supreme love to meet her; that love which has been revealed in humanity,
in Jesus Christ." (*Illumined Soul*, 46.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. Regeneration](ldjb16)

</div>
