<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb03)  [Next](ldjb05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

#### THE

# DOCTRINES OF JACOB BOEHME.

<span class="small">"Our whole doctrine is nothing else but an
instruction to show how man may create a kingdom of light within
himself. . . . He in whom this spring of divine power flows, carries
within himself the divine image and the celestial substantiality. In him
is Jesus born from the Virgin, and he will not die in eternity." (*Six
Points*, vii. 33.)</span>

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="small">"Not I, the I that I am, know these things; but God
knows them in me." (*Apology*, *Tilken*, ii. 72.)</span>

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### CHAPTER I.

### INTRODUCTION.

"Science cannot abolish faith in the all-seeing God, without worshipping
in His place the blind intellect."

"The true faith is that the spirit of the soul enters with its will and
desire into that which it does neither see nor feel." (*Four
Complexions*, 85.)

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is self-evident that if we wish to
attempt a contemplation of that which is divine and eternal, we must
first of all not refuse to believe in the possibility that something
divine and eternal exists or may reveal itself in the constitution of
man. This spiritual principle in man is superior to the animal and
reasoning man; superior to the material body, and superior to the
arguing intellect; it does not need to reason and guess; it perceives
and knows. Being superior to the intellect, it cannot be conceived
intellectually; but it can be perceived by man if he rises above the
animal and intellectual plane to the consciousness of his own divine
spirit; or to express it in the language of Boehme, if he attains
self-knowledge in Christ. The animal instincts in man belong to the
animal nature in man, his intellectual faculties belong to his
intellectual nature, but that which is divine in him belongs to his God,
his own true and real and permanent self.

Merely theoretical speculation in regard to the things that belong to
the Spirit in man is therefore entirely inadequate for their true
understanding, and is not divine wisdom; it can only lead to the
formation of theories and opinions about it, which may or may not be
true, but which do not constitute real knowledge, while true wisdom is
the result of practical experience,

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

attainable in no other way than by entering the divine state. In other
words, it is the knowledge by which God in "man" knows His own self.

Most surely the attainment of this divine state is not the result of
fancy's flights, of pious dreaming, or of allowing the imagination to
run away with one's self. There is nothing more positive, real, and
practical than the consciousness of being a man, and to find one's
centre of gravity in the dignity which arises from true manhood; or in
other words, from the knowledge of being a living temple wherein resides
the power of one's own immortal self.

 

Every state of knowledge has its uses in the sphere to which it belongs
and not to any other. Jacob Boehme says:—

"I do not say that man should not investigate natural sciences, and gain
experience in regard to external things. Such a study is certainly
useful to him; but man's own reasoning should not be the basis of his
knowledge. Man should not have his conduct guided merely by the light of
external reasoning, but he should, with all his reasoning and with his
whole being, bow in deep humility before God." (*Calmness*, i. 3 5.)

As long as a man does not recognise the existence of a divine principle
within his own self, it will be of little use for him to philosophise
and speculate about the attributes of the Divinity in the universe; he
cannot know the Holy Ghost as long as the Spirit of Holiness is not
active within himself.

"Natural man knows nothing about the mystery of the kingdom of God,
because he is outside and not within the state of divinity, as is daily
proved by the action of the philosophisers who are disputing about the
attributes and the will of God, and who nevertheless do not know God,
because they do not listen to the word of God within their own souls."
(*Letters*, xxxv. 5.)

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

External man judges according to his external reasoning. Man, depending
entirely on his external perceptions, and having neither belief nor
confidence in anything except what he sees with his bodily eyes, knows
only that which he sees with those eyes, and is not aware that there is
anything superior to that.

"When external reason beholds the things of this world, and how
misfortunes befall the pious as well as the godless, and that all things
are doomed to death and destruction—if it moreover perceives that there
seems to be none to save the virtuous from trouble and grief, but that
he, like the wicked, sorrowfully enters the valley of death, then man's
reason thinks that all things are due to hap-hazard, and that there is
no God to take care of those that are suffering." (*Contemplation*, i.
1.)

 

If there is no proof of the existence of a benevolent God to be found
within the world of phenomena, there is likewise no divine
self-knowledge to be obtained by the superficial reading of Holy Writ,
nor by an external study of the Bible, or conceiving of its contents
from a merely historical point of view. Neither will listening to
sermons be productive of self-knowledge, if he who preaches or he who
listens has not the living Spirit of Truth within himself.

"All those who desire to speak of or teach divine mysteries ought to be
in possession of the Spirit of God. Man should recognise within himself
the divine light of the truth, and in that light the things which he
desires to represent as being true. He should never be without such a
divine self-knowledge, and not make the force of his arguments to depend
merely on external reasonings or literal interpretations of the Bible."
(*Menschwerdung*, i. 1, 3.)

"What would it benefit me if I were continually quoting the Bible, and
knew the whole book by heart, but did not know the Spirit that inspired
the holy men

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

who wrote that book, nor the source from which they received their
knowledge? How can I expect to understand them in truth, if I have not
the same spirit as they? "(*Tilk*. ii. 55.)

 

Spiritual truths are above and beyond intellectual reasoning, and can,
therefore, not be intellectually explained. They can at best be
represented by allegories and pictures such as may induce men to give
way to exalted thoughts, and thus to acquire a higher state of
perception.

"The children of God spake as they were made to speak by the Holy
Spirit. Therefore their words remain a mystery to the men of earth; and
even if the latter imagine that they understand them, nevertheless they
see only the external meaning." (*Letters*, xi. 40.)

"In all things received by mere hearsay, without self-perception, there
still remains a doubt as to whether that which one has heard is actually
true; but that which is seen by the eye and understood by the heart
carries conviction with it." (*Three Principles*, x. 26.)

It should never be forgotten that speculative philosophy and theosophy
are two entirely different, if not opposite things, and those who
clamour for intellectual explanations of spiritual truths that are
beyond intellectual reasoning have an entirely wrong conception of the
meaning of the term "Theosophy."

"The true understanding must come from the interior fountain and enter
the mind from the living Word of God within the soul. Unless this takes
place, all teaching about divine things is useless and worthless."
(*Letters*, xxxv. 7.)

"I do not wish to divert men from the Word as it is written and taught;
but my writings are intended to lead them from a merely historical
belief to a living faith, even to Jesus Christ (the Light and Truth)
Himself. All preaching and teaching is in vain if it is mere

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

talk, and if the preacher or teacher has not the power of Christ, if not
Christ Himself by means of the Word acts within those that teach and
within those that listen." (*Richter*, 45.)

By studying a book we may at best imagine what the author believed; but
such an imaginary knowledge is not self-knowledge. Real spiritual
knowledge comes only from the awakening of the spirit.

"I am not collecting my knowledge from letters and books, but I have it
within my own self; because heaven and earth with all their inhabitants,
and moreover, God Himself, is in man." (*Tilk*. ii. 297.)

 

The essential man is not limited by the visible physical form of his
material body; his spiritual substance extends as far as the stars. His
true self is the Spirit of God, wherein are existing all worlds.

"The spirit of man has not merely come from the stars and the elements,
but there is hidden within him a spark of the light and the power of
God. It is not empty talk if Moses (Genesis i.) says God created man in
His own image. To be His own image created He him." (*Aurora*, Preface,
96.)

The divine Spirit, once awakened in the consciousness of man, knows all
things by the knowledge of its own self.

"The soul searches into the Godhead, and also into the depths of nature;
for she has her fountain and origin in the whole of the divine Being."
(*Aurora*, Preface, 98.)

"As the eye of man reaches the stars wherefrom it has its primitive
origin, likewise the soul penetrates and sees even within the divine
state of being wherein she lives." (*Aurora*, Preface, 99.)

"Oh, how near is God to all things. Nevertheless, no thing can
comprehend Him unless it be tranquil and surrenders to Him its own
self-will. If this is accomplished,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

then will God be acting through the instrumentality of everything, like
the sun that acts throughout the whole world." (*Mystery*, 45.)

"Why is it that we cannot see God? This world and the devil (perverted
good) within the wrath of God are the cause that we cannot see with the
eyes of God. There is no other impediment. If any one says, 'I can see
nothing divine,' let him understand that flesh and blood and the
craftiness of the devil (perverted desires) are to him an obstacle and
an impediment. If he were to enter the new life, if he were to step
below the cross of Christ, he would then be sure to see the Father and
his Redeemer the Christ, and also the Holy Ghost." (*Menschwerdung*, ii.
7.)

Let those would-be philosophers who reject God and that which is divine
remember that there can be no divine wisdom without something divine,
and that man can become divine in no other way than through the power of
Divinity.

"There is no spark of divine life in him who is without God. For this it
is not God who is to blame, but the person himself. Such persons have
themselves, and by their own will, entered into that state, and have
themselves drowned their higher consciousness, while the precious jewel,
although unknown to them, is still hidden within the centre. Let them,
therefore, again go out with their will from their wilful ignorance or
malignity and enter again into the will of God." (*Menschwerdung*, 3,
5.)

 

All this goes to show that it is useless and vain to seek for divine
wisdom, meaning a true realisation of eternal truth in outward things,
in external observations, in the reading of books, or in the sayings of
the sages, if we do not recognise the truth that exists within our own
self. All dependence placed upon external things and persons or gods
outside of our own true self, is

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

merely idol-worship and deceptive if we do not recognise the God that
exists within ourselves. The words, "Thou shalt worship no strange gods
or idols, but have only one God," mean, Thou shalt have faith and
confidence and trust in no other God than in the one whose temple you
are, and who resides within your own self.

"God," according to Boehme, is "the will of eternal wisdom." To become
strong in God is to become strong in that will which renders one wise.
This is the true faith, of which Boehme says that "it is not merely a
certain method of thinking, or a belief in certain historical
occurrences, but the receiving of the spirit and the power of Christ
within one's self." (*Letters*, xlvi. 39.)

"This light and this power of Christ arises in His children within their
interior foundation, and illumines the whole of their life. Within that
foundation is the kingdom of God in man." (*Communion*, v. 18.)

But what is it that prevents man from recognising God within his own
self? What hinders him from seeing the light of the truth, and hearing
the voice of the Divinity? To this Jacob Boehme answers, "Thy own
hearing, willing, and seeing prevents thee from seeing and hearing God.
By the exercise of your own will you separate yourself from the will of
God, and by the exercise of your own seeing you see only within your own
desires, while your desiring obstructs your sense of hearing by closing
your ears with that which belongs to terrestrial and material things. It
overshadows you so that you cannot see that which is beyond your own
human nature and supersensual. But if you keep quiet, and desist from
thinking and feeling with your own personal selfhood, then will the
eternal hearing, seeing, and speaking become revealed to you, and God
will see and hear and perceive through you."—(*Supersensual Life*, 1–5.)

 

Here it may be asked by some, "Is it then necessary

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

for us, if we want to attain divine wisdom, that we should sit down, and
think, and feel, and do nothing at all?" Those who ask such a question
do not realise that, as there is a region below all feeling and thought,
in which man resembles an animal, if not a corpse, there is also another
state, beyond all speculative thought, a state of divine being. Not a
state in which man imagines himself to be divine, but a condition in
which the will of man, having stripped off all that is earthly, becomes
divine and absorbed in the self-consciousness of divinity.

"The only true way by which God may be perceived in His word, His
essence, and His will, is that man arrives at the state of unity with
himself, and that—not merely in his imagination, but in his *will*—he
should leave everything that is his personal self, or that belongs to
that self, money and goods, father and mother, brother and sister, wife
and child, body and life, and that his own self should become as nothing
to him. He must surrender everything and become poorer than a bird in
the air that owns a nest. Man must have no nest for his heart in this
world. ' Not that a person should run away from his home, and desert his
wife, child, or relatives, commit suicide, or throw away his property,
so that he may not be therein corporeally; but he should kill and
annihilate his self-will, the will that claims all these things as its
possessions. He should surrender all this to his Creator, and say with
the full consent of his heart, Lord, all is Thine! I am unworthy to
govern it, but as You have placed me therein, I shall do my duty by
surrendering my will wholly and entirely to You. Act through me in what
manlier You will, so that Thy will shall be done in all things, and that
all that I am called upon to do may be done for the benefit of my
brothers, to whom I am serving according to Thy command. He who enters
into such a state of supreme resignation enters into divine union with
Christ, so that he sees God Himself. He speaks with God and God speaks
with him, and he thus

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

knows what is the Word, the Essence, and the Will of God." (*Mysterium*,
xli. 54–63.)

"Follow my advice, and leave off your difficult seeking for the
knowledge of God by means of your selfish will and reasoning; throw away
that imaginary reason, which your mortal self thinks to possess, and
your will shall then be the will of God. If He finds His will to be your
will in His, then will His will become manifest in your will as in His
own property. He is All, and whatever you wish to know in the All is in
Him. There is nothing hidden before Him, and you will see in His own
light." (*Forty Questions*, i. 36.)

All of one's own seeking and investigating of divine mysteries in a
spirit of selfishness is useless and vain. The self-will cannot
comprehend anything of God, because that will is not in God but external
to Him. The will in a state of divine tranquillity comprehends the
divine, because it is an instrument of the Spirit, and it is the spirit
wherein the will is tranquil that has the faculty of such a
comprehension. There are many things, undoubtedly, that may be
investigated and learned and comprehended in a spirit of selfishness,
but the conception thus formed by the mind is merely an external
appearance, and there is no understanding of the essential foundation."
(*Signature* 15, 33.)

 

To express the above in other words, we might say that the selfish will
of man, being limited, cannot conceive the universal will of God; it
must give up its selfishness and limitation, to become one in the Spirit
of God and understand its own self. Neither can the self-will know even
a part of God, because God is one and a Unity, and cannot be conceived
in parts.

"The will should strive after or desire nothing but the mercy of God in
the Christ; it should continually enter into the love of God, and not
permit anything whatever to turn it away from that object. If external
reason

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

triumphs and says, 'I have the true knowledge,' then should the will
make that carnal reason bow down to the earth, and cause it to enter
into the highest state of humility, and always repeat to it the words,
'You are foolish. You have nothing whatever except the mercy of God.'
Into that mercy you must seek to penetrate and to become entirely
nothing within yourself, and step out of all of your own selfish knowing
and desiring, regarding it as an entirely impotent thing. Then will the
natural self-will enter into a state of helplessness, and the Holy
Spirit of God will take a living form within yourself and ignite the
soul with its flame of divine love. Thus the high knowledge and the
science of the Centre of all being will arise and appear. The human
selfhood will then follow in its perceptions the Spirit of God,
tremblingly and in the joy of humility, and become able to see what is
contained in time and in eternity. Everything is near to a soul in that
state, for the soul is then no longer her own property, but an
instrument of God. In such a state of calmness and humility should the
soul then remain, like a fountain remains at its own origin, and she
should without ceasing draw and drink from that well, and nevermore
desire to leave the way of God." (*Calmness*, i. 24.)

As the worm, crawling in the dust of the earth, cannot rise like the
eagle above the clouds, so the self-willing thought of man, wandering in
the labyrinth of conflicting opinions, does not enter the realm of
eternal truth. But when man attains freedom by giving up self-will and
selfish desires—or, to express it in other words, when by means of the
Christ (eternal Light and Truth) he arrives at that state of oneness
(at-one-ment) with God, which renders his soul godlike and divine, he
then also receives in the Christ a true and essential knowledge of God
and of Nature.

"As soon as the newly-regenerated man becomes manifest, will he attain
real knowledge. As the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

external man sees the external world, likewise the regenerated man sees
the divine world wherein he dwells." (*Letters*, xxvii. 3.)

 

This spiritual world, wherein the regenerated ones consciously live, is
not an imaginary or illusive world, but perfectly real; neither has it
anything in common with the vulgar conceptions of heaven, which are
merely the products of fancy.

"It is to be regretted that men are led so blindly by those that are
blind, and that the truth is stopped from manifesting itself to us in
its glory and purity by our conceptions of external pictures and forms;
for when the divine power in all its splendour becomes manifest and
active within the interior foundation of the soul to such a degree that
man earnestly desires to depart from his godless ways and to sacrifice
his whole being to God, then will the whole of the triune Deity be
present within the life and the will of the soul, and the heaven,
wherein God resides, will be open to her." (*Mystery*, lx. 43.)

This is the only way in which a knowledge of God can be attained, and
there is no other way.

"Christ says: The Son of Man does nothing except what he sees that the
Father is doing. If the Son of Man has become our body and His spirit
our own, shall we then not be able to know God? If we live in the Christ
the Spirit of Christ will see through us and in us whatever it desires,
and that which the Christ desires we will see and know in Him. The world
of the angels is easier and more clearly comprehensible to the
regenerated man than the terrestrial world. He also sees into heaven,
and beholds God and eternity." (*Menschwerdung*, ii. 7, 3.)

"Our seeing and knowing is in God. He reveals to every one in this world
as much as He wills, and as much as He knows will be useful to him. We
are not in possession of our own selves. We know nothing of God.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

God Himself is our knowing and seeing. We are nothing, so that He may be
All in us. We should be blind and deaf and mute, and know nothing and
know of no life of our own, so that He may be our life and our soul, and
that our work may be His." (*Menschwerdung*, ii. 7, 9.)

 

Seen in this true light, how foolish appear the practices of those who
seek to obtain spiritual power and greatness by their speculations and
mental efforts, without the light of God. It is well known that the
light of the sun does .not shine upon the earth because we desire it to
shine, neither can we attract the sunlight to us. All we do is to step
out of the darkness, or climb to the top of. the mountain which rises
above the clouds. Likewise the sunlight of divine wisdom does not enter
the mind because the mind wills it to enter; but if our soul rises up to
the mountain of the true faith, whose top reaches above the clouds of
fear and superstition, and idle speculations and conflicting opinions,
then will that light come to us by its own sweet grace, and without any
merit or effort on our part to attract it.

The low cannot produce the high; neither can anything give birth to
something higher than that which it contains. Neither animal nor
reasoning man can create God, but the lily-bud of divinity unfolds
itself in man by its own power. The divine man creates himself outside
of man's willing. He is a god, and therefore self-created and
self-existent; he does neither grow greater nor lesser; he is what he
is; all that he requires is the conditions necessary for his revealing
himself, and this condition is a pure will and a mind undisturbed by
passions and idle thoughts, a heart full of calmness and peace.

Few indeed are the persons capable of entering into such a state of
humility that divine and eternal truth can manifest itself in them
without being distorted by selfish thoughts and desires. Not that not
all human

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

beings have not within themselves the inherent capacity for seeing the
divine image that exists within themselves; but the truth is so simple
and uncomplicated that it will not be accepted by those whose ways are
complicated, and who therefore seek for complexity everywhere.

Jacob Boehme was of a simple and unsophisticated nature. Having received
but little external education, there was not for him the necessity of
unlearning ingrafted errors, and erasing misconceptions and acquired
prejudices from his mind. Leading a pure life, his soul was like a clear
mirror, in which he could perceive the image of the Godhead reflected
therein, and his mind was like an unsoiled page, whereon the word of
truth was plainly written. Nevertheless he, like all other persons
similarly situated, had to overcome a certain amount of illusion arising
from external observation, and from the reflections of the generally
prevailing ideas within his own mind. He says:—

"Before I knew that which I deeply know now, I, like others, thought
that there was no other true heaven than that which as a blue circle
encloses the world high above the stars; thinking that God had a
separate existence therein, and that He was ruling this world by means
of His Holy Spirit. But after I had met with many a hard obstacle in
following out this theory, I fell into a state of deep melancholy and
grief in beholding the great depth of this world, the sun and the stars,
the clouds, rain and snow, and in fact the whole of creation. I compared
all that with the little speck called 'man,' and how insignificant he is
before God, if compared with this great work of heaven and earth. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Finding, moreover, that there is good and
evil in all things, in the elements as well as

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

in creatures, and that in this world the wicked meets with the same fate
as the pious, having good and ill luck; furthermore, that barbarous
people occupy the best countries of the world, and are more favoured by
fortune than those that are pious, I became very melancholy and
dejected, and could find no consolation in Holy Writ, although I knew
the Bible from beginning to the end. Perhaps it may be that the devil
played a part in all that, for I often had heathenish thoughts, of which
I will, however, say nothing at present. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

"When my spirit, full of sorrow, earnestly, and as if moving in a great
storm, arose in God, carrying with it my whole heart and mind, with all
my thoughts and with the whole of my will, and when I would not cease to
wrestle with the love and mercy of God unless His blessing descended
upon me—that is to say, unless He illumined my mind with His Holy
Spirit, so that I could understand His will and get rid of my sorrow,
then the light of the Spirit broke through the clouds. While in my zeal
I powerfully stormed against the portals of hell, as if I had more
strength than was in my possession, and willing to risk even my life
(all of which would have been impossible to me without the aid of God);
then after some hard fights with the powers of darkness, my spirit broke
through the doors of hell, and penetrated even into the innermost
essence of the newly-born Divinity, where it was received with great
love, such as is offered by a bridegroom welcoming his beloved bride.

"No words can express the great joy and triumph which I then
experienced, neither can I compare this gladness to anything except to a
state in which life is

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

born in the midst of death, or with a resurrection of the dead. While in
that state, my spirit immediately saw through everything, and recognised
God in all things, even in herbs and grasses, and it knew what is God
and what is His will. Then very soon my will grew in this light, and
received a strong impulse to describe the divine state." (*Aurora*, xix.
4.) <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

 

Truly, none can enter the kingdom of heaven (meaning spiritual
self-knowledge and unspeakable joy) than he who is reborn in the Spirit;
but no one can be reborn unless he dies entirely to all sense of
self-will, and he then ceases to be a person and becomes pure joy, pure
knowledge itself.

If this truth is once realised, if it is known that a limited
personality, subject to the conditions of time and space, cannot embrace
infinite wisdom and joy, then it appears self-evident that all the
attempts for the attainment of divine wisdom, as long as one clings to
self, must necessarily be unsuccessful. In fact no one should seek for
spiritual knowledge for the purpose of rendering himself knowing and
wise, but he should strive after dying within the Christ—that is to say,
to become entirely one with divine truth, so that it is not any longer
"he" who lives, but the truth living in him. He should not wish to
become celebrated or renowned or self-satisfied, but rather pray that
his knowledge should be taken away from him, unless it would lead to the
glorification of God in him. In short, he should not wish to *become*
anything, but he should *be* all knowledge, all joy, wisdom, and glory
itself. Boehme says—

"I have never desired to know anything about divine mysteries, neither
did I understand how I might seek or find them. I sought for nothing
except the heart of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jesus Christ (the
centre of truth), wherein I might hide myself and find protection from
the fearful wrath of God, and I asked God earnestly for His Holy Spirit
and mercy, that He might bless and conduct me, and take away from me all
that could avert me from Him, so that I might not live in my own will
but in His. While engaged in such an earnest seeking and desiring, the
door was opened to me, so that in one quarter of an hour I saw and
learned more than if I had studied for many years at the universities."
(*Letters*, xii. 6, 7.)

"I am not a master of literature nor of arts, such as belong to this
world, but a foolish and simple-minded man. I have never desired to
learn any sciences, but from early youth I strove after the salvation of
my soul, and thought how I might inherit or possess the kingdom of
heaven. Finding within myself a powerful *contrarium*, namely, the
desires that belong to the flesh and blood, I began to fight a hard
battle against my corrupted nature, and with the aid of God, I made up
my mind to overcome the inherited evil will, to break it, and to enter
wholly into the love of God in the Christ. I therefore then and there
resolved to regard myself as one dead in my inherited form, until the
Spirit of God would take form in me, so that in and through Him I might
conduct my life. This, however, was not possible for me to accomplish,
but I stood firmly by my earnest resolution, and fought a hard battle
with myself. Now while I was wrestling and battling, being aided by God,
a wonderful light arose within my soul. It was a light entirely foreign
to my unruly nature, but in it I recognised the true nature of God and
man, and the relation existing between them, a thing which heretofore I
had never understood, and for which I would never have sought." (*Tilk*.
20–26.)

 

The realisation of the truth that we are nothing, but that God is all,
constitutes the beginning of the true

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

faith, which forms the basis of true knowledge and the first step on the
road to spiritual unfoldment.

To wish, to will, to desire, to know, to do nothing except what God
desires, wills, wishes, knows, or does in and through man is true
resignation; it is the deepest humility for the carnal mind, while at
the same time it is the glorification of God in man, and therefore the
highest attainable state.

"I am continually waiting for my Redeemer, willing to submit myself
entirely to Him, whatever He may do. If He wants me to know a certain
thing, then do I want to know it; but if He does not, then am I not
desirous of knowing it. In Him I have put my will, my knowledge, my
science, my desiring and doing." (*Letters*, viii. 60.)

"Hundreds of times have I prayed to God, begging Him to take away from
me all knowledge, if it did not serve for His glorification and for the
amelioration of the condition of my brothers, and that He should only
retain me within His love. But the more I prayed the more the internal
fire within myself became ignited, and in such a state of ignition did I
execute my writings." (*Letters*, xii. 60.)

 

This interior illumination of the mind by the light of eternal Truth
alone, and not any other state or condition, is that which constitutes
the true theosophy. Therefore true theosophy does not consist in
intellectual learning of any kind, nor in morality, nor in being pious
or virtuous, nor in belonging to any Church or society, nor in
humanitarianism, or in anything that can be accomplished by man, but
*theosophy is the self-knowledge of God in man*, the illumination of the
mind by the light of the Christ, the eternal Truth itself. Such
theosophy is not as some have claimed, "a branch of theology," nor any
system of thought, nor a certain school, in which heretofore unknown
secrets are divulged, but it is *divine* 

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

*wisdom* itself, without any other qualification. It is beyond all
merely human conception, inconceivable to the reasoning intellect, and
can therefore not be explained. It is itself the most secret thing,
which can be known by no one except by him who has experienced it;
neither do those that live entirely within the realm of animality, or
within that of the speculating intellect, believe that such a state is
possible, and in fact it is unattainable for any person; because he who
enters into it, ceases to be a person, except in regard to his external
appearance and form—that is to say, all sense of personality is lost to
him, and has ceased to exist in the field of his inner consciousness.

It is therefore unnecessary to repeat that this state cannot be entered
by the exercise of the self-will of animal man; neither can it be
produced by him by means of any intellectual study; nor is it dependent
on his social condition, or education, profession, or external
qualifications in life, but it comes to man solely and alone by the
*mercy and grace of God*. It means the presence of the divine light, and
that presence depends on nothing else than on that presence itself.
Boehme says—

"It pleases the Supreme to reveal His secrets by means of the foolish,
who are looked upon by the world as being nothing; so that it may be
seen that their knowledge does not come from these fools, but from Him.
Therefore I ask you to regard my writings as being those of a child in
which the Supreme has manifested His power. There is in them so much,
that no kind or amount of argumentation and reasoning can comprehend or
grasp it; but to those that are illumined by the Spirit their
understanding is easy and merely child's play." (*Letters*, xv. 10.)

"The understanding is born of God. It is not the product of the schools
in which human science is taught. I do not treat intellectual learning
with contempt, and if I had obtained a more elaborate education, it
would

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

surely have been an advantage to me, while my mind received the divine
gift; but it pleases God to turn the wisdom of this world into
foolishness, and to give His strength to the weak, so that all may bow
down before Him." (*Forty Questions*, xxxvii. 20.)

 

The reasoning intellect has nothing to do with originating perceptions,
but is used for the purpose of bringing the ideas received from the
clear perception of truth into a requisite form; and as the mind is then
in a higher than the normal condition, it often happens that on
returning to the lower state it does not understand, and perhaps not
even remember, the ideas which it expressed during that time.

"I say it before God, and testify before His judgment-seat, where
everything must appear, that I in my human self do not know what I shall
have to write; but whenever I am writing the Spirit dictates to me what
to write, and shows me all in such a wonderful clearness, that I often
do not know whether or not I am with my consciousness in this world. The
more I seek the more I find, and I am continually penetrating deeper; so
that it often seems to me as if my sinful person were too low and too
unworthy for the reception of knowledge of such high and exalted
mysteries; but in such moments the Spirit unfolds His banner and says to
me, 'Behold! in this shalt thou live eternally, and be crowned
therewith. Why art thou terrified?'" (*Letters*, ii. 10.)

"I might sometimes perhaps write more elegantly, and in a better style,
but the fire burning within me is driving me on. My hand and my pen must
then seek to follow the thoughts as well as they can. The inspiration
comes like a shower of rain. That which I catch I have. If it were
possible to grasp and describe all that I perceive, then would my
writings be more explicit." (*Letters*, X. 45.)

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

From this it appears that truly inspired writings are quite different
from those produced by ordinary mediumship; because in the former
instance the seer perceives the truths which he is to express, while in
the latter case the medium is either an unconscious machine, or feels an
inspiration without knowing the nature of the source from which that
inspiration comes.

It is also not to be supposed that any person, as long as he inhabits a
physical body, and is to a certain extent dependent on external
conditions, should be at all times in that superior spiritual state
necessary to realise fully the eternal glory of the kingdom of God; but
that there must necessarily be a return of the lower state of
consciousness. Boehme says—

"As the lightning-flash arises within the centre, and disappears again
in a moment, so it is with the soul. When during her battle she
penetrates through the clouds, she sees the Godhead like a flash of
light; but the clouds of sin soon gather again around her and cover her
sight." (*Aurora*, xi. 76.)

"The soul has her origin partly from nature and partly from God. There
is good and evil in nature; and man, by means of his sinful tendencies,
has become subject to that which is fiery in nature, so that his soul
becomes daily and hourly spotted with sin. Therefore the power of the
soul to recognise eternal truth is not perfect." (*Aurora*, Preface,
100)

"As long as God watches over me with His protecting hand, I understand
that which I have written; but whenever He becomes hidden before me, I
then no longer recognise my own work, and this proves to me the
impossibility of penetrating into the mysteries of God unless by the aid
of His Spirit." (*Letters*, x. 29.)

 

If the carnal mind cannot understand the language of the Spirit, how
then could that mind arrive at a true recognition of the truth by its
own reasoning, that reasoning

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

leading at best only to an opinion of what the truth cannot be, but not
to a perception of what it is? Those who wish to understand such
writings must enter into the spirit of the author. Mere reasoning will
not serve the purpose.

"These writings transcend the horizon of intellectual reasoning, and
their interior meaning cannot be grasped by speculation and
argumentation; but it requires the mind to be in a godlike state, and
illumined by the Spirit of Truth." (*Letters*, xviii. 9.) 1

"If any one desires to follow me in the science of the things whereof I
write, let him follow rather the flights of my soul than those of my
pen." (*Three Principles*, xxiv. 2.)

 

This flight into the regions of eternal freedom is impossible for him
who is bound by the chains that are forged by the illusion of "self,"
and is therefore unattainable to those who seek for a knowledge of God
with the object of gratifying their curiosity, or with any other selfish
object in view.

"Above all, examine yourself for what purpose you desire to know the
mysteries of God, and whether you are prepared to employ that which will
be received for the glorification of God and to the benefit of your
neighbour. Are you ready to die entirely to your own selfish and earthly
will, and do you earnestly desire to become one with the Spirit? He who
has no such high purposes, and merely seeks for knowledge for the
gratification of self, or that he may be looked upon as something great
by the world, is not fit to receive such knowledge." (*Clavis*, ii. 3.)

1 "If you once understand the true meaning of what I have written, you
will then be released from the conflict of opinions and possess
self-knowledge; but, as a matter of course, this is not to be
accomplished by the mere reading of the letters, but by the living power
of the Spirit of Christ." (*Apologia*.)

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

Neither is such a state attained without a hard fight against the powers
of darkness.

"If any one desires to follow me, let him not be intoxicated by
terrestrial thoughts and desires, but girded with the sword of the
Spirit, because he will have to descend into a terrible depth, even into
the midst of the kingdom of hell. It indeed requires hard labour to
fight with the devil between heaven and hell, as he is a powerful lord.
During such battles I have often made many bitter experiences, which
filled my heart with sorrow. Often the sun has disappeared from my
sight, but then he rose again, and the oftener the sunset occurred, the
more beautiful, clear, and magnificent was the sunrise." (*Aurora*,
xiii. 20.)

He who desires nothing for himself, to him everything shall be given.
The infinite cannot be made to contract, to be comprehended by the
finite mind of man; but let the mind of man expand by the power of the
Spirit, and become conscious of its infinity, and it will then conceive
of infinite truth.

"Spiritual knowledge cannot be communicated from one intellect to
another, but must be sought for in the Spirit of God. Truly theosophical
writings will even to the intellect convey here and there a ray of
recognition; but if the reader is found worthy by God to have the divine
light kindled within his own soul, then will the inexpressible words of
God be heard by him." (*Letters*, lv. 8.)

"He who reads these writings and cannot understand them, should not
throw them aside, imagining that they can never be understood. He should
seek to change his will, and elevate his soul to God, asking Him for
grace and understanding, and then read again. He will then perceive more
truth than he did before, until at last the power of God will manifest
itself in him, and he will be drawn down into the depths, into the
supernatural foundation—

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

that is to say, into the eternal unity of God. Then will he hear actual
but inexpressible words of God,

which will conduct him through the divine radiation of the celestial
light, even within the grossest forms of terrestrial matter, and from
thence back again unto God; and the Spirit of God will search all things
in and with him." (*Clavis*, Preface, 5.) <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[47:1](ldjb04.htm#fr_0) At that time Boehme, like
other persons, mistook his terrestrial personality for his real self,
because he had not yet learned to know the God within his own heart, and
therefore he felt the insignificance of the former, if compared with the
grandeur of the universal power of <span id="page_48">p. 48</span> God
manifested in nature, until at last he awoke to a realisation of the
fact that the universal God and the God within his heart were one, and
that his own personality was merely one of millions of similar
instruments or organisms through which God is manifesting His power.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[48:1](ldjb04.htm#fr_1) The "devil" and the
"powers of darkness" are the perverted fiery will, with his evil
productions, originating from Lucifer, the "*Dhyan-Chohan*" of evil; the
greatest angel before he fell.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[49:1](ldjb04.htm#fr_2) "Rejoice and be glad, and
praise the Lord above all; for His name arises in glory above all the
mountains and hills. It grows up like a sprout and performs great
miracles. Who will hinder it?" (*Apologia*.)

<span id="fn_3"></span>[57:1](ldjb04.htm#fr_3) This may perhaps be also
expressed in the following words:—It is not the mortal intellect, but
the divinity in man, which is in possession of divine knowledge.... A
man knowing nothing of God, and having no faith in the power of anything
divine, which may become revealed in him, cannot be in possession of
divine self-knowledge; but if man, by being obedient to the law, enters
into a state of harmony and union with God, then may God become revealed
in him, and the mind being penetrated by the light of the divine spirit,
man may partake of the knowledge of divinity. In this way he may learn
all about everything in the three kingdoms; for the Spirit of God
pervades the All. Occult knowledge, therefore, does not consist in
gathering information or opinions from books and authorities, but its
foundation is the recognition of the divine will in man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Unity of the All](ldjb05)

</div>
