[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc16)  [Next](menc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 17

1\. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, 'When Shun went into the fields, he
cried out and wept towards the pitying heavens. Why did he cry out and
weep?' Mencius replied, 'He was dissatisfied, and full of earnest
desire.'

2\. Wan Chang said, 'When his parents love him, a son rejoices and
forgets them not. When his parents hate him, though they punish him, he
does not murmur. Was Shun then murmuring against his parents?' Mencius
answered, 'Ch'ang Hsî asked Kung-ming Kâo, saying, "As to Shun's going
into the fields, I have received your instructions, but I do not know
about his weeping and crying out to the pitying heavens and to his
parents." Kung-ming Kâo answered him, "You do not understand that
matter." Now, Kung-ming Kâo supposed that the heart of the filial son
could not be so free of sorrow. Shun would say, "I exert my strength to
cultivate the fields, but I am thereby only discharging my office as a
son. What can there be in me that my parents do not love me?"

3\. 'The Tî caused his own children, nine sons and two daughters, the
various officers, oxen and sheep, storehouses and granaries, all to be
prepared, to serve Shun amid the channelled fields. Of the scholars of
the kingdom there were multitudes who flocked to him. The sovereign
designed that Shun should superintend the kingdom along with him, and
then to transfer it to him entirely. But because his parents were not in
accord with him, he felt like a poor man who has nowhere to turn to.

4\. 'To be delighted in by all the scholars of the kingdom, is what men
desire, but it was not sufficient to remove the sorrow of Shun. The
possession of beauty is what men desire, and Shun had for his wives the
two daughters of the Tî, but this was not sufficient to remove his
sorrow. Riches are what men desire, and the kingdom was the rich
property of Shun, but this was not sufficient to remove his sorrow.
Honours are what men desire, and Shun had the dignity of being
sovereign, but this was not sufficient to remove his sorrow. The reason
why the being the object of men's delight, with the possession of
beauty, riches, and honours were not sufficient to remove his sorrow,
was that it could be removed only by his getting his parents to be in
accord with him.

5\. 'The desire of the child is towards his father and mother. When he
becomes conscious of the attractions of beauty, his desire is towards
young and beautiful women. When he comes to have a wife and children,
his desire is towards them. When he obtains office, his desire is
towards his sovereign:-- if he cannot get the regard of his sovereign,
he burns within. But the man of great filial piety, to the end of his
life, has his desire towards his parents. In the great Shun I see the
case of one whose desire at fifty year's was towards them.'

1\. Wan Chang asked Mencius, saying, 'It is said in the Book of Poetry,

> "In marrying a wife, how ought a man to proceed?  
> He must inform his parents."

If the rule be indeed as here expressed, no man ought to have
illustrated it so well as Shun. How was it that Shun's marriage took
place without his informing his parents?' Mencius replied, 'If he had
informed them, he would not have been able to marry. That male and
female should dwell together, is the greatest of human relations. If
Shun had informed his parents, he must have made void this greatest of
human relations, thereby incurring their resentment. On this account, he
did not inform them!

2\. Wan Chang said, 'As to Shun's marrying without informing his
parents, I have heard your instructions; but how was it that the Tî Yâo
gave him his daughters as wives without informing Shun's parents?'
Mencius said, 'The Tî also knew that if he informed them, he could not
marry his daughters to him.'

3\. Wan Chang said, 'His parents set Shun to repair a granary, to which,
the ladder having been removed, Kû-sâu set fire. They also made him dig
a well. He got out, but they, not knowing that, proceeded to cover him
up. Hsiang said, "Of the scheme to cover up the city-forming prince, the
merit is all mine. Let my parents have his oxen and sheep. Let them have
his storehouses and granaries. His shield and spear shall be mine. His
lute shall be mine. His bow shall be mine. His two wives I shall make
attend for me to my bed." Hsiang then went away into Shun's palace, and
there was Shun on his couch playing on his lute. Hsiang said, "I am come
simply because I was thinking anxiously about you." At the same time, he
blushed deeply. Shun said to him, "There are all my officers:-- do you
undertake the government of them for me." I do not know whether Shun was
ignorant of Hsiang's wishing to kill him.' Mencius answered, 'How could
he be ignorant of that? But when Hsiang was sorrowful, he was also
sorrowful; when Hsiang was joyful, he was also joyful.'

4\. Chang said, 'In that case, then, did not Shun rejoice
hypocritically?' Mencius replied, 'No. Formerly, some one sent a present
of a live fish to Tsze-ch'an of Chang. Tsze-ch'an ordered his
pond-keeper to keep it in the pond, but that officer cooked it, and
reported the execution of his commission, saying, "When I first let it
go, it embarrassed. In a little while, it seemed to be somewhat at ease,
then it swam away joyfully." Tsze-ch'an observed, "It had got into its
element! It had got into its element!" The pond-keeper then went out and
said, "Who calls Tsze-ch'an a wise man? After I had cooked and eaten the
fish, he says, "It had got into its element! It had got into its
element!" Thus a superior man may be imposed on by what seems to be as
it ought to be, but he cannot be entrapped by what is contrary to right
principle. Hsiang came in the way in which the love of his elder brother
would have made him come; therefore Shun sincerely believed him, and
rejoiced. What hypocrisy was there?'

1\. Wan Chang said, 'Hsiang made it his daily business to slay Shun.
When Shun was made sovereign, how was it that he only banished him?'
Mencius said, 'He raised him to be a prince. Some supposed that it was
banishing him?'

2\. Wan Chang said, 'Shun banished the superintendent of works to
Yû-châu; he sent away Hwan-tâu to the mountain Ch'ung; he slew the
prince of San-miâo in San-wei; and he imprisoned Kwân on the mountain
Yü. When the crimes of those four were thus punished, the whole kingdom
acquiesced:-- it was a cutting off of men who were destitute of
benevolence. But Hsiang was of all men the most destitute of
benevolence, and Shun raised him to be the prince of Yû-pî;-- of what
crimes had the people of Yû-pî been guilty? Does a benevolent man really
act thus? In the case of other men, he cut them off; in the case of his
brother, he raised him to be a prince.' Mencius replied, 'A benevolent
man does not lay up anger, nor cherish resentment against his brother,
but only regards him with affection and love. Regarding him with
affection, he wishes him to be honourable: regarding him with love, he
wishes him to be rich. The appointment of Hsiang to be the prince of
Yû-pî was to enrich and ennoble him. If while Shun himself was
sovereign, his brother had been a common man, could he have been said to
regard him with affection and love?'

3\. Wan Chang said, 'I venture to ask what you mean by saying that some
supposed that it was a banishing of Hsiang?' Mencius replied, 'Hsiang
could do nothing in his State. The Son of Heaven appointed an officer to
administer its government, and to pay over its revenues to him. This
treatment of him led to its being said that he was banished. How indeed
could he be allowed the means of oppressing the people? Nevertheless,
Shun wished to be continually seeing him, and by this arrangement, he
came incessantly to court, as is signified in that expression-- "He did
not wait for the rendering of tribute, or affairs of government, to
receive the prince of Yû-pî.

1\. Hsien-ch'iû Mang asked Mencius, saying, 'There is the saying, "A
scholar of complete virtue may not be employed as a minister by his
sovereign, nor treated as a son by his father. Shun stood with his face
to the south, and Yâo, at the head of all the princes, appeared before
him at court with his face to the north. Kû-sâu also did the same. When
Shun saw Kû-sâu, his countenance became discomposed. Confucius said, At
this time, in what a perilous condition was the kingdom! Its state was
indeed unsettled."-- I do not know whether what is here said really took
place.' Mencius replied, 'No. These are not the words of a superior man.
They are the sayings of an uncultivated person of the east of Ch'î. When
Yâo was old, Shun was associated with him in the government. It is said
in the Canon of Yâo, "After twenty and eight years, the Highly
Meritorious one deceased. The people acted as if they were mourning for
a father or mother for three years, and up to the borders of the four
seas every sound of music was hushed." Confucius said, "There are not
two suns in the sky, nor two sovereigns over the people." Shun having
been sovereign, and, moreover, leading on all the princes to observe the
three years' mourning for Yâo, there would have been in this case two
sovereigns.'

2\. Hsien-ch'iû Mang said, 'On the point of Shun's not treating Yâo as a
minister, I have received your instructions. But it is said in the Book
of Poetry,

> Under the whole heaven,  
> Every spot is the sovereign's ground;  
> To the borders of the land,  
> Every individual is the sovereign's minister;"

-- and Shun had become sovereign. I venture to ask how it was that
Kû-sâu was not one of his ministers.' Mencius answered, 'That ode is not
to be understood in that way:-- it speaks of being laboriously engaged
in the sovereign's business, so as not to be able to nourish one's
parents, as if the author said, "This is all the sovereign's business,
and how is it that I alone am supposed to have ability, and am made to
toil in it?" Therefore, those who explain the odes, may not insist on
one term so as to do violence to a sentence, nor on a sentence so as to
do violence to the general scope. They must try with their thoughts to
meet that scope, and then we shall apprehend it. If we simply take
single sentences, there is that in the ode called "The Milky Way,"--

> Of the black-haired people of the remnant of Châu,  
> There is not half a one left."

If it had been really as thus expressed, then not an individual of the
people of Châu was left.

3\. 'Of all which a filial son can attain to, there is nothing greater
than his honouring his parents. And of what can be attained to in the
honouring one's parents, there is nothing greater than the nourishing
them with the whole kingdom. Kû-sâu was the father of the sovereign;--
this was the height of honour. Shun nourished him with the whole
kingdom;-- this was the height of nourishing. In this was verified the
sentiment in the Book of Poetry,

> "Ever cherishing filial thoughts,  
> Those filial thoughts became an example to after ages."

4\. 'It is said in the Book of History, "Reverently performing his
duties, he waited on Kû-sâu, and was full of veneration and awe. Kû-sâu
also believed him and conformed to virtue."-- This is the true case of
the scholar of complete virtue not being treated as a son by his
father.'
