[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc13)  [Next](menc15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 14

Mencius said, 'The path of duty lies in what is near, and men seek for
it in what is remote. The work of duty lies in what is easy, and men
seek for it in what is difficult. If each man would love his parents and
show the due respect to his elders, the whole land would enjoy
tranquillity.'

1\. Mencius said, 'When those occupying inferior situations do not
obtain the confidence of the sovereign, they cannot succeed in governing
the people. There is a way to obtain the confidence of the sovereign:--
if one is not trusted by his friends, he will not obtain the confidence
of his sovereign. There is a way of being trusted by one's friends:-- if
one do not serve his parents so as to make them pleased, he will not be
trusted by his friends. There is a way to make one's parents pleased:--
if one, on turning his thoughts inwards, finds a want of sincerity, he
will not give pleasure to his parents. There is a way to the attainment
of sincerity in one's self:-- if a man do not understand what is good,
he will not attain sincerity in himself.

2\. 'Therefore, sincerity is the way of Heaven. To think how to be
sincere is the way of man.

3\. Never has there been one possessed of complete sincerity, who did
not move others. Never has there been one who had not sincerity who was
able to move others.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Po-Î, that he might avoid Châ'u, was dwelling on the
coast of the northern sea. When he heard of the rise of king Wan, he
roused himself, and said, "Why should I not go and follow him? I have
heard that the chief of the West knows well how to nourish the old."
T'âi-kung, that he might avoid Châu, was dwelling on the coast of the
eastern sea. When he heard of the rise of king Wan, he roused himself,
and said, "Why should I not go and follow him? I have heard that the
chief of the West knows well how to nourish the old."

2\. 'Those two old men were the greatest old men of the kingdom. When
they came to follow king Wan, it was the fathers of the kingdom coming
to follow him. When the fathers of the kingdom joined him, how could the
sons go to any other?

3\. 'Were any of the princes to practise the government of king Wan,
within seven years he would be sure to be giving laws to the kingdom.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Ch'iû acted as chief officer to the head of the Chî
family, whose evil ways he was unable to change, while he exacted from
the people double the grain formerly paid. Confucius said, "He is no
disciple of mine. Little children, beat the drum and assail him."

2\. 'Looking at the subject from this case, we perceive that when a
prince was not practising benevolent government, all his ministers who
enriched him were rejected by Confucius:-- how much more would he have
rejected those who are vehement to fight for their prince! When
contentions about territory are the ground on which they fight, they
slaughter men till the fields are filled with them. When some struggle
for a city is the ground on which they fight, they slaughter men till
the city is filled with them. This is what is called "leading on the
land to devour human flesh." Death is not enough for such a crime.

3\. 'Therefore, those who are skilful to fight should suffer the highest
punishment. Next to them should be punished those who unite some princes
in leagues against others; and next to them, those who take in grassy
commons, imposing the cultivation of the ground on the people.'

2\. 'Listen to a man's words and look at the pupil of his eye. How can a
man conceal his character?'

Mencius said, 'The respectful do not despise others. The economical do
not plunder others. The prince who treats men with despite and plunders
them, is only afraid that they may not prove obedient to him:-- how can
he be regarded as respectful or economical? How can respectfulness and
economy be made out of tones of the voice, and a smiling manner?'

1\. Shun-yü K'wan said, 'Is it the rule that males and females shall not
allow their hands to touch in giving or receiving anything?' Mencius
replied, 'It is the rule.' K'wan asked, 'If a man's sister-in-law be
drowning, shall he rescue her with his hand?' Mencius said, 'He who
would not so rescue the drowning woman is a wolf. For males and females
not to allow their hands to touch in giving and receiving is the general
rule; when a sister-in-law is drowning, to rescue her with the hand is a
peculiar exigency.'

2\. K'wan said, 'The whole kingdom is drowning. How strange it is that
you will not rescue it!'

3\. Mencius answered, 'A drowning kingdom must be rescued with right
principles, as a drowning sister-in-law has to be rescued with the hand.
Do you wish me to rescue the kingdom with my hand?'

2\. Mencius replied, 'The circumstances of the case forbid its being
done. The teacher must inculcate what is correct. When he inculcates
what is correct, and his lessons are not practised, he follows them up
with being angry. When he follows them up with being angry, then,
contrary to what should be, he is offended with his son. At the same
time, the pupil says, 'My master inculcates on me what is correct, and
he himself does not proceed in a correct path." The result of this is,
that father and son are offended with each other. When father and son
come to be offended with each other, the case is evil.

3\. 'The ancients exchanged sons, and one taught the son of another.

4\. 'Between father and son, there should be no reproving admonitions to
what is good. Such reproofs lead to alienation, and than alienation
there is nothing more inauspicious.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Of services, which is the greatest? The service of
parents is the greatest. Of charges, which is the greatest ? The charge
of one's self is the greatest. That those who do not fail to keep
themselves are able to serve their parents is what I have heard. But I
have never heard of any, who, having failed to keep themselves, were
able notwithstanding to serve their parents.

2\. 'There are many services, but the service of parents is the root of
all others. There are many charges, but the charge of one's self is the
root of all others.

3\. 'The philosopher Tsang, in nourishing Tsang Hsî, was always sure to
have wine and flesh provided. And when they were being removed, he would
ask respectfully to whom he should give what was left. If his father
asked whether there was anything left, he was sure to say, "There is."
After the death of Tsing Hsî, when Tsang Yüan came to nourish
Tsing-tsze, he was always sure to have wine and flesh provided. But when
the things were being removed, he did not ask to whom he should give
what was left, and if his father asked whether there was anything left,
he would answer "No;"-- intending to bring them in again. This was what
is called-- "nourishing the mouth and body." We may call Tsang-tsze's
practice-- "nourishing the will."

4\. 'To serve one's parents as Tsang-tsze served his, may be accepted as
flial piety.'

Mencius said, 'It is not enough to remonstrate with a sovereign on
account of the mal-employment of ministers, nor to blame errors of
government. It is only the great man who can rectify what is wrong in
the sovereign's mind. Let the prince be benevolent, and all his acts
will be benevolent. Let the prince be righteous, and all his acts will
be righteous. Let the prince be correct, and everything will be correct.
Once rectify the ruler, and the kingdom will be firmly settled.'

Mencius said, 'There are cases of praise which could not be expected,
and of reproach when the parties have been seeking to be perfect.'

1\. The disciple Yo-chang went in the train of Tsze-âo to Ch'î.

2\. He came to see Mencius, who said to him, 'Are you also come to see
me?' Yo-chang replied, 'Master, why do you speak such words?' 'How many
days have you been here?' asked Mencius. 'I came yesterday.' 'Yesterday!
Is it not with reason then that I thus speak?' 'My lodging-house was not
arranged.' 'Have you heard that a scholar's lodging-house must be
arranged before he visit his elder?'

3\. Yo-chang said, 'I have done wrong.'

Mencius, addressing the disciple Yo-chang, said to him, 'Your coming
here in the train of Tsze-âo was only because of the food and the drink.
I could not have thought that you, having learned the doctrine of the
ancients, would have acted with a view to eating and drinking.'

1\. Mencius said, 'There are three things which are unfilial, and to
have no posterity is the greatest of them.

2\. 'Shun married without informing his parents because of this,-- lest
he should have no posterity. Superior men consider that his doing so was
the same as if he had informed them.'

1\. Mencius said, 'The richest fruit of benevolence is this,-- the
service of one's parents. The richest fruit of righteousness is this,--
the obeying one's elder brothers.

2\. 'The richest fruit of wisdom is this,-- the knowing those two
things, and not departing from them. The richest fruit of propriety is
this,-- the ordering and adorning those two things. The richest fruit of
music is this,-- the rejoicing in those two things. When they are
rejoiced in, they grow. Growing, how can they be repressed? When they
come to this state that they cannot be repressed, then unconsciously the
feet begin to dance and the hands to move.'

2\. 'By Shun's completely fulfilling everything by which a parent could
be served, Kû-sâu was brought to find delight in what was good. When
Kû-sâu was brought to find that delight, the whole kingdom was
transformed. When Kû-sâu was brought to find that delight, all fathers
and sons in the kingdom were established in their respective duties.
This is called great filial piety.'
