[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc21)  [Next](menc23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 22

1\. Mencius said, 'It is not to be wondered at that the king is not
wise!

2\. 'Suppose the case of the most easily growing thing in the world;--
if you let it have one day's genial heat, and then expose it for ten
days to cold, it will not be able to grow. It is but seldom that I have
an audience of the king, and when I retire, there come all those who act
upon him like the cold. Though I succeed in bringing out some buds of
goodness, of what avail is it?

3\. 'Now chess-playing is but a small art, but without his whole mind
being given, and his will bent, to it, a man cannot succeed at it. Chess
Ch'iû is the best chess-player in all the kingdom. Suppose that he is
teaching two men to play.-- The one gives to the subject his whole mind
and bends to it all his will, doing nothing but listening to Chess
Ch'iû. The other, although he seems to be listening to him, has his
whole mind running on a swan which he thinks is approaching, and wishes
to bend his bow, adjust the string to the arrow, and shoot it. Although
he is learning along with the other, he does not come up to him. Why?--
because his intelligence is not equal? Not so.'

1\. Mencius said, 'I like fish, and I also like bear's paws. If I cannot
have the two together, I will let the fish go, and take the bear's paws.
So, I like life, and I also like righteousness. If I cannot keep the two
together, I will let life go, and choose righteousness.

2\. 'I like life indeed, but there is that which I like more than life,
and therefore, I will not seek to possess it by any improper ways. I
dislike death indeed, but there is that which I dislike more than death,
and therefore there are occasions when I will not avoid danger.

3\. 'If among the things which man likes there were nothing which he
liked more than life, why should he not use every means by which he
could preserve it? If among the things which man dislikes there were
nothing which he disliked more than death, why should he not do
everything by which he could avoid danger?

4\. 'There are cases when men by a certain course might preserve life,
and they do not employ it; when by certain things they might avoid
danger, and they will not do them.

5\. 'Therefore, men have that which they like more than life, and that
which they dislike more than death. They are not men of distinguished
talents and virtue only who have this mental nature. All men have it;
what belongs to such men is simply that they do not lose it.

6\. 'Here are a small basket of rice and a platter of soup, and the case
is one in which the getting them will preserve life, and the want of
them will be death;-- if they are offered with an insulting voice, even
a tramper will not receive them, or if you first tread upon them, even a
beggar will not stoop to take them.

7\. 'And yet a man will accept of ten thousand chung, without any
consideration of propriety or righteousness. What can the ten thousand
chung add to him? When he takes them, is it not that he may obtain
beautiful mansions, that he may secure the services of wives and
concubines, or that the poor and needy of his acquaintance may be helped
by him?

8\. 'In the former case the offered bounty was not received, though it
would have saved from death, and now the emolument is taken for the sake
of beautiful mansions. The bounty that would have preserved from death
was not received, and the emolument is taken to get the service of wives
and concubines. The bounty that would have saved from death was not
received, and the emolument is taken that one's poor and needy
acquaintance may be helped by him. Was it then not possible likewise to
decline this? This is a case of what is called-- "Losing the proper
nature of one's mind."'

1\. Mencius said, 'Benevolence is man's mind, and righteousness is man's
path.

2\. 'How lamentable is it to neglect the path and not pursue it, to lose
this mind and not know to seek it again!

3\. 'When men's fowls and dogs are lost, they know to seek for them
again, but they lose their mind, and do not know to seek for it.

4\. 'The great end of learning is nothing else but to seek for the lost
mind.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Here is a man whose fourth finger is bent and cannot
be stretched out straight. It is not painful, nor does it incommode his
business, and yet if there be any one who can make it straight, he will
not think the way from Ch'in to Ch'û far to go to him; because his
finger is not like the finger of other people.

2\. 'When a man's finger is not like those of other people, he knows to
feel dissatisfied, but if his mind be not like that of other people, he
does not know to feel dissatisfaction. This is called-- "Ignorance of
the relative importance of things."'

Mencius said, 'Anybody who wishes to cultivate the t'ung or the tsze,
which may be grasped with both hands, perhaps with one, knows by what
means to nourish them. In the case of their own persons, men do not know
by what means to nourish them. Is it to be supposed that their regard of
their own persons is inferior to their regard for a t'ung or tsze? Their
want of reflection is extreme.'

1\. Mencius said, 'There is no part of himself which a man does not
love, and as he loves all, so he must nourish all. There is not an inch
of skin which he does not love, and so there is not an inch of skin
which he will not nourish. For examining whether his way of nourishing
be good or not, what other rule is there but this, that he determine by
reflecting on himself where it should be applied?

2\. 'Some parts of the body are noble, and some ignoble; some great, and
some small. The great must not be injured for the small, nor the noble
for the ignoble. He who nourishes the little belonging to him is a
little man, and he who nourishes the great is a great man.

3\. 'Here is a plantation-keeper, who neglects his wû and chiâ, and
cultivates his sour jujube-trees;-- he is a poor plantation-keeper.

4\. 'He who nourishes one of his fingers, neglecting his shoulders or
his back, without knowing that he is doing so, is a man who resembles a
hurried wolf.

5\. 'A man who only eats and drinks is counted mean by others;-- because
he nourishes what is little to the neglect of what is great.

6\. 'If a man, fond of his eating and drinking, were not to neglect what
is of more importance, how should his mouth and belly be considered as
no more than an inch of skin?'

1\. The disciple Kung-tû said, 'All are equally men, but some are great
men, and some are little men;-- how is this?' Mencius replied, 'Those
who follow that part of themselves which is great are great men; those
who follow that part which is little are little men.'

2\. Kung-tû pursued, 'All are equally men, but some follow that part of
themselves which is great, and some follow that part which is little;--
how is this?' Mencius answered, 'The senses of hearing and seeing do not
think, and are obscured by external things. When one thing comes into
contact with another, as a matter of course it leads it away. To the
mind belongs the office of thinking. By thinking, it gets the right view
of things; by neglecting to think, it fails to do this. These-- the
senses and the mind-- are what Heaven has given to us. Let a man first
stand fast in the supremacy of the nobler part of his constitution, and
the inferior part will not be able to take it from him. It is simply
this which makes the great man.'

1\. Mencius said, 'There is a nobility of Heaven, and there is a
nobility of man. Benevolence, righteousness, self-consecration, and
fidelity, with unwearied joy in these virtues;-- these constitute the
nobility of Heaven. To be a kung, a ch'ing, or a tâ-fû;-- this
constitutes the nobility of man.

2\. 'The men of antiquity cultivated their nobility of Heaven, and the
nobility of man came to them in its train.

3\. 'The men of the present day cultivate their nobility of Heaven in
order to seek for the nobility of man, and when they have obtained that,
they throw away the other:-- their delusion is extreme. The issue is
simply this, that they must lose that nobility of man as well.'

2\. 'The honour which men confer is not good honour. Those whom Châo the
Great ennobles he can make mean again.

3\. 'It is said in the Book of Poetry,

> "He has filled us with his wine,  
> He has satiated us with his goodness."

"Satiated us with his goodness," that is, satiated us with benevolence
and righteousness, and he who is so satiated, consequently, does not
wish for the fat meat and fine millet of men. A good reputation and
far-reaching praise fall to him, and he does not desire the elegant
embroidered garments of men.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Benevolence subdues its opposite just as water
subdues fire. Those, however, who now-a-days practise benevolence do it
as if with one cup of water they could save a whole waggon-load of fuel
which was on fire, and when the flames were not extinguished, were to
say that water cannot subdue fire. This conduct, moreover, greatly
encourages those who are not benevolent.

2\. 'The final issue will simply be this-- the loss of that small amount
of benevolence.'

2\. 'A master-workman, in teaching others, uses the compass and square,
and his pupils do the same.'
