[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](menc24)  [Next](menc26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Mencius Chapter 25

1\. Mencius said, 'He who has exhausted all his mental constitution
knows his nature. Knowing his nature, he knows Heaven.

2\. 'To preserve one's mental constitution, and nourish one's nature, is
the way to serve Heaven.

3\. 'When neither a premature death nor long life causes a man any
double-mindedness, but he waits in the cultivation of his personal
character for whatever issue;-- this is the way in which he establishes
his Heaven-ordained being.'

1\. Mencius said, 'There is an appointment for everything. A man should
receive submissively what may be correctly ascribed thereto.

2\. 'Therefore, he who has the true idea of what is Heaven's appointment
will not stand beneath a precipitous wall.

3\. 'Death sustained in the discharge of one's duties may correctly be
ascribed to the appointment of Heaven.

4\. 'Death under handcuffs and fetters cannot correctly be so ascribed.'

1\. Mencius said, 'When we get by our seeking and lose by our
neglecting;-- in that case seeking is of use to getting, and the things
sought for are those which are in ourselves.

2\. 'When the seeking is according to the proper course, and the getting
is only as appointed;-- in that case the seeking is of no use to
getting, and the things sought are without ourselves.'

1\. Mencius said, 'All things are already complete in us.

2\. 'There is no greater delight than to be conscious of sincerity on
self-examination.

3\. 'If one acts with a vigorous effort at the law of reciprocity, when
he seeks for the realization of perfect virtue, nothing can be closer
than his approximation to it.'

2\. 'Those who form contrivances and versatile schemes distinguished for
their artfulness, do not allow their sense of shame to come into action.

3\. 'When one differs from other men in not having this sense of shame,
what will he have in common with them?'

Mencius said, 'The able and virtuous monarchs of antiquity loved virtue
and forgot their power. And shall an exception be made of the able and
virtuous scholars of antiquity, that they did not do the same? They
delighted in their own principles, and were oblivious of the power of
princes. Therefore, if kings and dukes did not show the utmost respect,
and observe all forms of ceremony, they were not permitted to come
frequently and visit them. If they thus found it not in their power to
pay them frequent visits, how much less could they get to employ them as
ministers?'

1\. Mencius said to Sung Kâu-ch'ien, 'Are you fond, Sir, of travelling
to the different courts? I will tell you about such travelling.

2\. 'If a prince acknowledge you and follow your counsels, be perfectly
satisfied. If no one do so, be the same.'

3\. Kâu-ch'ien said, 'What is to be done to secure this perfect
satisfaction?' Mencius replied, 'Honour virtue and delight in
righteousness, and so you may always be perfectly satisfied.

4\. 'Therefore, a scholar, though poor, does not let go his
righteousness; though prosperous, he does not leave his own path.

5\. 'Poor and not letting righteousness go;-- it is thus that the
scholar holds possession of himself. Prosperous and not leaving the
proper path;-- it is thus that the expectations of the people from him
are not disappointed.

6\. 'When the men of antiquity realized their wishes, benefits were
conferred by them on the people. If they did not realize their wishes,
they cultivated their personal character, and became illustrious in the
world. If poor, they attended to their own virtue in solitude; if
advanced to dignity, they made the whole kingdom virtuous as well.'

Mencius said, 'The mass of men wait for a king Wan, and then they will
receive a rousing impulse. Scholars distinguished from the mass, without
a king Wan, rouse themselves.'

Mencius said, 'Add to a man the families of Han and Wei. If he then look
upon himself without being elated, he is far beyond the mass of men.'

Mencius said, 'Let the people be employed in the way which is intended
to secure their ease, and though they be toiled, they will not murmur.
Let them be put to death in the way which is intended to preserve their
lives, and though they die, they will not murmur at him who puts them to
death.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Under a chief, leading all the princes, the people
look brisk and cheerful. Under a true sovereign, they have an air of
deep contentment.

2\. 'Though he slay them, they do not murmur. When he benefits them,
they do not think of his merit. From day to day they make progress
towards what is good, without knowing who makes them do so.

3\. 'Wherever the superior man passes through, transformation follows;
wherever he abides, his influence is of a spiritual nature. It flows
abroad, above and beneath, like that of Heaven and Earth. How can it be
said that he mends society but in a small way!'

1\. Mencius said, 'Kindly words do not enter so deeply into men as a
reputation for kindness.

2\. 'Good government does not lay hold of the people so much as good
instructions.

3\. 'Good government is feared by the people, while good instructions
are loved by them. Good government gets the people's wealth, while good
instructions get their hearts.'

1\. Mencius said, 'The ability possessed by men without having been
acquired by learning is intuitive ability, and the knowledge possessed
by them without the exercise of thought is their intuitive knowledge.

2\. 'Children carried in the arms all know to love their parents, and
when they are grown a little, they all know to love their elder
brothers.

3\. 'Filial affection for parents is the working of benevolence. Respect
for elders is the working of righteousness. There is no other reason for
those feelings;-- they belong to all under heaven.'

Mencius said, 'When Shun was living amid the deep retired mountains,
dwelling with the trees and rocks, and wandering among the deer and
swine, the difference between him and the rude inhabitants of those
remote hills appeared very small. But when he heard a single good word,
or saw a single good action, he was like a stream or a river bursting
its banks, and flowing out in an irresistible flood.'

2\. 'They are the friendless minister and concubine's son, who keep
their hearts under a sense of peril, and use deep precautions against
calamity. On this account they become distinguished for their
intelligence.'

2\. 'There are ministers who seek the tranquillity of the State, and
find their pleasure in securing that tranquillity.

3\. 'There are those who are the people of Heaven. They, judging that,
if they were in office, they could carry out their principles,
throughout the kingdom, proceed so to carry them out.

4\. 'There are those who are great men. They rectify themselves and
others are rectified.'

2\. 'That his father and mother are both alive, and that the condition
of his brothers affords no cause for anxiety;-- this is one delight.

3\. 'That, when looking up, he has no occasion for shame before Heaven,
and, below, he has no occasion to blush before men;-- this is a second
delight.

4\. 'That he can get from the whole kingdom the most talented
individuals, and teach and nourish them;-- this is the third delight.

5\. 'The superior man has three things in which he delights, and to be
ruler over the kingdom is not one of them.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Wide territory and a numerous people are desired by
the superior man, but what he delights in is not here.

2\. 'To stand in the centre of the kingdom, and tranquillize the people
within the four seas;-- the superior man delights in this, but the
highest enjoyment of his nature is not here.

3\. What belongs by his nature to the superior man cannot be increased
by the largeness of his sphere of action, nor diminished by his dwelling
in poverty and retirement;-- for this reason that it is determinately
apportioned to him by Heaven.

4\. 'What belongs by his nature to the superior man are benevolence,
righteousness, propriety, and knowledge. These are rooted in his heart;
their growth and manifestation are a mild harmony appearing in the
countenance, a rich fullness in the back, and the character imparted to
the four limbs. Those limbs understand to arrange themselves, without
being told.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Po-î, that he might avoid Châu, was dwelling on the
coast of the northern sea when he heard of the rise of king Wan. He
roused himself and said, "Why should I not go and follow him? I have
heard that the chief of the West knows well how to nourish the old."
T'âi-kung, to avoid Châu, was dwelling on the coast of the eastern sea.
When he heard of the rise of king Wan, he said, "Why should I not go and
follow him? I have heard that the chief if the West knows well how to
nourish the old." If there were a prince in the kingdom, who knew well
how to nourish the old, all men of virtue would feel that he was the
proper object for them to gather to.

2\. 'Around the homestead with its five mâu, the space beneath the walls
was planted with mulberry trees, with which the women nourished
silkworms, and thus the old were able to have silk to wear. Each family
had five brood hens and two brood sows, which were kept to their
breeding seasons, and thus the old were able to have flesh to eat. The
husbandmen cultivated their farms of 100 mâu, and thus their families of
eight mouths were secured against want.

3\. 'The expression, "The chief of the West knows well how to nourish
the old," refers to his regulation of the fields and dwellings, his
teaching them to plant the mulberry and nourish those animals, and his
instructing the wives and children, so as to make them nourish their
aged. At fifty, warmth cannot be maintained without silks, and at
seventy flesh is necessary to satisfy the appetite. Persons not kept
warm nor supplied with food are said to be starved and famished, but
among the people of king Wan, there were no aged who were starved or
famished. This is the meaning of the expression in question.'

1\. Mencius said, 'Let it be seen to that their fields of grain and hemp
are well cultivated, and make the taxes on them light;-- so the people
may be made rich.

2\. 'Let it be seen to that the people use their resources of food
seasonably, and expend their wealth only on the prescribed ceremonies:--
so their wealth will be more than can be consumed.

3\. 'The people cannot live without water and fire, yet if you knock at
a man's door in the dusk of the evening, and ask for water and fire,
there is no man who will not give them, such is the abundance of these
things. A sage governs the kingdom so as to cause pulse and grain to be
as abundant as water and fire. When pulse and grain are as abundant as
water and fire, how shall the people be other than virtuous?'
