[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mst07)  [Next](mst09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0374517541/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Nostradamus, the Man Who Saw Through Time*, by Lee McCann \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

### CHAPTER SIX

### A Prophet's Eyry

NOSTRADAMUS HAD FOUND, up to this time, that a settled home life was
about the most unattainable of his ambitions. Yet each time that he
returned from his absence it had been with more acclaim and a wider, if
bitterly controversial reputation. Now, once again he settled down to
live quietly in Salon, surrounded by the people and things he loved.
More than ever he sought an uninterrupted family life and pursuit of the
profound studies that were beckoning him to their secret fascinations.

He fitted up the top floor of his home as a study and laboratory sacred
to himself, and prepared to enjoy long hours of solitary concentration
in the late hours of evening when the day's professional duties were
done, and his dearly loved family were abed. Here in this eyry he could
arrange his books and instruments, placed to his liking with scientific
nicety. His library must by this time have been considerable. From his
grandfathers he would have inherited *incunabula*, old treatises on
medicine, mathematics and astronomy. He

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

had added to these with books and manuscripts picked up here and there
in his travels. He watched the printers’ lists for new scientific works
that seemed worthwhile, and editions of the classics. Greek, Latin,
Hebrew and French, they stood in orderly array upon his shelves. Among
them was a large, square Bible, its pages softened with much handling.

Near a window of the study, where the light fell most clearly, was his
long work table on which were writing materials. Against the far wall
there was a bed which he occasionally used when the few hours before
dawn were all that was left of a night spent in study. Nostradamus, like
Edison, is said to have needed but little sleep, and to have found five
hours or less always sufficient. A small, but for its time, modern and
well-equipped laboratory occupied part of the space in this private
haunt. Its charcoal brazier, alembic, retorts, and chemicals permitted
him to compound some of his prescription needs, and if he wished, to
carry out some research. Hour-glasses in several sizes stood about,
including a large twelve-hour time-keeper and a small one registering
the half-hour, useful in timing chemical experiments. A fine astrolabe
spoke eloquently of the doctor's continued interest in astronomy.
Nostradamus could afford to indulge his taste for the best in scientific
equipment. His patronage had been for a long time very large and
wealthy. He gave liberally to charity and to the Church, but he lived
simply by preference, and had plenty of income to indulge his interests
and hobbies.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

Inconspicuous in a corner, though startling to a beholder, stood a
tripod of solid brass which might have graced the mysterious rituals of
the Pythoness of Delphi. This was the "*selle d'airain*" of his first
quatrain, upon which, he tells us, he sat when in prophetic trance. On
the wall hung a mirror of soft-toned old glass in a gilded Italian
frame. Some said it was a magic mirror in which he saw his visions.
Others said he saw them in the large, gleaming copper bowl which was
also a part of the room's furnishings and which, the whispers told, he
filled to the brim with water for his occult ceremonies.

Among all of these practical furnishings there would have been, as there
always are, little personal things which he liked having near him and
looking at sometimes when he worked. Such as, perhaps, a childish
drawing by young César, who turned out in later years to be a very good
painter and sculptor. Perhaps there were also mementos of his
grandfathers. Some of the things in this room would be gifts from
wealthy patients. He had received many handsome presents from the time
of his young days when he first fought the plague. After he became
famous as a prophet gifts multiplied *ad infinitum*. From Delphi to
Nostradamus, all great oracles have been loaded with gifts, the general
idea being the hope that the favors of destiny might be commensurate
with the offerings.

About the study clung the dry, pungent odors of blended herbs, of which
a few clusters were visible. The rest, powdered or distilled for use,
filled a variety

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

of decorative earthenware jars. Sometimes a fresher fragrance gave its
odor to the room. This was when Anne Nostradamus would climb the steep
flights of narrow stairs to bring a jar of roses in her arms from her
garden.

Here in his high retreat Nostradamus began enjoyably to burn the
midnight oil to the scandal of the town. Late hours have long been
associated in simple minds with sin and sorcery. The country town of
Salon, where all knew that the Lord made the night for sleeping, to say
nothing of the high cost of candles, was early and suspiciously
conscious of the strange nocturnal habits of its celebrity. Nostradamus
had come to this town, in part, to escape from the enmity and envy of
powerful personalities in the large cities. Here he had thought that he
would be entirely free. But he found out that life had its drawbacks in
this place too. Because he was the one illustrious personage in its
small midst, everything he did and all that could be found out about him
fascinated the townspeople. Their desire for excitement fed on his
doings and, as in all little towns, they watched and pried and gossiped.
Who were his grand visitors, how many litters and blooded horses stood
outside his house, what did he eat, where did his wife go, what did she
pay for her clothes, and WHY did he sit up all night? Why couldn't he go
to bed like a Christian? Was there truth in what some people said, that
he trafficked in magic? One should not, of course, say too much, for he
had brought prosperity to the town.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

The talk and rumors kept up, in spite of the fact that the town was both
fond and proud of him. Nostradamus is said to have been not too happy
over all this. He had endless patience over anything related to his
work, but he was psychically thin-skinned and he had an irritable side.
He was hurt over the suspicions and gossip of the townspeople who owed
him so much. After the vicious accusations spread by his enemies, he
became more taciturn, though he still talked brilliantly in sympathetic
company. There were in Salon some charming, cultivated families, such as
that of the Sieur de Condoulet, with whom he and his wife were on terms
of intimacy. But he felt increasingly drawn to solitude and research.

His growing family, too, demanded more of his time and interest. Five
children, two boys and three girls, were born after César. The dates of
their births are not known, but Michel, Charles, Magdeleine, Diane and
Anne arrived in due season to add their charms of childhood to the home.
In his will Magdeleine is favored above the other girls to the extent of
a hundred écus above their portions. No reason for this is given, but
there must have been some ill health or handicap which required
particular provision. It would not have been like Nostradamus to play
favorites.

One pleasant day among the calls the doctor received was a social one
from the scholarly magistrate of the town of Beaune, Doctor Jean-Ayme de
Chavigny. He introduced himself and mentioned a number of mutual friends
in Provence, and expressed his deep

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

admiration for the doctor's achievements and all that he had heard of
him. Nostradamus was delightfully impressed with his visitor's dignified
manner and intelligent talk.

"Doctor Nostradamus," Chavigny said, "I have come for something more
than the great pleasure of meeting you. I want to study with you."

"To study with me!" the doctor echoed in surprise. Not since his days at
Montpellier had he taught. "To study what?" he asked.

"I should like to learn something of your wisdom which seems to me to be
beyond that of other men," Chavigny told him. "I have my degrees as
Doctor of Law and Doctor of Theology. I have been a student all my life,
which should be some preparation. I desire to continue studying,
particularly those things which will give me a deeper insight into the
mysteries of existence. I have never studied astronomy, except
superficially. And I think that I might also find the higher branches of
mathematics interesting. But if you will become my master, then I shall
leave the guidance of my studies to you."

Pleased, though hesitant at first, the doctor was gradually won over to
the idea, because he already liked Chavigny. The doctor agreed to plan
and supervise some studies for the magistrate who was to see him
reporting progress and receiving instruction from time to time. It was
the beginning of a fine and lasting friendship. How deeply Doctor
Chavigny penetrated into the mysteries of Nostradamus’ gifts, or if he
had

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

some psychic flair of his own, is not known. But the prophet's eyry soon
became familiar territory to him, and more than any other friend he was
received into his confidence. Unlike the friendship with Scaliger, no
disagreements marred the even tenor of the association, unbroken to the
death of Nostradamus.

It is supposedly in this period of his life that Nostradamus took up for
the first time the study of astrology. Garencières says that he did so
because he thought it might throw some additional light on the diagnosis
of disease. This would seem to be an unlikely reason. Medicine had all
too lately begun to emerge from its long bondage to superstition in
which a misapplied astrology had played its part. The pathology of the
humors, so recently blasted by Paracelsus, had its foundation in the
elemental divisions of astrology, as did many ideas of treatment then
being discarded. Nostradamus was too modern, too much the scientist
alive to the trends of the times to have taken up this study for medical
reasons.

From Belshazzar to Hitler, astrology has been the esoteric science of
courts and kings. Its oldest traditions are linked with governments and
their rulers. This was still true in the sixteenth century when there
was no monarch of importance but had his court astrologer. Where royalty
led, the courtiers followed. What the nobles did, the common people
imitated. The sixteenth century was permeated with astrological belief
and practice. No picture of the Renaissance is complete which leaves out
the overwhelming desire of the

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

age to penetrate the laws of destiny, to discover and manipulate fate
through prevision.

Astrology as much as astronomy was then the science of intellectuals. It
had not become "The unwise daughter of a wise mother." The two were
still sisters in prestige. Scholarship in one was incomplete without
knowledge of the other. Nostradamus had come to the study late because
his life had been filled with other activities. But keen astronomer that
he was, he would quite naturally have wished to round out his education
with knowledge of the sister science. Not to know it was a reflection on
his scholarship.

Nostradamus, no more than a man of today, could not be invited to dinner
without having his neighbor at table complain of what Saturn was doing
to him and lament that it would be another year before Jupiter helped
him financially. Someone, too, would be certain to ask what did Doctor
Nostradamus think of the political effects of the oncoming eclipse.
Doctor Nostradamus might choose to discount astrology, but it did not do
for him to be ignorant of it.

Nostradamus did not need astrology for his prophetic work. The
completeness of his extra-dimensional vision gave him what no astrologer
could ever find in his charts. There is no record of any horoscopes cast
by Nostradamus, although he may have occasionally made such charts at
the request of patrons and as a personal hobby. His patients may have
asked him for decumbency charts, for much was made of these horoscopes
through the seventeenth century. They

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

were horoscopes of illness, erected for the time when the person was
first taken ill. From such a chart the doctor or astrologer deduced not
only the nature of the illness, but its critical period, duration and
chance of survival. People liked the charts because they flattered their
egos and they could talk about them. "My astrologer said he never before
saw anyone live through such a frightful position of Mars." It was just
the way people talk of their operations today.

Nostradamus, besides his desire to be acquainted with astrology, to test
it and see for himself how much truth it contained, had another reason,
a very practical one, for establishing a reputation as an astrologer.
This motive was self-protective. He was already deep in the psychic
experiences which were to result in his written prophecies. Perhaps he
was even then toying with the idea of eventually publishing some of
them. He knew he would be treading on dangerous ground, and that he
might risk the accusation of sorcery by the Inquisition. Astrology was
more respectable than other kinds of prophecy. It was called The
Celestial Science. It was patronized by the best people and the most
learned minds, many of whom were high within the Church. If Nostradamus
could launch his prophecies under the protective coloration of
astrology, he had a better chance to escape persecution than if he put
them out as revelation only. Such would be the wise course to follow, at
least until he had tested public and authoritative reaction. Which is
exactly what he did.

Queen Catherine was a sincere believer in astrology

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

and came of a family who had employed court astrologers for generations.
She had brought Ruggiero, the son of her father's astrologer, to France
to act as her adviser. Later, after the king's death, he had apartments
in the palace connected with the queen's by a private stairway, and
still later she built an observatory for him at Blois and erected a
column to honor him in Paris. Canny Catherine was herself an expert
astrologer. So also was Renée, daughter of Louis XII, and Duchess of
Ferrara, who was considered one of the most cultivated women in Europe.
Pope Julius II had been known as a fine astrologer, as was Clement VIII
later on. Old Doctor John Dee, the English astrologer, planned Queen
Elizabeth's coronation and advised her throughout her tenure of the
throne.

Seldom has an astrologer changed the course of history. Kings did as
they pleased, not as they were advised. But they kept the astrologers on
the pay roll because the good ones were usually right. Monarchs, even
the richest, were invariably short of cash for their needs, and a good
astrologer came high. He had to have a laboratory, expensive
instruments, and de luxe books. Sometimes he had more worldly tastes for
which he expected the king to foot the bills, as had Angelo Catho,
astrologer to Louis XI. Monarchs who employed astrologers at least
believed that they had value received for their money, for not one of
them was keen about giving away gold. Acceptance and use by royal and
powerful personalities conferred dignity upon the old science and kept
it in the limelight of

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

fashion and practice. Everybody of importance had horoscopes cast, if
they did not do them themselves. Notable collections of the birth-charts
of all important personages of the times were compiled, and have been
handed down to the present day. These may in some future age be
considered as precious as written histories. Forman says that when
Kepler cast horoscopes, a generation later, "To have a nativity cast by
Kepler was like having one's portrait painted by Rembrandt."

Nostradamus reiterates in both his letters, to César and to King Henry,
which preface the *Centuries*, that he has made use of astrology in
combination with his prophetic gift. But as a matter of fact the
*Centuries* show little use of it. A prophet who could casually identify
James I of England and Cromwell by the planets rising at the time they
were born, which was long after his own death, had no need of astrology.
Nostradamus, however, had to use a certain amount of the terminology of
the science and some of the trimmings to back his assertion of its
influence. What he really did--and it is a marvel of marvels, utterly
unique--was to *foresee clairvoyantly* the kind of horoscope under which
the two rulers just cited would be born.

For the rest, he used his knowledge of the heavens as an astronomer
would. Instead of giving dates, he often, in the *Centuries*, times
events by astronomical positions. Sometimes he mentions a grouping of
planets, and again only Mars or the Sun. One of the great outcries
against the reputation of Nostradamus came

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

from the ranks of the astrologers themselves, after he had published his
astrological Almanachs. They well knew that his prophecies transcended
their limitations, and, echoing the doctors, shrieked, "Sorcery!"

No previous analyst of Nostradamus has inquired as to the precise place
astrology occupies in his writings. The attitude toward this has seemed
to be that in verses so cryptic, anything which puzzles the commentator
must be just part of the general oddity of expression. Whereas much
light is thrown on many prophecies by an understanding of how
Nostradamus used his knowledge of the stars.

Nostradamus may have been influenced to take up this study at the time
that he did through having seen and heard discussed a book published by
Jerome Cardan at Nuremberg in 1543. Cardan was one of the great
mathematicians of the epoch, and for this reason entitled to respect. He
was also a famous astrologer. His book was a collection of nearly
seventy nativities of public personages and a number of predictions
concerning those who were living at the time. Among his horoscopes was
that of Martin Luther. Nostradamus, passionately interested in all that
concerned the Church and contemporary religious conditions, would have
had his attention particularly caught by what Cardan had to say from an
astrologer's point of view. What Cardan did say, (as quoted in Manly
Hall's *Story of Astrology*) was:

"Incredible is the vast number of followers which this doctrine has in a
brief space achieved. Already the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

world is on fire with the wild struggle over this madness, which, owing
to the position of Mars, must ultimately break up of itself. Countless
are the heads which desire to reign in it, and if nothing else could
convince us of its futility, then the number of its diverse
manifestations must convince us. . . . Nevertheless, the Sun and Saturn
in the position of their future great conjunction indicate both the
strength and the long duration of this heresy."

In his book Cardan predicted the hanging of the Archbishop of Saint
Andrews, one of the remarkable forecasts of the period. Nine years
later, this English prelate, ill of a puzzling malady, sent to the
continent for the assistance of Cardan. The astrologer, after making a
diagnosis which brought about a cure, told the churchman that, though he
had been able to cure him, he could not change his destiny nor prevent
him from being hanged, as was eventually his fate. Cardan also correctly
predicted that his own son would be beheaded.

Nostradamus, mathematician and descendant of mathematicians, would have
been impressed by the authority of this book and the reputation of the
author as a mathematician. He would have said to himself, "I shall look
into astrology--when I have the time." It was not until after the plague
of Aix that he had this leisure, in 1547.

Another stimulant to his interest in the subject was the death of
Francis I, which occurred in 1547. This event brought to the throne a
new king, the son of

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Francis, who now
reigned as Henry II and whose queen was Catherine de’ Medici. Whenever
there was a change in the government it always was, and still is, the
signal for the prophets to burst into print. Prophets have an advantage
over the "now it can be told" groups, because the latter have to wait
for whatever happens, and spill the secrets afterwards. But no such
limitation binds the reader of the future. He "tells all" before the
event occurs. His disadvantage is that usually nobody believes him.
Prophets of all ages have seemed to love and specialize in gloom, the
motto appearing to be the opposite in most instances to the sundial,
which records only the happy hours. It must have been a little hard on
Henry II, the new king, to have the astrologers working on the details
of his death before he had time to put his crown on straight.

Everybody in prophetic circles knew that Henry and Catherine both had
afflicted nativities. Lucas Gauricus, a learned, competent astrologer
whose fine collection of charts has been handed down, had published in
his *Tractatus Astrologus*, 1542, the horoscopes of both sovereigns. He
had predicted that Henry would be killed in a duel, and warned him
against any kind of single combat in his forty-first year. This
prophecy, like that of Nostradamus concerning the fate of Henry, is a
famous one because it was an accurate forecast. Two stories are told
about it. One is that Catherine gave the birthdate to Gauricus under a
false name, and that he made the prophecy not knowing whose chart it
was. This would have been impossible. Royal

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

births are timed and witnessed, information was immediately and widely
accessible to astrologers. Gauricus would have recognized the horoscope
at once. The other account, which the Duchess of Cleves related in her
memoirs, was that the king told her that he visited Gauricus in disguise
and that the prophecy was made to him. He commented on it by saying that
kings did not fight duels except with equals, and he had just made peace
with Charles of Spain.

Interest in his forecast centers in the fact that Gauricus could not, by
the nature of astrology, have specifically predicted a duel. The
violence of Henry's chart, with its Aries planets afflicted by Mars and
Saturn, might have meant illness affecting the head, or war, or any
number of things. Catherine, born in the same year and just two weeks
later than Henry, had a chart as dangerous as his, yet her life was
different and nearly twenty years longer. So that if Gauricus really
predicted death through single combat, he was using the same
extradimensional sense, combined with astrology, which made Nostradamus
great.

There seem to have been no dramatic public forecasts about the Queen,
who was to be so much more fatal to France than the short-lived husband.
The French had never expected that Catherine would be their Queen. When
she married Henry, he was still the second son. Then the sudden death of
the Dauphin had put Henry in line for the throne. The match was
considered quite a step up for the Medici, who were, in the eyes of the
French aristocracy, trades-people,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

no matter how glorified. Had Henry been Dauphin at the time, a more
patrician alliance would have been planned for him. Perhaps, thought the
seers, studying these two fatalistic horoscopes of their rulers, neither
one would live very long, and maybe Catherine would go first.

From the time of Henry's accession, the forecast of Gauricus seems to
have been known generally and talked around. With the works of Gauricus
and Cardan published in successive years, attracting the attention and
discussion of scientists, scholars and court circles, it would have been
strange if Doctor Nostradamus had not felt that he wished to be
conversant with this much debated branch of prophecy.

The leading astrologers, whatever their limitations, were for the most
part honest, high-minded scholars, with many dramatically fulfilled
predictions to their credit. They were in their way a picturesque
ornament of the sixteenth century. But there was another and a darker
side to the century's "lust of knowing what shall not be known." Magic,
the black art of witch and sorcerer, flourished surreptitiously,
offering its secret, propitiatory rites to Satan, and attracting large
numbers of people in all ranks of society. Whereas astrology was
acknowledged by science and tolerated by the Church, the hidden ritual
of Devil-worship required of its votaries a willingness to make a
compact with Satan, and a little blood drawn from the worshiper's veins
wherewith to seal it.

Religion was the only form of mass production

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

which the century knew. From the time that Clovis had presented
Christianity to the Franks, saying take it or else, to the Renaissance
decree forbidding any other religion within France, belief and
conversion were strictly compulsory. The Inquisition was there to see
that they remained so. In those days of the tremendous certitudes when,
as Heywood Broun once said of the past, "heaven had a mighty low
ceiling," both heaven and hell were well-mapped countries whose
inhabitants, customs, flora and fauna were a matter of exact knowledge.
The Devil and his minions had for many, if anything, a more omnipresent
reality than had the beings of divinity. He was always prowling. Few
were the peasants who had not seen on starless nights a flash of scarlet
flame against black branches, and smelled the Devil's sulphur. Nor could
the rustling sounds from the heart of a dark wood always be
distinguished from the sinister witches' chant, by a man plodding home
on a lonely road. Sometimes, even in broad daylight, he might come upon
the clear track of the print of a cloven hoof, when woe betide his
flocks and herds. From Egypt and Carthage, from Greece and Rome, from
the Druids and all the people of the forgotten lands, the old spells
lived on, woven by Satan to affright the heart and tempt the soul to its
damnation.

The blessed saints wrought miracles for the benefit of mankind, but the
evil one worked his magic through man and could not accomplish his works
except with the aid of human co-operation. When strange misfortunes

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

befell Jacques Bonhomme and his pious wife Marie, they knew that Satan
had found his like on earth to do his bidding. If the flocks sickened
and died for no reason, if the harvest was blighted, or Marie's fresh
cream soured in the pan, and a child broke an arm, then someone in their
community had sold out to Satan and was working mischief.

"Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live."

Stark terror and primitive fear were the witchery that drove people of
the Renaissance into a kind of madness. To this, color was given by the
very real number who sought Satanic contact with pentagram and
incantation, incense and sacrifice in the hope of gold and power, the
ancient promise of the kingdom of the world, never fulfilled.

There was only one way to protect the righteous, that was to fight the
Devil with fire. So the witch-fires of the stake were lighted and burned
high over Europe for more than two hundred years. While Nostradamus was
a boy preparing for Avignon, five hundred of the piteous creatures
accused of witchcraft were burned in Geneva. This was typical of what
went on throughout Christendom. Nor was there any more tolerance among
Protestants than among Catholics. It was Martin Luther who said that the
Devil caused children to disappear and placed his own minions as
changelings in their place to be reared, all unsuspectingly, by honest
parents. Since Luther found a great many people whom he did not like, it
was easy for him to spot, as he did, such changelings. Not without
reason has Doctor

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Victor Robinson,
in his *Story of Medicine*, called the sixteenth century the world's
darkest age. The very brilliance of its blaze of glory and enlightenment
made blacker the shadows that it cast.

Among the common people, such medical practice as they had sustained the
belief in witchcraft. The two went hand in hand (as with the hex doctors
of present-day Pennsylvania). The herbalist and the "wise woman" were
the doctors in country districts and among the city poor where there was
no free clinic. Here old magical ideas of the sympathetic virtues of
plants were as strong as ever. These had all to be gathered in certain
phases of the moon, and their distillations made under proper magical
conditions. The witches' brew was a part of such beliefs, and the
charlatan's decoction of the Elixir of Life.

In the upper classes, the spread of the new learning stimulated, if
anything, the interest in magical practice, because the writings of
Greece and Rome are filled with the most intriguing stories about it.
The seeker after occult information could get from the classics new
ideas and techniques with which to experiment. One of the books
accessible to the times and apparently much consulted by the "evil
folk," as Nostradamus calls them, was the work of an early writer,
Michael Psellus, entitled provocatively enough *Concerning Demons*. If
there was one thing above another that was adored by the sixteenth
century it was the sinister doings of demons, and also with many, how to
get hold of one and put him to work. Psellus gives full

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

details of the way to do this. He also gives descriptions of degraded
orgies in connection with such rites, which were once the ceremonial of
the old fertility magic. Nostradamus wrote this curious quatrain about
the followers of what might be called the Psellus method:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The tenth of the Calends of April, by the pre-Gregorian calendar,  
Is again revived by evil gentry,  
The light extinguished, the group of evil-worshipers  
Seek to rouse the ancient Demon of Psellus.

</div>

No one can say today whom the prophet was accusing. The magic rites had
greatest power when used on the night of Good Friday. It is supposable
that he referred to a group who were experimenting in a year when this
day fell on the twenty-third of April.

"Sorcery and sanctity are the only realities," wrote that English master
of mystical prose, Arthur Machen. The distinction between the two is
sometimes fine drawn. If the difference is to be based upon the means
employed, then Nostradamus, judged by sixteenth-century standards, was,
as his enemies claimed, a sorcerer. But if the distinction is one of
motivation, then in his deep religious faith, in his long record of
charity and good will toward men, his life followed better than most the
pattern of sanctity. It is indisputable that he came deeply under the
old pagan methods of divination. That is written in the record, and by
his

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

own hand. But he truly believed that the agencies which he invoked were
heavenly ones.

It must be assumed that the Church also took this view. His work and his
life were known in their completeness to the Church. Only acceptance by
the papacy of his inspirational claims can account for the fact that
throughout his life no rebuke nor interference ever came to him from the
Inquisition. Had he not been sure of it he would never have dared to
publish the *Centuries*. The hue and cry against him from the enemies
within his own profession, their constant accusations of sorcery, would,
at the slightest notice from the Inquisition, have carried him to the
stake. Nor could the King and all the prophet's courtly patrons have
availed to save him. Nostradamus was always on terms of friendship with
important prelates and he may have rendered secret and valuable services
to the Church, for which it was grateful. The published prophecies are
but a small part of the predictive work which he carried on after he
became known as a prophet and possibly before that. It is said that
Europe is strewn with his forecasts made privately to noble and royal
families, and never given out.

I-1

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Seated at night in secret study,  
Alone, at ease upon my tripod of brass,  
From out the low flame of solitude  
Comes realization of that in which it is not empty to believe.

</div>

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

I-2

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Holding the bough with my hand where the branches fork,  
The Branch seeking the Ripple moistens (with a spatter) the hem of my
robe and my foot,  
Fear and a voice make me tremble in my sleeves,  
Splendor divine, the Divine Being is seated near.

</div>

In these opening lines of the *Centuries*, Nostradamus gives a clear,
specific picture of his lone, late evenings when all the world was quiet
and sleeping. He shows himself to posterity engaged in the ancient rite
of divination by water, an oracle so old and universal that its origin
is one with the lost river that first ran by the feet of the first man
dreaming beside its banks. Nostradamus, in his letter to César, has told
something of the books which were the source of his knowledge of the
water-ritual, which he considered too dangerous to keep.

"Although many volumes have come before me which have lain hidden for
long ages, dreading what might happen in the future, after reading them,
I made an offering of them to Vulcan. As the flame caught them, the
fire, licking the air, flared in unaccustomed brightness, clearer than
natural flame, more like the explosion of powder. It cast a subtle
illumination over the house, as if it were filled by the reflection of
the conflagration. So that you might not at some time be harmed by
alchemic research for the perfect

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

lunar or solar transformation, or the hidden, incorruptible metals of
earth or sea, I reduced these books to ashes."

There has been much speculation over what these books were and how
Nostradamus came by them. Some commentators have thought they might have
been inherited. Those who would have Nostradamus of Jewish descent have
concocted the fantastic theory that the books were part of the temple
treasure salvaged at the time of the Diaspora. There is no evidence for
such ideas. It is most unlikely that the books were inherited.
Grandfather de Rémy, be it remembered, initiated the boy Michel into
some slight exhibition of extra-sensory perception. Having done this,
the old man would hardly leave within the reach of a boy whose curiosity
he had aroused, works which might spell danger, and even his doom at the
stake. He would have withheld them for the same reason that Nostradamus
destroyed them, to protect the child he loved from possible harm.
Grandfather de Rémy, too, was too wise for anything else.

Europe was full of ancient books on magic; some were spurious and some
authentic. When [Constantinople](errata.htm#6) fell in 1540, many Greeks
fled to Italy and France. They brought with them all they could rescue
of their written works. It was said that invariably beneath the rags of
the refugee could be seen the parchment edges of some treasured rarity
of manuscript. The Greeks sold many of these; they were forced to in
order to live. Nostradamus almost certainly acquired his magic

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

books during the years of his travels, and found them in either
Marseilles or Italy. Both were gateways for all the world, and many
strange, lost secrets of antiquity drifted in at their ports.

The particular work on water-divining was in all likelihood a Greek
manuscript and one of the priceless *incunabula* which the refugees
brought with them. Probably the manuscript contained an accurate account
of the divinatory ceremonies practiced in ancient Greece in the temple
of the god Branchus. Since Nostradamus mentions "long ages" in
connection with these magical books, they may have been of the time of
Alexander the Great, or even as early as Xerxes. The priests of Branchus
were said to have sold out to the Persian invaders and fled, to escape
popular anger. They were later destroyed by Alexander. The work on
water-divination must have been something very special, for there is an
account of the rites of Branchus in *The Mysteries of Egypt*, by
Iamblichus, in current circulation in Nostradamus’ day. His own books
must have contained knowledge far more prized and secret.

The word "Branches," which Nostradamus printed in capitals to emphasize
its significance, has reference to the forked branch of laurel or hazel
used in this divinatory art, and also stands for the name of the god,
Branchus, from whose name are derived "branch" and "bronchial." The myth
of Branchus makes him the son of Apollo and a mortal. The sun-god
entered the mother's mouth in a dream, and impregnated her. Branchus
means throat and branches. The ancient

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

oracle of Branchus was very famous, and it is easy to see the
association of prophecy with this god of the throat. It is not so easy
to see his association with water, except that speech is difficult with
a dry throat! Even so it would seem more reasonable for the priestess of
Branchus to take a drink of water than spill a little, as she did, on
her foot and the hem of her dress. However that may be, it is
undoubtedly Branchus whose ritual Nostradamus describes.

Did Nostradamus really believe in the worship of Branchus? Of course
not. Nostradamus says more than once that his prophetic faculty was
inherited. This ancient method of the vision by water could have
stimulated, perhaps developed his gift to greater scope, but it never
could have conferred it.

This man, whose intelligence was universal and of tomorrow, understood
that the laws of attunement between the world of the senses and the
realm beyond their range were in themselves unrelated to creed or dogma,
nor were they inconsistent with the Christian life. The same force has
animated the prophets of all ages, only the methods, the technique by
which the psychic accord is established are different and individual.
Nostradamus had found in the old Greek ritual one that suited his
faculty. Mantra, incantations, chants, all such have only the purpose of
attuning the prophet. That Nostradamus was familiar with the spoken
words of magical ceremonies and probably used them in just this way may
be judged from the passage in which he warns the frivolous and the
charlatans

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

to keep hands off his *Centuries* or consider themselves "cursed
according to the rites of magic." Such curses were like the chants, oral
pronouncements, and evidently the prophet knew their literature.

And what happened next in this strange night-life of prophecy? Let
Nostradamus describe it. Writing to César, he says:

"Through some eternal power, and epileptic Herculean excitement,
celestial causation is made known to me . . . But the perfect knowledge
of causes cannot be acquired without divine inspiration. All authentic
prophecy derives its first principle from God the Creator, next from
favoring conditions, and last from natural endowment."

This passage is the answer to those who call Nostradamus pagan. In his
letter to Henry II, the prophet writes concerning the *Centuries:* 

"The entire work has been composed and calculated on days and hours of
best election and disposition . . ." That is to say, he began his work
and carried it on under favorable planetary conditions. The choice of a
desirable time for beginning any undertaking is called, in stellar
parlance, an election, meaning that a time has been elected.
"Disposition" refers to aspects favorably disposed. Such elections have
in all times been considered of the utmost importance by astrologers.
This has been particularly true of the coronations of royalty, their
marriages, wars and important affairs. There is no knowing if
Nostradamus did use elections or if their mention was merely part of his
insistence

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

on the importance of astrology in his work. But perhaps he did consult
his ephemeris for the positions of the Moon and Mercury, watching the
import of their transits upon the clarity and expression of his vision.
Perhaps, too, while studying astrology he cast his own nativity, curious
to see this celestial blue-print of his own destiny.

The curtains drawn, the candles lighted in his study, on some evening
when the oracle is silent, he may have drawn the twelve-rayed circle
upon a sheet of parchment and placed precisely the symbols of the Sun
and Moon and planets.

Interestedly he studies the chart. In the eighth mansion of the chart,
in the mystical water sign of the Scorpion, a waning, secret Moon is
setting. The eighth house is the house of death, and of interest in all
that lies behind the veil. Nostradamus sighs as he thinks how truly that
portent of the Moon's position has been fulfilled from early years. But
the Moon is in trine, a benefic aspect, to the powerful conjointure of
Jupiter and Saturn in the Moon's own sign, Cancer. These grave planets
rule the hierarchy of the Church, of the political and economic
conditions, and, placed in a water sign, are a splendid augury for
success as a physician and for psychic matters. "And here is my
success." His finger touches the Mid-Heaven Sun. "I should not fear to
dedicate my work to king or pope." Longest his eye lingered on Mercury
in the sign of the Centaur, for Mercury, planet of brain and speech, is
the celestial prototype of Branchus.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

"Mercury," he whispered, "27 degrees of Sagittarius, it touches the
Mercury of Jeanne d’Arc in the same sign. Oh, Branchus, speed the
Archer's arrows, let my words be winged--for France!"

On other nights when the prophetic spirit was upon him, the candles
would flicker on the forked laurel branch as it bent from the prophet's
electrically sensitive hand to the clear water filling to the brim the
great, gleaming copper bowl. As the seer bent above the water undulant
to the laurel bough, a listener might have heard his low chanting in an
ancient tongue, words that once wove a spell amidst the splendor of a
long-razed temple.

The phenomenon of illumination which has always been an accompaniment of
great prophets, which is mentioned in the Bible, and which has given its
name, the illuminati, to those of advanced spiritual perception is
referred to by Nostradamus in the letter to César in these words:

"Though everlasting God alone knows His eternity of light, yet I speak
frankly to all whose long, melancholy inspiration is informed by the
revelation of His immeasurable greatness. It is through the hidden
source of divine light, manifested in two principal ways, that the
understanding of the prophet is inspired. One way is the intuition which
clarifies vision in him who predicts by the stars. The other is prophecy
by inspired revelation, which is practically a participation in divine
eternity. In the latter, the prophet's judgment is according to his
share of divine spirit

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

which he has received through attunement with God the Creator, and also
according to native endowment. The complete efficacy of illumination and
the thin flame is to recognize that what is predicted is true and of
heavenly origin. For this light of prophecy descends from above no less
than the light of day."

Did Nostradamus see history flow before his sight in a bowl of water?
Did the "Divine Being" dictate his writing as he sat in trance? None
knows. Research can pursue no further these "nocturnal studies of sweet
odor." Within the prophet's study the candle and the "thin flame" burn
low in mystery.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Seven: Purpose](mst09)
