[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mst04)  [Next](mst06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0374517541/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Nostradamus, the Man Who Saw Through Time*, by Lee McCann \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span id="img_05400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![ Etching made by a
woman of Salon, from the portrait bust by César Nostradamus, son of the
prophet.](tn/05400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05400.jpg)  
Etching made by a woman of Salon, from the portrait bust by César
Nostradamus, son of the prophet.  
</span>

### CHAPTER THREE

### Personages and Politics

THE NEW FREEDOM which had lured Doctor de Nostradame from Montpellier's
halls was providing the kind of activity he liked best. His success had
made him the rage throughout southern France. People were clamoring for
him, requesting his attendance on their ills, inviting him to be their
guest, for months if he would. Important doors were invitingly open.
Everyone wanted to know the current sensation because he was charming,
modest and had a great future. Besides, plagues had a way of returning,
it was well to stand in with the only man who could cope with them. So
Doctor de Nostradame, combining business with pleasure, travelled about
from city to city, attending a patient in Avignon, stopping off for a
visit in Salon, and moving on to Marseilles to answer new calls.

Everywhere he went he found men disturbed over the international unrest.
His own native interest in internal and foreign affairs, dormant since
the curiosity of his childhood, responded quickly to the incessant,
exciting talk. Some of his new patients were men

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

in a position to tell him inside facts and give him informed opinions.
They enjoyed talking over these matters with the keen, witty young
scientist, who listened so eagerly. These conversations bred in
Nostradamus a dawning sense of political perspective that led eventually
to his study of natural destinies on a plane of perception beyond the
senses. Just now his picture of the great, warring forces of power
politics was confused, incomplete. Too, he had been for so long in
out-of-the-way pest-ridden districts where the only news was a tolling
bell, that he was seriously behind on his history, for much had happened
in those years.

The high noon of the Renaissance was now shedding its dazzling sunlight
upon the most transcendent period-piece ever played by man. Chivalry,
antiquity, and the beginnings of a different social order were mingling
in a new civilization that was already ornamented with every splendor
and blackened with every crime. Conquerors, alchemists, poets, lovers
and [heretics](errata.htm#2) played their fiery roles in velvets and
gems, plumes and armor, scholar's robe and monkish gown, against a
background of deep, sensual reds, primeval greens and the blue of Mary's
mantle. Chaos, war, unrest drove the scenes forward with climax topping
climax. And always wine of violence and the scent of blood flavored the
graces, the wit, and the etiquette of courts.

The initial impulse of the Renaissance had united an inherited physical
dynamism, an ancestral hardihood, with a fresh, powerful increase in the
electric

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

potential of brain and spirit. The vigor was still earthy, and its
forces, though far from the primitive, were still natural. It was this
new electric urge of the Renaissance, expanding all horizons, which was
responsible for the triumphs and tragedies of the grand age of the
sword, the lyre, and the printing-press.

The costumes, armor and weapons, so different from ours, seem remote as
we read of them. But the political set-up of the age had amazing
similarities to what the world is enduring today. If a file of current
newspapers could be handed back through time to a man of the sixteenth
century, he would be astonished, not because our methods are so
different, but because we bring them to bear on the same old situations
as of his day. "Persecutions of Jews," "Fresh Axis Threats," "Books
Banned," "Massacre of Religious Orders," "New Invention by Scientist,"
"Communism Gains Ground," "Parliament Asked for More Money"--such
headlines would be quite familiar to a gentleman of the Renaissance.
Nostradamus knew them all.

Martin Luther was making his bid for power with the new ideology of the
Reformation. Sir Thomas More was publishing *Utopia*, the ancestor of
Communism. Indeed, Nostradamus in writing of modern Communism calls it
"the doctrine of the camel, More." Leonardo was playing with designs for
aircraft and hydraulic pumps; Rabelais and other liberal scholars were
fighting the ban on their books; and a new star of first magnitude, the
Hitler of his day, had risen on the political horizon.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

It would perhaps be unfair to call Charles V, King of Spain and Holy
Roman Emperor, the first totalitarian, since he was without benefit of
national socialism. But he certainly thought that Europe should belong
totally to him, and he got his hands on more of it than did anyone else
before Hitler. In the matter of real estate, Charles, like Browning's
*Last Duchess*, liked whate’er he looked on and his looks went
everywhere.

Trouble between France and Spain had started about the time that Michel
was entering Montpellier. Francis I had quickly transformed the
easy-going government of Louis XII into a cast-iron autocracy. He had
flouted Parliament, and lie had made the offices of the clergy into a
crown benefice, a situation which continued until the Revolution.
Francis hoped soon to apply these tactics to the international scene,
pick up some spare parts of Italy, and eventually get the best of Spain.
But the curtain went up before Francis was ready, on a drama he had not
planned.

A Bourbon and a woman opened the scene. They were the Constable of
France and Louise of Savoy, mother of Francis. In a short fifty years
more, the duel between another Bourbon and another queen-mother, Henry
of Bourbon-Navarre and Catherine de’ Medici, would ring down the curtain
upon the Valois dynasty. Two hundred and fifty years later, the
Revolution would begin its drama with the blood of a Bourbon and "the
Austrian woman." And shortly, within our own years--so the prophet has
foretold--the last and

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

greatest of the Bourbons shall arise to lead France back to power. His
reign is to close the cycle of this dynasty which has alternately
troubled or glorified France since the time of Nostradamus.

It was a Frenchman, Balzac, who wrote: "To the heart there are no little
events. Love magnifies everything. It places in the same scale the fate
of an empire and the dropping of a woman's glove. Almost always the
glove outweighs the empire." This has been tragically true of France,
where passion and politics have gone together from the distant yesterday
of Louise and Bourbon to the recent yesterday of Daladier, Reynaud and
their plotting loves.

The court drama of the queen-mother's infatuation and revenge which
brought the Spaniards on French soil and opened the long conflict
between the houses of Valois and Bourbon began while Michel, the
student, was listening to Doctor Rondelet lecture on bones and muscles.
Except for cynical Paris, the French people had little understanding of
what it was all about, nor did most of them ever find out. Palamides
Tronc de Condoulet told the story to Doctor de Nostradame over a glass
of ripe Provençal wine, in de Condoulet's house at Salon.

"While I was fighting the plague," Nostradamus had said, "I used to
think, when I had a moment to think at all, that when it was all over, I
would be an old man in a strange world. Such tricks does our time-sense
play us that it seemed to me eons must have passed before I returned to
the cities. I have still but

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

little knowledge of what happened besides the plague, for at Montpellier
they talk naught except science. I saw something of the passing of
Spanish troops, before the plague struck. I know that our Duc de
Bourbon, Constable of France, turned traitor and brought them here to
seize the Crown of France for himself. But why did treachery tempt so
great a man? You, my friend, who have news from everywhere, perhaps you
can tell me?"

The Sieur de Condoulet, who became a lifelong friend of Nostradamus, was
a good gossip. The stories he left about the prophet show that. He was a
prosperous Provençal merchant who enjoyed and dealt in the good things
of life. He was equipped to bring the physician up-to-date, for
merchants often got news ahead of others, and in greater detail, through
travelling salesmen and peddlers who went with their wares all over the
country. A good salesman's best introduction to a prospective purchaser
was a fresh budget of exciting, though not always reliable, news picked
up at the inns along his route. Often he displayed his merchandise in
châteaux and palaces, the lords and ladies making their own selections.
Then the salesman had a chance to talk to the help, and many a juicy
morsel was gleaned in this way.

"Bourbon's troops," said de Condoulet, "looted my warehouses and ruined
my business. Then the King carne rampaging down to drive him out, and
his men destroyed the little I had left."

"'That which the palmerworm hath left hath the

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

locust eaten,'" quoted the doctor, who was ever partial to the Book of
Joel.

"Palmerworm or locust, whichever of the two is the hungrier, that was
the Spaniards. You'd think they'd never seen food till they came to
Provence."

"A conqueror's appetite is always worse than his guns. An invader brings
an empty belly. But you have not answered my question," Nostradamus
reminded him.

"*Cherchez la femme*--in this case the King's mother."

"Madame Louise!" exclaimed the doctor. "But, she must be all of--?"

"--forty-five," de Condoulet told him, "and Bourbon was but turned
thirty. Some tell it that Madame Louise is arrogant, grasping, but still
beautiful. Others say she is arrogant, grasping and fat. The latter
insist that of her twin gods, Cupid and Cupidity, the second is so
strong that even her flesh seeks gain."

"What happened?"

"She sent Milord Chancellor to Bourbon with the offer of her hand. I had
that straight from the palace. Bourbon told him he would never marry an
immodest i woman, to take back that word to her."

"*Hé, Dieu!* What insult to a royal lady."

"Insult, but understatement. The lady has looked on many a man, and one
way or another usually gotten him. But not Bourbon."

"And then--?" asked Nostradamus interestedly. "Why, then, she wanted
revenge. His Grace of

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bourbon, besides
being the handsomest man in France, had committed a more serious
mistake, he was the richest. His coffers held more gold than the King's.
His gentlemen wore three gold chains about the neck, and the King's but
one."

"But would the King lend himself to such evil?"

"Madame Louise put the King up to it, but he was willing enough," de
Condoulet said cynically. "First they took away from the Duc his command
of the armies, which was cutting off France's nose to spite Francis’
face. Bourbon was the best general in Europe. Then they stripped him of
his last gold écu and most of his land."

"How could even the King do so?" Nostradamus asked, shocked. "There are
courts of justice as well as courts of royalty."

"And the chancellor used them. He is a smart man and the queen-mother's
creature. It was put over with a nice pretense of legality. And done
quietly. Why, people in Bourbon's own domain didn't know what was
happening."

"A tale of shame!"

"’Twas then, they say, that the Duc, with his back to the wall, wrote a
letter and dispatched it by secret courier to Spanish Charles. Bourbon's
friends deny this, but I had it from a peddler who heard it from a man
who is cousin to the courier that carried the letter."

"I pity the Duc," Nostradamus remarked, "but I

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

still say it was treachery to expose the country to invasion--for a
personal grudge."

"It was more than a grudge, it was a man's life. Madame Louise and the
King had done Bourbon too great injury to let him live. When the King
got wind of that letter, he speeded up plans already made. His soldiers
hunted the Duc like a wild boar through the forest. But he got away over
the German border."

The physician lifted his wine-glass and quaffed deeply, as if to take
away an unpleasant taste.

"King Francis and Emperor Charles had been aching for a crack at each
other," de Condoulet continued. "This gave both of them an excuse. The
Emperor gave Bourbon a Spanish army and backed him for a try at the
French Crown. So, we had Spanish troops and their plague on French soil.
And a plague on them all, I say.

"King Francis, whatever his faults, is God's anointed, and the power of
Heaven protects him," said the doctor a bit sententiously.

Tronc de Condoulet eyed his friend humorously. "Heaven doesn't always
protect its anointed, doctor. The same bishops would have anointed
Bourbon quickly enough--if he had won."

"Why did he not, if he was such a great general?"

"The Spaniards fought badly. Their generals were jealous of him, they
objected to serving under a Frenchman."

"Why, after the King had driven off Bourbon and the Spaniards, didn't he
finish the job?"

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

"He thought he had. Why, when they fled into the Italian mountains, the
Romans put up placards reading: 'Lost--an army in the mountains of
Genoa. If anybody knows what became of it, let him come forward and say.
He will be well rewarded.'"

"The King should have claimed the reward," the doctor murmured.

"He tried to," de Condoulet smiled. "Our King Francis, is a hero; none
doubts that, but glory is too much his god. He thought the way lay open
to capture Milaness and Naples, incurable madness of French kings. *Hé
Dieu!* he almost did it. He shouted in the midst of the battle at Pavia:
'Now at last I can call myself Duke of Milan!'"

"The cup and the lip," sighed the doctor.

"True. Bourbon had a whole new army. Germans, Savoyards and Spaniards.
In a few short hours our King was not Duke of Milan. He was captive of
Charles V, taken by one of Bourbon's own men. He got free of Charles’
dungeon about the time you left Montpellier, when you were in the very
midst of the plague."

"That was one of the few pieces of news that penetrated to me,"
Nostradamus said, "that of the King's return to France after two years’
captivity. The thought of it made even the sick feel cheerful. But to me
’twas tempered by the sadness of his two small sons having to take their
father's place as hostages to Spain. Even though the Spaniards treat
them not unkindly, they are too young to be taken from their home. The
Spaniards are a dour, stern people, of rigid custom. Who

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

knows what mark such enforced residence will leave upon the tender youth
of the future King of France?"

One of those little boys, the younger, grew up to be Henry II, the King
of France who honored the prophet Nostradamus. The sympathy and
understanding with which the prophet won the friendship of the monarch
had its roots in the pity he had always felt for Henry's forlorn
childhood. The cold reserve, the almost shy quality of Henry's matured
personality, has been attributed to the influence of those early
prisoning years in Spain.

"I need not, I suppose, bring you up-to-date as to the sack of Rome by
Bourbon's men," de Condoulet said. "All the world knows of that."

"Yes, horrible. I can only surmise that after enduring so much, the Duc
fell into a madness."

"Not at all. He was stuck in Italy with a great army, and no gold to pay
them. The Emperor promised, but he didn't send it. He, like the others,
was afraid of the Duc. He wanted to use him, but keep him poor. Bourbon
wouldn't have it. The Emperor had himself just held the Pope up for a
mighty sum. There was more where that came from, Bourbon thought."

"He met the fate such an impious act deserved."

"Maybe. ’Tis said that from boyhood he had the prescience of an early
death. Before the battle, he told his officers that he had consulted an
astrologer who told him that if he went to Rome he would surely die
there."

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

"Why is it people never take the advice of those they consult?"
Nostradamus asked reflectively.

"Because they don't like the advice," his friend answered. "Almost the
last words of the Duc were that he cared but little for dying there, if
but his corpse be left with endless glory throughout the world."

"Ah, glory--tragic mirage."

"And he didn't die in glory. He died of a shot from the arquebus of a
common brawler. But perhaps not so common, since he is a metal worker to
whom I hear both the King and His Holiness give commissions. A man named
Cellini."

"And now, after all that treachery, we have a Spaniard for our queen,
the Emperor's sister."

"Power politics," de Condoulet shrugged. "But that too was a cruel jest
on Bourbon. She was his affianced, and King Francis took her away from
him while he was in jail. Ye God, but our King is ever a great one with
women. Another glass of this heartening wine, *mon ami*."

"No more. The hour grows late."

"What of it? And speaking of women, there are pretty girls in Salon,
well dowered too. Let me find a wife for you who will keep you with us
always in this town."

"Your wish is dear to me, my friend. Perhaps, some day--I like this
town, and the country hereabout is pleasing. Perhaps I shall come back
to you. Now, the road still beckons. But my thoughts are lingering on
all that you have told me. The House of Bourbon is

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

puissant and able. The Duc is dead, but the Bourbons still remember. A
Bourbon may yet one day displace a Valois."

"I never saw such a man for always thinking toward the future. Come,
come, you shall take one more glass." And the friends drank a final
toast.

It was some time later that Doctor de Nostradame received a call that
took him travelling to the haunts of his first school-days, Avignon. The
papal legate there, Cardinal de Claremont, had been ill and wished the
services of the rising star of medicine. Many were the welcomes and
congratulations which greeted the doctor's return to this town where he
was so well remembered as a boyhood prodigy.

The prelate gave him his blessing, and brightened up at his visit, as
did most of his patients.

"It seems only yesterday," Cardinal de Claremont told him, "that I was
hearing tales of how you talked about the stars like an old astronomer.
But alas, it is more than yesterday, and my old bones tell me so. Each
year I feel the cold of the mistral more. I hope you are not going to
bleed me."

"I wouldn't think of it," the doctor replied. "There is altogether too
much of that, and purging too. I am going to give you a strengthening
remedy in which I have great confidence."

"Good," the legate relaxed with a relieved sigh. "We hear great things
of what you can do. Certainly next to the salvation of souls comes the
saving of their

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

earthly tenements. I think mine is in considerable need of repair."

"Perhaps. But surely the ivy of Christ's spirit grows ever greener on
its walls."

"I would like to think so, especially in these troubled times. Draw your
chair nearer to my bedside that we may talk the better. I want to hear
something of your experience."

It was inevitable that in the course of the conversation the subject of
the Lutheran heresy should come up. The frightening gains of "the
religion," as it was called, were agitating the minds of all Catholic
churchmen.

"That renegade monk, that Martin Luther, is at the bottom of every piece
of trouble that afflicts the world," the legate railed, propping himself
up straighter on his pillows. "Reform, Luther calls it. May the Holy Son
of God preserve us from such evil kind."

"And does not Your Grace think that the disturbed state of politics and
warring sovereigns play overwell into the hands of Luther?" the doctor
asked.

"Of course they do. When rulers lose all godliness in pursuit of power,
shall ignorant common people do less than follow them!"

"That is what I mean. Take the sack of Rome, the most grievous horror
the Church has faced since the Caesars. The army of assault was made up
of German Lutherans, I am told. But they were led by our French Duc de
Bourbon, of the Roman faith, who commanded for the Holy Roman Emperor
Charles. That is what

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

shocks me so deeply. That men sworn to uphold the Church--"

"Kings and princes are putting lust for power before the love of God,"
the prelate broke in. "Power politics cares not with what bedfellow it
couches, let it be Christian, heretic or Moslem infidel."

"It is that very thing which makes me question the sincerity of these
Lutherans. Numbers are no doubt sincere though deluded. But most of them
seem as willing to fight under a Catholic banner, if it suits their
ambition, as are Catholic kings to employ them."

"Ay. You put your finger on it. Those of the religion are already making
their bid for power. It is the kingdoms of earth they want, and already
they are tools for leaders of unscrupulous ambition. Proof of this lies
in the fact that if the Church had its faults it has gone a long way to
cleanse them, but still the Protestants will have none of it."

"Has His Holiness recovered from the dreadful experience of the siege?"

"You don't recover from a shock like that," the legate said feelingly.
"He is as well as may be. Know you that George Freundsberg, Bourbon's
Protestant general, had got himself made a great gold chain--and I
quote--'to hang and strangle the Pope with his own hand, because since
the Pope called himself premier in Christendom, he must be deferred to
somewhat more than others.'"

The sack of Rome by the Lutheran *landesknechten* of Bourbon had
occurred some two years previously,

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

during the plague. It still holds a record in military savagery
unequalled except perhaps by Hitler at Warsaw. The Catholic world had
not yet recovered from the horror of this crime against their holy city.
The troops, while en route to the assault on Rome, had stopped briefly
before Florence where, in the quiet of the Dominican Nunnery, a little
nine-year-old girl had heard and trembled at the thunder of their
passing. Later she had listened to the nuns tell of the massacre, the
looting, rape and burning of Rome. She heard of the terror that drove
her own uncle, Pope Clement VII, narrowly escaping death, to barricade
himself in the old Castel San Angelo. The little girl was Catherine de’
Medici. In a few short years she would be Queen of France. Another span
of years would see her also queen of Saint Bartholomew's.

"And yet," marveled the doctor, "men call the Emperor, under whose
banner this took place, devout."

"Devout he is," the prelate said bitterly. "Asked his confessor if it
was a sin for him to take any thought to his personal life. But his very
title of Holy Roman Emperor is in my opinion a trouble breeder when
borne by a temporal ruler. The Church is the only Holy Empire."

"Temporal power lasts not long in any man's hands," the physician
observed thoughtfully, "but the Church endures. It is the rock. The
spread of heresy is a cankerous growth of another sort, far more
serious. How menacing are its proportions, thinks Your Grace?"

"Look how its forest fire has swept all Germany!

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The sparks are
falling now on France. If this fire be not extinguished and quickly, by
any means, our country may be next. The intellectuals, the very men who
should know better, are taking it up, spreading false doctrine with the
aid of the printing-press, which I sometimes think was an invention of
the Devil. The king is vacillating. He will adopt no strong policy of
extermination of the heretics. Their impudence is even shielded by the
King's own sister, Marguerite, a royal daughter of France."

"Strange that there should be so many converts among people strictly
trained in the true faith."

"It is all this new freedom that they are demanding. Nobody is willing
to submit to authority any more, not even to the discipline of God's
Church. They must be free to think for themselves, whether they have any
brains to think with or not. They must be free to act as they please,
and free to spend their money instead of giving the Church her righteous
tithes."

"It sounds as if it were the worst danger since the Great Schism."

"It is more serious." The legate sat upright in his zeal. "Then, at
least, there was no argument over the right of the papacy to exist.
Luther, if he dared, would deny us even that."

"The seal of Divine authority received from the hand of Saint
Peter--Luther has not that."

"True, and the Church will fight to keep that authority. With fire and
sword, faggot and rack, the Church will struggle with Satan's armies.
'Blow ye the

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain.'"

"But," argued the doctor gently, "is not the special glory of the Church
those early martyrs who did not fight back? Was it not the blood of
martyrs which made the perpetuation of the Church secure?"

The churchman regarded him frowningly. "That was different. The
Christians had not then come into their power. Had a Christian sat where
Nero sat, then had Nero been lion's meat as he should have been."

The Church of France drew its descent from prelates who wielded their
broadswords beside Charlemagne, and from the embattled bishops who aided
Hugh Capet. Sword-clanging lines of Archbishop Turpin in the *Chanson de
Roland* flashed across the doctor's memory:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The good archbishop could not brook  
On pagan such as he to look.  
You pagan, so it seems to me  
A grievous heretic must be.  
’Twere best to slay him, though I died.  
Cowards I never could abide.

</div>

"This time," the cardinal continued, "the Church has the power to fight,
and she will use it to the extermination of the last heretic."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"'Ha, bravely struck!' the Frenchmen yell,  
 'Our Bishop guards the Cross right well.'"

</div>

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

"You will be giving Luther the martyrs," Doctor de Nostradame told the
churchman shrewdly.

"Not all of them I fear," the cardinal answered grimly. This young man
was a bit too free-spoken. Cardinal de Claremont opened his mouth to
rebuke him. Then he bethought himself of his rheumatic bones, and how
much he hoped for from the ministrations of the doctor. Curbing his
speech, he pursed his lips and sat glumly silent.

Doctor de Nostradame made his patient comfortable and left with him a
tincture and directions for its use. Promising to look in again shortly,
he took his leave, his mind full of the cardinal's conversation.

Power! He was beginning to get the picture. They were all playing the
same game, inside the Church and outside. He could see that. Still it
had to be admitted that right was on the side of King and Church who
held their offices from God. Doctor de Nostradame's religion and
politics were mediaeval to the marrow, and he had no more tolerance for
a heretic than had Archbishop Turpin. His quatrains on the deaths of
Coligny and Condé show that. But he was essentially a man of peace, and
his life was dedicated to the saving of life. He saw with horror the
gentle name of Christ become a trumpet call to violence. And he was too
much the mystic not to realize that the true function of the Church must
lie in keeping the open road to the house not built by hands. This could
not be done in an enlightened age by choking that road with the slain,
tortured

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

bodies of victims, heretics though they were. Better a thousand times
that the Church should suffer fresh martyrdom than confer that crown
upon its enemies.

Yet he could see and sympathize with the point of view of the
Church--his church. The pattern of Christianity, he reflected, had been
a violent one. The forcible conversion of Europe's hordes, the Crusades
with their religious orders militant, the constant persecution of Jews,
all these had made it natural for the Church to turn in its new hour of
peril to the violent methods which had served her so well for so long.

He could appreciate, too, how the Church felt about the uninhibited
spread of the new learning. Even while he himself reached eagerly for
the long-lost treasures of ancient culture, reclaimed by the
printing-press, though he thrilled to the beauty and mirage of the
budding knowledge which promised to every man the kingdoms of the
intellect, he was alive to its dangers. The influx and spread of
knowledge would bring a glory, but already he could perceive how it
might also breed a slow madness and frost of disillusion in men's minds.
And what would the stake and the rack breed? For the competition of
these with the new freedom grew daily more claimant for fresh victims.
What tragedies might not all this be setting in train for the unsullied
future? Where on the time-road would it end?

Nostradamus later lamented:

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

X-66

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Oh great Rome thy ruin approaches,  
Not of thy walls but of thy blood and substance,  
The printed word will work terrible havoc,  
The point of the dagger will be driven home to the hilt.

</div>

Near the time of these two conversations, occurred another which
interested the doctor even more because it concerned the East, of which
he knew little. This came as the result of a call to attend a celebrated
patient, which gave him a boyish thrill of anticipation. It would be, he
told himself, like meeting a hero out of an old romaunt.

The dying flame of chivalry was fast being smothered under ideas of the
new order. But there were two brilliant sparks, the last, which lighted
its final ashes, two soldiers whom history recalls as the last knight
and the last Crusader. The former, Chevalier Bayard, the parfait, gentil
knight, was gone, struck down not by a noble lance or sword, but killed
by a shot, a modern insult, while commanding Francis' troops against the
Constable de Bourbon. Nostradamus had never known Bayard, except by
reputation, but he had mourned with all France at the news of his
passing. Only in written romances would his like be met again.

But that other valiant soldier, the Crusader, still lived and fought for
the glory of God and France. He it was, the famous, colorful Villiers de
L’Isle Adam, who needed the services of Doctor Nostradamus. His

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

name had recently rung through Christendom as the hero of the siege of
Rhodes, the last important outpost of all that the Crusaders had won for
Europe. The sword of Villiers de L’Isle Adam, some three centuries
later, was given by Napoleon to Czar Alexander. After the Emperor had
returned to Paris from the session on the raft at Tilsit, he sent the
ancient steel as his imperial compliment to the ruler of Russia in token
that the Czar, as defender of Christianity against the Turks, was worthy
of it.

William Stearns Davis, in his *History of the Near East*, calls Adam and
his soldiers at Rhodes, "a little band of military monks clinging to a
ruined cliff," and tells how that little band fought off twenty assaults
by the army of Solyman the Great, and killed a hundred thousand of the
flower of the Turkish Army in one of the greatest defenses recorded in
history. Of course Rhodes fell to the Sultan in the end, for Solyman's
resources were unlimited, and no single galley went from Christendom to
help Adam.

The Grand Commander of Rhodes and his fighting monks, for all their
courage, appear to have been virtually pirates. At Rhodes they had lived
by forays against the Moslem coast, and done themselves so well that the
Turks put up loud squawks to Solyman. The Sultan needed the island,
anyway, to complete his defenses and further threaten the Western
Mediterranean. Solyman, though not a Christian, was something of a
parfait, gentil knight himself. When Rhodes fell to him, he permitted
Adam and his remnant of men to

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

withdraw with honor. More, he expressed his regret at dislodging such
brave men from the island they had for so long called their home.

The Western world, feeling perhaps a little conscience stricken, gave to
the returning hero and his order the island of Malta as a permanent
home. This was, however, with the understanding that he would earn his
board and keep by helping the powers resist the serious encroachments of
pirates preying on their shipping.

It was on one of Commander Adam's visits to the mainland of France that
he heard of the new medical celebrity and requested his services.

The doctor saw, when he made his call, a powerful man, of the old
Burgundian type, grizzled, darkened, and weathered like oaken timber
exposed to many suns and seas. His eyes, cold and keen as a blade, were
brushed unfathomably with a brooding quality which only long association
with the East can give.

"The old wounds ache me, Doctor," the old soldier said. "Days when the
wind blows damply with mist, the scars of Solyman's scimitars plague me
like fresh wounds."

"That can be helped, though I fear not cured," was the reply. "You have
been too hard a taskmaster to your body these many years."

"Do your best. I hear great things of you, sir. By Saint John, my
patron, I never envied Solyman his soldiers. ’Twas the other way round.
But many's the time I envied him his physicians. The infidels have

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

rare skill in medicine, especially in the poulticing and healing of
wounds."

"So my grandfathers held, and taught me something of Eastern methods,
which, as I am about to use them in your behalf, may seem familiar. But
first, an examination."

The doctor's eye, straying momentarily from his skillful, probing hands,
lighted upon the lean, wicked length of an extraordinarily long sword
that lay upon the near walnut table. It was the type known technically
as bastard, from its unusual proportions.

"Is that, Sir Knight, the sword to which, in your hands, Christendom
owes so much?"

"Right, Sir Medic, that is *my* trusty Durandal. Perhaps it has not
drunk the blood of as many paynim as did the sword of Roland, but it has
not gone thirsty."

"Well I know. I wish, sir, that you would tell me something of the
Turks, if you would be so kind as to enlighten my ignorance. What of
menace do you think the Turks hold for western Europe?"

"In Solyman they have an abler leader than Christian Europe can boast,"
the Commander said. "And he has at his beck numbers enough to overflow
the continent. Numbers, that was what did for me. And mark you, though
Holy Writ may say that the battle is not always to the strong, if the
disproportion is enough, any fighting-man knows that numbers do win."

"But surely Europe has men enough for that." "The trouble is Europe
can't, or won't, pull together.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Solyman is
banking on it. Look what has just happened in these last few years. The
Holy Roman Emperor, Charles, takes captive The Most Christian King
Francis, and fights Christ's Vicar, the Pope, at the same time. The Most
Christian Francis then writes post haste to infidel Solyman to protect
him against Holy Charles. Solyman, whose ancestors were skewered by mine
before the walls of Jerusalem, writes back that the petition of The Most
Christian King has reached the foot of his, Solyman's, throne! And so
Frenchmen put up with the humiliation of being protected by the infidel
Sultan of Turkey against other Christians."

Nostradamus, as he worked with bandages, hummed to himself:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"'Blow, Roland, blow,  
  That Charles and all his hosts may know!'"

</div>

"And don't think that the Turk hasn't a proper sense of humor," the
Commander continued. "He has laughs a-plenty out of the Christians and
he will have more. His pirates have almost ruined commerce in the
Mediterranean, and he may defeat the navy of Venice before he is
through. What sort of madness is it that grips Europe so that it does
not see what lies ahead of its peoples?"

"The common people know naught of it," the doctor told him. "They have
no way to learn, and needs

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

must trust the guidance of their leaders. But surely heads of state
should know if there is really peril?"

"The Turk," said Adam emphatically, "waits until the Christian armies
are weakened with slaughtering each other. Then he will attack with all
his forces. Europe does not know the Camel of the East, but I have lived
beside him long as friend, and fought him as foe. I do know him. Beyond
him lie the elephantine hordes of Asia, and there is Africa, which
sleeps now, but may some day wake to our sorrow. The one thing that can
save Europe is to stop this insane strife, and unite against the common
foe. You would think the Pope, as head of Christendom, would be working
for this, but he is no better than the rest."

"How soon do you think the Turks will try their hand at conquering
Europe?" Nostradamus asked.

"I don't know," the soldier said thoughtfully. "But I would say that
there will be a showdown in the next twenty-five years or so. Solyman is
still consolidating his gains in his own waters. The East has patience
and endless time. They will wait for opportunity to favor them."

"But are not the Turks poor fighters? Judging from the toll you took of
them, I would suppose so?"

"No, they are fierce and excellent fighters, though their military
science is not yet so good as ours. As for courage, the Moslems rush to
welcome death in battle, and why not with their infidel beliefs? Eighty
houris, with their keep and jewels guaranteed by Allah, reward each
Moslem warrior who falls in battle. ’Tis

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

enough to tempt a Christian, if he could depend on Allah's promises."

"That is all more disturbing than I dreamed of," the doctor told him.

"You cannot shave the Turk so fine but what his beard will grow again,"
the warrior pronounced. "The West cannot hold the East in final check.
Ay, if it takes a thousand years there will come a day--a day of victory
for them."

The faultless memory of Doctor de Nostradame registered for the future
every detail and impression gleaned from this dynamically interesting,
completely informed patient. Later, his vision searching the hinterlands
of time for Moslem ambitions, he wrote many prophecies concerning them.
A number of these have been brilliantly fulfilled. Not yet has history
recorded this one.

II-29

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Oriental will go out from his stronghold,  
He will cross the Apennines to look on Gaul,  
He will sweep through the sky, across seas and over cloudy summits,  
His power will smite the countries along his way.

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Four: Garlands of Fame](mst06)
