<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](chc02)  [Next](chc04) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair*, by William Morris, \[1895\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f02"></span>

CHAPTER II.

OF THE KING'S SON.

As for the King's son, to whom the folk had of late done homage as king,
he was at first seen about a corner of the High House with his nurses;
and then in a while it was said, and the tale noted, but not much, that
he must needs go for his health's sake, and because he was puny, to some
stead amongst the fields, and folk heard say that he was gone to the
strong house of a knight somewhat stricken in years, who was called Lord
Richard the Lean.  The said house was some twelve miles from Oakenham,
not far from the northern edge of the wild-wood.  But in a while, scarce
more than a year, Lord Richard brake up house at the said castle, and
went southward through the forest.  Of this departure was little said,
for he was not a man amongst the foremost.  As for the King's little
son, if any remembered that he was in the hands of the said Lord
Richard, none said aught about it; for if any thought of the little babe
at all, they said to themselves, Never will he come to be king.

Now as for Lord Richard the Lean, he went far through the wood, and
until he was come to another house of his, that stood in a clearing
somewhat near to where Oakenrealm marched on another country, which
hight Meadham; though the said wild-wood ended not where Oakenrealm
ended, but stretched a good way into Meadham; and betwixt one and the
other much rough country there was.

It is to be said that amongst those who went to this stronghold of the
woods was the little King Christopher, no longer puny, but a stout babe
enough:  so he was borne amongst the serving men and thralls to the
castle of the Outer March; and he was in no wise treated as a great
man's son; but there was more than one woman who was kind to him, and as
he waxed in strength and beauty month by month, both carle and quean
fell to noting him, and, for as little as he was, he began to be
well-beloved.

As to the stead where he was nourished, though it were far away amongst
the woods, it was no such lonely or savage place:  besides the castle
and the houses of it, there was a merry thorpe in the clearing, the
houses whereof were set down by the side of a clear and pleasant little
stream. Moreover the goodmen and swains of the said township were no ill
folk, but bold of heart, free of speech, and goodly of favour; and the
women of them fair, kind, and trusty. Whiles came folk journeying in to
Oakenrealm or out to Meadham, and of these some were minstrels, who had
with them tidings of what was astir whereas folk were thicker in the
world, and some chapmen, who chaffered with the thorpe-dwellers, and
took of them the woodland spoil for such outland goods as those woodmen
needed.

So wore the years, and in Oakenham King Christopher was well nigh
forgotten, and in the wild-wood had never been known clearly for King's
son.  At first, by command of Rolf the Marshal, a messenger came every
year from Lord Richard with a letter that told of how the lad
Christopher did.  But when five years were worn, the Marshal bade send
him tidings thereof every three years; and by then it was come to the
twelfth year, and still the tidings were that the lad throve ever, and
meanwhile the Marshal sat fast in his seat with none to gainsay, the
word went to Lord Richard that he should send no more, for that he, the
Marshal, had heard enough of the boy; and if he throve it were well, and
if not, it was no worse.  So wore the days and the years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Of The King of Meadham and his Daughter](chc04)

</div>
