<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](chc13)  [Next](chc15) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair*, by William Morris, \[1895\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f13"></span>

CHAPTER XIII.

OF GOLDILIND IN THE GARTH.

Now, as she went in that garden with her face turned toward the postern
which led into the open space of the greenwood, which was but two
bow-shots from the thicket, she heard the clatter of horse-hoofs on the
loose stones of the path, and how they stopped at the said postern; and
presently there was a key in the lock, the door opened, and a man came
in walking stiffly, like a rider who has ridden far and fast. He was
clad in jack and sallet, and had a sword by his side, and on his sleeve
was done in green and gold a mountain aflame; so that Goldilind knew him
at once for a man of Earl Geoffrey's; and, indeed, she had seen the man
before, coming and going on errands that she knew nought of, and on
which nothing followed that was of import to her.  Therefore, as she
watched him cross the garden and go straight up to the door of the
Foresters' Tower, and take out another key and enter, she heeded him but
little, nor did his coming increase her trouble a whit.

She walked on toward the postern, and now she saw that the errand-bearer
had left it open behind him, and when she came close up to it, she saw
his horse tied to a ring in the wall, a strong and good bay nag.  The
sight of him, and the glimpse of the free and open land, stirred in her
the misery of her days and the yearning for the loveliness of the world
without, converse of friends, hope of the sufficiency of desire, and the
sweetness of love returned.  And so strong a wave of anguish swept over
her, that she bowed her down upon the grass and wept bitterly.  Yet but
a little while it lasted; she rose up presently and looked warily all
round her, and up to the Castle, and saw none stirring; she drew up the
skirts of her green gown into her girdle, till the hem but just hid her
knees; then she stepped lightly through the half-open door with flushed
cheeks and glittering eyes, while her heart rose within her; then she
lifted her hand, unhitched the reins from the iron ring, and quietly led
the horse close under the garth-wall, and stole gently up the slope
which, as all roads from the Castle, went straightway toward the
thicket, but this was the straightest.  So she went, till she came to
the corner of the garth-wall, and a little further; and the Castle on
that side was blind, save for the swale on the battlement, whereon in
that deep peace was little going; and, moreover, it was not even yet six
o'clock.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Goldilind Goes Free](chc15)

</div>
