<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](chc24)  [Next](chc26) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Child Christopher and Goldilind the Fair*, by William Morris, \[1895\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f24"></span>

CHAPTER XXIV.

THEY TAKE COUNSEL AT LITTLEDALE.

Ten days they abode in the house of Littledale in all good cheer, and
Joanna led Goldilind here and there about the woods, and made much of
her, so that the heart within her was full of joy, for the freedom of
the wild-woods and all the life thereof was well-nigh new to her;
whereas on the day of her flight from Greenharbour, and on two other
such times, deadly fear, as is aforesaid, was mingled with her joyance,
and would have drowned it utterly, but for the wilfulness which hardened
her heart against the punishment to come.  But now she was indeed free,
and it seemed to her, as to Christopher when he was but new healed of
his hurt, as if all this bright beauty of tree and flower, and beast and
bird, was but made for her alone, and she wondered that her fellow could
be so calm and sedate amidst of all this pleasure.  And now, forsooth,
was her queenhood forgotten, and better and better to her seemed
Christopher's valiant love; and the meeting in the hall of the eventide
was so sweet to her, that she might do little but stand trembling whiles
Christopher came up to her, and Joanna's trim feet were speeding her
over the floor to meet her man, that she might be a sharer in his deeds
of the day.

Many tales withal Joanna told the Queen of the deeds of her husband and
his kindred, and of the freeing of her and the other three from their
captivity at Wailing Knowe, and of the evil days they wore there before
the coming of their lads, which must have been worser by far, thought
Goldilind, than the days of Greenharbour; so with all these tales, and
the happy days in the house of the wild-woods, Goldilind now began to
deem of this new life as if there had been none other fated for her, so
much a part was she now become of the days of those woodmen and
wolf-heads.

But when the last of those ten days was wearing to an end and those five
were sitting happy in the hall (albeit David sat somewhat pensive, now
staring at Goldilind's beauty, now rising from his seat to pace the
floor restlessly), Gilbert spake and said:  "Brethren, and thou, Queen
Goldilind, it may be that the time is drawing near for other deeds than
letting fly a few shafts at the dun deer, and eating our meat, and
singing old songs as we lie at our ladies' feet; for though we be at
peace here in the wild-wood, forgetting all things save those that are
worthy to be remembered, yet in the cities and the courts of kings guile
is not forgotten, and pride is alive, and tyranny, and the sword is
whetted for innocent lives, and the feud is eked by the destruction of
those who be sackless of its upheaving. Wherefore it behoveth to defend
us by the ready hand and the bold heart and the wise head.  So, I say,
let us loiter here no longer, but go our ways to-morrow to the Tofts,
and take the rede of our elders.  How say ye, brethren?"

Quoth Christopher:  "Time was, brother, when what thou sayest would have
been as a riddle to me, and I would have said:  Here are we merry,
though we be few; and if ye lack more company, let me ride to the Tofts
and come back with a half score of lads and lasses, and thus let us eke
our mirth; and maybe they will tell us whitherward to ride. But now
there is a change, since I have gained a gift over-great for me, and I
know that they shall be some of the great ones who would be eager to
take it from me; and who knows what guile may be about the weaving even
now, as on the day when thou first sawest this hall, beloved."

Goldilind spake and sighed withal:  "Whither my lord will lead me,
thither will I go; but here is it fair and sweet and peaceful; neither
do I look for it that men will come hither to seek the Queen of
Meadham."

David said:  "Bethink thee, though, my Lady, that he who wedded thee to
the woodman may yet rue, and come hither to undo his deed, by slaying
the said woodman, and showing the Queen unto the folk."

Goldilind turned pale; but Joanna spake:  "Nay, brother David, why wilt
thou prick her heart with this fear? For my part, I think that,
chance-hap apart, we might dwell here for years in all safety, and
happily enough, maybe.  Yet also I say that we of the Tofts may well be
eager to show this jewel to our kindred, and especially to our father
and mother of the Tofts; so to-morrow we will set about the business of
carrying her thither, will she, nill she."  And therewith she threw her
arms about Goldilind, and clipped her and kissed her; and Goldilind
reddened for pleasure and for joy that she was so sore prized by them
all.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Now they all Come to the Tofts](chc26)

</div>
