[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob18)  [Next](lob20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

### 17. Siddhartha Deserted by His First Disciples

THE clear waters of the Nairanjana flowed through a rich and fertile
land. Little villages drowsed in the shade of magnificent trees, and
great meadows stretched away into the distance. The hero thought, "How
pleasant it is here; what an inviting spot in which to meditate!
Perhaps, here, I shall find the path to wisdom. Here I shall dwell."

He became deeply absorbed in contemplation. He was so engrossed with his
thoughts that he stopped breathing, and, one day, he fell into a swoon.
The Gods, who were watching him from the sky, thought he was dead, and
they cried:

"Is he dead, this child of the Sakyas? Has he died and left the world to
its suffering?"

Maya, the hero's mother, lived among the Gods. She heard their cries and
plaints, and she feared for the life of her son. Attended by a host of
Apsarases, she descended to the banks of the Nairanjana, and when she
saw Siddhartha, so stiff, so inert, she wept.

She said:

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

"When you were born in the garden, I was assured, O my son, that you
would behold the truth. And later, Asita predicted that you would set
the world free. But they were all lies, these predictions. You did not
win fame by any royal conquest, you did not attain supreme knowledge!
You died, pitifully and alone. Who will help you, O my son? Who will
bring you back to life? For ten moons I carried you in my womb, O my
jewel, and now I can only grieve."

She scattered flowers over the body of her son, whereupon he stirred and
spoke to her in a gentle voice:

"Have no fear, mother; your labor was not in vain; Asita told you no
lie. Even if the earth crumble into dust, even if Meru sink below the
waters, even if the stars fall like rain upon the earth, I shall not
die. I, alone, of all men, will survive the world's ruin! Do not weep,
mother! The time is approaching when I shall attain supreme knowledge."

Maya smiled at her son's words; three times she bowed, then ascended to
the sky, to the music of celestial lutes.

For six years, the hero remained on the banks of the river and
meditated. He never sought shelter from the wind, from the sun or from
the rain; he allowed the gadflies, the mosquitoes and the serpents

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

to sting him. He was oblivious to the boys and girls, the shepherds and
woodcutters, who jeered at him as they passed by and who sometimes threw
dust or mud at him. He hardly ate: a fruit and a few grains of rice or
of sesame composed his fare. He became very thin; his bones showed
prominently. But under his gaunt forehead, his dilated eyes shone like
stars.

And yet true knowledge did not come to him. He felt he was becoming very
weak, and he realized that if he wasted away, he would never reach the
goal he had set for himself. So he decided to take more nourishment.

There was a village called Uruvilva near the spot where Siddhartha spent
long hours in meditation. The head man of this village had ten
daughters. They revered the hero, and they brought him grain and fruit
by way of alms. He rarely touched these gifts, but, one day, the girls
noticed that he had eaten all they had offered him. The next day, they
came with a large dish full of boiled rice, and he emptied that. The
following day, each one brought a different delicacy, and the hero ate
them all. He began to gain flesh, and, presently, he started going to
the village to beg his food. The inhabitants vied with one another in
giving him alms, and, before long, he had regained his strength and his
beauty.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

But the five disciples who had joined him said to each other:

"His austerities did not lead him into the path of true knowledge, and
now he has ceased to practice them. He takes abundant nourishment; he
seeks comfort. He no longer thinks of doing holy deeds. How can he, now,
attain true knowledge? We considered him a wise man, but we were
mistaken: he is a madman and a fool."

And they left him and went to Benares.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Siddhartha Under the Tree of Knowledge](lob20)
