[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob13)  [Next](lob15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

### 12. Siddhartha Leaves His Father's Palace

HE called his equerry, fleet Chandaka.

"Bring me my horse Kanthaka, at once," said he. "I would be off, to find
eternal beatitude. The deep joy I feel, the indomitable strength that
now sustains my will, the assurance that I have a protector even though
I am alone, all these things tell me that I am about to attain my goal.
The hour has come; I am on the road to deliverance."

Chandaka knew the king's orders, but he felt some superior power urging
him to disobey. He went to fetch the horse.

Kanthaka was a magnificent animal; he was strong and supple. Siddhartha
stroked him quietly, then said to him in a gentle voice:

"Many times, O noble beast, my father rode you into battle and defeated
his powerful enemies. To-day, I go forth to seek supreme beatitude; lend
me your help, O Kanthaka! Companions in arms or in pleasure are not hard
to find, and we never want for friends when we set out to acquire
wealth; but companions and friends desert us when it is the path of
holiness we would take. Yet of this

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

am I certain: he who helps another to do good or to do evil shares in
that good or in that evil. Know then, O Kanthaka, that it is a virtuous
impulse that moves me. Lend me your strength and your speed; the world's
salvation and your own is at stake."

The prince had spoken to Kanthaka as he would have to a friend. He now
eagerly climbed into the saddle, and he looked like the sun astride an
autumn cloud.

The horse was careful to make no noise, for the night was clear. No one
in the palace or in Kapilavastu was awakened. Heavy iron bars protected
the gates of the city, an elephant could have raised them only with
great difficulty, but, to allow the prince to pass, the gates opened
silently, of their own accord.

Leaving his father, his son and his people, Siddhartha went forth from
the city. He felt no regret, and in a steady voice, he cried:

"Until I shall have seen the end of life and of death, I shall not
return to the city of Kapila."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. Siddhartha the Hermit](lob15)
