[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob24)  [Next](lob26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### 3. The Buddha Leaves for Benares

THE Blessed One wondered who was worthy of being the first to hear the
word of salvation. "Where is there a man of virtue, intelligence and
energy, to whom I can teach the law?" he asked himself. "His heart must
be innocent of hatred, his mind must be tranquil, and he must not keep
the knowledge to himself as if it were some dark secret."

He thought of Rudraka, son of Rama. He remembered that he had been free
from hatred and had tried to lead a life of virtue, and that he was not
the sort of man who would make a secret of the knowledge. He decided to
teach him the law, and this question arose in his mind: "Where is
Rudraka, now?" Then he learned that Rudraka, son of Rama, had been dead
seven days, and he said:

"It is a great pity that Rudraka, son of Rama, should have died without
hearing the law. He would have understood it, and he, in turn, could
have taught it."

He thought of Arata Kalama. He remembered his clear intellect and his
virtuous life, and he decided

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

that Arata Kalama would be glad to propagate the knowledge. And this
question arose in his mind: "Where is Arata Kalama now?" Then he learned
that Arata Kalama had been dead three days, and he said:

"Arata Kalama died without hearing the law; great is Arata Kalama's
loss."

He thought again, and he remembered Rudraka's five disciples who had
once joined him. They were virtuous; they were energetic; they would
certainly understand the law. The Blessed One knew, by virtue of his
intelligence, that Rudraka's five disciples were living in the Deer Park
at Benares. So he set out for Bernares.

At Mount Gaya he met a monk named Upaka. At the sight of the Blessed
One, Upaka uttered a cry of admiration.

"How beautiful you are!" he exclaimed. "Your face is radiant. Fruit that
has ripened in the sun has less bloom. Yours is the beauty of a clear
autumn. My Lord, may I ask who your master was?"

"I had no master," answered the Blessed One. "There is no one like me. I
alone am wise, calm, incorruptible."

"What a great master you must be!" said Upaka. "Yes, I am the only
master in this world; my

equal can not be found on earth or in the sky." "Where are you going?"
asked Upaka.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

"I am going to Benares," said the Blessed One, "and there I shall light
the lamp that will bring light into the world, a light that will dazzle
even the eyes of the blind. I am going to Benares, and there I shall
beat the drums that will awaken mankind, the drums that will sound even
in the ears of the deaf. I am going to Benares, and there I shall teach
the law."

He continued on his way, and he came to the banks of the Ganges. The
river was high, and the Blessed One looked for a boatman to take him
across. He found one and said to him:

"Friend, will you take me across the river?"

"Certainly," replied the boatman, "but first pay me for the trip."

"I have no money," said the Blessed One.

And he flew through the air to the opposite bank.

The boatman was heart-broken. He cried, "I did not take him across the
river, he who was such a saintly man! Oh, woe is me!" And he rolled on
the ground in his great distress.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Buddha Finds His Former Disciples](lob26)
