[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob57)  [Next](lob59) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

### 16. The Buddha Instructs the Monks of Vaisali

THE Master came to the banks of the Ganges, to the place where the city
of Pataliputra was being built. He bowed before the walls that were
beginning to rise out of the ground, and he exclaimed:

"This city will one day have greatness and renown; many heroes will be
born here, here will reign a famous king. A thriving city you will be, O
Pataliputra, and down through the ages men will praise your name."

He crossed the river. He set out for Vaisali, but in the village of
Bailva he became gravely ill. He suffered intense pain. Ananda wept, for
he thought he was dying. But the Master remembered the many disciples he
had still to visit; he did not wish to enter nirvana until he had given
them final instructions. By the strength of his will, he overcame the
sickness, and life did not leave him. He recovered.

When he was well again, he went outside the house that had given him
shelter, and he took a seat that had been prepared for him near the
door. Ananda came and sat down beside him.

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

"My Lord," said he, "I see that you have recovered your health. When I
found you so ill, my strength failed me; I was faint. There were times I
could not realize that the Master was sick. And yet I was reassured, for
I remembered that you had not disclosed your intentions regarding the
community, and I knew you would not enter nirvana without first
revealing them."

The Blessed One spoke these words:

"What more does the community want of me, Ananda? I have stated the
doctrine, and I have taught it; there is not a single point I have not
expounded! Let him who thinks, 'I want to rule over the community,'
disclose his intentions regarding the community. The Blessed One,
Ananda, never thought, 'I want to rule over the community.' Why then
should he disclose his intentions? I am an old man, Ananda; my hair is
white, and I have grown feeble. I am eighty years old; I have come to
the end of the road. Be, now, each one of you, your own torch; look to
no one to bring you light. He who is his own torch, after I have left
the world, will show that he has understood the meaning of my words; he
will be my true disciple, Ananda; he will know the right way to live."

He set out again, and presently he arrived at Vaisali. He went through
the city, begging his food

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

from door to door. Suddenly, he saw Mara standing before him.

"The hour has come," said the Evil One; "enter nirvana, O Blessed One."

"No," replied the Buddha. "I know when I must enter nirvana; I know
better than you, Evil One. A few months more, and it will be time. Three
months more, and the Blessed One will enter nirvana."

At these words the earth shook, and thunder rolled across the sky: the
Blessed One had destroyed the will by which he still held to life; he
had set the time for his entry into nirvana. The earth shook, and
thunder rolled across the sky.

In the evening he assembled the monks of Vaisali, and he addressed them.

"O monks, preserve carefully, the knowledge I have acquired and that I
have taught you, and walk in the right path, in order that the life of
holiness may long endure, for the joy and salvation of the world, for
the joy and salvation of the Gods, for the joy and salvation of mankind.
A few months more, and my time will have come; three months more, and I
shall enter nirvana. I go and you remain. But never cease to struggle, O
monks. He who falters not in the path of truth avoids birth, avoids
death, for ever and ever avoids suffering."

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

The following day, he again wandered through the city, in quest of alms;
then, with a few disciples, he set out on the road to Kusinagara, where
he had decided to enter nirvana.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. The Meal at Cunda's](lob59)
