[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm02a12a)  [Next](mm02a14a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 2

## Chapter XIII

### How Witch Midwives commit most Horrid Crimes when they either Kill Children or Offer them to Devils in most Accursed Wise.

        We must not omit to mention the injuries done to children by
witch midwives, first by killing them, and secondly by blasphemously
offering them to devils. In the diocese of Strasburg and in the town of
Zabern there is an honest woman very devoted to the Blessed Virgin MARY,
who tells the following experience of hers to all the guests that come
to the tavern which she keeps, known by the sign of the Black Eagle.  
        I was, she says, pregnant by my lawful husband, now dead, and as
my time approached, a certain midwife importuned me to engage her to
assist at the birth of my child. But I knew her bad reputation, and
although I had decided to engage another woman, pretended with
conciliatory words to agree to her request. But when the pains came upon
me, and I had brought in another midwife, the first one was very angry,
and hardly a week later came into my room one night with two other
women, and approached the bed where I was lying. And when I tried to
call my husband, who was sleeping in another room, all the use was taken
away from my limbs and tongue, so that except for seeing and hearing I
could not move a muscle. And the witch, standing between the other two,
said: “See! this vile woman, who would not take me for her midwife,
shall not win through unpunished.” The other two standing be her pleaded
for me, saying: “She has never harmed any of us.” But the witch added:
“Because she has offended me I am going to put something into her
entrails; but, to please you, she shall not feel any pain for half a
year, but after that time she shall be tortured enough.” So she came up
and touched my belly with her hands; and it seemed to me that she took
out my entrails, and put in something which, however, I could not see.
And when they had gone away, and I had recovered my power of speech, I
called my husband as soon as possible, and told him what had happened.
But he put it down to pregnancy, and said: “You pregnant women are
always suffering from fancies and delusions.” And when he would by no
means believe me, I replied: “I have been given six months' grace, and
if, after that time, no torment comes to me, I shall believe you.”  
        She related this to her son, a cleric who was then Archdeacon of
the district, and who came to visit her on the same day. And what
happened? When exactly six months had passed, such a terrible pain came
into her belly that she could not help disturbing everybody with her
cries day and night. And because, as has been said, she was most devout
to the Virgin, the Queen of Mercy, she fasted with bread and water every
Saturday, so that she believed that she was delivered by Her
intercession. For one day, when she wanted to perform an action of
nature, all those unclean things fell from her body; and she called her
husband and son, and said: “Are those fancies? Did I not say that after
a half a year the truth would be known? Or who ever saw me ear thorns,
bones, and even bits of wood?” For there were brambles as long as a
palm, as well as a quantity of other things.  
        Moreover (as was said in the First Part of the work), it was
shown by the confession of the servant, who was brought to judgement at
Breisach, that the greatest injuries to the Faith as regards the heresy
of witches are done by midwives; and this is made clearer than daylight
itself by the confessions of some who were afterwards burned.  
        For in the diocese of Basel at the town of Dann, a witch who was
burned confessed that she had killed more than forty children, by
sticking a needle through the crowns of their heads into their brains,
as they came out from the womb.  
        Finally, another woman in the diocese of Strasburg confessed
that she had killed more children than she could count. And she was
caught in this way. She had been called from one town to another to act
as midwife to a certain woman, and, having performed her office, was
going back home. But as she went out of the town gate, the arm of a
newly born child fell out of the cloak she had wrapped around her, in
whose folds the arm had been concealed. This was seen by those who were
sitting in the gateway, and when she had gone on, they picked up from
the ground what they took to be a piece of meat; but when they looked
more closely and saw that it was not a piece of meat, but recognized it
by its fingers as a child's arm, they reported it to the magistrates,
and it was found that a child had died before baptism, lacking an arm.
So the witch was taken and questioned, and confessed the crime, and that
she had, as has been said, killed more children than she could count.  
        Now the reason for such practices is as follows: It is to be
presumed that witches are compelled to do such things at the command of
evil spirits, and sometimes against their own wills. For the devil knows
that, because of the pain of loss, or original sin, such children are
debarred from entering the Kingdom of Heaven. And by this means the Last
Judgement is delayed, when the devils will be condemned to eternal
torture; since the number of the elect os more slowly completed, on the
fulfilment of which the world will be consumed. And also, as has already
been shown, witches are taught by the devil to confect from the limbs of
such children an unguent which is very useful for their spells.  
        But in order to bring so great a sin into utter detestation, we
must not pass over in silence the following horrible crime. For when
they do not kill the child, they blasphemously offer it to the devil in
this manner. As soon as the child is born, the midwife, if the mother
herself is not a witch, carries it out of the room on the pretext of
warming it, raises it up, and offers it to the Prince of Devils, that is
Lucifer, and to all the devils. And this is done by the kitchen fire.  
        A certain man relates that he noticed that his wife, when her
time came to give birth, against the usual custom of women in
childbirth, did not allow any woman to approach the bed except her own
daughter, who acted as midwife. Wishing to know the reason for this, he
hid himself in the house and saw the whole order of the sacrilege and
dedication to the devil, as it has been described. He saw also, as it
seemed to him, that without any human support, but by the power of the
devil, the child was climbing up the chain by which the cooking-pots
were suspended. In great consternation both at the terrible words of the
invocation of the devils, and at the other iniquitous ceremonies, he
strongly insisted that the child should be baptized immediately. While
it was being carried to the next village, where there was a church, and
when they had to cross a bridge over a certain river, he drew his sword
and ran at his daughter, who was carrying the child, saying in the
hearing of two others who were with them: “You shall not carry the child
over the bridge; for either it must cross the bridge by itself, or you
shall be drowned in the river.” The daughter was terrified and, together
with the other women in company, asked him if he were in his right mind
(for he had hidden what had happened from all the others except the two
men who were with him). Then he answered: “You vile drab, by your magic
arts you made the child climb the chain in the kitchen; now make it
cross the bridge with no on carrying it, or I shall drown you in the
river.” And so, being compelled, she put the child down on the bridge,
and invoked the devil by her art; and suddenly the child was seen on the
other side of the bridge. And when the child had been baptized, and he
had returned home, since he now had witnesses to convict his daughter of
witchcraft (for he could not prove the former crime of the oblation to
the devil, inasmuch as he had been the only witness of the sacrilegious
ritual), he accused bother daughter and mother before the judge after
their period of purgation; and they were both burned, and the crime of
midwives of making that sacrilegious offering was discovered.  
        But here the doubt arises: to what end or purpose is the
sacrilegious offering of children, and how does it benefit the devils?
To this it can be said that the devils do this for three reasons, which
serve three most wicked purposes. The first reason arises from their
pride, which always increases; as it is said: “They that hate Thee have
lifted up the head.” For they try as far as possible to conform with
divine rites and ceremonies. Secondly, they can more easily deceive men
under the mask of an outwardly seeming pious action. For in the same way
they entice young virgins and boys into their power; for though they
might solicit such by means of evil and corrupt men, yet they rather
deceive them by magic mirrors and reflections seen in witches'
finger-nails, and lure them on in the belief that they love chastity,
whereas they hate it. For the devil hates above all the Blessed Virgin,
because she bruised his head. Just so in this oblation of children they
deceive the minds of witches into the vice of infidelity under the
appearance of a virtuous acts. And the third reason is, that the perfidy
of witches may grow, to the devils' own gain, when they have witches
dedicated to them from their very cradles.  
        And this sacrilege affects the child in three ways. In the first
place, visible offerings to God are made of visible things, such as wine
of bread or the fruits of the earth, as a sign of honour and subjection
to Him, as it is said in *Ecclesiasticus* xxv: Thou shalt not appear
empty before the Lord. And such offerings cannot and must not afterwards
be put to profane uses. Therefore the holy Father, S. John Damascene,
says: The oblations which are offered in church belong only to the
priests, but not that they should divert them to their own uses, but
that they should faithfully distribute them, partly in the observance of
divine worship, and partly for the use of the poor. From this it follows
that a child who has been offered to the devil in sign of subjection and
homage to him cannot possibly be dedicated by Catholics to a holy life,
in worthy and fruitful service to God for the benefit of himself and
others.  
        For who can say that the sins of the mothers and of other do not
redound in punishment upon the children? Perhaps someone will quote that
saying of the prophet: “The sons shall not bear the iniquity of the
father.” But there is that other passage in *Exodus* xx: I am a jealous
God, visiting the sins of the father upon the children unto the third
and fourth generation. Now the meaning of these two sayings is as
follows. The first speaks of spiritual punishment in the judgement of
Heaven or God, and not in the judgement of men. And this is the
punishment of the soul, such as loss or the forfeiture of glory, or the
punishment of pain, that is, of the torment of eternal fire. And with
such punishments no one is punished except for his own sin, either
inherited as original sin or committed as actual sin.  
        The second text speaks of those who imitate the sins of their
father, as Gratian has explained (I, q. 4, etc.); and there he gives
other explanations as to how the judgement of God inflicts other
punishments on a man, not only for his own sins which he has committed,
or which he might commit (but is prevented by punishment from
committing), but also for the sins of others.  
        And it cannot be argued that when a man is punished without
cause, and without sin, which should be the cause of punishment. For
according to the rule of law, no one must be punished without sin,
unless there is some cause of punishment. And we can say that there is
always a most just cause, though it may not be known to us: see S.
Augustine, XXIV, 4. And if we cannot in the result penetrate the depth
of God's judgement, yet we know that what He has said is true, and what
He has done is just.  
        But there is this distinction to be observed in innocent
children who are offered to devils not by their mothers when they are
witches, but by midwives who, as we have said, secretly take from the
embrace and the womb of an honest mother. Such children are not so cut
off from grace that they must necessarily become prone to such crimes;
but it is piously to be believed that they may rather cultivate their
mothers' virtues.  
        The second result to the children of this sacrilege is as
follows. When a man offers himself as a sacrifice to God, he recognizes
God as his Beginning and his End; and this sacrifice is more worthy than
all the external sacrifices which he makes, having its beginning in his
creation and its end in his glorification, as it is said: A sacrifice to
God is an afflicted spirit, etc. In the same way, when a witch offers a
child to the devils, she commends it body and soul to him as its
beginning and its end in eternal damnation; wherefore not without some
miracle can the child be set free from the payment of so great a debt.  
        And we read often in history of children whom their mothers, in
some passion or mental disturbance, have unthinkingly offered to the
devil from the very womb, and how it is only with the very greatest
difficulty that they can, when they have grown to adult age, be
delivered from that bondage which the devil has, with God's permission,
usurped to himself. And of this the *Book of Examples, Most Blessed
Virgin MARY*, affords many illustrations; a notable instance being that
of the man whom the Supreme Pontiff was unable to deliver from the
torments of the devil, but at last he was sent to a holy man living in
the East, and finally with great difficulty was delivered from his
bondage through the intercession of the Most Glorious Virgin Herself.  
        And if God so severely punishes even such a thoughtless, I will
not say sacrifice, but commendation used angrily by a mother when her
husband, after copulating with her, says, I hope a child will come of
it; and she answers, May the child go to the devil! How much greater
must be the punishment when the Divine Majesty is offended in the way we
have described!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](mm02a14a)  
Here followeth how Witches Injure Cattle in Various Ways.  
