[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm02a00a)  [Next](mm02a02a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 2

## Chapter I

### Of the several Methods by which Devils through Witches Entice and Allure the Innocent to the Increase of that Horrid Craft and Company.

        There are three methods above all by which devils, through the
agency of witches, subvert the innocent, and by which that perfidy is
continually being increased. And the first is through weariness, through
inflicting grievous losses in their temporal possessions. For, as S.
Gregory says: The devil often tempts us to give way from very weariness.
And it is to be understood that it is within the power of a man to
resist such temptation; but that God permits it as a warning to us not
to give way to sloth. And in this sense is *Judges* ii to be understood,
where it says that God did not destroy those nations, that through them
He might prove the people of Israel; and it speaks of the neighbouring
nations of the Canaanites, Jebusites, and others. And in our time the
Hussites and other Heretics are permitted, so that they cannot be
destroyed. Devils, therefore, by means of witches, so afflict their
innocent neighbours with temporal losses, that they are to beg the
suffrages of witches, and at length to submit themselves to their
counsels; as many experiences have taught us.  
        We know a stranger in the diocese of Augsburg, who before he was
forty-four years old lost all his horses in succession through
witchcraft. His wife, being afflicted with weariness by reason of this,
consulted with witches, and after following their counsels, unwholesome
as they were, all the horses which he bought after that (for he was a
carrier) were preserved from witchcraft.  
        And how many women have complained to us in our capacity of
Inquisitors, that when their cows have been injured by being deprived of
their milk, or in any other way, they have consulted with suspected
witches, and even been given remedies by them, on condition that they
would promise something to some spirit; and when they asked what they
would have to promise, the witches answered that it was only a small
thing, that they should agree to execute the instructions of that master
with regard to certain observances during the Holy Offices of the
Church, or to observe some silent reservations in their confessions to
priests.  
        Here it is to be noted that, as has already been hinted, this
iniquity has small and scant beginnings, as that of the time of the
elevation of the Body of Christ they spit on the ground, or shut their
eyes, or mutter some vain words. We know a woman who yet lives,
protected by the secular law, who, when the priest at the celebration of
the Mass blesses the people, saying, *Dominus uobiscum*, always adds to
herself these words in the vulgar tongue “Kehr mir die Zung im Arss
umb.” Or they even say some such thing at confession after they have
received absolution, or do not confess everything, especially mortal
sins, and so by slow degrees are led to a total abnegation of the Faith,
and to the abominable profession of sacrilege.  
        This, or something like it, is the method which witches use
towards honest matrons who are little given to carnal vices but
concerned for worldly profit. But towards young girls, more given to
bodily lusts and pleasures, they observe a different method, working
through their carnal desires and the pleasures of the flesh.  
        Here it is to be noted that the devil is more eager and keen to
tempt the good than the wicked, although in actual practice he tempts
the wicked more than the good, because more aptitude for being tempted
is found in the wicked than in the good. Therefore the devil tries all
the harder to seduce all the more saintly virgins and girls; and there
is reason in this, besides many examples of it.  
        For since he already possesses the wicked, but not the good, he
tries the harder to seduce into his power the good whom he does not,
than the wicked whom he does, possess. Similarly any earthly prince
takes up arms against those who do not acknowledge his rule rather than
those who do not oppose him.  
        And here is an example. Two witches were burned in Ratisbon, as
we shall tell later where we treat of their methods of raising tempests.
And one of them, who was a bath-woman, had confessed among other things
the following: that she had suffered much injury from the devil for this
reason. There was a certain devout virgin, the daughter of a very rich
man whom there is no need to name, since the girl is now dead in the
disposition of Divine mercy, and we would not that his thought should be
perverted by evil; and the witch was ordered to seduce her by inviting
her to her house on some Feast Day, in order that the devil himself, in
the form of a young man, might speak with her. And although she had
tried very often to accomplish this, yet whenever she had spoken to the
young girl, she had protected herself with the sign of the Holy Cross.
And no one can doubt that she did this at the instigation of a holy
Angel, to repel the works of the devil.  
        Another virgin living in the diocese of Strasburg confessed to
one of us that she was alone on a certain Sunday in her father's house,
when an old woman of that town came to visit here and, among other
scurrilous words, made the following proposition; that, if she liked,
she would take her to a place where there were some young men unknown to
all the townsmen. And when, said the virgin, I consented, and followed
her to her house, the old woman said, “See, we go upstairs to an upper
room where the young men are; but take care not to make the sign of the
Cross.” I gave her my promise not to do so, and as she was going up
before me and I was going up the stairs, I secretly crossed myself. At
the top of the stairs, when we were both standing outside the room, the
hag turned angrily upon me with a horrible countenance, and looking at
me said, “Curse you! Why did you cross yourself? Go away from here.
Depart in the name of the devil.” And so I returned unharmed to my
home.  
        It can be seen from this how craftily that old enemy labours in
the seduction of souls. For it was in this way that the bath-woman whom
we have mentioned, and who was burned, confessed that she had been
seduced by some old women. A different method, however, was used in the
case of her companion witch, who had met the devil in human form on the
road while she herself was going to visit her lover for the purpose of
fornication. And when the Incubus devil had seen her, and has asked her
whether she recognized him, and she had said that she did not, he had
answered" “I am the devil; and if you wish, I will always be ready at
your pleasure, and will not fail you in any necessity.” And when she had
consented, she continued for eighteen years, up to the end of her life,
to practise diabolical filthiness with him, together with a total
abnegation of the Faith as a necessary condition.  
        There is also a third method of temptation through the way of
sadness and poverty. For when girls have been corrupted, and have been
scorned by their lovers after they have immodestly copulated with them
in the hope and promise of marriage with them, and have found themselves
disappointed in all their hopes and everywhere despised, they turn to
the help and protection of devils; either for the sake of vengeance by
bewitching those lovers or the wives they have married, or for the sake
of giving themselves up to every sort of lechery. Alas! experience tells
us that there is no number to such girls, and consequently the witches
that spring from this class are innumerable. Let us give a few out of
many examples.  
        There is a place in the diocese of Brixen where a young man
deposed the following facts concerning the bewitchment of his wife.  
        “In the time of my youth I loved a girl who importuned me to
marry her; but I refused her and married another girl from another
country. But wishing for friendship's sake to please her, I invited her
to the wedding. She came, and while the other honest women were wishing
us luck and offering gifts, she raised her hand and, in the hearing of
the other women who were standing round, said, You will have few days of
health after to-day. My bride was frightened, since she did not know her
(for, as I have said, I had married her from another country), and asked
the bystanders who she was who had threatened her in that way; and they
said that she was a loose and vagrom woman. None the less, it happened
just as she had said. For after a few days my wife was so bewitched that
she lost the use of all her limbs, and even now, after ten years, the
effects of witchcraft can be seen on her body.”  
        If we were to collect all the similar instances which have
occurred in one town of that diocese, it would take a whole book; but
they are written and preserved at the house of the Bishop of Brixen, who
still lives to testify to their truth, astounding and unheard-of though
they are.  
        But we must not pass over in silence one unheard-of and
astonishing instance. A certain high-born Count in the ward of
Westerich, in the diocese of Strasburg, married a noble girl of equal
birth; but after he had celebrated the wedding, he was for three years
unable to know her carnally, on account, as the event proved, of a
certain charm which prevented him. In great anxiety, and not knowing
what to do, he called loudly on the Saints of God. It happened that he
went to the State of Metz to negotiate some business; and while he was
talking about the streets and squares of the city, attended by his
servants and domiciles, he met a certain women who had formerly been his
mistress. Seeing her, and not at all thinking of the spell that was on
him, he spontaneously addressed her kindly for the sake of their old
friendship, asking her how she did, and whether she was well. And she,
seeing the Count's gentleness, in her turn asked very particularly after
his health and affairs; and when he answered that he was well, and that
everything prospered with him, she was astonished and was silent for a
time. The Count, seeing her thus astonished, again spoke kindly to her,
inviting her to converse with him. So she inquired after his wife, and
received a similar reply, that she was in all respects well. Then she
asked if he had any children; and the Count said he had three sons, one
born in each year. At that she was more astonished, and was again silent
for a while. And the Count asked her, Why, my dear, do you make such
careful inquiries? I am sure that you congratulate my on my happiness.
Then she answered, Certainly I congratulate you; but curse that old
woman who said she would bewitch your body so that you could not have
connexion with your wife! And in proof of this, there is a pot in the
well in the middle of your yard containing certain objects evilly
bewitched, and this was placed there in order that, as long as its
contents were preserved intact, for so long you would be unable to
cohabit. But see! it is all in vain, and I am glad, etc. On his return
home the Count did not delay to have the well drained; and, finding the
pot, burned its contents and all, whereupon he immediately recovered the
virility which he had lost. Wherefore the Countess again invited all the
nobility to a fresh wedding celebration, saying that she was now the
Lady of that castle and estate, after having for so long remained a
virgin. For the sake of the Count's reputation it is not expedient to
name that castle and estate; but we have related this story in order
that the truth of the matter may be known, to bring so great a crime
into open detestation.  
        From this it is clear that witches use various methods to
increase their numbers. For the above-mentioned woman, because she had
been supplanted by the Count's wife, case that spell upon the Count with
the help of another witches; and this is how one witchcraft brings
innumerable others in its train.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](mm02a02a)  
Of the Way whereby a Formal Pact with Evil is made.  
