[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Neo-Paganism](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mm02b08a)  [Next](mm03_01a) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Malleus Maleficarum Part 3

## General and Introductory

### Who are the Fit and Proper Judges in the Trial of Witches?

        The question is whether witches, together with their patrons and
protectors and defenders, are so entirely subject to the jurisdiction of
the Diocesan Ecclesiastical Court and the Civil Court so that the
Inquisitors of the crime of heresy can be altogether relieved from the
duty of sitting in judgement upon them. And it is argued that this is
so. For the Canon (c. *accusatus*, § *sane*, lib. VI) says: Certainly
those whose high privilege it is to judge concerning matters of the
faith ought not to be distracted by other business; and Inquisitors
deputed by the Apostolic See to inquire into the pest of heresy should
manifestly not have to concern themselves with diviners and soothsayers,
unless these are also heretics, nor should it be their business to
punish such, but they may leave them to be punished by their own
judges.  
        Nor does there seem any difficulty in the fact that the heresy
of witches is not mentioned in that Canon. For these are subject to the
same punishment as the others in the court of conscience, as the Canon
goes on to say (dist. I, *pro dilectione*). If the sin of diviners and
witches is secret, a penance of forty days shall be imposed upon them:
if it is notorious, they shall be refused the Eucharist. And those whose
punishment is identical should receive it from the same Court. Then,
again, the guilt of both being the same, since just as soothsayers
obtain their results by curious means, so do witches look for and obtain
from the devil the injuries which they do to creatures, unlawfully
seeking from His creatures that which should be sought from God alone;
therefore both are guilty of the sin of idolatry.  
        This is the sense of *Ezechiel* xxi, 23; that the King of
Babylon stood at the cross-roads, shuffling his arrows and interrogating
idols.  
        Again it may be said that, when the Canon says “Unless these are
also heretics,” it allows that some diviners and soothsayers are
heretics, and should therefore be subject to trial by the Inquisitors;
but in that case artificial diviners would also be so subject, and no
written authority for that can be found.  
        Again, if witches are to be tried by the Inquisitors, it must be
for the crime of heresy; but it is clear that the deeds of witches can
be committed without any heresy. For when they stamp into the mud of the
Body of Christ, although this is a most horrible crime, yet it may be
done without any error in the understanding, and therefore without
heresy. For it is entirely possible for a person to believe that It is
the Lord's body, and yet throw It into the mud to satisfy the devil, and
this by reason of some pact with him, that he may obtain some desired
end, such as the finding of a treasure or anything of that sort.
Therefore the deeds of witches need involved no error in faith, however
great the sin may be; in which case they are not liable to the Court of
the Inquisition, but are left to their own judges.  
        Again, Solomon showed reverence to the gods of his wives out of
complaisance, and was not on that account guilty of apostasy from the
Faith; for in his heart he was faithful and kept the true Faith. So also
when witches give homage to devils by reason of the pact they have
entered into, but keep the Faith in their hearts, they are not on that
account to be reckoned as heretics.  
        But it may be said that all witches have to deny the Faith, and
therefore must be judged heretics. On the contrary, even if they were to
deny the Faith in their hearts and minds, still they could not be
reckoned as heretics, but as apostates. But a heretic is different from
an apostate, and it is heretics who are subject to the Court of the
Inquisition; therefore witches are not so subject.  
        Again it is said, in c. 26, quest. 5: Let the Bishops and their
representatives strive by every means to rid their parishes entirely of
the pernicious art of soothsaying and magic derived from Zoroaster; and
if they find any man or woman addicted to this crime, let him be
shamefully cast out of their parishes in disgrace. So when it says at
the end of c. 348, Let them leave them to their own Judges; and since it
speaks in the plural, both of the Ecclesiastic and the Civil Court;
therefore, according to this Canon they are subject to no more than the
Diocesan Court.  
        But if, just as these arguments seem to show it to be reasonable
in the case of Inquisitors, the Diocesans also wish to be relieved of
this responsibility, and to leave the punishment of witches to the
secular Courts, such a claim could be made good by the following
arguments. For the Canon says, c. *ut inquisitionis:* We strictly forbid
the temporal lords and rulers and their officers in any way to try to
judge this crime, since it is purely an ecclesiastical matter: and it
speaks of the crime of heresy. It follows therefore that, when the crime
is not purely ecclesiastical, as is the case with witches because of the
temporal injuries which they commit, it must be punished by the Civil
and not by the Ecclesiastical Court.  
        Besides, in the last Canon Law concerning Jews it says: His
goods are to be confiscated, and he is to be condemned to death, because
with perverse doctrine he opposed the Faith of Christ. But if it is said
that this law refers to Jews who have been converted, and have
afterwards returned to the worship of the Jews, this is not a valid
objection. Rather is the argument strengthened by it; because the civil
Judge has to punish such Jews as apostates from the Faith; and therefore
witches who abjure the Faith ought to be treated in the same way; for
abjuration of the Faith, either wholly or in part, is the essential
principle of witches.  
        And although it says that apostasy and heresy are to be judged
in the same way, yet it is not the part of the ecclesiastical but of the
civil Judge to concern himself with witches. For no one must cause a
commotion among the people by reason of a trial for heresy; but the
Governor himself must make provision for such cases.  
        The *Authentics* of Justinian, speaking of ruling princes, says:
You shall not permit anyone to stir up your Province by reason of a
judicial inquiry into matters concerning religions or heresies, or in
any way allow an injunction to be put upon the Province over which you
govern; but you shall yourself provide, making use of such monies and
other means of investigation as are competent, and not allow anything to
be done in matters of religion except in accordance with our precepts.
It is clear from this that no one must meddle with a rebellion against
the Faith except the Governor himself.  
        Besides, if the trial and punishment of such witches were not
entirely a matter for the civil Judge, what would be the purpose of the
laws which provide as follows? All those who are commonly called witches
are to be condemned to death. And again: Those who harm innocent lives
by magic arts are to be thrown to the beasts. Again, it is laid down
that thy are to be subjected to questions and tortures; and that none of
the faithful are to associate with them, under pain of exile and the
confiscation of all their goods. And many other penalties are added,
which anyone may read in those laws.  
        But in contradiction of all these arguments, the truth of the
matter is that such witches may be tried and punished conjointly by the
Civil and the Ecclesiastical Courts. For a canonical crime must be tried
by the Governor and the Metropolitan of the Province; not by the
Metropolitan alone, but together with the Governor. This is clear in the
*Authentics*, where ruling princes are enjoined as follows: If it is a
canonical matter which is to be tried, you shall inquire into it
together with the Metropolitan of the Province. And to remove all doubt
on this subject, the gloss says: If it is a simple matter of the
observance of the faith, the Governor alone may try it; but if the
matter is more complicated, then it must be tried by a Bishop and the
Governor; and the matter must be kept within decent limits by someone
who has found favour with God, who shall protect the orthodox faith, and
impose suitable indemnities of money, and keep our subjects inviolate,
that is, shall not corrupt the faith in them.  
        And again, although a secular prince may impose the capital
sentence, yet this does not exclude the judgement of the Church, whose
part it is to try and judge the case. Indeed this is perfectly clear
from the Canon Law in the chapters *de summa trin.* and *fid. cath.*,
and again in the Law concerning heresy, c. *ad abolendam* and c.
*urgentis* and c. *excommunicamus*, 1 and 2. For the same penalties are
provided by both the Civil and the Canon Laws, as is shown by the Canon
Laws concerning the Manichaean and Arian heresies. Therefore the
punishment of witches belongs to both Courts together, and not to one
separately.  
        Again, the laws decree that clerics shall be corrected by their
own Judges, and not by the temporal or secular Courts, because their
crimes are considered to be purely ecclesiastical. But the crime of
witches is partly civil and partly ecclesiastical, because they commit
temporal harm and violate the faith; therefore it belongs to the Judges
of both Courts to try, sentence, and punish them.  
        This opinion is substantiated by the *Authentics*, where it is
said: If it is an ecclesiastical crime needing ecclesiastical punishment
and fine, it shall be tried by a Bishop who stands in favour with God,
and not even the most illustrious Judges of the Province shall have a
hand in it. And we do not wish the civil Judges to have any knowledge of
such proceedings; for such matters must be examined ecclesiastically and
the souls of the offenders must be corrected by ecclesiastical
penalties, according to the sacred and divine rules which our laws
worthily follow. So it is said. Therefore it follows that on the other
hand a crime which is of a mixed nature must be tried and punished by
both courts.  
        We make our answer to all the above as follows. Our main object
here is to show how, with God's pleasure, we Inquisitors of Upper
Germany may be relieved of the duty of trying witches, and leave them to
be punished by their own provincial Judges; and this because of the
arduousness of the work: provided always that such a course shall in no
way endanger the preservation of the faith and the salvation of souls.
And therefore we engaged upon this work, that we might leave to the
Judges themselves the methods of trying, judging and sentencing in such
cases.  
        Therefore in order to show that the Bishops can in many cases
proceed against witches without the Inquisitors; although they cannot so
proceed without the temporal and civil Judges in cases involving capital
punishment; it is expedient that we set down the opinions of certain
other Inquisitors in parts of Spain, and (saving always the reverence
due to them), since we all belong to one and the same Order of
Preachers, to refute them, so that each detail may be more clearly
understood.  
        Their opinion is, then, that all witches, diviners,
necromancers, and in short all who practise any kind of divination, if
they have once embraced and professed the Holy Faith, are liable to the
Inquisitorial Court, as in the three cases noted in the beginning of the
chapter, *Multorum querela*, in the decretals of Pope Clement concerning
heresy; in which it says that neither must the Inquisitor proceed
without the Bishop, nor the Bishop without the Inquisitor: although
there are five other cases in which one may proceed without the other,
as anyone who reads the chapter may see. But in one case it is
definitively stated that one must not proceed without the other, and
that is when the above diviners are to be considered as heretics.  
        In the same category they place blasphemers, and those who in
any way invoke devils, and those who are excommunicated and have
contumaciously remained under the ban of excommunication for a whole
year, either because of some matter concerning faith or, in certain
circumstances, not on account of the faith; and they further include
several other such offences. And by reason of this the authority of the
Ordinary is weakened, since so many more burdens are placed upon us
Inquisitors which we cannot safely bear in the sight of the terrible
Judge who will demand from us a strict account of the duties imposed
upon us.  
        And because their opinion cannot be refuted unless the
fundamental thesis upon which it is founded is proved unsound, it is to
be noted that it is based upon the commentators on the Canon, especially
on the chapter *accusatus*, and § *sane*, and on the words “savour of
heresy.” Also they rely upon the sayings of the Theologians, S. Thomas,
Blessed Albert, and S. Bonaventura, in the *Second Book of Sentences*,
dist. 7.  
        It is best to consider some of these in detail. For when the
Canon says, as was shown in the first argument, that the Inquisitors or
heresy should not concern themselves with soothsayers and diviners
unless they manifestly savour of heresy, they say that soothsayers and
diviners are of two sorts, either artificial or heretical. And the first
sort are called diviners pure and simple, since they work merely by art;
and such are referred to in the chapter *de sortilegiis*, where it says
that the presbyter Udalricus went to a secret place with a certain
infamous person, that is, a diviner, says the gloss, not with the
intention of invoking the devil, which would have been heresy, but that,
by inspecting the astrolabe, he might find out some hidden thing. And
this, they say, is pure divination or sortilege.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question I](mm03_01a)  
The Method of Initiating a Process  
