[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff022)  [Next](lff024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XX

<span class="small">Of a very beautiful vision which was seen by a young
friar, who held the cowl in so great abomination that he was minded to
put off the habit and to leave the Order</span>

A YOUNG man very noble and dainty entered the Order of St. Francis: the
which, after certain days, by the instigation of the demon, began to
hold the habit that he wore in such abomination, that it seemed to him
that he wore a most base sack; he had a horror of the sleeves, he
abominated the cowl, and the length and roughness of the habit appeared
to him an intolerable burden. And his disgust for the Religion ever
increasing, he finally resolved to abandon the habit and return to the
world. Now he had already accustomed himself, according to that which
his master had taught him, whenever he passed before the altar of the
convent, wherein was kept the Body of

<span id="page_.53">p. .53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christ, to kneel
with great reverence and to draw back his cowl and with his arms crossed
upon his breast to bow himself down. It befel that, on the night on
which he was about to depart and leave the Order, it was necessary for
him to pass before the altar of the convent, and, according to his
custom, he kneeled him down and did reverence. And, anon, he was rapt in
spirit and a marvellous vision was showed him by God; for he saw before
him an almost infinite number of saints, after the fashion of a
procession, two and two, clad in very beautiful and precious vestments
of silken stuffs; and their faces and hands shone like the sun, and they
moved to the sound of angelic songs and music; among which saints were
two more nobly clad and adorned than all the rest; and they were
encompassed round about by so bright a light that whosoever looked on
them was filled with very great amaze; and, almost at the end of the
procession, he saw one adorned with so great glory that he seemed a
new-made knight, more honoured than his peers. Beholding the aforesaid
vision, this young man marvelled thereat and knew not what that
procession might mean, and he dared not ask but stood dazed with keen
delight. Nevertheless, when all the procession had passed by, he took
courage and ran after the last of them and with great dread enquired of
them, saying: "O most dear ones, I beseech you that it may please you to
tell me, who are these so marvellous folk which go in this procession so
majestical". They made answer: "Know, son, that we be all minor friars,
who now are coming from paradise". Whereupon he asked: "Who are those
two who are more resplendent than the rest?" They answered: "These be
St. Francis and St. Anthony; and he who goeth last, whom thou seest so
highly honoured, is a holy friar who is newly dead,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

whom; because he fought valiantly against temptations and persevered
even unto the end, we are leading in triumph to the glory of paradise;
and these beautiful silken vestments which we wear, are given us of God
in exchange for the rough habits which we wore patiently in the
Religion; and the glorious resplendence which thou seest in us, is given
us of God for the humility and patience, and for the holy poverty and
obedience and chastity which we observed even unto the end. Wherefore,
son, deem it not a hard thing to wear the sackcloth of the Religion
which bringeth so great a reward; because if, with the sackcloth of St.
Francis, for the love of Christ, thou shalt despise the world and
mortify the flesh, and shalt fight valiantly against the demon, thou,
together with us, shalt have like vestments, brightness and glory." And
when these words had been spoken, the young man came to himself, and,
comforted by the vision, drove away from him every temptation and
confessed his fault before the guardian and the friars; from
thenceforward he desired the roughness of penance and of raiment, and
ended his life in the Order in great sanctity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. Of the most holy miracle which St. Francis wrought
when he converted the very fierce wolf of Agobio](lff024)
