[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff017)  [Next](lff019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### CHAPTER XV

<span class="small">How St. Clare ate with St. Francis and with the
friars, his companions, in Santa Maria degli Angeli</span>

ST. FRANCIS, when he abode at Assisi, ofttimes visited St. Clare and
gave her holy admonishments; and she having very great longings to eat
once with him, and thereto beseeching him many times, he was never
willing to give her this consolation; wherefore his companions
perceiving the desire of St. Clare, said to St. Francis: "Father, to us
it seems that this severity is not in accordance with Divine charity, in
that thou hearkenest not to Sister Clare, a virgin so holy and so
beloved of God, in so small a matter as is this of eating with thee; and
the more so considering that she through thy preaching abandoned the
riches and pomps of the world; and, of surety, if she asked of thee a
greater boon than this is, thou oughtest to grant it to thy spiritual
offspring". Then St. Francis made answer: "Doth it seem to you that I
ought to grant her prayer?" The companions replied: "Yea, father; it is
a fitting thing that thou grant her this grace and consolation". Then
St. Francis said: "Since it seemeth so to you, it seemeth so also to me.
But to the end that she may have the greater consolation, I desire that
this meal be eaten in St. Mary of the Angels, because she hath been long
shut up in St. Damian, and thus will she have joy in beholding the Place
of St. Mary, where a she was shorn and made the bride of Jesus Christ;
and there will we eat together in the name of God." Accordingly, the day
thereunto appointed being come, St. Clare went forth from the convent
with one companion, and, accompanied by the companions of St.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Francis, came to
St. Mary of the Angels, and after she had devoutly saluted the Virgin
Mary before her altar, where she had been shorn and veiled, they took
her to see the Place until the dinner hour was come. And, in the
meantime, St. Francis caused the table to be set upon the bare ground,
as he was wont to do. And when the dinner hour was come, St. Francis and
St. Clare sat down together, and one of the companions of St. Francis
with the companion of St. Clare; and thereafter all the other companions
sate them humbly down at the table. And, at the first dish, St. Francis
began to speak of God so sweetly, so highly and so marvellously, that
abundance of Divine grace descended upon them and they were all rapt in
God. And while they were thus rapt, with eyes and hands raised to
heaven, the men of Assisi and of Bettona, and they of the district round
about, saw that St. Mary of the Angels, and all the Place, and the wood
which was then hard by the Place, were burning fiercely; and it seemed
to them that there was a great fire which encompassed the church and the
monastery and the wood together; for the which cause the men of Assisi
ran down thither with great haste to quench the fire, believing that
verily everything was burning. But when they reached the Place they saw
that there was no fire at all, and they went in and found St. Francis
and St. Clare and all their company rapt in God through contemplation,
and [sitting](errata.htm#4) about that lowly board. Whereby they
understood of a surety that that had been Divine fire and not material,
the which God had made to appear miraculously to show forth and signify
the fire of Divine love wherewith were enkindled the souls of those holy
friars and holy nuns; wherefore they departed thence with great
consolation of heart and holy edification. Then, after a long

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

while St. Francis and St. Clare, together with the others, returned to
themselves and being greatly comforted with spiritual food they gave but
little thought to bodily food; and so, that blessed meal being ended,
St. Clare, well accompanied, returned to St. Damian; whereof, when they
beheld her, the nuns had great joy, in that they feared lest St. Francis
should have sent her to rule some other convent, even as he had
aforetime sent Sister Agnes, her holy sister, to be abbess of Montecelli
in Florence; and St. Francis had once said to St. Clare: "Hold thyself
in readiness, that, if need be, I may send thee to some other Place";
whereto she as a daughter of holy obedience had made answer: "Father, I
am ready to go whithersoever you shall send me"; and therefore the nuns
rejoiced greatly when they received her back again; and from
thenceforward St. Clare abode in much consolation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. How St. Francis received the counsel of St. Clare .
. .and preached to the birds . . .](lff019)
