[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff003)  [Next](lff005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE LITTLE FLOWERS OF

# ST. FRANCIS

### CHAPTER I

<span class="small">In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ the Crucified,
and of His Mother the Virgin Mary. In this book are contained certain
Little Flowers, Miracles and devout ensamples of the glorious mendicant
of Christ, Messer St. Francis, and of certain of his Holy Companions, to
the praise of Jesus Christ. Amen</span>

FIRST, it is to be considered that the glorious Messer St. Francis in
all the acts of his life was conformed to Christ the blessed: in that as
Christ, at the beginning of His preaching, chose Twelve Apostles to
despise every earthly thing and to follow Him in poverty and in the
other virtues; so did St. Francis, at the beginning, choose for the
foundation of his Order twelve companions, possessors of most high
Poverty. And as one of the Twelve Apostles of Christ, being rejected of
God, finally hanged himself by the neck; so likewise one of the twelve
companions of St. Francis, whose name was Friar Giovanni della Cappella,
apostatised and finally hanged himself by the neck. And unto the elect
this is a great ensample and cause of humility and of fear; considering
that no man can be certain that he will persevere unto the end in the
grace of God. And as those Holy Apostles were of marvellous sanctity and
humility before all the world and full of the Holy Ghost, so these most
holy companions

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

of St. Francis were men of so much sanctity, that, from the time of the
Apostles until now, the world had never such marvellous and holy men;
for one of them was caught up into the third heaven, like St. Paul, and
this was Friar Giles; one of them, to wit Friar Filippo Lungo, was
touched upon the lips by an angel with a live coal, as was Esaias the
prophet; one of them, and he was Friar Sylvester, spake with God, as one
friend speaketh with another, after the manner that Moses did; one, by
reason of the subtlety of his intellect, soared even unto the light of
the Divine wisdom, as did the eagle, to wit John the Evangelist; the
which was the most lowly Friar Bernard, who with very great
understanding expounded the Holy Scriptures; one of them was sanctified
of God and canonised in heaven, while yet he lived in the world; this
was Friar Ruffino, a gentleman of Assisi; and in like manner every each
of them was granted a singular seal of sanctity, as is hereinafter set
forth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Of Friar Bernard of Quintavalle, first companion of
St. Francis](lff005)
