[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff010)  [Next](lff012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="small">How while St. Francis and Friar Leo were on a
journey, he expounded unto him those things which are perfect joy</span>

ONCE when St. Francis was coming from Perugia to Santa Maria degli
Angeli with Friar Leo in the winter, and the very great cold vexed him
sore, he called Friar Leo, who was going before, and spake after this
manner: "Friar Leo, albeit the minor friars in every land set a great
example of holiness and of good edification, nevertheless, write and
note diligently that therein is not perfect joy". And when St. Francis
had gone farther, he called unto him the second time: "O Friar Leo,
although the minor friar should give sight to the blind, make straight
the crooked, cast out devils, make the deaf to hear, the lame to walk,
and the dumb to speak, and, what is a greater thing, should raise those
who have been dead four days; write that therein is not perfect joy".
Going a little farther, he shouted loudly: "O Friar

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Leo, if the minor
friar knew all tongues, and all sciences, and all the Scriptures, so
that he was able to prophesy and to reveal not only things to come but
also the secrets of consciences and souls; write that therein is not
perfect joy". Going a little farther, St. Francis yet again shouted
loudly: "O Friar Leo, little sheep of God, albeit the minor friar should
speak with the tongue of angels, and knew the courses of the stars and
the virtues of herbs, and albeit all the treasures of the earth were
revealed to him and he knew the virtues of birds and of fishes and of
all animals and of men, of trees, of stones and of roots and of waters;
write that therein is not perfect joy". And going yet farther a certain
space, St. Francis shouted loudly: "O Friar Leo, although the minor
friar should know to preach so well that he should convert all the
infidels to the faith of Christ; write that therein is not perfect joy".
And this manner of speech continuing for full two miles, Friar Leo, with
great wonder, asked and said: Father, I pray thee in the name of God to
tell me wherein is perfect joy". And St. Francis answered him: "When we
shall be at Santa Maria degli Angeli, thus soaked by the rain, and
frozen by the cold, and befouled with mud, and afflicted with hunger,
and shall knock at the door of the Place, and the doorkeeper shall come
in anger and shall say: 'Who are ye?' and we shall say: 'We are two of
your [friars](errata.htm#3),' and he shall say: 'Ye speak not truth;
rather are ye two lewd fellows who go about deceiving the world and
robbing the alms of the poor: get you hence'; and shall not open unto
us, but shall make us stay outside in the snow and rain, cold and
hungry, even until night; then, if we shall bear such great wrong and
such cruelty and such rebuffs patiently, without disquieting ourselves
and without murmuring

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

against him; and shall think humbly and charitably that that door-keeper
really believes us to be that which he has called us, and that God makes
him speak against us; O Friar Leo, write that here is perfect joy. And
if we persevere in knocking, and he shall come forth enraged and shall
drive us away with insults and with buffetings, as importunate rascals,
saying, 'Get you hence, vilest of petty thieves, go to the hospice. Here
ye shall neither eat nor lodge.' If we shall bear this patiently and
with joy and love; O Friar Leo write that herein is perfect joy. And if,
constrained by hunger and by cold and by the night, we shall continue to
knock and shall call and beseech for the love of God, with great
weeping, that he open unto us and let us in, and he, greatly offended
thereat, shall say: 'These be importunate rascals; I will pay them well
as they deserve,' and shall come forth with a knotty club and take us by
the cowl, and shall throw us on the ground and roll us in the snow and
shall cudgel us pitilessly with that club; if we shall bear all these
things patiently and with cheerfulness, thinking on the sufferings of
Christ the blessed, the which we ought to bear patiently for His love; O
Friar Leo, write that here and in this is perfect joy; and therefore
hear the conclusion, Friar Leo; above all the graces and gifts of the
Holy Spirit, which Christ grants to His friends, is that of
self-conquest and of willingly bearing sufferings, injuries and
reproaches and discomforts for the love of Christ; because in all the
other gifts of God we cannot glory, inasmuch as they are not ours, but
of God; whence the Apostle saith: *What hast thou that thou didst not
receive from God! and if thou didst receive it from Him, wherefore dost
thou glory therein as if thou hadst it of thyself!* But in the cross of
tribulation and of affliction

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

we may glory, because this is our own; and therefore the Apostle saith:
*I would not glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. How St. Francis taught Friar Leo to make answer. .
.](lff012)
