[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff090)  [Next](lff092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

### CHAPTER OF HOLY PATIENCE

HE who with steadfast humility and patience suffereth and beareth
tribulations for fervent love of God, will soon come to great graces and
virtues, and will be lord of this world and will have an earnest of the
other glorious world. Everything which a man doth, whether good or ill,
unto himself he doth it; and therefore be thou not offended with him who
doth thee wrong; rather shouldst thou have humble patience, and for his
sin alone shouldst thou grieve, having pity upon him and praying God
effectually for him. In proportion as a man is strong to bear and to
endure injury and tribulation patiently for love of God, even so is he
great in the sight of God, and not more; and the weaker a man is to bear
sorrow and adversity for the love of God, the less is he in the sight of
God. If any man praise thee speaking well of thee, give that praise to
God only; and if any man speak evil of thee or revile thee, do thou aid
him, speaking the same evil of thyself and worse. If thou desire to make
good thy cause, ever strive to make it bad; and make good that of thy
companion, always accusing thyself, and always praising or excusing thy
neighbour. When any  man would contend or go to law with thee, if thou
desire to win, lose, and thou wilt win; for if thou shouldst desire to
go to law to win, when thou didst believe that thou hadst won, then
wouldst thou find that thou hadst greatly lost. And therefore, my
brother, believe me that of a surety the straight way of salvation is
the way of perdition. But when we bear not tribulation well, then we
cannot be followers of the eternal consolations. A far greater
consolation is it. and a more meritorious thing, to bear injuries and

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

reproaches patiently and without murmuring, for the love of God, than to
feed, a hundred poor and to fast continually every day. But what shall
it profit a man, or what shall it avail him to despise himself, and to
grievously vex his body with great fasts and watchings and scourgings,
if he cannot bear a little wrong at the hands of his neighbour? For the
which thing a man shall receive a far greater reward and greater merit
than for all the afflictions wherewith he may afflict himself of his own
will; for to bear the upbraidings and abuse of his neighbour with humble
patience and without murmuring much more quickly cleanseth from sin than
doth the fountain of many tears. Blessed is that man who always keeps
before the eyes of his mind the memory of his sins and the benefits of
God! for he will bear with patience every tribulation and adversity;
from which things he looks for great consolations. The man who is truly
humble looks not for any merit or reward from God, but only strives
continually how he may please Him in everything, knowing himself to be
His debtor; and every good thing which he hath he knows that he hath
only through the goodness of God, and not through any merit of his own;
and every adversity which befalleth him he knows to have befallen him
through his sins. A friar asked Friar Giles saying: "Father, if great
adversities and tribulations shall come in our times, what ought we to
do?" To whom Friar Giles made answer, saying: "My brother, I would have
thee know that, if the Lord should cause stones and thunderbolts to rain
down from heaven, they could not hurt us nor do us any harm, if we were
such men as we ought to be; because were a man in truth that which he
ought to be, every evil and every tribulation would be turned to good;
for we know that the Apostle said that *all things work* 

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

*together for good to them that love God;* and so likewise for the man
whose desire is evil, all good things are turned to evil and to
judgment. If thou wouldst save thyself and go to the celestial glory, it
behoveth thee never to desire any vengeance or retribution upon any
creature; for the inheritance of the saints is always to do good and
always to receive evil. If in very truth thou knewest in what manner and
how grievously thou hast offended thy Creator, thou wouldst know that it
is a right and just thing that all creatures should persecute thee and
work thee pain and tribulation; inasmuch as such creatures would be
taking vengeance for the offences which thou hast committed against
their Creator. Very great virtue is it for a man to conquer himself; for
he who conquereth himself shall conquer all his enemies and attain unto
all good. Yet much greater virtue would it be if a man should permit
himself to be conquered by all men; because then he would be lord of all
his enemies, to wit of vices, of demons, of the world and of his own
flesh. If thou wouldst save thyself, renounce and despise every
consolation which all worldly things and all mortal creatures can give
thee; for greater and more frequent are the falls which come from
prosperity and from consolations, than those which come through
adversities and tribulations." Once a Religious murmured against his
Superior in the presence of Friar Giles by reason of a harsh obedience
which he had commanded him; unto whom Friar Giles said: "Dearly beloved,
the more thou shalt murmur, the more thy burden increaseth and the
heavier will it be for thee to bear; and the more humbly and devoutly
thou shalt put thy head beneath the yoke of holy obedience, the lighter
will this obedience be and the sweeter for thee to bear. But to me it
seemeth that thou art not willing to be

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

reviled in this world for love of Christ, and yet desirest to be
honoured by Christ in the world to come; thou art not willing to be
persecuted and cursed in this world for Christ's sake, and yet in the
other world thou desirest to be blessed and received by Christ; in this
world thou wouldst not labour, and in the other world thou wouldst rest
and take thine ease. I tell thee, friar, that thou art badly deceived;
for by the path of misery and shames and revilings man cometh to the
true heavenly honour, and by patiently bearing derision and curses for
love of Christ, man cometh to the glory of Christ; therefore well saith
the worldly proverb: *He who gives away nothing which he feels the loss
of, receives nothing which he wants*. Excellent is the nature of the
horse, because how fast soever he may run he allows himself to be ruled,
guided and turned up and down, forward and backward, according to the
will of his rider; and so likewise ought the servant of God to do, to
wit he ought to allow himself to be ruled, guided, twisted and bent,
according to the will of his superior, and also by every one else, for
the love of Christ. If thou wouldst be perfect strive earnestly to be
gracious and virtuous, and fight valiantly against vice, bearing
patiently every adversity for love of thy Lord, who was tormented,
afflicted, reviled, beaten, crucified and slain for love of thee, and
not for His fault, or for His glory, or for His profit, but only for thy
salvation; and to do this which I have told thee, above all it is
needful that thou conquer thyself; because it profiteth a man little to
lead and draw souls to God if he doth not first conquer and lead and
draw himself."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of Sloth](lff092)
