[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff094)  [Next](lff096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

### CHAPTER OF TEMPTATIONS

THE great graces which man receives from God, man cannot possess in
tranquillity and peace, because many contrary things arise and many
troubles and adversities hostile to these graces; for the more pleasing
a man is to God, the more grievously is he assailed and attacked by the
fiends. Therefore man ought never to cease from fighting, that he may be
able to keep the grace which he hath received from God: for the harder
the battle, the more precious will be the crown, if he conquer in the
fight. But we have not many battles, nor many hindrances, nor many
temptations, because we are not such as we should be in the spiritual
life. But very true it is that if man walked well and wisely along the
way of God, he would have neither weariness nor toil in his journey; but
the man who walketh in the way of the world, will never be able to avoid
many toils, wearinesses, anxieties, tribulations and sorrows, even to
the day of his death. Said a friar to Friar Giles: "My father, to me it
seemeth that these two sayings of thine are contrary to one another, for
first thou didst say that the more virtuous and the more pleasing to God
a man is, the greater the obstructions and the battles which he will
have in the spiritual life; and thereafter thou saidst the opposite, to
wit that the man who walked well and wisely along the way of God would
not feel either toil or weariness in his journey". To whom Friar Giles,
explaining the contrariety of these two sayings, made answer thus: "My
brother, certain is it that the demons make greater battle with strong
temptations against those who have the will to do right than they do
against others who have not good will, to wit after

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

the mind of God. But to the man who goeth wisely and fervently along the
way of God, what toil and what weariness and what harm can the demons
and all the adversities of the world cause? since he knoweth and seeth
that he is selling his merchandise at a price a thousand times greater
than it is worth. Moreover I tell thee certainly that he who hath been
enkindled with the fire of Divine love, the more he is assailed by sins
the more he bolded) them in hatred and abhorrence. It is the custom of
the worst demons to run and tempt man when he is in some sickness and in
some bodily weakness, or when he is in some trouble, or very cold or
sorrowful, or when he is an hungered or athirst, or when he hath
received some shame or wrong, or temporal or spiritual injury; for these
wicked ones know that in such hours and moments as these, man is more
prone to yield to temptation; but I tell thee that for every temptation
and for every sin that thou shalt conquer thou shalt obtain a virtue;
and if thou conquerest that sin which assaileth thee, thou shalt receive
therefor so much the greater grace and fairer crown." A friar asked
counsel of Friar Giles, saying: "Father, often I am tempted by a very
evil temptation, and many times have I prayed God to deliver me from it;
yet the Lord taketh it not from me; counsel me, father, what I ought to
do". To whom Friar Giles made answer: "My brother, the more nobly a king
doth furnish his knights with excellent and strong armour, the more
manfully would he have them fight against his enemies for his love". A
friar asked Friar Giles, saying: "What remedy shall I use, that I may be
able to go to prayer more willingly, and with more desire and with more
fervour? For when I go to pray I am hard, slothful, dry and lacking in
devotion." To whom Friar Giles made answer, saying: "A king hath two
servants; and the

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

one hath arms wherewith to fight, and the other hath not arms wherewith
to fight, and both of them wish to enter into the battle and to fight
against the enemies of the king. He that is armed enters into the battle
and fights valiantly; but the other who is unarmed, speaks on this wise
to his lord: 'My lord, thou seest that I am naked without arms; but for
love of thee, gladly would I enter into the battle and fight all unarmed
as I am'. And then the good king, beholding the love of his faithful
servant, saith to his attendants: 'Go with this my servant and clothe
him with all those arms which are necessary for him to be able to fight,
so that he may enter into the battle with safety; and sign all his arms
with my royal sign so that he may be known as my faithful knight'. And
so oftentimes it befalleth a man when he goeth to pray, that he findeth
himself naked, undevout, slothful and hard of heart, but nevertheless he
compelleth himself for love of His Lord to enter into the battle of
prayer; and then our gracious King and Lord, seeing the endeavour of His
knight, giveth him by the hands of His attendants, the Angels, fervour
of devotion and good-will. Sometimes it happens that a man will begin
some great and toilsome labour, such as clearing and cultivating the
earth or a vineyard, to gather therefrom fruit in due season. And many
by reason of the great toil and the many anxieties weary thereof and
almost repent of having begun that labour; but if they persevere until
harvest, they forget thereafter it weariness and are comforted and glad
beholding the fruit which they can enjoy; and even so the man who is
strong in the day of temptations will attain unto many consolations; for
after tribulations, says St. Paul, are given consolations and crowns of
life eternal: and not only will the reward be given in heaven to those
who

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

resist temptations, but also in this life, as saith the Psalmist: Lord,
according to the multitude of my temptations and sorrows Thy
consolations shall make glad my soul; so that the greater the temptation
and the fight the more glorious will he the crown." A friar asked
counsel of Friar Giles concerning a certain temptation of his, saying:
"O father, I am tempted by two exceedingly grievous temptations. One is
that, when I do any good thing, I am forthwith tempted to vainglory; the
other is that when I do any evil I fall into such great sadness and
listlessness, that I am well-nigh driven to despair." To whom Friar
Giles made answer: "My brother, well doest thou and wisely to lament thy
sin; but I counsel thee to grieve prudently and in moderation, and
always shouldst thou remember that the mercy of God is greater than thy
sin. But if the infinite mercy of God receiveth to repentance the man
who is a great sinner and who sinneth of his own free will, when he
repenteth; believest thou that that good God abandons the good man who
sinneth against his will, and is already contrite and repentant?
Further, I counsel thee that thou cease not ever to do well, for fear of
vainglory; for if a man desiring to sow grain, should say: 'I will not
sow because if I should sow, peradventure the birds will devour it ';
and if, thus saying, he should not sow his seed, certain is it that he
would gather no harvest that year. But if he soweth his seed, albeit the
birds eat of that seed, nevertheless the husbandman harvesteth the
greater part thereof; and in like manner when a man is assailed by
vainglory, if he doth not well for vainglory's sake, but always fighteth
against it, I say that he loseth not the merit of the good which he
doth, because he is tempted." A friar said to Friar Giles: "Father, I
find that St. Bernard once said the seven penitential psalms with so

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

great tranquillity of mind and with such devotion, that he thought not
nor mused on any other thing save only the proper meaning of the
aforesaid psalms". Unto whom Friar Giles made answer thus: "My brother,
I deem that that lord showeth much greater prowess who holdeth a walled
place, and being besieged and attacked by his enemies, defendeth himself
so valorously that he alloweth no enemy of his to enter therein, than
doth that man who liveth in peace with none to hinder him".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter of Holy Penance](lff096)
