[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff047)  [Next](lff049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLV

<span class="small">Of the conversion, life, miracles and death of the
holy Friar John of Penna</span>

WHEN Friar John of Penna was still a boy and a scholar in the Province
of the March, one night there appeared unto him a very beautiful Child

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

and called him, saying: "John, go to \[the church of\] Santo Stefano,
where one of My minor friars is preaching; believe his doctrine, and
give ear unto his words, for I have sent him thither; and, when thou
hast so done, thou hast a long journey to make; and thereafter thou
shalt come to Me". Thereupon, he rose up at once, and he felt a great
change in his heart; and going to Santo Stefano, he found a great
multitude of men and women there, who were waiting to hear the
preaching. And he who was to preach was a friar whose name was Philip,
the same being one of the first friars who had come to the March of
Ancona; for as yet but few Places were taken in the March. Now this
Friar Philip rose up to preach, and he preached most devoutly, not with
words of human wisdom but by virtue of the Spirit of Christ, proclaiming
the Kingdom of Life Eternal. And, when the sermon was ended, the said
boy went to the said Friar Philip and said unto him: "Father, if you
would vouchsafe to receive me into the Order, I would willingly do
penance and serve our Lord Jesus Christ". Friar Philip, perceiving and
knowing the marvellous innocence of the boy, and his ready will to serve
God, said unto him: "Thou shalt come to me on such a day at Recanati,
and I will cause thee to be received". (Now in that place the Provincial
Chapter was about to be held.) Wherefore the boy, who was very simple,
thought within himself that this was the long journey which he must
make, according to the revelation which he had had, and that thereafter
he must go to paradise; and this he believed that he must do as soon as
he had been received into the Order. He went, therefore, and was
received; and, perceiving that his expectations were not fulfilled at
once, when the minister said in the Chapter that whosoever

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

desired to go into the Province of Provence, for the merit of holy
obedience, would be freely given leave so to do, there came upon him a
great desire to go thither; for he thought in his heart that this was
the long journey which he must make before he went to paradise; but,
being ashamed to say so, at the last, having great trust in the
aforesaid Friar Philip who had received him into the Order, he besought
him earnestly that he would obtain for him this favour, that he might
have leave to go into the Province of Provence. Then Friar Philip,
seeing his simplicity of heart and holy purpose, obtained for him that
leave; whereupon Friar John set out with great rejoicing, having this
opinion, that, when he had finished that journey, he would go to
paradise. But, as God willed it, he abode in the said province
twenty-five years, in this expectation and desire; living in very great
honesty and sanctity, ever setting a good example and growing in favour
with God and man; and he was greatly beloved by the friars and by the
laity. Now, one day, while Friar John was praying devoutly, and weeping
and lamenting because his desire was not fulfilled and his earthly
pilgrimage was too much prolonged, Christ the Blessed appeared unto him;
at the sight of Whom his soul was altogether melted. And He said unto
him: "My son, Friar John, ask Me what thou wilt"; and he replied: "My
Lord, I know not what to ask of Thee save Thyself alone, for I desire
nothing else; but this only do I beseech Thee that Thou pardon all my
sins, and give me grace to see Thee another time, when I have greater
need thereof". Jesus said: "Thy prayer is heard". And when He had thus
spoken He departed and Friar John remained full of consolation. At last,
the friars of the March, hearing report of his

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

sanctity, so wrought with the General that he sent him his commandment
to return to the March; and, when he had received the said commandment,
he set out on his way with joy, thinking that, when he had finished that
journey, he would go to heaven according to the promise of Christ. But,
after he had returned to the Province of the March, he lived therein
thirty years; and there was not one of his kinsmen who knew him again;
and every day he awaited the mercy of God, that He should fulfil His
promise to him. And in those days, he divers times filled the office of
guardian with great discretion; and through him God wrought many
miracles. And among the other gifts which he had of God, was the spirit
of prophecy; whereby it came to pass that, on a time, when he was away
from the Place, a certain novice of his was assailed by the devil, and
so grievously tempted that he, consenting unto the temptation, resolved
within himself to leave the Order, as soon as Friar John should have
returned; the which thing, to wit his temptation and resolve, having
been made known unto Friar John through the spirit of prophecy, he
forthwith returned home, and called unto him the said novice, and said
that he desired that he should confess; but, before he confessed, he
recounted to him in order all his temptation, even as God had revealed
it unto him, and concluded thus: "Son, because thou didst await me, and
desiredst not to depart without my blessing, God hath granted thee this
grace that never shalt thou leave the Order, but shalt die therein with
the Divine blessing". Then was the said novice stablished in good
resolve, and, continuing in the Order, became a holy friar; and all
these things Friar Hugolin told me. The said Friar John was a man of
cheerful and quiet mind, and rarely spake; he was constant in prayer

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

and in devotion, and especially after matins he never returned to his
cell, but abode in the church in prayer even until day. And one night,
while he continued in prayer after matins, the angel of the Lord
appeared unto him and said: "Friar John, thy journey hath reached its
end, the which thou hast so long awaited; and therefore I announce unto
thee, in the name of God, that thou mayest choose what grace thou wilt.
And further I announce unto thee that thou mayest choose which thou
wilt, either one day in purgatory, or seven days of suffering in this
world." And, Friar John choosing rather the seven days of suffering in
this world, he straightway sickened of divers sicknesses; for he was
sore smitten with a fever, and with gout in his hands and feet, and with
colic and many other ills; but that which vexed him worse than all was
this: that a demon ever stood before him, holding in his hand a great
scroll, whereon were written all the sins that he had ever done or
thought, and spake unto him continually, saying: "For these sins which
thou hast committed in thought, word and deed, thou art condemned to the
depths of hell". And he remembered not any good thing that he had ever
done, nor that he was in the Order, nor that he had ever been therein;
and so he verily believed that he was damned, even as the demon said
unto him. Wherefore, whenever he was asked how he fared, he made answer:
"Ill, for I am damned". Now, when the friars saw this, they sent for an
aged friar, who was called Friar Matthew of Monte Rubbiano, the same
being a holy man and a great friend of this Friar John; and the said
Friar Matthew came unto him on the seventh day of his affliction, and
saluted him and asked him how he fared; whereto he replied that he fared
ill because he was damned. Then Friar Matthew

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

said: "Dost thou not remember that thou hast ofttimes been confessed by
me, and that I have wholly absolved thee of all thy sins? Dost thou not
remember that thou hast ever served God in this holy Order for many
years? Further, dost thou not remember that the mercy of God is greater
than all the sins of the world, and that Christ the blessed, our
Saviour, paid to redeem us an infinite price? Wherefore be thou of good
hope that of a surety thou art saved." And while he thus spake, inasmuch
as the period of Friar John's purgation was ended, the temptation left
him, and consolation came unto him. Then spake Friar John to Friar
Matthew, with great joy, saying: "Because thou art weary and the hour is
late, I pray thee go and take some rest": and albeit Friar Matthew
desired not to leave him, at the last, by reason of his much urging, he
departed from him and went to lie down; and Friar John remained alone
with the friar which waited on him. And lo! Christ the Blessed came with
very great splendour and with an exceeding sweet fragrance, even as He
had promised him that He would appear to him a second time when he
should have greater need thereof: and so He healed him thoroughly from
all his sickness. Then Friar John, with clasped hands, gave thanks to
God, because He had brought the long journey of the present miserable
life to so fair an ending; and, commending his soul into the hands of
Christ and yielding it up to God, he passed from this mortal life to the
life eternal with Christ the blessed, whom He had so long waited for and
desired to behold. And the said Friar John was buried in the Place of
Penna San Giovanni.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI. Friar Pacificus and Humilis](lff049)
