[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff005)  [Next](lff007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER III

<span class="small">How for an evil thought which St. Francis had
against Friar Bernard, he commanded the said Friar Bernard to tread with
his feet three times upon his throat and upon his mouth</span>

THE most devout servant of the Crucified, Messer St. Francis, by the
severity of his penance and by his continual weeping, had become almost
blind and saw

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

but little. Upon one occasion among others, he left the Place where he
was and went to the Place where Friar Bernard was, to speak with him of
Divine things; and on reaching the Place, he found that he was in the
wood in prayer, all uplifted and joined with God. Then St. Francis went
into the wood and called him. "Come," said he, "and talk to this blind
man;" and Friar Bernard answered him never a word; because, being a man
of great contemplation, his mind was transported and raised to God; and
because he had singular grace in speaking of God, as St. Francis had
ofttimes proved, he therefore desired to speak with him. After waiting a
little, he called him a second and a third time, in the same manner, and
never a time did Friar Bernard hear him, and therefore he answered him
not neither went unto him, so that St. Francis departed thence, somewhat
cast down and marvelling and lamenting within himself that Friar
Bernard, albeit he had been called three times, had not come unto him.
Departing with this thought, St. Francis, after he had gone a little
way, said unto his companion: "Await me here"; and he betook himself to
a solitary place hard by, and casting himself upon his knees, besought
God that He would reveal to him the reason why Friar Bernard had not
answered him; and, while he yet prayed, there came to him a voice from
God which spake thus: "O poor manikin, why art thou disquieted? Should a
man leave God for a creature? Friar Bernard, when thou calledst him, was
joined unto Me; and therefore he could not come to thee nor answer thee;
marvel not then if he could not answer thee; because he was beside
himself, and heard nothing of thy words." St. Francis, having received
this answer from God, immediately and with great haste returned toward
Friar Bernard, to accuse

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

himself humbly of the thought which he had had concerning him. And when
Friar Bernard saw him coming towards him, he went to meet him and cast
himself down at his feet; then did St. Francis lift him up, and with
great humility he told him of the thought and tribulation which he had
had concerning him, and of the answer which God had given him touching
the same; and he made an end of speaking after this manner: "I command
thee in the name of holy obedience to do that which I bid thee." Now
Friar Bernard, fearing lest St. Francis should command something
excessive, as he was wont to do, sought a way to escape from that
obedience honestly; wherefore he made answer on this wise: "I am ready
to do your obedience, if you promise me to do that which I shall command
you". And when St. Francis had promised him, Friar Bernard said: "Now,
father, tell me that which you wish me to do". Then said St. Francis: "I
command thee in the name of holy obedience that, to punish my
presumption and the arrogance of my heart, when now I shall cast myself
down upon my back upon the earth, thou shalt set one foot on my throat
and the other on my mouth and so pass over me three times, from one side
to the other, crying shame and infamy upon me, and especially say thou
unto me: 'Lie there, thou churl, son of Pietro Bernardoni, whence hast
thou so much pride, thou that art a very abject creature?'" Hearing
this, Friar Bernard, albeit it was exceeding hard for him to do so, for
the sake of holy obedience, fulfilled that which St. Francis had
commanded him, as courteously as he was able; and when he had so done,
St. Francis said: "Now do thou command me that which thou wouldest that
I should do unto thee; for I have promised thee obedience". Said Friar
Bernard: "I

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

command thee in the name of holy obedience that every time that we are
together thou shalt rebuke me and correct me harshly for my faults".
Thereat St. Francis marvelled much because Friar Bernard was of so great
sanctity that he held him in exceeding reverence and deemed him not
blameworthy in anything. Wherefore, from thenceforward, St. Francis was
careful to avoid being much with him by reason of the said obedience, to
the end that he might speak no word of correction to one whom he knew to
be of so great sanctity; but when he desired to see him or to hear him
speak of God, he left him as quickly as possible and gat him thence. And
it was a passing edifying thing to see with what love and reverence and
humility, St. Francis, the father, conversed and spake with Friar
Bernard, his first-born son. To the praise and glory of Jesus Christ and
of the mendicant Francis. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. How the Angel of God proposed a question to Friar
Elias. . .](lff007)
