[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff080)  [Next](lff082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER V

<span class="small">How Friar Giles lived by the labour of his
hands</span>

FRIAR GILES being once at a convent in Rome, wished to live by bodily
labour, even as it had been his wont to do from the time he entered the
Order; and he did after this manner. In the morning betimes he heard
Mass with great devotion; then he gat himself to the wood, which was
eight miles distant from Rome, and brought back a bundle of wood on his
shoulders, and sold it for bread and other things to eat. One time among
others, as he was returning with a load of wood, a woman wished to buy
it of him; and, when the bargain for the price had been made, he carried
it to her house. Notwithstanding the bargain which had been made, the
woman, because she saw that he was a Religious, gave him far more than
she had promised him. Said Friar Giles: "Good woman, I would not that
the vice of avarice should overcome nee; wherefore I desire not a higher
price than that which I bargained for with thee"; so that not only did
he not take more, but only took half the price which had been agreed
upon, and so departed; whereat that woman conceived toward him a great
devotion. In all the work which he did for hire Friar Giles was ever
mindful of holy honesty; he helped the husbandmen to pick the olives and
to tread out the wine. One day, when he was in the piazza, a certain man
wanted to have his walnut trees beaten, and asked another to beat them
at a price; he

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

excused himself because it was a very long way off and the climbing was
very difficult. Said Friar Giles: "My friend, if thou art willing to
give me part of the walnuts, I will go with thee and beat thy trees";
and, when he had covenanted with him, he went; and, having first made
the sign of the most holy Cross, he climbed up, with great fear, into a
high tree to beat it; and, when he had beaten it, so many nuts fell to
his share that he could not carry them in his lap; so he took off his
habit, and, having tied the sleeves and the cowl, made a sack of his
habit, remaining naked save only for his breeches; and so he put this
habit full of walnuts upon his back, and carried them to Rome, and, with
great joy, gave them all to the poor for the love of God. When the wheat
was reaped, Friar Giles went with other poor folk to glean the ears, and
if any one offered him a handful of grain, he made answer: "My brother,
I have no granary wherein to store it"; and those ears he generally gave
away for the love of God. Rarely did Friar Giles help another all the
day; for he was wont to bargain for sufficient time in which to say the
canonical hours, and not to miss his private prayers. Once Friar Giles
went to the Fountain of St. Sixtus to draw water for those monks, and a
man asked drink of him. Friar Giles replied: "And how can I carry the
vessel half empty to the monks?" The man, being angered, spake many
abusive words and insults to Friar Giles; wherefore Friar Giles returned
to the monks very sorrowful. He borrowed a large vessel and forthwith
returned to the said fountain for water, and found that man again and
said: "My friend, take and drink as much as thy heart desireth and be
not wrath; for to me it seemed a discourtesy to carry to those holy
monks water wherefrom another had

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

drunk". The man, moved to contrition and constrained by the charity and
humility of Friar Giles, confessed his fault, and from that day forward
held him in great devotion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. How Friar Giles was miraculously provided for in his
great need . . .](lff082)
