[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff023)  [Next](lff025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXI

<span class="small">Of the most holy miracle which St. Francis wrought
when he converted the very fierce wolf of Agobio</span>

DURING the time that St. Francis dwelt in the city of Agobio, there
appeared in the territory of Agobio a very great wolf, terrible and
fierce, the which not only devoured animals but also men and women, so
that all the citizens stood in great fear, because ofttimes he came nigh
unto the city; and all

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

men went armed when they went forth from the city, as if they were going
to battle; and therewithal they were not able to defend themselves from
him, when haply any man encountered him alone; and for dread of this
wolf things came to such a pass that no one dared to leave the city.
Wherefore, St. Francis, having compassion on the men of the city, was
minded to go forth to meet this wolf, albeit the citizens altogether
counselled him not to do so; and, making the sign of the cross, he went
forth from the city with his companions, putting all his trust in God.
And because the others feared to go farther, St. Francis alone took the
road toward the place where the wolf was. And lo! while many citizens
who had come out to behold this miracle were looking on, the said wolf
made at St. Francis with open mouth. Whereupon St. Francis advanced
towards him, and making over him the sign of the most holy Cross, called
him unto him and spake to him after this manner: "Come hither, friar
wolf. I command thee in Christ's name that thou do no harm to me nor to
any other." O marvellous thing! Scarcely had St. Francis made the sign
of the cross than the terrible wolf instantly closed his mouth and
stayed his running; and, in obedience to that command, came, gentle as a
lamb, and laid himself down at the feet of St. Francis. Then St. Francis
spake unto him thus: "Friar wolf, thou dost much damage in these parts,
and thou hast committed great crimes, destroying and slaying the
creatures of God without His licence: and not only hast thou slain and
devoured beasts, but thou hast also had the hardihood to slay men, made
in the image of God; for the which cause thou dost merit the gallows as
a thief and most iniquitous murderer; and all men cry out against thee
and complain, and all this city is thine

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

enemy. But I desire, friar wolf, to make peace between thee and them; to
the end that thou mayest no more offend them and that they may forgive
thee all thy past offences and neither men nor dogs may pursue thee any
more." At these words, the wolf, by movements of his body and tail and
eyes, and by bowing his head, showed that he accepted that which St.
Francis said and was minded to observe the same. Thereupon St. Francis
spake unto him again saying: "Friar wolf, inasmuch as it seemeth good
unto thee to make and keep this peace, I promise thee that, so long as
thou shalt live, I will cause thy food to be given thee continually by
the men of this city, so that thou shalt no more suffer hunger; for I
know full well that whatever of evil thou hast done thou hast done it
through hunger. But seeing that I beg for thee this grace, I desire,
friar wolf, that thou shouldst promise me that never from henceforward
wilt thou injure any human being or any animal. Dost thou promise me
this?" And the wolf, by bowing his head, gave evident token that he
promised it. And St. Francis said: "Friar wolf, I desire that thou swear
me fealty touching this promise, to the end that I may trust thee
utterly". Then St. Francis held forth his hand to receive his fealty,
and the wolf lifted up his right fore-foot and put it with friendly
confidence in the hand of St. Francis, giving thereby such token of
fealty as he was able. Thereupon St. Francis said: "Friar wolf, I
command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come now with me, nothing
doubting, and let us go and stablish this peace in the name of God". And
the wolf went with him obediently, like a gentle lamb; wherefore the
citizens beholding the same marvelled greatly. And anon, the fame
thereof was noised abroad through all the city, and all the people,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

men and women, great and small, young and old, thronged to the piazza to
see the wolf with St. Francis. And when all the folk were gathered
together, St. Francis rose up to preach unto them, saying, among other
things, how, by reason of sin, God permits such pestilences; and far
more perilous is the fire of hell, the which must for ever torment the
damned, than is the fury of a wolf which can only kill the body; how
much then are the jaws of hell to be feared when the jaws of a little
beast can hold so great a multitude in fear! "Turn ye then, most dear
ones, turn ye to God, and do befitting penance for your sins, and God
will save you from the wolf in this present world and from the fire of
hell in that which is to come". And when he had done preaching, St.
Francis said: "Hear ye, my brethren. Friar wolf, who is here before you,
hath promised and sworn fealty to me, that he will make peace with you
and never more offend you in anything; do ye now promise him to give him
every day that whereof he hath need; and I become surety unto you for
him that he will faithfully observe this covenant of peace." Then all
the people with one voice promised to provide him food continually, and
St. Francis spake unto the wolf before them all, saying: "And thou,
friar wolf, dost thou promise to observe the covenant of peace which
thou hast made with this folk, that thou wilt offend neither men nor
beast nor any creature?" And the wolf kneeled him down and bowed his
head, and, with gentle movements of his body and tail and ears, showed
as far as he was able his determination to keep that covenant wholly.
Said St. Francis: "Friar wolf, as thou didst me fealty touching this
promise, without the gate, so now I desire that thou do me fealty,
before all the people, touching thy promise, and that thou wilt not
deceive

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

me concerning my promise and surety which I have given for thee". Then
the wolf, lifting up his right foot, put it in the hand of St. Francis.
By which act, and by the other acts aforesaid, all the people were
fulfilled with so great joy and wonder, alike for devotion toward the
saint, and for the strangeness of the miracle, and for the peace with
the wolf, that they all began to shout to heaven, praising and blessing
God who had sent them St. Francis, who, by his merits, had freed them
from the jaws of the cruel beast. And thereafter, the said wolf lived
two years in Agobio, and entered familiarly into the houses, going from
door to door, neither doing injury to any one nor receiving any; and he
was courteously nourished by the people; and, as he thus went through
the town and through the houses, never did any dog bark after him.
Finally, after two years, friar wolf died of old age; whereat the
citizens lamented much, because as long as they saw him going so gently
through their city, they recalled the better the virtue and sanctity of
St. Francis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. How St. Francis tamed the wild
turtle-doves](lff025)
