[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lff014)  [Next](lff016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A7WE3W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Little Flowers of St. Francis*, tr. by W. Heywood, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="small">How St. Francis laid upon Friar Masseo the service
of the gate, of alms-giving and of the kitchen; and thereafter, at the
prayer of the other friars, relieved him of them</span>

ST. FRANCIS, desiring to humble Friar Masseo, to the end that he might
not become puffed up by reason of the many gifts and graces which God
was giving him, but by virtue of humility might increase thereby from
virtue to virtue; once when he was dwelling in a solitary place with
those true saints, his first companions, among whom was the said Friar
Masseo, he spake on a day to Friar Masseo before all his

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

companions, saying: "O Friar Masseo, all these thy companions have the
grace of contemplation and of prayer; but thou hast the grace of
preaching the Word of God to the satisfying of the people; and
therefore, to the end that these thy companions may be able to give
themselves to contemplation, I will that thou perform the office of the
gate and of alms-giving and of the kitchen; and when the other friars
shall eat thou shalt cat without the gate of the Place, so that thou
mayest satisfy those who come to the Place with some good works of God
or ever they have knocked; thus it will not be necessary for any other
to go forth save thee alone; and this do thou for the merit of holy
obedience". Thereupon, Friar Masseo drew back his cowl and bowed his
head and humbly received this obedience and persevered therein for many
days, performing the office of the gate, of almsgiving and of the
kitchen. Wherefore his companions, as men illuminated of God, began to
feel great remorse in their hearts, considering that Friar Masseo was a
man of great perfection even as they or more so, and upon him was laid
all the burthen of the Place and not on them. For which cause they were
all moved with one desire and went to beseech the holy father that he
would be pleased to distribute among them those offices; inasmuch as
their consciences might in no wise bear that Friar Masseo should endure
so great labour. Hearing this St. Francis inclined his ear unto their
counsels and consented unto their wish. Calling Friar Masseo he spake to
him after this manner: "Friar Masseo, thy companions desire to share the
offices which I have given thee; and therefore I will that they be
divided among them." Said Friar Masseo, with great humility and
patience: "Father, that which thou layest upon me, whether in whole or
in part, I esteem it altogether

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

done of God". Then St. Francis, beholding the charity of those others
and the humility of Friar Masseo, preached unto them a marvellous sermon
touching most holy humility; teaching them that the greater the gifts
and graces which God bestows upon us, the greater should our humility
be; because without humility no virtue is acceptable to God. And whey:
he had finished preaching, he distributed the offices with very great
love.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. How St. Francis and Friar Masseo placed the bread
which they had begged upon a stone . . .](lff016)
