<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](elms08)  [Next](elms10) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

VII\.

RECEPTIVITY.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> order to lay the foundations for
practical work, the student must endeavour to get a clear conception of
what is meant by the intelligence of undifferentiated spirit. We want to
grasp the idea of intelligence apart from individuality, an idea which
is rather apt to elude us until we grow accustomed to it. It is the
failure to realize this quality of spirit that has given rise to all the
theological errors that have brought bitterness into the world and has
been prominent amongst the causes which have retarded the true
development of mankind. To accurately convey this conception in words,
is perhaps, impossible, and to attempt definition is to introduce that
very idea of limitation which is our object to avoid. It is a matter of
feeling rather than of definition; yet some endeavour must be made to
indicate the direction in which we must feel for this great truth if we
are to find it. The idea is that of realizing personality without that
selfhood which differentiates one individual from another. "I am not
that other because I am myself"—this is the definition of individual
selfhood; but it necessarily imparts the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

idea of limitation, because the recognition of any other individuality
at once affirms a point at which our own individuality ceases and the
other begins. Now this mode of recognition cannot be attributed to the
Universal Mind. For it to recognize a point where itself ceased and
something else began would be to recognize itself as *not* universal;
for the meaning of universality is the including of *all* things, and
therefore for this intelligence to recognize anything as being *outside
itself* would be a denial of its own being. We may therefore say without
hesitation that, whatever may be the nature of its intelligence, it must
be entirely devoid of the element of self-recognition *as an individual
personality* on any scale whatever. Seen in this light it is at once
clear that the originating all-pervading Spirit is the grand impersonal
principle of Life which gives rise to all the particular manifestations
of Nature. Its absolute impersonalness, in the sense of the entire
absence of any consciousness of *individual* selfhood, is a point on
which it is impossible to insist too strongly. The attributing of an
impossible individuality to the Universal Mind is one of the two grand
errors which we find sapping the foundations of religion and philosophy
in all ages. The other consists in rushing to the opposite extreme and
denying the quality of personal intelligence to the Universal Mind. The
answer to this error remains, as of old, in the simple question,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "He that made the
eye shall He not see? He that planted the ear shall He not hear?"—or to
use a popular proverb, "You cannot get out of a bag more than there is
in it;" and consequently the fact that we ourselves are centres of
personal intelligence is proof that the infinite, from which these
centres are concentrated, must be infinite intelligence, and thus we
cannot avoid attributing to it the two factors which constitute
personality, namely, intelligence and volition. We are therefore brought
to the conclusion that this universally diffused essence, which we might
think of as a sort of spiritual protoplasm, must possess all the
qualities of personality without that conscious recognition of self
which constitutes separate individuality: and since the word
"personality" has became so associated in our ordinary talk with the
idea of "individuality" it will perhaps be better to coin a new word,
and speak of the personalness of the Universal Mind as indicating its
personal *quality*, apart from individuality. We must realize that this
universal spirit permeates all space and all manifested substance, just
as physical scientists tell us that the ether does, and that wherever it
is, there it must carry with it all that it is in its own being; and we
shall then see that we are in the midst of an ocean of undifferentiated
yet intelligent Life, above, below, and all around, and permeating
ourselves both mentally and corporeally, and all other beings as well.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

Gradually as we come to realize the truth of this statement, our eyes
will begin to open to its immense significance. It means that all Nature
is pervaded by an interior personalness, infinite in its potentialities
of intelligence, responsiveness, and power of expression, and only
waiting to be called into activity by our recognition of it. By the
terms of its nature it can respond to us only as we recognize it. If we
are at that intellectual level where we can see nothing but chance
governing the world, then this underlying universal mind will present to
us nothing but a fortuitous confluence of forces without any
intelligible order. If we are sufficiently advanced to see that such a
confluence could only produce a chaos, and not a cosmos, then our
conceptions expand to the idea of universal Law, and we find *this* to
be the nature of the all-underlying principle. We have made an immense
advance from the realm of mere accident into a world where there are
definite principles on which we can calculate with certainty *when we
know them*. But here is the crucial point. The laws of the universe are
there, but we are ignorant of them, and only through experience gained
by repeated failures can we get any insight into the laws with which we
have to deal. How painful each step and how slow the progress! Æons upon
æons would not suffice to grasp all the laws of the universe in their
totality, not in the visible world only, but also in the world

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

of the unseen; each failure to know the true law implies suffering
arising from our ignorant breach of it; and thus, since Nature is
infinite, we are met by the paradox that we must in some way contrive to
compass the knowledge of the infinite with our individual intelligence,
and we must perform a pilgrimage along an unceasing Via Dolorosa beneath
the lash of the inexorable Law until we find the solution to the
problem. But it will be asked, May we not go on until at last we attain
the possession of all knowledge? People do not realize what is meant by
"the infinite," or they would not ask such questions. The infinite is
that which is limitless and exhaustless. Imagine the vastest capacity
you will, and having filled it with the infinite, what remains of the
infinite is just as infinite as before. To the mathematician this may be
put very clearly. Raise *x* to any power you will, and however vast may
be the disparity between it and the lower powers of *x*, both are
equally incommensurate with *x<sup>n</sup>.* The universal reign of Law
is a magnificent truth; it is one of the two great pillars of the
universe symbolized by the two pillars that stood at the entrance to
Solomon's temple: it is Jachin, but Jachin must be equilibriated by
Boaz.

It is an enduring truth, which can never be altered, that every
infraction of the Law of Nature must carry its punitive consequences
with it. We

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

can never get beyond the range of cause and effect. There is no escaping
from the law of punishment, except by knowledge. If we know a law of
Nature and work with it, we shall find it our unfailing friend, ever
ready to serve us, and never rebuking us for past failures; but if we
ignorantly or wilfully transgress it, it is our implacable enemy, until
we again become obedient to it; and therefore the only redemption from
perpetual pain and servitude is by a self-expansion which can grasp
infinitude itself. How is this to be accomplished? By our progress to
that kind and degree of intelligence by which we realize the inherent
*personalness* of the divine all-pervading Life, which is at once the
Law and the Substance of all that is. Well said the Jewish rabbis of
old, "The Law is a Person." When we once realize that the universal Life
and the universal Law are one with the universal Personalness, then we
have established the pillar Boaz as the needed complement to Jachin; and
when we find the common point in which these two unite, we have raised
the Royal Arch through which we may triumphantly enter the Temple. We
must dissociate the Universal Personalness from every conception of
individuality. The universal can never be the individual: that would be
a contradiction in terms. But because the universal personalness is the
root of all individual personalities, it finds its highest expression

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

in response to those who realize its personal nature. And it is this
recognition that solves the seemingly insoluble paradox. The only way to
attain that knowledge of the Infinite Law which will change the Via
Dolorosa into the Path of Joy is to embody in ourselves a *principle* of
knowledge commensurate with the infinitude of that which is to be known;
and this is accomplished by realizing that, infinite as the law itself,
is a universal Intelligence in the midst of which we float as in a
living ocean. Intelligence without individual personality, but which, in
producing us, concentrates itself into the personal individualities
which we are. What should be the relation of such an intelligence
towards us? Not one of favouritism: not any more than the Law can it
respect one person above another, for itself is the root and support for
each alike. Not one of refusal to our advances; for without
individuality it can have no personal object of its own to conflict with
ours; and since it is itself the origin of all individual intelligence,
it cannot be shut off by inability to understand. By the very terms of
its being, therefore, this infinite, underlying, all-producing Mind must
be ready immediately to respond to all who realize their true relation
to it. As the very principle of Life itself it must be infinitely
susceptible to feeling, and consequently it will reproduce with absolute
accuracy whatever conception of itself we impress upon it; and

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

hence if we realize the human mind as that stage in the evolution of the
cosmic order at which an individuality has arisen capable of expressing,
not merely the livingness, but also the personalness of the universal
underlying spirit, then we see that its most perfect mode of
self-expression must be by identifying itself with these individual
personalities.

The identification is, of course, limited by the measure of the
individual intelligence, meaning, not merely the intellectual perception
of the sequence of cause and effect, but also that indescribable
reciprocity of *feeling* by which we instinctively recognize something
in another making them akin to ourselves; and so it is that when we
intelligently realize that the innermost principle of being, must by
reason of its universality, have a common nature with our own, then we
have solved the paradox of universal knowledge, for we have realized our
identity of being with the Universal Mind, which is commensurate with
the Universal Law. Thus we arrive at the truth of St. John's statement,
"Ye know all things," only this knowledge is primarily on the spiritual
plane. It is not brought out into intellectual statement whether needed
or not; for it is not in itself the specific knowledge of particular
facts, but it is the undifferentiated principle of knowledge which we
may differentiate in any direction that we choose. This is a
philosophical necessity of the case, for though the action of the
individual

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

mind consists in differentiating the universal into particular
applications, to differentiate the *whole* universal would be a
contradiction in terms; and so, because we cannot exhaust the infinite,
our possession of it must consist in our power to differentiate it as
the occasion may require, the only limit being that which we ourselves
assign to the manifestation.

In this way, then, the recognition of the community of *personality*
between ourselves and the universal undifferentiated Spirit, which is
the root and substance of all things, solves the question of our release
from the iron grasp of an inflexible Law, not by abrogating the Law,
which would mean the annihilation of all things, but by producing in us
an intelligence equal in affinity with the universal Law itself, and
thus enabling us to apprehend and meet the requirements of the Law in
each particular as it arises. In this way the Cosmic Intelligence
becomes individualized, and the individual intelligence becomes
universalized; the two became one, and in proportion as this unity is
realized and acted on, it will be found that the Law, which gives rise
to all outward conditions, whether of body or of circumstances, becomes
more and more clearly understood, and can therefore be more freely made
use of, so that by steady, intelligent endeavour to unfold upon these
lines we may reach degrees of power to which it is impossible to assign
any limits. The student who would understand the rationale of

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

the unfoldment of his own possibilities must make no mistake here. He
must realize that the whole process is that of bringing the universal
within the grasp of the individual by raising the individual to the
level of the universal and not vice-versa. It is a mathematical truism
that you cannot contract the infinite, and that you *can* expand the
individual; and it is precisely on these lines that evolution works. The
laws of nature cannot be altered in the least degree; but we can come
into such a realization of our own relation to the universal principle
of Law that underlies them as to be able to press all particular laws,
whether of the visible or invisible side of Nature, into our service and
so find ourselves masters of the situation. This is to be accomplished
by knowledge; and the only knowledge which will effect this purpose in
all its measureless immensity is the knowledge of the personal element
in Universal Spirit in its reciprocity to our own personality. Our
recognition of this Spirit must therefore be twofold, as the principle
of necessary sequence, order or Law, and also as the principle of
Intelligence, responsive to our own recognition of it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII.—Reciprocal Action of the Universal and Individual
Minds](elms10)

</div>
