<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](elms02)  [Next](elms04) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science.

### I.

### SPIRIT AND MATTER.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> commencing a course of lectures on
Mental Science, it is somewhat difficult for the lecturer to fix upon
the best method of opening the subject. It can be approached from many
sides, each with some peculiar advantage of its own; but, after careful
deliberation, it appears to me that, for the purpose of the present
course, no better starting-point could be selected than the relation
between Spirit and Matter. I select this starting-point because the
distinction—or what we believe to be such— between them is one with
which we are so familiar that I can safely assume its recognition by
everybody; and I may, therefore, at once state this distinction by using
the adjectives which we habitually apply as expressing the natural
opposition between the two—*living* spirit and *dead* matter. These
terms express our current impression of the opposition between spirit
and matter with sufficient

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

accuracy, and considered only from the point of view of outward
appearances this impression is no doubt correct. The general consensus
of mankind is right in trusting the evidence of our senses, and any
system which tells us that we are not to do so will never obtain a
permanent footing in a sane and healthy community. There is nothing
wrong in the evidence conveyed to a healthy mind by the senses of a
healthy body, but the point where error creeps in is when we come to
judge of the meaning of this testimony. We are accustomed to judge only
by external appearances and by certain limited significances which we
attach to words; but when we begin to enquire into the real meaning of
our words and to analyse the causes which give rise to the appearances,
we find our old notions gradually falling off from us, until at last we
wake up to the fact that we are living in an entirely different world to
that we formerly recognized. The old limited mode of thought has
imperceptibly slipped away, and we discover that we have stepped out
into a new order of things where all is liberty and life. This is the
work of an enlightened intelligence resulting from persistent
determination to discover what truth really is irrespective of any
preconceived notions from whatever source derived, the determination to
think honestly for ourselves instead of endeavouring to get our thinking
done for us. Let us then commence by enquiring what we

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

really mean by the livingness which we attribute to spirit and the
deadness which we attribute to matter.

At first we may be disposed to say that livingness consists in the power
of motion and deadness in its absence; but a little enquiry into the
most recent researches of science will soon show us that this
distinction does not go deep enough. It is now one of the
fully-established facts of physical science that no atom of what we call
"dead matter" is without motion. On the table before me lies a solid
lump of steel, but in the light of up-to-date science I know that the
atoms of that seemingly inert mass are vibrating with the most intense
energy, continually dashing hither and thither, impinging upon and
rebounding from one another, or circling round like miniature solar
systems, with a ceaseless rapidity whose complex activity is enough to
bewilder the imagination. The mass, as a mass, may lie inert upon the
table; but so far from being destitute of the element of motion it is
the abode of the never-tiring energy moving the particles with a
swiftness to which the speed of an express train is as nothing. It is,
therefore, not the mere fact of motion that is at the root of the
distinction which we draw instinctively between spirit and matter; we
must go deeper than that. The solution of the problem will never be
found by comparing Life with what we call deadness, and the reason for
this will become apparent later on; but the true key is to

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

be found by comparing one degree of livingness with another. There is,
of course, one sense in which the quality of livingness does not admit
of degrees; but there is another sense in which it is entirely a
question of degree. We have no doubt as to the livingness of a plant,
but we realize that it is something very different from the livingness
of an animal. Again, what average boy would not prefer a fox-terrier to
a goldfish for a pet? Or, again, why is it that the boy himself is an
advance upon the dog? The plant, the fish, the dog, and the boy are all
equally *alive*; but there is a difference in the quality of their
livingness about which no one can have any doubt, and no one would
hesitate to say that this difference is in the degree of intelligence.
In whatever way we turn the subject we shall always find that what we
call the "livingness" of any individual life is ultimately measured by
its intelligence. It is the possession of greater intelligence that
places the animal higher in the scale of being than the plant, the man
higher than the animal, the intellectual man higher than the savage. The
increased intelligence calls into activity modes of motion of a higher
order corresponding to itself. The higher the intelligence, the more
completely the mode of motion is under its control: and as we descend in
the scale of intelligence, the descent is marked by a corresponding
increase in *automatic* motion not subject to the control of a
self-conscious

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

intelligence. This descent is gradual from the expanded self-recognition
of the highest human personality to that lowest order of visible forms
which we speak of as "things," and from which self-recognition is
entirely absent.

We see, then, that the livingness of Life consists in intelligence—in
other words, in the power of Thought; and we may therefore say that the
distinctive quality of spirit is Thought, and, as the opposite to this,
we may say that the distinctive quality of matter is Form. We cannot
conceive of matter without form. Some form there must be, even though
invisible to the physical eye; for matter, to be matter at all, must
occupy space, and to occupy any particular space necessarily implies a
corresponding form. For these reasons we may lay it down as a
fundamental proposition that the distinctive quality of spirit is
Thought and the distinctive quality of matter is Form. This is a radical
distinction from which important consequences follow, and should,
therefore, be carefully noted by the student.

Form implies extension in space and also limitation within certain
boundaries. Thought implies neither. When, therefore, we think of Life
as existing in any particular *form* we associate it with the idea of
extension in space, so that an elephant may be said to consist of a
vastly larger amount of living substance than a mouse. But if we think
of Life as

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the fact of livingness we do not associate it with any idea of
extension, and we at once realize that the mouse is quite as much alive
as the elephant, notwithstanding the difference in size. The important
point of this distinction is that if we can conceive of anything as
entirely devoid of the element of extension in space, it must be present
in its entire totality anywhere and everywhere—that is to say, at every
point of space simultaneously. The scientific definition of time is that
it is the period occupied by a body in passing from one given point in
space to another, and, therefore, according to this definition, when
there is no space there can be no time; and hence that conception of
spirit which realizes it as devoid of the element of space must realize
it as being devoid of the element of time also; and we therefore find
that the conception of spirit as pure Thought, and not as concrete Form,
is the conception of it as subsisting perfectly independently of the
elements of time and space. From this it follows that if the idea of
anything is conceived as existing on this level it can only represent
that thing as being actually present here and now. In this view of
things nothing can be remote from us either in time or space: either the
idea is entirely dissipated or it exists as an actual present entity,
and not as something that *shall* be in the future, for where there is
no sequence in time there can be no future. Similarly where there is no
space

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

there can be no conception of anything as being at a distance from us.
When the elements of time and space are eliminated all our ideas of
things must necessarily be as subsisting in a universal here and an
everlasting now. This is, no doubt, a highly abstract conception, but I
would ask the student to endeavour to grasp it thoroughly, since it is
of vital importance in the practical application of Mental Science, as
will appear further on.

The opposite conception is that of things expressing themselves through
conditions of time and space and thus establishing a variety of
*relations* to other things, as of bulk, distance, and direction, or of
sequence in time. These two conceptions are respectively the conception
of the abstract and the concrete, of the unconditioned and the
conditioned, of the absolute and the relative. They are not opposed to
each other in the sense of incompatibility, but are each the complement
of the other, and the only reality is in the combination of the two. The
error of the extreme idealist is in endeavouring to realize the absolute
without the relative, and the error of the extreme materialist is in
endeavouring to realize the relative without the absolute. On the one
side the mistake is in trying to realize an inside without an outside,
and on the other in trying to realize an outside without an inside; both
are necessary to the formation of a substantial entity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II.—The Higher Mode of Intelligence Controls the Lower](elms04)

</div>
