<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](elms14)  [Next](elms16.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

### XIII.

### IN TOUCH WITH SUB-CONSCIOUS MIND.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> preceding pages have made the student
in some measure aware of the immense importance of our dealings with the
sub-conscious mind. Our relation to it, whether on the scale of the
individual or the universal, is the key to all that we are or ever can
be. In its unrecognized working it is the spring of all that we can call
the automatic action of mind and body, and on the universal scale it is
the silent power of evolution gradually working onwards to that "divine
event, to which the whole creation moves"; and by our conscious
recognition of it we make it, relatively to ourselves, all that we
believe it to be. The closer our *rapport* with it becomes, the more
what we have hitherto considered automatic action, whether in our bodies
or our circumstances, will pass under our control, until at last we
shall control our whole individual world. Since, then, this is the
stupendous issue involved, the question how we are to put ourselves
practically in touch with the sub-conscious mind is a very important
one. Now the clue which gives us the right direction is to be found in
the *impersonal* quality of sub-conscious mind of

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

which I have spoken. Not impersonal as lacking the *elements* of
personality; nor even, in the case of individual subjective mind, as
lacking the sense of individuality; but impersonal in the sense of not
recognizing the particular external relations which appear to the
objective mind to constitute its personality, and having a realization
of itself quite independent of them. If, then, we would come in touch
with it we must meet it on its own ground. It can see things only from
the deductive standpoint, and therefore cannot take note of the
inductive standpoint from which we construct the idea of our external
personality; and accordingly if we would put ourselves in touch with it,
we cannot do so by bringing it down to the level of the external and
non-essential but only by rising to its own level on the plane of the
interior and essential. How can this be done? Let two well-known writers
answer. Rudyard Kipling tells us in his story of "Kim" how the boy used
at times to lose his sense of personality by repeating to himself the
question, *Who* is Kim? Gradually his personality would seem to fade and
he would experience a feeling of passing into a grander and a wider
life, in which the boy Kim was unknown, while his own conscious
individuality remained, only exalted and expanded to an inconceivable
extent; and in Tennyson's life by his son we are told that at times the
poet had a similar experience. We come into touch

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

with the absolute exactly in proportion as we withdraw ourselves from
the relative: they vary inversely to each other.

For the purpose, then, of getting into touch with our sub-conscious mind
we must endeavour to think of ourselves as pure being, as that entity
which interiorly supports the outward manifestation, and doing so we
shall realize that the essential quality of pure being must be good. It
is in itself *pure Life*, and as such cannot desire anything detrimental
to pure Life under whatever form manifested. Consequently the purer our
intentions the more readily we shall place ourself *en rapport* with our
subjective entity; and *a fortiori* the same applies to that Greater
Sub-conscious Mind of which our individual subjective mind is a
particular manifestation. In actual practice the process consists in
first forming a clear conception in the objective mind of the idea we
wish to convey to the subjective mind: then, when this has been firmly
grasped, endeavour to lose sight of all other facts connected with the
external personality except the one in question, and then mentally
address the subjective mind as though it were an independent entity and
impress upon it what you want it to do or to believe. Everyone must
formulate his own way of working, but one method, which is both simple
and effective is to say to the subjective mind, "This is what I want you
to do; you will now step into my

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

place and do it, bringing all your powers and intelligence to bear, and
considering yourself to be none other than myself." Having done this
return to the realization of your own objective personality and leave
the subjective mind to perform its task in full confidence that, by the
law of its nature, it will do so if not hindered by a repetition of
contrary messages from the objective mind. This is not a mere fancy but
a truth daily proved by the experience of increasing numbers. The facts
have not been fabricated to fit the theory, but the theory has been
built up by careful observation of the facts; and since it has been
shown both by theory and practice that such is the law of the relation
between subjective and objective mind, we find ourselves face to face
with a very momentous question. Is there any reason why the laws which
hold good of the individual subjective mind should not hold good of the
Universal Mind also? and the answer is that there is not. As has been
already shown the Universal Mind must, by its very universality, be
purely subjective, and what is the law of a part must also be the law of
the whole: the qualities of fire are the same whether the centres of
combustion be great or small, and therefore we may well conclude these
lectures by considering what will be the result if we apply what we have
learnt regarding the individual subjective mind to the Universal Mind.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

We have learnt that the three great facts regarding subjective mind are
its creative power, its amenableness to suggestion, and its inability to
work by any other than the deductive method. This last is an exceedingly
important point, for it implies that the action of the subjective mind
is in no way limited by precedent. The inductive method works on
principles inferred from an already existing pattern, and therefore at
the best only produces the old thing in a new shape. But the deductive
method works according to the essence or spirit of the principle, and
does not depend on any previous concrete manifestation for its
apprehension of it; and this latter method of working must necessarily
be that of the all-originating Mind, for since there could be no prior
existing pattern from which it could learn the principles of
construction, the want of a pattern would have prevented its creating
anything had its method been inductive instead of deductive. Thus by the
necessity of the case the Universal Mind must act deductively, that is,
according to the law which has been found true of individual subjective
mind. It is thus not bound by any precedent, which means that its
creative power is absolutely unlimited; and since it is essentially
subjective mind, and not objective mind, it is entirely amenable to
suggestion. Now it is an unavoidable inference from the identity of the
law governing subjective mind, whether in the individual or the
universal, that just

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

as we can by suggestion impress a certain character of personality upon
the individual subjective mind, so we can, and do, upon the Universal
Mind; and it is for this reason that I have drawn attention to the
inherent personal *quality* of pure spirit when contemplated in its most
interior plane. It becomes, therefore, the most important of all
considerations with what character we invest the Universal Mind; for
since our relation to it is *purely subjective* it will infallibly bear
*to us* exactly that character which we impress upon it; in other words
it will be to us exactly what we believe it to be. This is simply a
logical inference from the fact that, as subjective mind, our primary
relation to it can only be on the subjective plane, and indirectly our
objective relations must also spring from the same source. This is the
meaning of that remarkable passage twice repeated in the Bible, "With,
the pure thou wilt show thyself pure, and with the froward thou wilt
show thyself froward." (Ps. xviii., 26, and II. Sam. xxii., 27), for the
context makes it clear that these words are addressed to the Divine
Being. The spiritual kingdom is *within* us, and as we realize it
*there* so it becomes to us a reality. It is the unvarying law of the
subjective life that "as a man thinketh in his heart so is he," that is
to say, his inward subjective states are the only true reality, and what
we call external realities are only their objective correspondences. If
we

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

thoroughly realize the truth that the Universal Mind must be to us
exactly according to our conception of it, and that this relation is not
merely imaginary but by the law of subjective mind must be to us an
actual fact and the foundation of all other facts, then it is impossible
to over-estimate the importance of the conception of the Universal Mind
which we adopt. To the uninstructed there is little or no choice: they
form a conception in accordance with the tradition they have received
from others, and until they have learnt to think for themselves, they
have to abide by the results of that tradition: for natural laws admit
of no exceptions, and however faulty the traditional idea may be, its
acceptance will involve a corresponding reaction upon the Universal
Mind, which will in turn be reflected into the conscious mind and
external life of the individual. But those who understand the law of the
subject will have no one but themselves to blame if they do not derive
all possible benefits from it. The greatest Teacher of Mental Science
the world has ever seen has laid down sufficiently plain rules for our
guidance. With a knowledge of the subject whose depth can be appreciated
only by those who have themselves some practical acquaintance with it,
He bids His unlearned audiences, those common people who heard Him
gladly, picture to themselves the Universal Mind as a benign Father,
tenderly compassionate of all and sending the common

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

bounties of Nature alike on the evil and the good; but He also pictured
It as exercising a special and peculiar care over those who recognize
Its willingness to do so:—"the very hairs of your head are all
numbered," and "ye are of more value than many sparrows." Prayer was to
be made to the unseen Being, not with doubt or fear, but with the
absolute assurance of a certain answer, and no limit was to be set to
its power or willingness to work for us. But to those who did not thus
realize it, the Great Mind is necessarily the adversary who casts them
into prison until they have paid the uttermost farthing; and thus in all
cases the Master impressed upon his hearers the exact correspondence of
the attitude of this unseen Power towards *them* with their own attitude
towards *it*. Such teaching was not a narrow anthropomorphism but the
adaptation to the intellectual capacity of the unlettered multitude of
the very deepest truths of what we now call Mental Science. And the
basis of it all is the cryptic personality of spirit hidden throughout
the infinite of Nature under every form of manifestation. As unalloyed
Life and Intelligence it *can* be no other than good, it can entertain
no intention of evil, and thus all intentional evil must put us in
opposition to it, and so deprive us of the consciousness of its guidance
and strengthening and thus leave us to grope our own way and fight our
own battle single-handed against the universe, odds

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

which at last will surely prove too great for us. But remember that the
opposition can never be on the part of the Universal Mind, for in itself
it is sub-conscious mind; and to suppose any active opposition taken on
its own initiative would be contrary to all we have learnt as to the
nature of sub-conscious mind whether in the individual or the universal;
the position of the Universal Mind towards us is always the reflection
of our own attitude. Therefore although the Bible is full of threatening
against those who persist in conscious opposition to the Divine Law of
Good, it is on the other hand full of promises of immediate and full
forgiveness to all who change, their attitude and desire to co-operate
with the Law of Good so far as they know it. The laws of Nature do not
act vindictively; and through all theological formularies and
traditional interpretations let us realize that what we are dealing with
is the supreme law of our own being; and it is on the basis of this
natural law that we find such declarations as that in Ezek. xviii., 22,
which tells that if we forsake our evil ways our past transgressions
shall never again be mentioned to us. We are dealing with the great
principles of our subjective being, and our misuse of them in the past
can never make them change their inherent law of action. If our method
of using them in the past has brought us sorrow, fear and trouble, we
have only to fall back on the law that if we reverse the cause the
effects will

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

be reversed also; and so what we have to do is simply to reverse our
mental attitude and then endeavour to act up to the new one. The sincere
endeavour to act up to our new mental attitude is essential, for we
cannot really think in one way and act in another; but our repeated
failures to fully act as we would wish must not discourage us. It is the
sincere intention that is the essential thing, and this will in time
release us from the bondage of habits which at present seem almost
insuperable.

The initial step, then, consists in determining to picture the Universal
Mind as the ideal of all we could wish it to be both to ourselves and to
others, together with the endeavour to reproduce this ideal, however
imperfectly, in our own life; and this step having been taken, we can
then cheerfully look upon it as our ever-present Friend, providing all
good, guarding from all danger, and guiding us with all counsel.
Gradually as the habit of thus regarding the Universal Mind grows upon
us, we shall find that in accordance with the laws we have been
considering, it will become more and more *personal* to us, and in
response to our desire its inherent intelligence will make itself more
and more clearly perceptible within as a power of perceiving truth far
beyond any statement of it that we could formulate by merely
intellectual investigation. Similarly if we think of it as a great power
devoted to supplying all our needs, we

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

shall impress this character also upon it, and by the law of subjective
mind it will proceed to enact the part of that special providence which
we have credited it with being; and if, beyond the general care of our
concerns, we would draw to ourselves some particular benefit, the same
rule holds good of impressing our desire upon the Universal Subjective
Mind. And if we realize that above and beyond all this we want something
still greater and more enduring, the building-up of character and
unfolding of our powers so that we may expand into fuller and yet fuller
measures of joyous and joy-giving Life, still the same rule holds good:
convey to the Universal Mind the suggestion of the desire, and by the
law of relation between subjective and objective mind this too will be
fulfilled. And thus the deepest problems of philosophy bring us back to
the old statement of the Law:—Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. This is the
summing-up of the natural law of the relation between us and the Divine
Mind. It is thus no vain boast that Mental Science can enable us to make
our lives what we will. We must start from where we are now, and by
rightly estimating our relation to the Divine Universal Mind we can
gradually grow into any conditions we desire, provided we first make
ourselves in habitual mental attitude the person who corresponds to
those conditions: for we can never get

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

over the law of correspondence, and the externalization will always be
in accord with the internal principle that gives rise to it. And to this
law there is no limit. What it can do for us to-day it can do to-morrow,
and through all that procession of to-morrows that loses itself in the
dim vistas of eternity. Belief in limitation is the one and only thing
that causes limitation, because we thus impress limitation upon the
creative principle; and in proportion as we lay that belief aside our
boundaries will expand, and increasing life and more abundant blessing
will be ours.

But we must not ignore our responsibilities. Trained thought is far more
powerful than untrained, and therefore the more deeply we penetrate into
Mental Science the more carefully we must guard against all thoughts and
words expressive of even the most modified form of ill-will. Gossip,
tale-bearing, sneering laughter, are not in accord with the principles
of Mental Science; and similarly even our smallest thoughts of good
carry with them a seed of good which will assuredly bear fruit in due
time. This is not mere "goodie, goodie," but an important lesson in
Mental Science, for our subjective mind takes its colour from our
settled mental habits, and an occasional affirmation or denial will not
be sufficient to change it; and we must therefore cultivate that tone
which we wish to see reproduced in our conditions whether of body, mind,
or circumstance.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

In these lectures my purpose has been, not so much to give specific
rules of practice as to lay down the broad general principles of Mental
Science which will enable the student to form rules for himself. In
every walk in life, book knowledge is only a means to an end. Books can
only direct us where to look and what to look for, but we must do the
finding *for ourselves;* therefore, if you have really grasped the
principles of the science, you will frame rules of your own which will
give you better results than any attempt to follow somebody else's
method, which was successful in their hands precisely because it was
theirs. Never fear to be yourself. If Mental Science does not teach you
to be yourself it teaches you nothing. Yourself, more yourself, and yet
more yourself is what you want; only with the knowledge that the true
self includes the inner and higher self which is always in immediate
touch with the Great Divine Mind.

As Walt Whitman says:—"You are not all included between your hat and
your boots."

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

*The growing popularity of the Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science has
led me to add to the present edition three more sections on Body, Soul,
and Spirit, which it is hoped will prove useful by rendering the
principles of the interaction of these three factors somewhat clearer*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV.—The Body](elms16.md)

</div>
