<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](elms06)  [Next](elms08.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### V.

### FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE MIND.

<span class="smallcaps">An</span> intelligent consideration of the
phenomena of hypnotism will show us that what we call the hypnotic state
is the *normal* state of the subjective mind. It *always* conceives of
itself in accordance with some suggestion conveyed to it, either
consciously or unconsciously to the mode of objective mind which governs
it, and it gives rise to corresponding external results. The abnormal
nature of the conditions induced by experimental hypnotism is in the
removal of the normal control held by the individual's own objective
mind over his subjective mind and the substitution of some other control
for it, and thus we may say that the normal characteristic of the
subjective mind is its perpetual action in accordance with some sort of
suggestion. It becomes therefore a question of the highest importance to
determine in every case what the nature of the suggestion shall be and
from what source it shall proceed; but before considering the sources of
suggestion we must realize more fully the place taken by subjective mind
in the order of Nature.

If the student has followed what has been said regarding

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

the presence of intelligent spirit pervading all space and permeating
all matter, he will now have little difficulty in recognizing this
all-pervading spirit as universal subjective mind. That it cannot *as
universal mind* have the qualities of objective mind is very obvious.
The universal mind is the creative power throughout Nature; and as the
originating power it must first give rise to the various *forms* in
which objective mind recognizes its own individuality, before these
individual minds can re-act upon it; and hence, as pure spirit or *first
cause*, it cannot possibly be anything else than subjective mind; and
the fact which has been abundantly proved by experiment that the
subjective mind is the builder of the body shows us that the power of
creating by growth from within is the essential characteristic of the
subjective mind. Hence, both from experiment and from *a priori*
reasoning, we may say that where-ever we find creative power at work
there we are in the presence of subjective mind, whether it be working
on the grand scale of the cosmos, or on the miniature scale of the
individual. We may therefore lay it down as a principle that the
universal all-permeating intelligence, which has been considered in the
second and third sections, is purely subjective mind, and therefore
follows the law of subjective mind, namely that it is amenable to any
suggestion, and will carry out any suggestion that is impressed upon

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

it to its most rigorously logical consequences. The incalculable
importance of this truth may not perhaps strike the student at first
sight, but a little consideration will show him the enormous
possibilities that are stored up in it, and in the concluding section I
shall briefly touch upon the very serious conclusions resulting from it.
For the present it will be sufficient to realize that the subjective
mind in ourselves is *the same* subjective mind which is at work
throughout the universe giving rise to the infinitude of natural forms
with which we are surrounded, and in like manner giving rise *to
ourselves also*. It may be called the supporter of our individuality;
and we may loosely speak of our individual subjective mind as our
personal share in the universal mind. This, of course, does not imply
the splitting up of the universal mind into fractions, and it is to
avoid this error that I have discussed the essential unity of spirit in
the third section, but in order to avoid too highly abstract conceptions
in the present stage of the student's progress we may conveniently
employ the idea of a personal share in the universal subjective mind.

To realize our individual subjective mind in this manner will help us to
get over the great metaphysical difficulty which meets us in our
endeavour to make conscious use of first cause, in other words to create
external results by the power of our own

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

thought. Ultimately there can be only one first cause which is the
universal mind, but because it is universal it cannot, *as universal*,
act on the plane of the individual and particular. For it to do so would
be for it to cease to be universal and therefore cease to be the
creative power which we wish to employ. On the other hand, the fact that
we are working for a specific definite object implies our intention to
use this universal power in application to a particular purpose, and
thus we find ourselves involved in the paradox of seeking to make the
universal act on the plane of the particular. We want to effect a
junction between the two extremes of the scale of Nature, the innermost
creative spirit and a particular external form. Between these two is a
great gulf, and the question is how is it to be bridged over. It is
here, then, that the conception of our individual subjective mind as our
personal share in the universal subjective mind affords the means of
meeting the difficulty, for on the one hand it is in immediate
connection with the universal mind, and on the other it is immediate
connection with the individual objective, or intellectual mind; and this
in its turn is in immediate connection with the world of
externalization, which is conditioned in time and space; and thus the
relation between the subjective and objective minds in the individual
forms the bridge which is needed to connect the two extremities of the
scale.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

The individual subjective mind may therefore be regarded as the organ of
the Absolute in precisely the same way that the objective mind is the
organ of the Relative, and it is in order to regulate our use of these
two organs that it is necessary to understand what the terms "absolute"
and "relative" actually mean. The absolute is that idea of a thing which
contemplates it as existing *in itself* and not in relation to something
else, that is to say, which contemplates the essence of it; and the
relative is that idea of a thing which contemplates it as related to
other things, that is to say as circumscribed by a certain environment.
The absolute is the region of causes, and the relative is the region of
conditions; and hence, if we wish to control conditions, this can only
be done by our thought-power operating on the plane of the absolute,
which it can do only through the medium of the subjective mind. The
conscious use of the creative power of thought consists in the
attainment of the power of Thinking in the Absolute, and this can only
be attained by a clear conception of the interaction between our
different mental functions. For this purpose the student cannot too
strongly impress upon himself that subjective mind, on whatever scale,
is intensely sensitive to suggestion, and as creative power works
accurately to the externalization of that suggestion which is most
deeply impressed upon it. If then, we would take

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

any idea out of the realm of the relative, where it is limited and
restricted by conditions imposed upon it through surrounding
circumstances, and transfer it to the realm of the absolute where it is
not thus limited, a right recognition of our mental constitution will
enable us to do this by a clearly defined method.

The object of our desire is necessarily first conceived by us as bearing
some relation to existing circumstances, which may, or may not, appear
favourable to it; and what we want to do is to eliminate the element of
contingency and attain something which is certain in itself. To do this
is to work upon the plane of the absolute, and for this purpose we must
endeavour to impress upon our subjective mind the idea of that which we
desire quite apart from any conditions. This separation from the
elements of condition implies the elimination of the idea of *time*, and
consequently we must think of the thing as already in actual existence.
Unless we do this we are not consciously operating upon the plane of the
absolute, and are therefore not employing the creative power of our
thought. The simplest practical method of gaining the habit of thinking
in this manner is to conceive the existence in the spiritual world of a
spiritual prototype of every existing thing, which becomes the root of
the corresponding external existence. If we thus habituate ourselves to
look on the

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

spiritual prototype as the essential being of the thing, and the
material form as the growth of this prototype into outward expression,
then we shall see that the initial step to the production of any
external fact must be the creation of its spiritual prototype. This
prototype, being purely spiritual, can only be formed by the operation
of *thought*, and in order to have substance on the spiritual plane it
*must* be thought of as actually existing there. This conception has
been elaborated by Plato in his doctrine of archetypal ideas, and by
Swedenborg in his doctrine of correspondences; and a still greater
teacher has said "All things whatsoever ye pray and ask for, believe
that ye *have* received them, and ye *shall* receive them." (Mark xi.
24, R.V.) The difference of the tenses in this passage is remarkable.
The speaker bids us first to believe that our desire *has* already been
fulfilled, that it is a thing already accomplished, and then its
accomplishment *will* follow as a thing in the future. This is nothing
else than a concise direction for making use of the creative power of
thought by impressing upon the universal subjective mind the particular
thing which we desire as an already existing fact. In following this
direction we are thinking on the plane of the absolute and eliminating
from our minds all consideration of conditions, which imply limitation
and the possibility of adverse contingencies; and we are thus planting a
seed which, if left

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

undisturbed, will infallibly germinate into external fruition.

By thus making intelligent use of our subjective mind, we, so to speak,
create a *nucleus*, which is no sooner created than it begins to
exercise an attractive force, drawing to itself material of a like
character with its own, and if this process is allowed to go on
undisturbed, it will continue until an external form corresponding to
the nature of the nucleus comes out into manifestation on the plane of
the objective and relative. This is the universal method of Nature on
every plane. Some of the most advanced thinkers in modern physical
science, in the endeavour to probe the great mystery of the first origin
of the world, have postulated the formation of what they call "vortex
rings" formed from an infinitely fine primordial substance. They tell us
that if such a ring be once formed on the minutest scale and set
rotating, then, since it would be moving in pure ether and subject to no
friction, it must according to all known laws of physics be
indestructible and its motion perpetual. Let two such rings approach
each other, and by the law of attraction, they would coalesce into a
whole, and so on until manifested matter as we apprehend it with our
external senses, is at last formed. Of course no one has ever seen these
rings with the physical eye. They are one of those abstractions which
result if we follow out the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

observed law of physics and the unavoidable sequences of mathematics to
their necessary consequences. We cannot account for the things that we
*can* see unless we assume the existence of other things which we
*cannot*; and the "vortex theory" is one of these assumptions. This
theory has not been put forward by mental scientists but by purely
physical scientists as the ultimate conclusion to which their researches
have led them, and this conclusion is that all the innumerable forms of
Nature have their origin in the infinitely minute nucleus of the vortex
ring, by whatever means the vortex ring may have received its initial
impulse, a question with which physical science, as such, is not
concerned.

As the vortex theory accounts for the formation of the inorganic world,
so does biology account for the formation of the living organism. That
also has its origin in a primary nucleus which, as soon as it is
established, operates as a centre of attraction for the formation of all
those physical organs of which the perfect individual is composed. The
science of embryology shows that this rule holds good without exception
throughout the whole range of the animal world, including man; and
botany shows the same principle at work throughout the vegetable world.
All branches of physical science demonstrate the fact that every
completed manifestation, of whatever kind and on whatever scale, is
started by the establishment

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

of a nucleus, infinitely small but endowed with an unquenchable energy
of attraction, causing it to steadily increase in power and definiteness
of purpose, until the process of growth is completed and the matured
form stands out as an accomplished fact. Now if this be the universal
method of Nature, there is nothing unnatural in supposing that it must
begin its operation at a stage further back than the formation of the
material nucleus. As soon as that is called into being it begins to
operate by the law of attraction on the material plane; but what is the
force which originates the material nucleus? Let a recent work on
physical science give us the answer; "In its ultimate essence, energy
may be incomprehensible by us except as an exhibition of the direct
operation of that which we call Mind or Will." The quotation is from a
course of lectures on "Waves in Water, Air and Æther," delivered in
1902, at the Royal Institution, by J. A. Fleming. Here, then, is the
testimony of physical science that the originating energy is Mind or
Will; and we are, therefore, not only making a logical deduction from
certain unavoidable intuitions of the human mind, but are also following
on the lines of the most advanced physical science, when we say that the
action of Mind plants that nucleus which, if allowed to grow
undisturbed, will eventually attract to itself all the conditions
necessary for its manifestation in outward visible form. Now the

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

only action of Mind is Thought; and it is for this reason that by our
thoughts we create corresponding external conditions, because we thereby
create the nucleus which attracts to itself its own correspondences in
due order until the finished work is manifested on the external plane.
This is according to the strictly scientific conception of the universal
law of growth; and we may therefore briefly sum up the whole argument by
saying that our thought of anything forms a spiritual prototype of it,
thus constituting a nucleus or centre of attraction for all conditions
necessary to its eventual externalization by a law of growth inherent in
the prototype itself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI.—The Law of Growth](elms08.md)

</div>
