<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](elms11)  [Next](elms13.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Edinburgh Lectures on Mental Science*, by Thomas Troward, \[1909\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### X.

### INTUITION.

<span class="smallcaps">We</span> have seen that the subjective mind is
amenable to suggestion by the objective mind; but there is also an
action of the subjective mind upon the objective. The individual's
subjective mind is his own innermost self, and its first care is the
maintenance of the individuality of which it is the foundation; and
since it is pure spirit it has its continual existence in that plane of
being where all things subsist in the universal here and the everlasting
now, and consequently can, inform the lower mind of things removed from
its ken either by distance or futurity. As the absence of the conditions
of time and space must logically concentrate all things into a present
focus, we can assign no limit to the subjective mind's power of
perception, and therefore the question arises, why does it not keep the
objective mind continually informed on all points? And the answer is
that it would do so if the objective mind were sufficiently trained to
recognize the indications given, and to effect this training is one of
the purposes of Mental Science. When once we recognize the position of
the subjective mind as the supporter of the whole individuality

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

we cannot doubt that much of what we take to be the spontaneous movement
of the objective mind has its origin in the subjective mind prompting
the objective mind in the right direction without our being consciously
aware of it. But at times when the urgency of the case seems to demand
it, or when, for some reason yet unknown, the objective mind is for a
while more closely *en rapport* with the subjective mind, the interior
voice is heard strongly and persistently; and when this is the case we
do well to pay heed to it. Want of space forbids me to give examples,
but doubtless such will not be wanting in the reader's experience.

The importance of understanding and following the intuition cannot be
exaggerated, but I candidly admit the great practical difficulty of
keeping the happy mean between the disregard of the interior voice and
allowing ourselves to be run away with by groundless fancies. The best
guide is the knowledge that comes of personal experience which gradually
leads to the acquisition of a sort of inward sense of touch that enables
us to distinguish the true from the false, and which appears to grow
with the sincere desire for truth and with the recognition of the spirit
as its source. The only general principles the writer can deduce from
his own experience are that when, in spite of all appearances pointing
in the direction of a certain line of conduct, there is still

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

a persistent *feeling* that it should not be followed, in the majority
of instances it will be found that the argument of the objective mind,
however correct on the facts objectively known, was deficient from
ignorance of facts which could not be objectively known at the time, but
which were known to the intuitive faculty. Another principle is that our
*very first* impression of feeling on any subject is generally correct.
Before the objective mind has begun to argue on the subject it is like
the surface of a smooth lake which clearly reflects the light from
above; but as soon as it begins to argue from outside appearances these
also throw their reflections upon its surface, so that the original
image becomes blurred and is no longer recognizable. This first
conception is very speedily lost, and it should therefore be carefully
observed and registered in the memory with a view to testing the various
arguments which will subsequently arise on the objective plane. It is
however impossible to reduce so interior an action as that of the
intuition to the form of hard and fast rules, and beyond carefully
noting particular cases as they occur, probably the best plan for the
student will be to include the whole subject of intuition in the general
principle of the Law of Attraction, especially if he sees how this law
interacts with that personal quality of universal spirit of which we
have already spoken.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI.—Healing](elms13.md)

</div>
