<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lsbh18)  [Next](lsbh20) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraeus*, by Bar-Hebraeus, tr. E.A.W.
Budge, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

### The Fourteenth Chapter

### STORIES OF MEN WHO FOLLOWED DESPISED HANDICRAFTS.

CCCCLXIX\. A certain man came to a barber and said to him, "Shave my
head for me and take heed that thou handle the razor skilfully. Be
careful of my ears and do not gash me, and do not leave a hair
anywhere." The barber said to him, "Rest assured that I will shave thy
head as thou commandest me, and I will do so in such a way that everyone
who seeth it shall wish to stroke it with his hand."

CCCCLXX\. A certain weaver came to a judge and asked him, saying, "If a
judicial case required men (*i.e.*, witnesses) and people asked me to
come to bear witness before thee on a certain matter, wouldst thou
receive my testimony?" The judge replied to him, "Yes, if it were
accompanied by that of three other trustworthy witnesses." And the
weaver said to him, "Well and good, I will tell these three witnesses
that they may be ready beforehand, and then, \[when\] they let me know,
I will come."

CCCCLXXI\. Another weaver wished to prophesy, and when certain folk said
to him, "No one ever saw a prophet who was a weaver," he replied,
"Shepherds, in spite of their exceedingly great simplicity, have been
employed as prophets, but weavers have never been so employed."

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

CCCCLXXII\. Another weaver was asked by a certain man, "If thou wert
king what wouldst thou desire?" He replied, "Honey and pounded sesame
seeds."

CCCCLXXIII. Luck came to a certain weaver and he became a governor. And
one day his music player said to him, "O master, give me a fine cloak
wherein I may dress myself at the feast." He replied to him, "Bring me
the stuff for weaving it, and in the three days which are yet to pass
before the feast day I will make for thee a cloak."

CCCCLXXIV\. Another man said, "The intelligence of seventy women is like
unto that of one man, and the mind of seventy weavers is as that of one
woman."

CCCCLXXV\. Another man said, "They were weavers who stole Joseph's cup,
and the rod of Moses, and the fleece of Gideon, and the sling of David,
and the swaddling bands of John, and the sandals of the Apostles; and
when Mary asked them to shew her the way to the Sepulchre, they sent her
by a wrong road. For this reason she prayed and entreated her Lord,
saying, 'Wherever weavers live let them toil with their hands and feet
for others, and let no blessing ever come upon them.'"

CCCCLXXVI\. Another man went to a tooth-drawer to extract for him a
tooth which was diseased, and the tooth-drawer asked him for a *zûzâ;*
and the man said, "I will not give a whole *zûzâ*, but only a half."
Then the handicraftsman said to him, "Less than a *zûzâ* I will not
take, but if thou wishest it, and on account of thine honourable
position, I will pull out another tooth also, and I will not charge thee
any more than the *zûzâ*."

CCCCLXXVII. Another man had a diseased tooth

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

which made his mouth to smell badly, and when he went to the
tooth-drawer and had opened his mouth and exhaled the foul smell, the
handicraftsman said to him, "This matter doth not belong to my
handicraft but to the trade of those who cleanse the sewers."

CCCCLXXVIII. A certain woman took a kettle with a hole in it to the
blacksmith, and she said to him, "Mend it for me." And having taken it
he smeared a little clay over and into the hole and blackened it with
soot and gave it back to her. And when the woman had taken the kettle
\[home\], and had filled it with water \[and set it on the fire\], the
clay melted away as the water began to boil. 'Then straightway she took
the kettle and went back to the blacksmith and said to him, "What hast
thou done? Behold, the kettle is just as it was \[when I first brought
it\], and the hole is unstopped." The blacksmith said to her, "Perhaps
thou hast put some water in it? I thought that thou wishedst to put bran
or herbs into it, but since it is water that thou wouldst put in it get
thee to some other craftsman who is more skilled than I am, and let him
mend it."

CCCCLXXIX\. Another man who was a sailor, saw a man riding a horse, and
noticed that he worked his legs as he did so; and he said, "Glory be to
Thee, O God, the legs of this man are his rudders!"

CCCCLXXX\. Another man was gathering up dung \[for fuel\] and he said,
"How beautiful is that which David <span id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100)
saith, "Man in his honour hath no understanding, but resembleth the
beast and is like thereunto." And when a certain rich man heard him he
said unto him, "What now, is this honour of thine whereby thou hast

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

understanding, which causeth thee to be dissimilar and unlike the beast?
For, behold, thou art occupied with the dung of beasts all the days of
thy life." The man said to him, "My honourable estate is that I eat of
the labour of my hands, and that I ask no alms from such as thou."

CCCCLXXXI\. A certain shopkeeper lit a lamp in the day time and set it
before him, and when it was said to him, "Why doest thou this?" he
replied, "Behold all the shopkeepers around me are buying and selling,
but no man cometh nigh unto me. And I thought that perhaps folk did not
see me, and therefore I have made a blaze before me that they may do
so."

CCCCLXXXII. Another man wishing to sell rue cried out, saying, "Take ye
of this honey; take ye of this sweetmeat." And a certain man drew nigh
to him and said, "I have a sick person at home, and I wish to buy some
bitter rue, for this is what he longeth for; hast thou none?" The seller
said to him, "Take some of this which is before me, and do not believe
my words, for every bit that I have is more bitter than the vinegar in
my shop."

CCCCLXXXIII. A certain cook <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) cried
out about the roasted meat which he had before him, saying,
"Peradventure ye would wish me to prolong my praises of the meat which
is before you? Whosoever eateth of my meat once will not \[need\] to buy
oil for seven days by reason of the grease which will run from him."

CCCCLXXXIV. Another man went to a certain man in the market and asked
him to lend him some money, and he said to him, "At thy command will I
withhold

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

nothing from thee," And he commanded his servant to bring him a bag of
*zûzê*, and a pair of scales, and a mirror, and he weighed out to him
the amount which he required. And when he had taken the money the man of
the market put the mirror into his hands, and said unto him, "Look, now,
at thy face in the mirror and see how joyful it is on the day whereon
thou borrowest money and receivest it. Take care, now, that thy
countenance be thus gladsome, and not gloomy on the day whereon thou
must pay it back."

CCCCLXXXV\. A certain merchant having bought a crate full of glass
vessels wanted some one to carry it to his home with him, and when a
certain youth came to carry it, he said to him, "Take it, and ask no
hire of me, and I will teach thee three counsels whereby thou shalt live
nobly." And when the youth hath shouldered the crate and had gone one
third of the way he said to the merchant, "Teach me, now, one of the
three counsels." And the merchant said to him, "This is one of them:—If
any man say unto thee, 'Hunger is better than satiety,' believe him
never a whit." And when the youth had gone one half of the way, he said
to him, "Tell me, now, the second counsel." And the merchant said to
him, "If any man say unto thee, 'It is better to walk than to ride,'
believe him never a whit." And when the youth had come to the house he
said, "Teach me, now, the third counsel." And the merchant said unto
him, "If any man shall tell thee that he hath found any man who will
carry a load for hire less than thine, believe him never a whit. Then
the youth cast the crate upon the ground and the glass vessels which
were in it were broken to pieces and crushed into dust, and he said to
the merchant, "If any man saith

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

unto thee that a single glass vessel remaineth unbroken among these,
believe him never a whit."

CCCCLXXXVI. A certain tax-gatherer having fled and hidden himself from
the king found that his blood had become heated and excited in him, and
he said unto him in whose house he was hidden, "Go to such and such a
blood-letter and mention my name in his presence; if he abuseth me say
nothing further to him, but if he speaketh well of me bid him come to
me." And the man went and did thus, and he took the blood-letter and
brought him to him; and when he had gone in he saluted the tax-gatherer
with respect and behaved graciously to him. And the tax-gatherer said to
him, "Cup me on the back of my neck," and when he had cupped him and had
let blood and wished to depart, the tax-gatherer took out a *dînâr* and
gave it to him; and the surgeon took the money and went and told his
son. Then the son rose up and went and knocked at the door and entered
the chamber of the tax-gatherer and said to him, "I hear that thou hast
been cupped on the back of the neck, but thou didst not require this,
for it should have been done on thine arm." Then he cupped him on the
arm and let out some more blood, and as he was going out the
tax-gatherer gave him a *dînâr* also; and he went and told his
son-in-law. And this man came also and knocked at the door, and he
entered the chamber of the tax-gatherer and said to him, "Thou didst not
require cupping except on thy legs." Then the tax-gatherer being afraid
that \[if he refused to allow it\] the man would be angry and go forth
and betray his hiding-place, said, "Do as thou advisest; and when he had
let out some blood and wished to go the tax-gatherer gave him a *dînâr*
and

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

bade him tell no man about the house where he was. And it came to pass
that, when the tax-gatherer had meditated a short time, he rose up and
went to the king, and told him his story, saying, "These cursed villains
wanted to let out and suck all my blood by their cuppings; draw thy
sword now, and slay me, and I shall escape from \[my\] trouble." And
when the king heard this, he laughed and forgave him all the money which
he owed him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_100"></span>[124:1](lsbh19.htm#fr_100) Psalm xlix. 20.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[125:1](lsbh19.htm#fr_101) \#\#\# = \#\#\# =
Arab. \#\#\#.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fifteenth Chapter: Laughable Stories of Actors and
Comedians](lsbh20)

</div>
