<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lsbh11)  [Next](lsbh13) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraeus*, by Bar-Hebraeus, tr. E.A.W.
Budge, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

### The Seventh Chapter:

### PROFITABLE STORIES OF TEACHERS AND LEARNED MEN.

CCLII\. A certain teacher used to say, "A very large portion of learning
hath escaped me, I mean that portion which I was ashamed to learn from
men who were my inferiors. Therefore do not, O my disciples, let it be
accounted a disgrace by you to ask questions of those who are your
inferiors, whereby ye may become accomplished and perfect."

CCLIII\. Another teacher related a story of his master to the effect
that on a certain day the people asked him more than fifty questions,
and that he replied to \[each of\] them shamelessly "I do not know the
answer thereof;" and that he never answered questions on any matters
except such as he knew accurately.

CCLIV\. Another teacher used to say, "The things which I know are few,
but I know those accurately."

CCLV\. Another learned man, when sitting at a feast with certain people
who were drinking milk and honey, said to the servants, "Give me to
drink of that for which when it cannot be found a man would sell his
soul, but which when found is rejected;" now by these words he meant
water.

CCLVI\. Another learned man in heaping abuse on a common man, said, "The
father of this man used to conceal the greater number of the animals
which he owned

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

in his garments;" now by those words he referred to lice.

CCLVII\. Another learned man used to say, "Honourable praise is that the
man to whom thou hast done no good thing should praise thee, and
veritable abuse, likewise, is that he to whom thou hast never done harm
should abuse thee."

CCLVIII\. Another learned man said, "A man is wholly at ease until his
teeth become worn out or he be sick."

CCLIX\. Another learned man said, "I wish to be considered before God as
one of the excellent ones of men, and before myself as one of the
abjects of the children of men, and before men as one among them who is
neither good nor bad; for the exalted are eaten up by care, and the
abjects are wasted away by hunger."

CCLX\. Another learned man said, "There are three classes of men who are
not destitute of advantage:—He that teacheth being hired for wages, and
he that hireth to learn excellence, and he who being the equal of his
pupil in knowledge merely calleth to mind what he hath learnt; but the
man who wisheth to learn whilst pretending to teach is remote from any
advantage whatsoever."

CCLXI\. Another learned man said, "He that meditateth upon a learned
life, having no need so to do, should not be deprived of the benefit
thereof when he hath need of it."

CCLXII\. Another learned man said, "A good woman is like a raven with
white legs," that is to say, she cannot be found.

CCLXIII\. Another learned man was asked, "Who

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

are the foolish ones?" And he replied, "Those who do not know either how
to praise or to blame."

CCLXIV\. Another learned man said, "Smite no man for his folly, for if
thou dost so he will make profit by thee as from a friend, or he will
hate thee as an enemy."

CCLXV\. Another learned man was asked, "Who is the wise man? Is it he of
whom a man hath said, Send a wise man and command him not?" And he
replied, "He that hearkeneth." <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84)

CCLXVI\. Another teacher pretended to learn the answer to a certain
question from his disciple, and it was said to him \[by a certain man\],
"Dost thou learn from such an one as this?" And he replied, "I know the
answer to this question much better than he, but I wish him to taste the
pleasure of teaching, in order that he may be incited the more to
learn."

CCLXVII\. Another teacher said, "The commentary on the Books of
Scripture is like the earrings in the ears of a virgin."

CCLXVIII\. Another teacher said, "Let the counsels which are mingled
with the Scriptures be thy principal, and let those which are in thy
heart be the interest thereof."

CCLXIX\. Another teacher while writing a certain discourse upon a
tablet, found that the tablet was filled before he had finished this
discourse, and he began to rub out the beginning of his discourse from
the top of the tablet, and then wrote the remainder of it. And when he
was asked why he did this, he answered, "I am doing this in order that I
may have my discourse

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

by me complete, for having written down the beginning thereof I can
repeat it by heart."

CCLXX\. Another teacher said, "There are four classes of men to whom it
is pleasant for them to be listened unto:—The man from whom a gift, or
instruction, or blessings, or prayers are expected, or he that having
the power can cause loss."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[68:1](lsbh12.htm#fr_84) Read \#\#\#

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eighth Chapter: Profitable Sayings of the Arab Ascetics and
Old Men](lsbh13)

</div>
