<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lsbh06)  [Next](lsbh08) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraeus*, by Bar-Hebraeus, tr. E.A.W.
Budge, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### The Second Chapter

### PROFITABLE SAYINGS OF THE PERSIAN SAGES.

LXVIII\. Cyrus wrote to Hormizd the sage, saying, "If kings only knew
their need of wise men, \[and wise men knew\] their need of kings, kings
would never marvel if they stood continually at the doors of the wise;
for the need of kings for wise men is greater than that of wise men for
kings."

LXIX\. Bazarjamhir <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33) said, "It is
better for a man to

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

humble himself that he may overcome than to conquer that he may humble
himself," that is to say, we must not be deceived by the man who
humbleth himself to us for a time and afterwards ruleth over us
tyrannically.

LXX\. This same Bazarjamhir was asked, "What is the wealth which is not
destroyed when cast away?" He replied, "Humility."

LXXI\. This same Bazarjamhir said, "How beautiful

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

patience would be if it were not that life is \[so\] short."

LXXII\. Another sage was asked, "Is it indeed true that any speech of
truth can be hated?" He replied, "Yes, by the Calumniator."

LXXIII\. Another sage said, "I hold every man who saith that he hateth
riches to be a liar until he establisheth a sure proof thereof from what
he hath gathered together, and having established his belief it is, at
the same time, quite certain that he is a fool!"

LXXIV\. Another sage was enquired of concerning a means of subsistence,
and he replied, "If it is ordained for thee hasten not, for it will come
unto thee; and if it be not ordained go not in after it, for it will not
come unto thee."

LXV\. Another sage said, "He that doeth good to a fool is like him who
decketh a pig with rich and heavy jewellery and who feedeth a serpent
upon honey."

LXXVI\. Another sage said, "He who is mighty in the fulfilling and
keeping of the laws shall become mighty, and he who is mighty in
transgressing the commandment and in \[doing\] illegal things shall
become feeble."

LXXVII\. Another sage used to say, "The wise man goeth round about
\[seeking\] for a means of subsistence, but the fool \[stayeth\] in the
place of his father who begot him."

LXXVIII\. Once upon a time Anôsharwân <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35) the king ordered that no man should either
eat of the same kind of food as that of which he ate, or drink of the
same kind of

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

drink as that of which he drank. Now a certain prince having made ready
royal food sent and invited one of the nobles to sit at meat with him.
And when he had eaten his meal and had gone forth he wrote to the king,
saying, "Such and such an one maketh use of the royal food. I myself
have seen it and I cannot hide it from thee." And the king wrote on the
back of the letter, "We praise thee for fidelity and for the covenant
which thou hast kept with us, but we blame him that made use of the food
because he did not know how to keep his secret and revealed it unto such
as thou."

LXXIX\. Khusrau <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) was asked, "Which of
thy sons is \[most\] beloved by thee?" He replied, "He that loveth
correction and feareth disgrace, and longeth for a rank higher than his
own."

LXXX\. Bazarjamhir said, "The defect of this world is that it never
giveth to a man that of which he is deserving. For it either giveth to
him more than that of which he is worthy, or it giveth to him less than
that of which he is worthy."

LXXXI\. Ardashîr <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37) said, "It is meet
that the wrath of kings should be made manifest in shewing mercy upon
those who provoke to wrath and not in depriving them of that which they
need."

LXXXII\. \[Ardashîr\] <span id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_38) said that "the
foundation of

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

a nation is religion, and that the government is the protector thereof.
Every building which possesseth not a sound foundation is quickly
overthrown, and every house which possesseth no keeper is speedily
despoiled."

LXXXIII\. It is said that in the days of Khusrau <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) the king a certain man went round about
crying, "Who will buy three wise maxims for a thousand *dînârs?*" When
the king heard \[these words\] he called him, and said unto him, "What
are the sayings?" And the man ordered that the *dînârs* of which he had
spoken should be made ready, and when they were ready he said, "This is
the first saying:—There is no good in any man whatsoever. And the second
is:—Although all men are thus nothing rational is to be obtained from
them. And the third is:—It is necessary for the king to know the extent
of the wickedness of every man and to expose him according to his
wickedness so that he may escape from him." When the king heard these
words he praised them and ordered the man to take the gold; but he would
not do so. And the king said to him, "Why then didst thou ask for it?"
The man replied, "I wished to ascertain if ever any man would be willing
to buy wisdom with gold, or not."

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

LXXXIV\. Anôshârwân said, "Idleness exciteth the thoughts, and the
thoughts provoke sadness."

LXXXV\. Another king commanded his son, saying, "When thou art king do
not add unto the riches of thy soldiers, lest they cease from thy
service through having no need of thee; neither do thou reduce them to
poverty, lest they hate thee. But give thou unto every man that which is
meet for him in his own capacity, and act in such a way that their hope
in thee may be ever more and more increased even though thy gifts to
them be not multiplied."

LXXXVI\. Bazarjamhir said, "Of the supporters of a king some are like
spears which can only be used by those who guard \[him\] at a distance;
and some are like arrows which are shot away and return not; and some
are like swords for which it is not meet that they should turn away from
him."

LXXXVII\. Khusrau said, "Do not show hatred to one whom thou art unable
to remove from thee."

LXXXVIII\. Bazarjamhir was asked, "Why do friends so easily turn into
enemies, for with much more difficulty do enemies become friends?" And
he replied, "Even in the same way that to overthrow a house is easier
than to build it up, and the breaking of a vessel is easier than the
making of it, and the spending of money is easier than the acquisition
of it."

LXXXIX\. Bazarjamhir also said, "In the season of Teshrîn <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40) months the crops are beautiful, and in the
time of the month Nîsân <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) \[we\] have
the flowers.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[Even so\] in the
maiden \[we should have\] beauty, and in the youth strenuous action \[of
the limbs\], and in the stranger humility of mind."

XC\. It was said to Khusrau, "What \[class of\] men dost thou wish to
become wise?" He replied, "My enemies, because wise men are not easily
made to work wickedness, but fools cannot by any means whatsoever keep
themselves away from it."

XCI\. When Bazarjamhir was imprisoned by the king <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) his friends asked him, "With what, now,
dost thou console thyself?" He replied, "With four sayings. In the first
I say to myself, Everything is decreed and fixed by fate, and escape
from wrath is impossible; in the second I say, If I cannot endure
suffering patiently what can I do?; in the third \[I say\], It were
possible for me to fall into a worse plight than this; and in the fourth
I say, Perhaps respite is nigh although I know it not."

XCII\. Bazarjamhir also exhorted a certain king who was ruling over a
country to act as a friend towards honest folk, and as a judge towards
those who were neither good nor bad, and as a tyrant towards the
wicked <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43).

XCIII\. When the king was angry with this same Bazarjamhir and
crucified <span id="fr_44"></span>[3](#fn_44) him, his daughter heard

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[about it\] and
ran out among the men having her head uncovered, but when she came to
her father on the cross she covered it. And when the king asked her
concerning what she had done, she replied, "He was the only man
\[there\] before whom it was meet to be ashamed \[at being uncovered\]."

XCIV\. Sapor <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45) said, "The ornaments of
a city are these:—A victorious king, a righteous judge, a market
\[full\] of merchandize, a skilful physician and a flowing river."

XCV\. Khusrau (II) asked one of his wise men, "Which are the more
numerous, men or devils?" And he replied, "If thou considerest the Kurds
and the common folk of the bazaars men, men are the more numerous."

XCVI\. Bazarjamhir said, "Whosoever loveth thee will keep thee from
thine anger, but whosoever hateth thee will stir thee up thereunto."

XCVII\. To this same Bazarjamhir it was said, "Who is he that hath no
defect in him?" And he replied, "He that dieth not."

XCVIII\. Bazarjamhir's wife asked him a certain question and he replied,
"I know not the answer." Thereupon she said unto him, "Dost thou take
such large wages from the king \[for thy wisdom\] and yet not know the
answer to my question?" And he replied, "I receive my wages for what I
know, and it is not payment for what I know not. If I were to receive
wages for that which I know not all the king's treasures would be
insufficient to reward me, for the things which I know not are
exceedingly many."

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

XCIX\. Ispandahar <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) said, "The horse,
even though he be exceedingly swift, hath need of the whip, and a woman,
though she be chaste, yet hath need of a man, and a man, even though he
be wise, hath need to receive counsel from others."

C. Khusrau said, "Wine washeth from the heart trouble and grief."

CI\. When Kîkôbâd (Kaiḳubād) <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) the
king died, one of his wise men said, "Yesterday the king spake volubly,
but to-day he being silent admonisheth \[us\] with greater
effect." <span id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48)

CII\. This same wise man said, "Hearts have need to be reared on wisdom,
even as men's bodies have need of food whereon to grow."

CIII\. Sapor said, "On many occasions matters come to fools on the right
hand, and to wise men on the left, and I recognize that the Governor of
affairs is a Being quite distinct from them."

CIV\. Ardashîr <span id="fr_49"></span>[4](#fn_49) said, "Occupy thyself
with the things

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

which are seemly, in order that thou mayest be kept from the things
which are unseemly."

CV\. Bazarjamhir said, "When thou dost not know which of two things is
the better for thee \[to do\], take counsel with thy wife and do the
opposite of that which she saith, for she will only counsel \[thee to
do\] the things which are injurious to thee."

CVI\. Merâdwîkh <span id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) was asked, "Wherein
doth trouble differ from wrath?" And he replied, "When a man is injured
by some great thing he is troubled, but when by some small matter he is
enraged."

CVII\. One day while Khusrau was sitting down, a man mean of stature
drew nigh to him and began to weep and cry, saying, "Avenge me upon him
that hath oppressed me;" but Khusrau took no notice of him. And when one
of his noblemen asked him, "Why dost thou not hearken unto his voice?"
he said, "The man mean of stature cannot be oppressed." And the mean man
understood and cried out, "Master, he that hath oppressed me is meaner
than I;" and when the king heard \[this\] he laughed and avenged his
cause.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[18:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_33) *I.e.*, Buzurjumihr,
the son of Bakhtagân, \#\#\# <span id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34), a
famous Persian sage who flourished during the reign of Khusrau
Anôsharwân, A.D. 531-579. According to Mas‘ûdî (ii. p. 205) this king
one day assembled his wise men and asked them to give him such advice as
would be to the benefit of both himself and his people. When all had
spoken except Buzurjumihr this sage said, "O king, all that thou
desirest to hear I can say in twelve sentences," and when ordered to
speak on he said that his counsel was:—1. "When a king is about to fall
into lust, or covetousness, or laziness, or anger, or love, to fear God,
and to dread in the consequences of these passions not man, but God. 2.
To be sincere in word and faithful in performing engagements; to carry
out what has been agreed upon, and bonds and treaties. 3. To accept the
counsel of the sages in every matter. 4. To honour the learned, the
nobles, the governors of frontiers, officers, secretaries and officials
each in his grade. 5. To watch <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> the
judges and to control the accounts of the taxgatherers; to reward
faithful service and to punish dishonest service. 6. To visit often
those in prison so as to learn their condition, in order to be able to
double the watch over the guilty and to set free the innocent. 7. To
safeguard roads and places of dealing, and to facilitate trade and the
business of the merchant. 8. To punish the guilty according to their
deserts, and to keep the people loyal. 9. To keep up a supply of arms
and the munitions of war. 10. To honour his family, and children, and
neighbours, and to watch over their interests. 11. To watch keenly over
the frontier defence so as to perceive when danger is about to come and
to take steps to ward it off. 12. To keep a watch upon the ministers and
officials, and to recall those who are notoriously disloyal or
incapable." Several other wise sayings are attributed to him, and this
distinguished Persian seems, as Nöldeke says (*Geschichte der Perser and
Araber*, p. 251) to have been the ideal of an Oriental Minister; the
above twelve maxims were thought so highly of that the king ordered them
to be written in letters of gold. A full account of Buzurjumihr and of
his interpretation of the King's dream may be found in Mohl, *Le Livre
des Rois par Abou’l-kasim Firdousi*, tom. vi. p. 192 ff. A copy of his
moral teachings in the shape of question and answer, the interlocutors
being the sage and his master, exists in Brit. Mus. MS. Add. 8994, fol.
84b-99b; see Rieu, *Catalogue of the Persian MSS. in the British
Museum*, p. 52, col. 2. The work is stated to have been written at the
request of his master, King Anôsharwân, and it was called *Zafar-Nāmah*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[18:\*](lsbh07.htm#fr_34) For this form of the
name see Tornberg, *Ibn-el-Athiri*, tom. ii. p. 368, l. 14.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[20:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_35) He reigned from A.D.
531 to 579.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[21:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_36) Probably Khusrau
Anôsharwân.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[21:2](lsbh07.htm#fr_37) Probably Ardashîr I,
who began to reign A.D. 226, is here referred to. He was the author of
several maxims and wise sayings.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[21:3](lsbh07.htm#fr_38) Surely Bar-Hebraeus
must here have a version of a piece of advice which Ardashîr is said to
have given to his son Shâpûr. "O my son, behold, religion and
sovereignty are sisters, neither <span id="page_22">p. 22</span> one of
which can exist without the other. For religion is the foundation of
sovereignty, and sovereignty is the protector of religion. "Every
building which is without foundation falleth down, and whatsoever is
unprotected perisheth." \#\#\#. See Mas‘ûdî (ed. B. de Meynard) tom. ii.
p. 162.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[22:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_39) Probably Khusrau
Anôsharwân.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[23:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_40) The first and second
Teshrîn months correspond roughly to our October and November.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[23:2](lsbh07.htm#fr_41) Nîsân corresponds
roughly to our April.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[24:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_42) He was thrown into
prison by Khusrau II Parwêz (A.D. 590-628), who is said to have
suspected him of having joined the atheists, \#\#\#; whilst there the
king wrote insulting letters to him, and was so enraged at the sage's
replies that he had his head cut off. See Mas‘ûdî, *op. cit.*, tom. ii.
pp. 224. 225.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[24:2](lsbh07.htm#fr_43) The text of the first
line of this saying appears to be corrupt. The saying itself echoes the
general sense of Buzurjumihr's fifth maxim; see the note to story No.
LXIX.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[24:3](lsbh07.htm#fr_44) As a matter of fact his
head was cut off; see the note to story No. XCI. In story No. V
Bar-Hebraeus used the root \#\#\# in the same loose way, for Socrates
died by drinking poison.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[25:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_45) Shâpûr I began to reign
A.D. 272, Shâpûr II A.D. 621, and Shâpûr III A.D. 695.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[26:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_46) Probably Ispandahar,
the son of Gushtasp; see Malcolm, *History of Persia*, Vol. I. p. 46
ff.; and Mohl, *Le Livre des Rois*, tom. IV. p. 451.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[26:2](lsbh07.htm#fr_47) The founder of the
Kaianian dynasty is here referred to; see Malcolm, *History of Persia*,
vol. I. p. 23 ff.; Mohl, *Le Livre des Rois*, tom. I. p. 367.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[26:3](lsbh07.htm#fr_48) This saying is also
attributed to Diogenes, who is said to have uttered it over Alexander's
dead body. In Mas‘ûdî (*op. cit.* tom. vii. p. 186) it runs "Alexander
was less talkative yesterday than he is to-day; but to-day he teacheth
us more than he did yesterday." Another version is, "Of all teachings
which thou hast bestowed upon us the most eloquent is thy death."
Mas‘ûdî (*op. cit.*, tom. ii. p. 253).

<span id="fn_49"></span>[26:4](lsbh07.htm#fr_49) Probably Ardashîr I,
who began to reign A.D. 226.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[27:1](lsbh07.htm#fr_50) Probably Mardawîj,
\#\#\#, the king who was slain by his Turkish bodyguard while enjoying a
bath in the palace of Ahmed ibn ‘Abd el-Azîz, A.H. 323.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Chapter: Profitable Sayings of the Indian
Sages](lsbh08)

</div>
