<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lsbh22)  [Next](lsbh24) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Laughable Stories of Bar-Hebraeus*, by Bar-Hebraeus, tr. E.A.W.
Budge, \[1897\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

### The Eighteenth Chapter

### STORIES OF THIEVES AND OF ROBBERS.

DCLIII\. When a certain man's money had been stolen the people said to
him, "Grieve not, for in the day of judgment the wages of him who took
it shall not be reckoned \[unto him\];" and he replied, "I do not know
about that, but at the moment he hath taken all my wages."

DCLIV\. Certain things having been stolen from a man it was said to him,
"Take refuge in God and in the adorable Gospel, and He will expose the
thief." The man replied, "If the thief had hearkened unto the counsel of
the Gospel, he would not only have robbed me, but he would also have
destroyed me and slain me; for he would have heard our Lord saying, 'The
thief cometh not except to steal and to slay, and to destroy <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122),' and how can He Who counselled the
thief thus expose him?"

DCLV\. When some thieves were stripping another man of his clothes he
said to them, "Leave my clothes on me, and I will send you the price
thereof with something in addition." The thieves said to him, "O fool,
who ever saw the robber who put anything out at interest?"

DCLVI\. Another thief used only to steal children,

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

whom he sold. And when he was asked why he did this, he said, "I steal
children because they will all rise at the Resurrection, and when people
demand their children from me I shall be able to say, 'Here are your
children, take them.' But if I were to steal an ass or a garment, whence
should I obtain them when they were demanded from me in the day of the
Resurrection?"

DCLVII\. Another thief having stolen much clothing from a certain house,
the owners of the house found out who he was and captured him: and he
began to entreat them to let him go, and took an oath that he would
leave off stealing. Then they said unto him, "Let go our clothing then,
and go to the Devil's perdition," whereupon the thief said to them, "If
ye take those things away from me on what shall I live during the time
of \[my\] repentance? For behold, I have sworn to you that I will not
steal again, and I have no other handicraft."

DCLVIII\. Some thieves went to the house of a certain man by night, and
began to search for something which they found not, whereupon the owner
of the house said to them, "O brave boys, that which ye seek to find in
this house by night I have looked for therein very carefully, but have
not found it."

DCLIX\. Another man was repeating a story of how whilst travelling along
the road together with twenty men, two wicked highwaymen fell upon them
and stripped them of what they had. And when it was said to him, "How
could two men get the mastery over you?" he said, "What could we do? For
one of them seized one of us and the other did the plundering; how then
could one of us vanquish two?"

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

DCLX\. From one of the elders a Book of the Gospels with a golden case
was stolen, and he stood up in the church, and admonished and cursed him
that had stolen it. And when he saw them all weeping and uttering curses
with him, he said to them, "Behold, all ye people of the village, ye all
weep, men, and women, and children, but if your weeping be sincere, who
stole the Book of the Gospels?"

DCLXI\. When some money had been stolen from another man, he said, "This
is a sad day," and a thief replied, "Not for every man."

DCLXII\. When another robber broke into a house and found nothing
therein except a pen and some ink, he took \[the pen\] and wrote on the
wall, "Woe is me for your sakes! How needy and lazy ye must be."

DCLXIII\. From another man some money was stolen, and he suspected that
his wife had stolen it. And while he was weeping and groaning his
neighbour said to him, "Weep not, have hope in God and He will return to
thee thy money." And the man said to him, "Behold, this woman maketh no
use of God, and it will not be easy for her to return anything; and as
for God, whom doth He fear that He should return anything?"

DCLXIV\. Another thief stole an ass and carried him to the market to
sell, and when he was asked for how much he had sold it, he said, "For
exactly what I gave for it: I gained nothing and I lost nothing."

DCLXV\. Certain thieves went into the house of another man, and took
everything which they found therein, and they left nothing there except
a mat; and as they were going out the owner of the house took the mat
himself and went forth with them. The thieves

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

said to him, "Where art thou going with us?" and he replied, "To see the
house to which we are going from here, for God hath made you to carry
for me my property without payment."

DCLXVI\. Another thief broke into a house and found there nothing but a
jar of wine whereof he was glad; and he took \[it\] and drank \[it\],
and became drunken. In the morning the master of the house rose up and
found him lying there asleep, and he took his upper tunic and went and
sold it in the market, and bought something to eat; and this he brought
home and cooked and ate, and the remainder he left. Now when the thief
woke up he found that the eye of day had risen, and that as he could not
go forth he must hide himself until the evening. And when the evening
had come the thief waited for the master of the house to go to sleep so
that he might go forth; and when he had gone to sleep the thief rose up
to depart, and again ransacked everything in the house but found nothing
except that which the master of the house had left of his food. And this
he sat down and ate, and he took \[some of the wine\], and drank it and
made merry and did not go forth until the morning. Then the master of
the house arose, and finding him still there, he took his second tunic
and went yet again \[to the market\] and sold it, and bought some things
to eat; and he brought these home, and cooked and ate of them, and what
was over he left. And the thief woke up at the third hour of the day and
could not, therefore, depart; so he remained until the night. Now when
he was wishing to go forth once more, he found the food which had been
left, and he ate it, and drank \[wine\], and became drunken and fell
asleep. Then the master of the house rose up

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

and took his cloak and went and sold it, and thus the two of them did
until the master of the house left no garment at all on the thief, not
even his loin-cloth. And finally when the thief woke up and found that
he had nothing at all wherewith to cover his body, he said to himself.
"Why should I fear the master of the "house? For he hath eaten of what
belongs to me more than I have eaten of his." Then he went, and woke him
up, and said, "Give me something wherewith I may cover myself, so that I
may turn and depart; where is my clothing?" The master of the house said
to him, "Where am I to get it to give thee? "Consider, now, what we have
spent and what we have eaten. On the first day we ate the price of thy
upper tunic, and on the second day the price of thy lower one, and on
the third day the price of thy cloak, and on the fourth day the price of
thy loin-cloth. If thou wert able to drink more than what thou didst
eat, why didst thou not inform me? For I did not prepare food for thee."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[165:1](lsbh23.htm#fr_122) St. John x. 10.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Nineteenth Chapter: Stories of Wonderful Events and
Occurrences](lsbh24)

</div>
