[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](maui09)  [Next](maui11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHBQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia*, by W. D. Westervelt,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VII.

### MAUI AND TUNA.

WHEN Maui returned from the voyages in which he discovered or "fished
up" from the ocean depths new islands, he gave deep thought to the
things he had found. As the islands appeared to come out of the water he
saw they were inhabited. There were houses and stages for drying and
preserving food. He was greeted by barking dogs. Fires were burning,
food cooking and people working. He evidently had gone so far away from
home that a strange people was found. The legend which speaks of the
death of his brothers, "eaten" by the great fish drawn up from the floor
of the sea, may very easily mean that the new people killed and ate the
brothers.

Maui apparently learned some new lessons, for on his return he quickly
established a home of his own, and determined to live after the fashion
of the families in the new islands.

Maui sought Hina-a-te-lepo, "daughter of the swamp," and secured her as
his wife. The New Zealand tribes tell legends which vary in different
localities about this woman Hina. She sometimes bore the name
Rau-kura--"The red plume."

She cared for his thatched house as any other Polynesian woman was in
the habit of doing. She attempted the hurried task of cooking his food
before he snared the sun and gave her sufficient daylight for her
labors.

They lived near the bank of a river from which Hina was in the habit of
bringing water for the household needs.

One day she went down to the stream with her calabash. She was entwined
with wreaths of leaves and flowers, as was the custom among Polynesian
women. While she was standing on the bank, Tuna-roa, "the long eel," saw
her. He swam up to the bank and suddenly struck her and knocked her into
the water and covered her with slime from the blow given by his tail.

Hina escaped and returned to her home, saying nothing to Maui about the
trouble. But the next day, while getting water, she was again overthrown
and befouled by the slime of Tuna-roa.

Then Hina became angry and reported the trouble to Maui.

Maui decided to punish the long eel and started out to find his hiding
place. Somie of the New Zealand legends as collected by White, state
that Tuna-roa was a very smooth skinned chief, who lived on the opposite
bank of the stream, and, seeing Hina, had insulted her.

When Maui saw this chief, he caught two pieces of wood over which he was
accustomed to slide his canoe into the sea. These he carried to the
stream and laid them from bank to bank as a bridge over which he might
entice Tuna-roa to cross.

Maui took his stone axe, Ma-Tori-Tori, "the severer," and concealed
himself near the bank of the river.

When "the long eel" had crossed the stream, Maui rushed out and killed
him with a mighty blow of the stone axe, cutting the head from the body.

Other legends say that Maui found Tuna-roa living as an eel in a deep
water hole, in a swamp on the seacoast of Tata-a, part of the island
Ao-tea-roa. Other stories located Tuna-roa in the river near Maui's
home.

Maui saw that he could not get at his enemy without letting off the
water which protected him.

Therefore into the forest went Maui, and with sacred ceremonies,
selected trees from the wood of which he prepared tools and weapons.

Meanwhile, in addition to the insult given to Hina, Tuna-roa had caught
and devoured two of Maui's children, which made Maui more determined to
kill him.

Maui made the narrow spade (named by the Maoris of New Zealand the "ko,"
and by the Hawaiians "o-o") and the sharp spears, with which to pierce
either the earth or his enemy. These spears and spades were consecrated
to the work of preparing a ditch by which to draw off the water
protecting "the long eel."

The work of trench-making was accomplished with many incantations and
prayers. The ditch was named "The sacred digging," and was tabooed to
all other purposes except that of catching Tuna-roa.

Across this ditch Maui stretched a strong net, and then began a new
series of chants and ceremonies to bring down an abundance of rain. Soon
the flood came and the overflowing waters rushed down the sacred ditch.
The walls of the deep pool gave way and "the long eel" was carried down
the trench into the waiting net. Then there was commotion. Tuna-roa was
struggling for freedom.

Maui saw him and hastened to grasp his stone axe, "the severer."
Hurrying to the net, he struck Tuna-roa a terrible blow, and cut off the
head. With a few more blows, he cut the body in pieces. The head and
tail were carried out into the sea. The head became fish and the tail
became the great conger-eel. Other parts of the body became sea
monsters. But some parts which fell in fresh water became the common
eels. From the hairs of the head came certain vines and creepers among
the plants.

After the death of Tuna-roa the offspring of Maui were in no danger of
being killed and soon multiplied into a large family.

Another New Zealand legend related by White says that Maui built a
sliding place of logs, over which Tuna-roa must pass when coming from
the river.

Maui also made a screen behind which he could secrete himself while
watching for Tuna-roa.

He commanded Hina to come down to the river and wait on the bank to
attract Tuna-roa. Soon the long eel was seen in the water swimming near
to Hina. Hina went to a place back of the logs which Maui had laid down.

Tuna-roa came towards her, and began to slide down the skids.

Maui sprang out from his hiding place and killed Tuna-roa with his axe,
and cut him in pieces.

The tail became the conger-eel. Parts of his body became fresh-water
eels. Some of the blood fell upon birds and always after marked them
with red spots. Some of the blood was thrown into certain trees, making
this wood always red. The muscles became vines and creepers.

From this time the children of Maui caught and ate the eels of both salt
and fresh water. Eel traps were made, and Maui taught the people the
proper chants or incantations to use when catching eels.

This legend of Maui and the long eel was found by White in a number of
forms among the different tribes of New Zealand, but does not seem to
have had currency in many other island groups.

In Turner's "Samoa" a legend is related which was probably derived from
the Maui stories and yet differs in its romantic results. The Samoans
say that among their ancient ones dwelt a woman named Sina. Sina among
the Polynesians is the same as Hina--the "h" is softened into "s". She
captured a small eel and kept it as a pet. It grew large and strong and
finally attacked and bit her. She fled, but the eel followed her
everywhere. Her father came to her assistance and raised high mountains
between the eel and herself.

But the eel passed over the barrier and pursued her. Her mother raised a
new series of mountains. But again the eel surmounted the difficulties
and attempted to seize Sina. She broke away from him and ran on and on.
Finally she wearily passed through a village. The people asked her to
stay and eat with them, but she said they could only help her by
delivering her from the pursuing eel. The inhabitants of that village
were afraid of the eel and refused to fight for her. So she ran on to
another place. Here the chief offered her a drink of water and promised
to kill the eel for her. He prepared awa, a stupefying drink, and put
poison in it. When the eel came along the chief asked him to drink. He
took the awa and prepared to follow Sina. When he came to the place
where she was the pains of death had already seized him. While dying he
begged her to bury his head by her home. This she did, and in time a
plant new to the islands sprang up. It became a tree, and finally
produced a cocoanut, whose two eyes could continually look into the face
of Sina.

Tuna, in the legends of Fiji, was a demon of the sea. He lived in a deep
sea cave, into which he sometimes shut himself behind closed doors of
coral. When he was hungry, he swam through the ocean shadows, always
watching the restless surface. When a canoe passed above him, he would
throw himself swiftly through the waters, upset the canoe, and seize
some of the boatmen and devour them. He was greatly feared by all the
fishermen of the Fijian coasts.

Roko-a mo-o or dragon god-in his journey among the islands, stopped at a
village by the sea and asked for a canoe and boatmen. The people said:
"We have nothing but a very old canoe out there by the water." He went
to it and found it in a very bad condition. He put it in the water, and
decided that he could use it. Then he asked two men to go with him and
paddle, but they refused because of fear, and explained this fear by
telling the story of the water demon, who continually sought the
destruction of this canoe, and also their own death. Roko encouraged
them to take him to wage battle with Tuna, telling them he would destroy
the monster. They paddled until they were directly over Tuna's cave.
Roko told them to go off to one side and wait and watch, saying: "I am
going down to see this Tuna. If you see red blood boil up through the
water, you may be sure that Tuna has been killed. If the blood is black,
then you will know that he has the victory and I am dead."

Roko leaped into the water and went down-down to the door of the cave.
The coral doors were closed. He grasped them in his strong hands and
tore them open, breaking them in pieces. Inside he found cave after cave
of coral, and broke his way through until at last he awoke Tuna. The
angry demon cried: "Who is that?" Roko answered: "It is I, Roko, alone.
Who are you?"

Tuna aroused himself and demanded Roko's business and who guided him to
that place. Roko replied: "No one has guided me. I go from place to
place, thinking that there is no one else in the world."

Tuna shook himself angrily. "Do you think I am nothing? This day is your
last."

Roko replied: "Perhaps so. If the sky falls, I shall die."

Tuna leaped upon Roko and bit him. Then came the mighty battle of the
coral caves. Roko broke Tuna into several pieces--and the red blood
poured in boiling bubbles upward through the clear ocean waters, and the
boatmen cried: "The blood is red the blood is red--Tuna is dead by the
hand of Roko."

Roko lived for a time in Fiji, where his descendants still find their
home. The people use this chant to aid them in difficulties:

My load is a red one.  
It points in front to Kawa (Roko's home).  
Behind, it points to Dolomo--(a village on another island)."

In the Hawaiian legends, Hina was Maui's mother rather than his wife,
and Kuna (Tuna) was a mo-o, a dragon or gigantic lizard possessing
miraculous powers.

Hina's home was in the large cave under the beautiful Rainbow Falls near
the city of Hilo. Above the falls the bed of the river is along the
channel of an ancient lava flow. Sometimes the water pours in a torrent
over the rugged lava, sometimes it passes through underground passages
as well as along the black river bed, and sometimes it thrusts itself
into boiling pools.

Maui lived on the northern side of the river, but a chief named
Kuna-moo-a dragon-lived in the boiling pools. He attacked Hina and threw
a dam across the river below Rainbow Falls, intending to drown Hina in
her cave. The great ledge of rock filled the river bed high up the bank
on the Hilo side of the river. Hina called on Maui for aid. Maui came
quickly and with mighty blows cut out a new channel for the river--the
path it follows to this day. The waters sank and Hina remained unharmed
in her cave.

The place where Kuna dwelt was called Wai-kuna -the Kuna water. The
river in which Hina and Kuna dwelt bears the name Wailuku--"the
destructive water." Maui went above Kuna's home and poured hot water
into the river. This part of the myth could easily have arisen from a
lava outburst on the side of the volcano above the river. The hot water
swept in a flood over Kuna's home. Kuna jumped from the boiling pools
over a series of small falls near his home into the river below. Here
the hot water again scalded him and in pain he leaped from the river to
the bank, where Maui killed him by beating him with a club. His body was
washed down the river over the falls under which Hina dwelt, into the
ocean.

The story of Kuna or Tuna is a legend with a foundation in the enmity
between two chiefs of the long ago, and also in a desire to explain the
origin of the family of eels and the invention of nets and traps.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Maui and His Brother-In-Law](maui11)
