[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](maui16)  [Next](maui18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAHBQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Legends of Maui, A Demi-God of Polynesia*, by W. D. Westervelt,
\[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XIV.

### GHOSTS OF THE HILO HILLS.

THE legends about Hina and her famous son Maui and her less widely known
daughters are common property among the natives of the beautiful little
city of Hilo. One of these legends of more than ordinary interest finds
its location in the three small hills back of Hilo toward the mountains.

These hills are small craters connected with some ancient lava flow of
unusual violence. The eruption must have started far up on the slopes of
Mauna Loa. As it sped down toward the sea it met some obstruction which,
although overwhelmed, checked the flow and caused a great mass of
cinders and ashes to be thrown out until a large hill with a hollow
crater was built up, covering many acres of ground.

Soon the lava found another vent and then another obstruction and a
second and then a third hill were formed nearer the sea. These hills or
extinct craters bear the names Halai, Opeapea and Puu Honu. They are not
far from the Wailuku river, famous for its picturesque waterfalls and
also for the legends which are told along its banks. Here Maui had his
lands overlooking the steep bluffs. Here in a cave under the Rainbow
Falls was the home of Hina, the mother of Maui, according to the
Hawaiian stories. Other parts of the Pacific sometimes make Hina Maui's
wife, and sometimes a goddess from whom he descended. In the South Sea
legends Hina was thought to have married the moon. Her home was in the
skies, where she wove beautiful tapa cloths (the clouds), which were
bright and glistening, so that when she rolled them up flashes of light
(cloud lightning) could be seen on the earth. She laid heavy stones on
the corners of these tapas, but sometimes the stones rolled off and made
the thunder. Hina of the Rainbow Falls was a famous tapa maker whose
tapa was the cause of Maui's conflict with the sun.

Hina had several daughters, four of whose names are given: Hina Ke Ahi,
Hina Ke Kai, Hina Mahuia, and Hina Kuluua. Each name marked the peculiar
"mana" or divine gift which Hina, the mother, had bestowed upon her
daughters.

Hina Ke Ahi meant the Hina who had control of fire. This name is
sometimes given to Hina the mother. Hina Ke Kai was the daughter who had
power over the sea. She was said to have been in a canoe with her
brother Maui when he fished up Cocoanut Island, his line breaking before
he could pull it up to the mainland and make it fast. Hina Kuluua was
the mistress over the forces of rain. The winds and the storms were
supposed to obey her will. Hina Mahuia is peculiarly a name connected
with the legends of the other island groups of the Pacific. Mahuia or
Mafuie was a god or goddess of fire all through Polynesia.

The legend of the Hilo hills pertains especially to Hina Ke Ahi and Hina
Kuluua. Hina the mother gave the hill Halai to Hina Ke Ahi and the hill
Puu Honu to Hina Kuluua for their families and dependents.

The hills were of rich soil and there was much rain. Therefore, for a
long time, the two daughters had plenty of food for themselves and their
people, but at last the days were like fire and the sky had no rain in
it. The taro planted on the hillsides died. The bananas and sugar cane
and sweet potatoes withered and the fruit on the trees was blasted. The
people were faint because of hunger, and the shadow of death was over
the land. Hina Ke Ahi pitied her suffering friends and determined to
provide food for them. Slowly her people labored at her command. Over
they went to the banks of the river course, which was only the bed of an
ancient lava stream, over which no water was flowing; the famished
laborers toiled, gathering and carrying back whatever wood they could
find, then up the mountain side to the great koa and ohia forests,
gathering their burdens of fuel according to the wishes of their
chiefess.

Their sorcerers planted charms along the way and uttered incantations to
ward off the danger of failure. The priests offered sacrifices and
prayers for the safe and successful return of the burden-bearers. After
many days the great quantity of wood desired by the goddess was piled up
by the side of the Halai Hill.

Then came the days of digging out the hill and making a great imu or
cooking oven and preparing it with stones and wood. Large quantities of
wood were thrown into the place. Stones best fitted for retaining heat
were gathered and the fires kindled. When the stones were hot, Hina Ke
Ahi directed the people to arrange the imu in its proper order for
cooking the materials for a great feast. A place was made for sweet
potatoes, another for taro, another for pigs and another for dogs. All
the form of preparing the food for cooking was passed through, but no
real food was laid on the stones. Then Hina told them to make a place in
the imu for a human sacrifice. Probably out of every imu of the long ago
a small part of the food was offered to the gods, and there may have
been a special place in the imu for that part of the food to be cooked.
At any rate Hina had this oven so built that the people understood that
a remarkable sacrifice would be offered in it to the gods, who for some
reason had sent the famine upon the people.

Human sacrifices were frequently offered by the Hawaiians even after the
days of the coming of Captain Cook. A dead body was supposed to be
acceptable to the gods when a chief's house was built, when a chief's
new canoe was to be made or when temple walls were to be erected or
victories celebrated. The bodies of the people belonged to the will of
the chief. Therefore it was in quiet despair that the workmen obeyed
Hina Ke Ahi and prepared the place for sacrifice. It might mean their
own holocaust as an offering to the gods. At last Hina Ke Ahi bade the
laborers cease their work and stand by the side of the oven ready to
cover it with the dirt which had been thrown out and piled up by the
side. The people stood by, not knowing upon whom, the blow might fall.

But Hina Ke Ahi was "Hina the kind," and although she stood before them
robed in royal majesty and power, still her face was full of pity and
love. Her voice melted the hearts of her retainers as she bade them
carefully follow her directions.

"O my people. Where are you? Will you obey and do as I command? This imu
is my imu. I shall lie down on its bed of burning stones. I shall sleep
under its cover. But deeply cover ine or I may perish. Quickly throw the
dirt over in), body. Fear not the fire. Watch for three days. A woman
will stand by the imu. Obey her will."

Hina Ke Ahi was very beautiful, and her eyes flashed light like fire as
she stepped into the great pit and lay down on the burning stones. A
great smoke arose and gathered over the imu. The men toiled rapidly,
placing the imu mats over their chiefess and throwing the dirt back into
the oven until it was all thoroughly covered and the smoke was quenched.

Then they waited for the strange, mysterious thing which must follow the
sacrifice of this divine chiefess.

Halai hill trembled and earthquakes shook the land round about. The
great heat of the fire in the imu withered the little life which was
still left from the famine. Meanwhile Hina Ke Ahi was carrying out her
plan for securing aid for her people. She could not be injured by the
heat for she was a goddess of fire. The waves of heat raged around her
as she sank down through the stones of the imu into the underground
paths which belonged to the spirit world. The legend says that Hina made
her appearance in the form of a gushing stream of water which would
always supply the want of her adherents. The second day passed. Hina was
still journeying underground, but this time she came to the surface as a
pool named Moe Waa (canoe sleep) much nearer the sea. The third day came
and Hina caused a great spring of sweet water to burst forth from the
sea shore in the very path of the ocean surf. This received the name
Auauwai. Here Hina washed away all traces of her journey through the
depths. This was the last of the series of earthquakes and the
appearance of new water springs. The people waited, feeling that some
more wonderful event must follow the remarkable experiences of the three
days. Soon a woman stood by the imu, who commanded the laborers to dig
away the dirt and remove the mats. When this was done, the hungry people
found a very great abundance of food, enough to supply their want until
the food plants should have time to ripen and the days of the famine
should be over.

The joy of the people was great when they knew that their chiefess had
escaped death and would still dwell among them in comfort. Many were the
songs sung and stories told about the great famine and the success of
the goddess of fire.

The second sister, Hina Kuluua, the goddess of rain, was always very
jealous of her beautiful sister Hina Ke Ahi, and many times sent rain to
put out fires which her sister tried to kindle. Hina Ke Ahi could not
stand the rain and so fled with her people to a home by the seaside.

Hina Kuluua (or Hina Kuliua as she was sometimes known among the
Hawaiians) could control rain and storms, but for some reason failed to
provide a food supply for her people, and the famine wrought havoc among
them. She thought of the stories told and songs sung about her sister
and wished for the same honor for herself. She commanded her people to
make a great imu for her in the hill Pun Honu. She knew that a strange
power belonged to her and yet, blinded by jealousy, forgot that rain and
fire could not work together. She planned to furnish a great supply of
food for her people in the same way in which her sister had worked.

The oven was dug. Stones and wood were collected and the same ghostly
array of potatoes, taro, pig and dog prepared as had been done before by
her sister.

The kahunas or priests knew'that Hina Kuluua was going out of her
province in trying to do as her sister had done, but there was no use in
attempting to change her plans. jealousy is self-willed and obstinate
and no amount of reasoning from her dependents could have any influence
over her.

The ordinary incantations were observed, and Hina Kulutia gave the same
directions as those her sister had given. The imu was to be well heated.
The make-believe food was to be put in and a place left for her body. It
was the goddess of rain making ready to lie down on a bed prepared for
the goddess of fire. When all was ready, she lay down on the heated
stones and the oven mats were thrown over her and the ghostly
provisions. Then the covering of dirt was thrown back upon the mats and
heated stones, filling the pit which had been dug. The goddess of rain
was left to prepare a feast for her people as the goddess of fire had
done for herfollowers.

Some of the legends have introduced the demi-god Maui into this story.
The natives say that Maui came to "burn" or "cook the rain" and that he
made the oven very hot, but that the goddess of rain escaped and hung
over the hill in the form of a cloud. At least this is what the people
saw-not a cloud of smoke over the imu, but a rain cloud. They waited and
watched for such evidences of underground labor as attended the passage
of Hina Ke Ahi through the earth from the hill to the sea, but the only
strange appearance was the dark rain cloud. They waited three days and
looked for their chiefess to come in the form of a woman. They waited
another day and still another and no signs or wonders were rnanifest.
Meanwhile Maui, changing himself into a white bird, flew up into the sky
to catch the ghost of the goddess of rain which had escaped from the
burning oven. Having caught this spirit, he rolled it in some kapa cloth
which lie kept for food to be placed in an oven and carried it to a
place in the forest on the mountain side where again the attempt was
made to "burn the rain," but a great drop escaped and sped upward into
the sky. Again Maui can ht the ghost of the goddess and carried it to a
pali or precipice below the great volcano Kilauea, where he again tried
to destroy it in the heat of a great lava oven, but this time the spirit
escaped and found a safe refuge among kukui trees on the mountain side,
from which she sometimes rises in clouds which the natives say are the
sure sign of rain.

Whether this Maui legend has any real connection with the two Hinas and
the famine we do not surely know. The legend ordinarily told among the
Hawaiians says that after five days had passed the retainers decided on
their own responsibility to open the imu. No woman had appeared to give
them directions. Nothing but a mysterious rain cloud over the hill. In
doubt and fear, the dirt was thrown off and the mats removed. Nothing
was found but the ashes of Hina Kuluua. There was no food for her
followers and the goddess had lost all power of appearing as a chiefess.
Her bitter and thoughtless jealousy brought destruction upon herself and
her people. The ghosts of Hina Ke Ahi and Hina Kuluua sometimes draw
near to the old hills in the form of the fire of flowing lava or clouds
of rain while the old men and women tell the story of the Hinas, the
sisters of Maui, who were laid upon the burning stones of the imus of a
famine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Hina, the Woman In the Moon](maui18)
