[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](str03)  [Next](str05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Stonehenge, A Temple Restor'd to the British Druids*, by William
Stukeley, \[1740\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. II.

*Of the name of* Stonehenge*. These works prior to the* Roman *times.
Who were the builders? Of the general situation of it, again. Of the
beauty of its general proportion. A peep into it. A walk round the area.
Remarks on two stones standing on the* vallum*, and two corresponding
cavities for water vases: explained from ancient coins. That the* Welsh
*are the remains of the* Belgæ *from the continent, who lived here at
the* Roman *invasion, and by whose reports,* Stonehenge *was built by
the most ancient oriental colony, that brought the* Druids *hither*.

COME we to the name of *Stonehenge*, so called by our *Saxon* ancestors;
an argument sufficient, they were not the builders of it; they would
have called it by a more honourable name. Rode hengenne is in *Saxon* a
hanging-rod

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

or pole, *i.e.* a gallows; and *Stonehenge* is a stone gallows, called
so from the hanging parts, architraves, or rather imposts, the more
remarkable part; and which only can persuade people from thinking, the
stones *grew* in the very place, (as they express it.) And so Mr.
*Camden*, Dr. *Holland*, Mr. *Webb* and others think, of the wonderful
work at *Abury*; because there are none of these overthwart stones, as
here. Many are so astonished at the bulk of these stones, that measuring
all art and power by their own, they had rather think, they sprouted up
in their places, like mushrooms, at regular distances, in mathematical
circles; than that they were plac’d there by human industry, for
excellent purpose. But pendulous rocks are now called *henges* in
*Yorkshire*, and I have been informed of another place there called
*Stonehenge*, being natural rocks. So that I doubt not, *Stonehenge* in
*Saxon* signifies the hanging stones. In *Cornwall* is a Heath call’d
now *Hengston* down, probably from such a work as ours, now demolished.
It is in the hundred of *Easte*. And near it, is that other memorable
Antiquity, composed of many upright stones, call’d the Hurlers, a Druid
temple. The old *Britons* or *Welsh* call *Stonehenge* *choir gaur*,
which some interpret *chorea gigantum*, the giants dance: I judge, more
rightly *chorus magnus*, the great choir, round church, or temple. As
Banchor (where probably was of old, another Druid temple) means the high
temple. But they mistake it for *chorea*, *chwarae χuare*, a ball,
dance; as *Necham* sings;

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Nobilis est lapidum structura, chorea gigantum:  
Ars experta, suum posse, peregit opu*s,

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mr. *Camden*
defines the work *coronæ in modum*. The Latin *corona* a crown,
*corolla* a *ghirland*, and the *British* *crown* comes from its
circular form, as *côr* *chorus*. The armoric *Britons* call *cryn*
*rotundus*, *kruin* the *Irish*. *Coryn* is the round tip of any thing,
many such like words in all the *Celtic* dialects. The *chorus* of a
building among *Roman* christians, became appropriate to the more sacred
part, or east end of churches, always turn’d of a circular form; from
the time of *Constantine* the *Great*. Thus all the churches in the holy
land, thus the chapel in *Colchester* castle, and in the *Tower* of
*London*, (both, in my opinion, built about his time) are round at the
east end. The old *Britons* or *Welsh*, we find, had a notion of its
being a sacred place, tho’ they were not the builders of it; for I take
them to be the remains of the *Celtic* people that came from the
continent, who chiefly inhabited *England*, at least the south part,
when the *Romans* invaded the island, they are more particularly the
remains of the *Belgæ*. I suppose their name *Welsh*, a corruption of
*Belgæ*, Ὀυέλγαι in greek, <span id="img_00800"></span>
![Belgichen](img/00800.jpg.md) and <span id="img_00801"></span>
![Welichen](img/00801.jpg.md) in german. *Strabo* IV. speaks of their way
of making flannel, called <span id="img_00802"></span>
![](img/00802.jpg) \[λαῖνα, χλαῖνα, Latin laena--JBH\] for which our
*Welsh* are so famous. *Strabo* gives the celtic word without the
guttural aspirate, *chlæna* in latin. The most ancient inhabitants, the
remains of the old *Phœnician* colony and primitive *Celts* who built
*Stonehenge*, were the *Picts*, *Scots*, *Highland* and *Irish*, all the
same people, tho’ perhaps differing somewhat in dialect, as in
situation: no otherwise than a *Cumberland-man* and one of
*Somersetshire* now. The *Cornish*, I suppose, some remains too, of the
old oriental race. But at this very day in *Wales*, they call every
antiquated appearance beyond memory, *Irish*. Upon view of land, that
from before any ones remembrance appears to have been plow’d, or very
ancient ruins of buildings, and the like, they immediately pronounce,
That it was in the times of the *Irish*. The very same is observable in
the north, of the *Picts* or *Pights*, as they pronounce it, gutturally,
in the oriental fashion, which we cannot imitate. They call old
foundations, *Pights* houses, *&c*. Every thing is *Pictish*, whose
origin they do not know. These people are conscious, that they are not
the *Aborigines*, who by time and successive inundations, were forc’d
northward and westward, into *Scotland* and *Ireland*. And also in the
days of the *Romans*, such of the then inhabitants,

<span id="img_pl05"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 5. The Front
View of Stonehenge](tn/pl05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl05.jpg.md)  
Plate 5. The Front View of Stonehenge  
</span>

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

as would not submit to their gentile yoke, took the same road. The
*Irish* therefore, or ancient *Scottish*, is the remnant of the
*Phœnician* language, mixt with old *Biscayan* and *Gallic*, dialects of
*Celts*; and some oriental, *Arabic* in particular: as Mr. *Toland*
observes. And they are the descendants of the people who built
*Stonehenge*, and the like Works. Whence spring the strange reports of
these stones, coming from *Egypt*, from *Africa*, from *Spain*, from
*Ireland*. As retaining some memory of the steps, by which the people
who preceded their ancestors, travelled; nor they themselves, nor even
the *Belgæ* pretending to be the builders of this wonderful work. For
the *Belgæ* could not be ignorant of their own coming from the Gallic
continent.

I have taken notice of another remarkable particular, as to the name of
*Stonehenge*; which I apprehend to be of highest antiquity: that it was
called the *Ambres*, or *Ambrose*, as the famous *main Ambre* by
*Pensans* in *Cornwall*, another work of the Druids akin to this. And
from hence the adjacent town of *Ambresbury* had its name. But of this
matter, I must beg the readers patience, till I come to the last
chapter, and discourse of the antiquity of there works in general.

So much at present as to the name of our fabrick; it is time to draw
toward the sacred pile, and fancy ourselves walking upon this delightful
plain:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

---------------*juvat arva videre  
Non rastris hominum, non ulli obnoxia curæ*.   Virg.

</div>

nought can be sweeter than the air that moves o’re this hard and dry,
chalky soil. Every step you take upon the smooth carpet, (literally)
your nose is saluted with the most fragrant smell of *serpillum*, and
*apium*, which with the short grass continually cropt by the flocks of
sheep, composes the softest and most verdant turf, extremely easy to
walk on, and which rises as with a spring, under ones feet. The
following drawing [TAB. III.](str03.htm#img_pl03.md) is a prospect taken
from<span class="margnote">TAB. III.</span> the king's barrow, west from
*Vespasian*'s camp, in the way from *Ambresbury* to *Stonehenge*, by the
*Bristol* road. Tho’ the graver has not done it justice: yet it will
give one a general notion of the situation of the place. It is admirably
chosen, being in the midst of those wide downs, call’d *Salisbury*
plain; between the river *Avon* to the east, and a brook that runs into
the *Willy*, on the west. These two streams half round encompass it, at
2 miles distance, forming as it were a circular area, of 4 or 5 miles
diameter, compos’d of gentle acclivities and declivities, open and airy.
Yet agreeably diversify’d with the appearance of barrows, every where
upon the edges of the highest grounds. Which very barrows are curious
and entertaining, when view’d at hand, as well for the nicety and
handsome turn of their forms, as for their great variety, and all within
sight of the temple. These downs feed many flocks of sheep, and no doubt
furnish’d the idea of *Thessalian* and *Arcadian* plains, to the noble
*Sydney* residing at the neighbouring *Wilton*. The rivers are planted
very thick with towns. Six miles south of *Stonehenge* is *Salisbury*, a
mile nearer is *Sorbiodunum*, or old *Sarum*, by the side of which
passes the *Roman* road via *Iceniana* reaching from *Norfolk*, into
*Dorsetshire*. As this road goes southward, a mile beyond *Woodyates*,
where it enters *Dorsetshire* and *Cranburn* chase, it passes over a
heath where are many old barrows, like these on *Salisbury* plain. It
happens there, to infringe upon one of the barrows, which luckily
affords us a demonstration, of the road being made since those barrows;
of which I took notice in my *itinerarium* p. 180. and further to
gratify the curious have here inserted a print of it [TAB.
IV.](str03.htm#img_pl04.md) <span class="margnote">TAB. IV.</span> and may
take the opportunity once for all to advertize them, of the disadvantage
under which all drawings from these plains must appear. They are made
for use and instruction, like mathematical figures, and cannot be
expected much to please the eye; being form’d chiefly from bare lines,
admitting no picture-like decoration.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

I have observ’d another similar proof of these works being older than
the *Roman* times here, in that *Roman* road that goes from
*Marlborough* to *Bath*. It is near *Abury*, and I have a print of it
engrav’d, which will be exhibited, when I next publish an account of
that great work. But in the former <span class="margnote">TAB.
IV.</span> *plate* [IV.](str03.htm#img_pl04.md) I call those Druid barrows,
which are often found on these plains: a circular trench, sometime of
100 foot diameter, with only a small tump of earth in the middle, under
which there is commonly an urn. Sometime two or three of these little
tumps or diminutive *tumuli* within one circle, which it is natural to
suppose, were friends or relations. These circles are always excellently
well mark’d out.

The particular spot of ground where *Stonehenge* stands, is in the
lordship of west or little *Ambresbury:* the possession of the reverend
Mr. *Hayward*, who at present may be call’d the Archdruid of the island.
’Tis a delicate part of this large plain, with a gentle declivity from
the south-west to the south and north-east. So that the soil, which is
chalk, is perfectly dry and hard. Hence the infinite numbers of coaches
and horses, that thro’ so many centuries have been visiting the place
every day, have not obliterated the track of the banks and ditches. The
water cannot possibly rest any where hereabouts. The founders consulted
well for the stability of their work, and salubrity of the place.
*Cæsar* informs us in his commentaries, B. G. vi. 13. that among the
Druids, "one has the supreme authority. When he is dead, whoever excels
in dignity succeeds. But if there be more candidates, the Archdruid is
chose by the votes of the Druids: and sometimes they fight for it. At a
certain fix’d time of the year the *Gaulish* Druids meet, in the
territories of the Carnutes, which country is in the middle of *Gaul*,
*in a consecrated place*. Hither all persons from all quarters come, who
have any controversy, and stand to their determination. The discipline
of the Druids arose in *Britain*, and is said from thence to have been
brought into *Gaul*. And now, they who design to be more throughly
initiated therein, go over to learn." Here in few lines the great author
acquaints us with a vast fund of ancient history, and upon which whole
volumes have been wrote. I observe no more from it at present, than that
we may very reasonably conclude, the elegant and the magnificent
structure of *Stonehenge* was as the metropolitical church of the chief
Druid of *Britain*. This was the *locus consecratus* where they met at
some great festivals in the year, as well to perform the extraordinary
sacrifices and religious rites, as to determine causes and civil
matters. *Cæsar* calls these appointments of the Druids in *Gaul*
consecrated places, where probably was nothing but a circle of rude
stones. Had he seen those of our island, an *Abury* or even a
*Stonehenge*, he would scarce have given them the title of temples: he
was not used to the old patriarchal way. But I reckon the true reading
in that passage quoted from him, to be *loco consecrato*, not *luco*,
which was put in by some bold transcriber, who had heard of the fondness
of the Druids for groves. But how unfit is a grove for a great and
public meeting upon civil affairs? And this for the excellency of its
situation upon a vast plain, was well calculated for a publick meeting
of those of the order, at an election of a new Archdruid. As *Cæsar*'s
words give light to the work before us, so it confirms what the warlike
author says, of the discipline being originally in *Britain*; which the
critics upon the continent cannot bear, and vainly endeavour to spirit
away *Cæsar*'s meaning. The very building of *Stonehenge*, to say
nothing of other like works here, shows it was not in vain, that the
youth of *Gaul* came to learn of men, who could contrive and execute so
mighty a work.

*Stonehenge* stands not upon the very summit of a hill, but pretty near
it, and for more than three quarters of the circuit you ascend to it
very gently from lower ground. At half a mile distance, the appearance
of it is stately and awful, really august. As you advance nearer,
especially up the avenue, which is to the north-east of it, (which side
is now most perfect) the greatness of its contour

<span id="img_pl06"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Chart converting
English feet to Cubits](tn/pl06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl06.jpg.md)  
Chart converting English feet to Cubits  
</span>

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

fills the eye in an astonishing manner. [TAB. V.](#img_pl05.md) is the
front prospect from<span class="margnote">TAB. V.</span> the entrance of
the avenue. The stone that leans o'er the high attar appears thro’ the
grand or principal entrance: because we stand upon lower ground. If the
reader pleases to cast his eye upon *Plate* [XII.](str06.htm#img_pl12.md)
there ’tis represented in orthography,[TAB. XII.](str06.htm#img_pl12.md)
(to speak technically) as here in prospect. Hence by this method of
comparing the designs together, we may, without confusion, gather a true
notion of the work. *Stonehenge* is a good deal more in diameter, than
the outside of St. *Paul*'s cupola. And from a comparison of these two
buildings, I was able to judge of the vanity of the architect of St.
*Peter*'s at *Rome*, who in order to degrade the *Pantheon*, (whilst he
was imitating it) boasted, he would set the *Pantheon* 200 foot high in
the air, meaning the cupola there. But the architect of the *Pantheon*,
*Valerius Ostiensis* (had he been alive) would have told him, that the
vastness of the diameter in these cupola's is lost by the very height.
Whatever we would have admired, ought to be preserved as the largest
dimension. Therefore *Valerius*, with admirable judgment, has made the
outward breadth of the *Pantheon* one fifth part compleatly longer than
its height, taken in front; but if we measure it sidewise, taking in the
portico, the breadth to the height, is more than 6 to 4. By this means
the wonder of the *Pantheon*, the curve or arch 150 *Roman* feet in
diameter, remains. So the curve of *Stonehenge*, which is above 100
*English* feet, appears extraordinary large and well proportion’d, upon
a height of 18 foot, which reaches to the top of the outer cornish; that
of the inner cornishes is but 24 foot high, at a medium. For the
cornishes of the inner part of *Stonehenge*, or that which *Webb* calls
the cell, are not all of equal height, of which in proper place. Thus
both parts of the wonder is preserv’d, the greatness of the circuit of
the whole work, the greatness and height of the parts that compose it;
the height being one fourth of the diameter. The greatness too of the
lights and shades in *Stonehenge*, as well as their variety arising from
a circular form, gives it all possible advantage, and makes it deserve
the appellation of;

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Deorum gloriosa domus*,

</div>

as *Theocritus* and *Herodotus* generally call temples. And its
situation is correspondent to the antient notion. *Pausanias* praises
the *Tanagrei* in *Beotia*, for having their temples in clean and
distinct area's, distant from profane buildings and traffic.

*Stonehenge* is inclosed within a circular ditch. After one has pass’d
this ditch, says the right reverend annotator to *Camden*, he ascends 35
yards before he comes at the work itself. This measure is the same, as
that which Webb calls 110 foot, the diameter of the work. For the area
inclos’d by a ditch, wherein *Stonehenge* is situate, is in diameter
three times the diameter of *Stonehenge*. See the *Plate* of the *area*.
[XXIII](str12.htm#img_pl23.md). Therefore the distance between the verge
<span class="margnote">TAB. XXIII.</span> of the ditch within side,
quite round, to the work of the Temple, is equal to the diameter of the
Temple. The reader remembers what I promis’d, about the scale or measure
whereby this work and all others of the Druids, is form'd; that ’tis the
old *Hebrew*, *Phœnician* or *Egyptian* Cubit, which compar’d with the
*English* foot, amounts to 20 inches and 4/5. Therefore I have drawn the
ensuing comparison and proportion, between our *English* and *Hebrew*
Scale; which is to accompany us in the future description. [TAB.
VI.](#img_pl06.md) the scale of <span class="margnote">TAB. VI.</span>
cubits and feet compar’d. That I might not be suspected to savour an
hypothesis, I produce other peoples measures, where I can find them in
print, provided they be done with tolerable judgment and accuracy; for
both are necessary in our case, with proper allowance. ’Tis not to be
suppos’d, that in this work, the minuteness and extreme curiosity of
*Desgodetz*, with which he measur’d the remains of old *Rome*, is
expected, or even possible. For tho’ the stones are not chizel’d and
squar’d, to such preciseness, as *Roman* works are; yet they are
chizel'd, and are far from rude. Nevertheless every body has not

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

skill, properly to measure them. For they are much impair’d by weather:
much is knock’d off by wretched hands. Those stones that stand, are
luxated various ways, by time and their own weight; by silly people
digging about them, and by the unfortunate colony of rabbets lately
translated thither. So that we may well say with *Claudian*,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Seram ponderibus pronis tractura ruinam,  
Pars cadit affiduo flatu, pars imbre peresa  
Rumpitur, abripuit partem vitiosa vetustas*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I was forc’d to
make many admeasurements and repeated, before I could obtain an exact
ground-plot; and it requir’d much consideration to do it, and to find
out the true scale by which it was compos’d, the Druid cubit, which they
<span class="margnote">TAB. VI.</span> brought with them from the east.
Therefore by the annexed scales, [TAB. VI.](#img_pl06.md) which I have
contriv’d to answer all lengths, the reader. will most perfectly
understand the subsequent description, and see the truth of my
assertion: and may from thence be enabled to measure any other like
works, in our islands, which I have not had the opportunity of viewing.
It was the eastern way, in laying out a building, to use a staff of 6
cubits long. This was of a convenient, manageable length; and its
divisions being half a dozen, suited well a reckoning by duodenaries.
Thus in *Ezek*. xl. 3, S. *Apoc*. xxi. 16. the angel that laid out the
temple of *Solomon*, is described, as having a reed of 6 cubits (a
measuring reed or cane) in his hand. This being the universal and first
measure of antiquity, was in time spread all over the world. In
particular, it became the *decempedum* of the *Greeks* and *Romans*; the
common measuring standard. But ’tis remarkable, they alter’d the
divisions, thinking it more artful and convenient to have them in less
parts: and instead of 6 cubits, they made it consist of 10 feet. And by
time and change, the whole measure became somewhat alter’d from the
primitive. For the *Greek* *decempedum* was swell’d somewhat too long,
as the *Romans* diminish’d theirs a little. Ezekiel's reed is our 10
foot and 4 inches 2/3; 400 cubits is the *stadium* of the ancients, or
furlong, 100 feet.

When you enter the building, whether on foot or horseback and cast your
eyes around, upon the yawning ruins, you are struck into an exstatic
*reverie*, which none can describe, and they only can be sensible of,
that feel it. Other buildings fall by piece meal, but here a single
stone is a ruin, and lies like the haughty carcase of *Goliath*. Yet
there is as much of it undemolished, as enables us sufficiently to
recover its form, when it was in its most perfect state. There is enough
of every part to preserve the idea of the whole. The next <span
class="margnote">TAB. VII."</span> *Plate*, [TAB. VII.](#img_pl07.md) the
peep (as I call it) into the *sanctum sanctorum*, is drawn, at the very
entrance, and as a view into the inside. When we advance further, the
dark part of the ponderous imposts over our heads, the chasm of sky
between the jambs of the cell, the odd construction of the whole, and
the greatness of every part, surprizes. We may well cry out in the
poet's words

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Tantum Relligio potuit!*

</div>

if you look upon the perfect part, you fancy intire quarries mounted up
into the air: if upon the rude havock below, you see as it were the
bowels of a mountain turn’d inside outwards. It is pleasant likewise to
consider the spot upon which ’tis situate, and to take a circular view
of the country around it. For which purpose I have sketch’d the
following prospects, taking in the country almost round the
circumference of the horizon. This Use there will be in them further; is
ever it happen, that this noble work should be destroy’d: the spot of it
may be found, by these views.

<span class="margnote">TAB. VIII.</span>[TAB. VIII.](str05.htm#img_pl08.md)
north prospect from *Stonehenge*.

<span class="margnote">TAB. IX.</span>[TAB. IX.](str05.htm#img_pl09.md)
south-west prospect from *Stonehenge*.

<span class="margnote">TAB. X.</span>[TAB. X.](str05.htm#img_pl10.md)
south-east prospect from *Stonehenge*.

<span id="img_pl07"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 7. A peep
into the Sanctum Sanctorum](tn/pl07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl07.jpg.md)  
Plate 7. A peep into the Sanctum Sanctorum  
</span>

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

The *vallum* of the ditch which incloses the *area*, or court, is
inwards, and makes a circular terras; walking upon which, we take the
foregoing prospects. The lowest part of the *area* is towards the
entrance. The tops of all the circumjacent hills, or rather easy
elevations, are cover’d o’re, as it were, with barrows, which cause an
agreeable appearance; adorning the bare downs with their figures. And
this ring of barrows reaches no further, than till you lose sight of the
temple, or thereabouts. Stand at the grand entrance by the stone that
lies upon the ground, and the view of the temple presents itself as in
the [Vth](#img_pl05.md) *Plate*, the front prospect of *Stonehenge*.
Directly down the avenue, <span class="margnote">TAB. V.</span> to the
north-east, the apex of an hill terminates the horizon, between which
and the bottom of a valley you see the *Cursus*, a work which has never
yet been taken notice of. Being a space of ground included between two
long banks going parallel east and west, at 350 foot distance, the
length 10000 feet. This was design’d for the horse races and games, like
the *Olympic*, the *Isthmian*, *&c*. of the *Greeks*. But we shall speak
more particularly of this afterwards. In the valley on this side of it,
the strait part of the avenue terminates in two branches; that on the
left hand, leads to the *Cursus*; that on the right goes directly up the
hill, between two famous groups of barrows, each consisting of seven in
number. The farthest, or those northward, I call the oldest king's
barrows; the hithermost are vulgarly called the seven king's graves.

If we walk a little to the left hand, [TAB. VIII.](str05.htm#img_pl08.md)
is presented. See the <span class="margnote">TAB. VIII.</span> northern
long barrow*:* on this side of which, the eye takes in the whole length
of the *Cursus*. Many barrows at the end and on both sides of it. That
mark’d P. was open’d by my Lord *Pembroke*, those mark’d S. were open’d
by myself. What was discover’d therein will be treated of hereafter.
Further to the west, the highest ground of that spot whereon
*Stonehenge* stands, eclipses a distant view, and *there* are the
nearest barrows planted with rabbets, which do much damage too at
*Stonehenge*, and threaten no less than the ruin of the whole. Upon the
*vallum* of *Stonehenge* is one of the stones there, which seems to be a
small altar, for some kind of libations, and at the letter A. the mark
of a cavity; of which more particularly, in the next page. The next or
south-west prospect, [TAB. IX.](str05.htm#img_pl09.md) from *Stonehenge*,
takes in the country from <span class="margnote">TAB. IX.</span>
*Berwickbarn*, and my Lord *Pembroke*'s wood of *Groveley*, to
*Salisbury* steeple: a chain of barrows reaching a 6th part of the whole
horizon. Many from the great quantity of these sepulchral *tumuli* here,
injudiciously conclude, that there have been great battels upon the
plain, and that the slain were bury’d there. But they are really no
other than family burying-places, set near this temple, for the same
reason as we bury in church-yards yards and consecrated ground.
*Salisbury* steeple seen from hence, brings to my sorrowful remembrance,
the great *Thomas* Earl of *Pembroke*, whose noble ashes are there
deposited. He was patron of my studies, particularly those relating to
*Stonehenge*. Virtue, piety, magnanimity, learning, generosity, all
sublime qualities recommended and added to his illustrious descent.
Glorious it will be for me, if these pages live to testify to another
age, the intimacy he was pleased to honour me with.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

             -------------*quis talia fando  
Temperet a lachrymis*---------- --------*!*

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In this *Plate*,
the reader may remark another of the cavities within the *vallum*, to
which that corresponds on the opposite diameter before hinted at.

The south-east prospect finishes the circle, [TAB.
X.](str05.htm#img_pl10.md) looking towards the <span class="margnote">TAB.
X.</span> valley southward, where the rain-water passes, from the whole
work of *Stonehenge*, the whole tract of the *Cursus* and the country
beyond it, as far as north long barrow; and so is convey’d into the
river *Avon* at *Lake*. That road between king barrow and the seven
barrows is the way to *Vespasian*'s camp and so

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

to *Ambresbury*. The barrow under those seven kings of later form, is
that nearest to *Stonehenge*.

Doubtless in the sacrifices and ceremonies which were here practis’d,
water was us’d, and I observe most of our Druid temples are set near
rivers. The reason why *Stonehenge* was not set near a river, has
hitherto effectually preserv’d it, this part being uninhabitable upon
that account, and rather too far off a town for tillage. But when I
curiously contemplated the beauty and convenience of this court, I
observ’d two remarkable places, which plainly have a conformity with the
two stones set upon the *vallum*; which stones puzzle all enquirers.
Those particulars seem to explain one another, and more especially by
the help of a coin in *Vaillant*, tom. II. p. 240. for which reason I
caus’d it to be engraven<span class="margnote">TAB. XXIII.</span> on
that plate, [TAB. XXIII.](str12.htm#img_pl23.md) the *area* of
*Stonehenge*. ’Tis a coin of *Philip* the *Roman* emperor, struck by the
city of *Heliopolis* in *Cœlesyria* under mount *Libanus*, now call’d
*Baldec*, where is an admirable ancient temple remaining, describ’d and
pictur’d in *Maundrel*'s travels of the holy land. In the walls of it
are two or three stones of an immense length, which seem to be the
fragments of an obelisk, dedicated to the sun, whence the name of
*Heliopolis*. The coin presents a temple built upon a rock: to which
they ascend by steps. The temple is inclos’d in an *area* with a wall.
On the left hand by the circuit of the *area* is a stone altar. A little
further, is a great vase for water to be us’d in the sacrifices. The
legend is COL*onia* IVL*ia* AVG*usta* FEL*ix* HEL*iopolitana*. Now the
two cavities in the circuit of our *area*, very probably were the places
where two great stone vases were set, and the two stones were two altars
for some particular rites, which we don’t take upon ourselves to
explain. See another coin II. in *Descamp's selectiora numismata*, p.
23. which is to the same purpose. Those stones are set in their proper
places in my scheme of the *area* of *Stonehenge:* and I leave them to
the better conjectures of the learned in these matters. Mr. *Webb*
fancies them the jambs of two portals of two entrances, besides the
great entrance; and makes them favour his imaginary triangles, from
which he forms the work of *Stonehenge*, upon a *Vitruvian* plan. And in
order to bring this about, he draws one stone, that toward the east, or
on the left hand, from the true and only entrance, no less than 120 foot
out of its real place. No doubt, the reader will be surpriz’d at this,
and the easier credit me, when I say his ground-plot in other parts, is
very far from being exact. The reader <span
class="margnote">XXIII.</span> will observe from my scheme, that the two
semicircular hollows mark’d A A, wherein I suppose the water-vases were
set, are plac’d alternatively, with the two stones: I don’t pretend to
show why the Druids did so. But that stone standing, together with the
upper A, and the center of the grand entrance by the stone that lies
flat there, make an exact equilateral triangle; yet really have not the
lean relation to the scheme of the work of *Stonehenge* in general, or
to the cell in particular. Nor do the stones, or those hollows, point
out any other entrance cross the ditch into the *area*. So in the
tabernacle of *Moses* and temple of *Solomon*, great vases in brass were
set for water, in the court before the temple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](str05.md)
