[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](str05)  [Next](str07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Stonehenge, A Temple Restor'd to the British Druids*, by William
Stukeley, \[1740\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

### CHAP. IV.

*Of the lesser circle of stones, without imposts. A disputation again
Mr. Webb*.

MANY drawings have been made and publish’d, of *Stonehenge*. But they
are not done in a scientific way, so as may prove any point, or improve
our understanding in the work. I have therefore drawn four
architectonic<span class="margnote">TAB. XII.</span> orthographies: one,
[TAB. XII.](#img_pl12) is of the front and outside: three are different
sections upon the two principal diameters of the work. These will for
ever preserve the memory of the thing, when the ruins even of these
ruins are perish’d; because from them and the ground-plot, at any time,
an exact model<span class="margnote">TAB. XIV, XV, XVI.</span> may be
made. TAB. [XIV](str07.htm#img_pl14), [XV](str07.htm#img_pl15),
[XVI.](str08.htm#img_pl16)these orthographies show the primary intent of
the founders; they are the designs, which the Druids made, before they
put the work in execution. And by comparing them with the drawings
correspondent, of the ruins, we gain a just idea of the place, when it
was in its perfection. But now as we are going to enter into the
building, it will <span class="margnote">TAB. XI.</span> be proper again
to survey the ground-plot, [pl11](#img_pl11) which is so different from
that publish’d by Mr. *Webb*. Instead of an imaginary hexagon, we see a
most noble and beautiful ellipsis, which composes the cell, as he names
it, I think *adytum* a proper word. There is nothing like it, to my
knowledge, in all antiquity; and ’tis an original invention of our
Druids, an ingenious contrivance to relax the inner and more sacred
part, where they perform’d their religious offices. The two outward
circles do not hinder the sight, but add much to the solemnity of the
place and the duties, by the crebrity and variety of their intervals.
They that were within, when it was in perfection, would see a most
notable effect produc’d by this elliptical figure, included in a
circular *corona*, having a large hemisphere of the heavens for its
covering.

Somewhat more than 8 feet inward, from the inside of this exterior
circle, is another circle of much lesser stones. In the measure of the
Druids ’tis five cubits. This circle was made by a radius of 24 cubits,
drawn from the common centers of the work. This struck in the chalk the
line of the circumference wherein they set these stones. The stones that
compote it are 40 in number, forming with the outward circle (as it
were) a circular portico: a most beautiful walk, and of a pretty effect.
Somewhat of the beauty of it may be <span class="margnote">TAB.
XVII.</span> seen in *Plate* [XVII.](str08.htm#img_pl17) where, at
present, ’tis most perfect. We are impos’d on, in Mr. *Webb's* scheme,
where he places only 30 stones equal to the number of the outer circle,
the better to humour his fancy of the dipteric aspect, p. 76. He is for
persuading us, this is a *Roman* work compos’d from a mixture of the
plainness and solidness of the Tuscan order, with the delicacy of the
Corinthian. That in aspect ’tis *dipteros hypæthros*, that in manner
’tis *pycnostylos*; which when apply’d to our antiquity, is no better
than playing with words. For suppose this inner circle consisted of only
30 stones, and they set as in his scheme, upon the same *radius*, as
those of the outer: what conformity has this to a portico properly, to
an order, *tuscan*, *corinthian* or any other, what similitude is there
between these stones and a column? where one sort is square oblong, the
other opposite (by his own account) pyramidal. Of what order is a
column, or rather a pilaster, where its height is little more than twice
its diameter? Where is the base, the shaft, the capital, or any thing
that belongs to a pillar, pillaster or portico? the truth and fact is
this. The inner circle has 40 stones in it. Whence few or none but those
two intervals upon the principal diameter, happen precisely to
correspond with those of the outer circle. Whereby a much better effect
is produc’d, than if the case had been as *Webb* would have it. For a
regularity there, would have been

<span id="img_pl12"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 12. The
Orthography of Stonehenge](tn/pl12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl12.jpg)  
Plate 12. The Orthography of Stonehenge  
</span>

<span id="img_pl11"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 11. The
Geometrical Ground plot of Stonehenge](tn/pl11.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl11.jpg)  
Plate 11. The Geometrical Ground plot of Stonehenge  
</span>

\[Plate 11 is on the verso of Plate 12, and thus are out of order in the
original--JBH\]

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

trifling and impertinent. Again, Mr. *Webb* makes these stones pyramidal
in shape, without reason. They are truly flat parallelograms, as those
of the outer circle. He says, p. 59. they are one foot and a half in
breadth, but they are twice as much. Their general and designed
proportion is 2 cubits, or two cubits and a half, as they happen’d to
find suitable stones. A radius of 23 cubits strikes the inner
circumference: of 24 the outer. They are, as we said before, a cubit
thick, and 4 cubits and a half in height, which is above 7 foot. This
was their stated proportion, being every way the half of the outer
uprights. Such seems to have been the original purpose of the founders,
tho’ ’tis not very precise, neither in design, nor execution. In some
places, the stones are broader than the intervals, in some otherwise: so
that in the ground-plot I chose to mark them as equal, each 2 cubits and
a half. There are scarce any of these intire, as to all these
dimensions; but from all, and from the symmetry of these *Celtic* kind
of works, which I have been conversant in, I found this to be the
intention of the authors. ’Tis easy for any one to satisfy themselves,
they never were pyramidal; for behind the upper end of the *adytum*,
there are three or four left, much broader than thick, above twice; and
not the least semblance of a pyramid. I doubt not but he means an
obelisk, to which they might some of them possibly be likened, but not
at all to a pyramid. Nor indeed do I imagine any thing of an obelisk was
in the founders view; but the stones diminish a little upward, as common
reason dictates they ought to do. Nor need we bestow the pompous words
of either pyramid, or obelisk upon them. For they cannot be said to
imitate, either one or other, in shape, use, much less magnitude: the
chief thing to be regarded, in a comparison of this sort. The central
distance between these stones of the inner circle, measured upon their
outward circumference, is 4 cubits. I observe further, that the two
stones of the principal entrance of this circle, correspondent to that
of the outer circle, are broader and taller, and set at a greater
distance from each other, being rather more than that of the principal
entrance in the outer circle. It is evident too, that they are set
somewhat more inward than the rest; so as that their outward face stands
on the line that marks the inner circumference of the inner circle. I
know no reason for all this, unless it be, that the outside of these two
stones, is the outside of the hither end of the ellipsis of the
*adytum:* for so it corresponds by measure upon the ground-plot. This is
apparent, that they eminently point out the principal entrance of that
circle, which is also the entrance into the *adytum*. For five stones on
this hand, and five on that, are as it were the *cancelli* between the
*sanctum* and *sanctum sanctorum*, if we may use such expressions. ’Tis
scarce worth mentioning to the reader, that there never were any imposts
over the heads of these stones of the inner circle. They are
sufficiently fasten’d into the ground. Such would have been no security
to them, no ornament. They are of a harder kind of stone than the rest,
as they are lesser; the better to resist violence.

There are but nineteen of the whole number left; but eleven of them are
standing *in situ*. There are five in one place standing contiguous,
three in another, two in another. The walk between these two circles,
which is 300 foot in circumference, is very noble and very delightful.
Probably it gave *Inigo Jones* the idea of designing that fine circular
portico, which is one great beauty, among many, in his drawings for
*White-hall*, publish’d lately from the originals by my Lord
*Burlington*; who has a true notion of the extraordinary merit of that
great man: and very commendably has reviv’d his memory. Such a circular
portico put in execution, would have a marvellous effect, much exceed a
common gallery in use, because ’tis a perpetual walk, without turning
back, and well becomes a royal residence. The best view of this sort, to
be had from our work, is from the north, as in [TAB.
XVII.](str08.htm#img_pl17) the reader cannot <span class="margnote">TAB.
XVII.</span> but observe, how little pretence here is for an imitation
of *Greek* or *Roman* portico's, notwithstanding the grand and agreeable
curve of the outward circle.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But when we see
the disproportion of the inner circle in regard to any purpose of this
sort, we must own the invention of *Hermogenes* in contriving the
*pseudo-dipteros*, is here apply’d with an ill grace. The founders of
*Stonehenge* cou’d have no need of make-shifts for want of room on
Salisbury plain. Or how could a concentric row of little stones, or
pillars if he will so have it, bear any resemblance to the contrivance
of *Hermogenes*, which consisted in having none; in taking away the
whole inner row of pillars, so as to add to the convenience of room, and
preserve the aspect, at the same time? Most undoubtedly the Druids had
no further meaning in it, than to make use of the even numbers of 30
greater stones, and 40 lesser stones; and this was to produce a more
perplexed variety, by the interstices having no regard to one another.
So far were they from having a notion of *Grecian* beauty, in the
pillars of circular portico's being set on the same *radius*; pillar
answering to pillar, intercolumniation to intercolumniation. And this
will be shown repeatedly in the progress of this work, to be the common
practice of the Druids in other like instances.

But when we consider the cell, as Mr. *Webb* names it, we find him
guilty of great disingenuity, in ill conceiving the form of it, and in
distorting his ground-plots, to colour it over the better. The minute
you enter this *adytum*, <span class="margnote">TAB. XVIII.</span> as in
[TAB. XVIII.](str10.htm#img_pl18) you discover ’tis not a hexagon, nor
ever was intended for one, and there can be no greater absurdity than to
imagine it one. It is in truth compos’d of certain *compages* of stones,
which I shall call *trilithons*, because made, each of two upright
stones, with an impost at top: and there are manifestly 5 of these
*trilithons* remaining. But the naked eye easily discovers, they are
very far from making 5 sides of a hexagon. They cannot be brought to any
approach, of a truly circular polygon. 3 *trilithons* of the 5 are
remaining entire, 2 are ruin’d indeed, in some measure, but the stones
remain *in situ*. And nothing is easier, than to take the ground-plot,
from symmetry and correspondency. We see the two *trilithons* on the
wings or sides of the *adytum*, are set almost in a strait line, one of
another; when in a hexagon form, they ought to make a considerable
angle. If you examine them trigonometrically, the true angle of an
hexagon is 120 degrees, but here is an angle of near 150. And by making
it an hexagon, he supposes one *trilithon* entirely gone, *that* nearest
the grand entrance, when there is not the least appearance that ever
there were such stones there. No cavity in the earth, no stump or
fragment visible, nor is it easy to imagine, how 3 stones of so vast a
bulk could have been clean carried away, either whole or in pieces.
There is no room for them to have been carried away whole, no traces of
their having been thrown down, broke in pieces and so carried away. This
outer side of the work being the most perfect of the whole. Of the ruins
of the other *trilithons*, there is not the least part wanting. What has
been thrown down and broke, remains upon the spot. But this *trilithon*
in dispute, must needs have been spirited away, by nothing less than
Merlin's magic, which erected it, as the monks fable. Besides, if it
were still standing, it would be very far from making this adytum a
regular hexagon, to which he has accommodated his *peripteros* scheme:
p. 87. Further, granting it was a regular hexagon, it would be very far
from corresponding with that scheme, or have the least appearance, of
its being taken from such a one. For our editor there, has converted the
cell quite from the nature of that at *Stonehenge*. He has made the
upper end of his cell at the letter H opposite to the grand entrance G,
not a *trilithon* as it is notoriously at *Stonehenge*, but an angular
interval between 2 *trilithons*. It is not the side of the figure, but
the angle. Whereas it is most notorious at *Stonehenge*, that the upper
end of the *adytum* opposite to the grand entrance, and to the whole
length of the avenue and entrance between it and the area, is a
*trilithon*; not an angle or interval. And that *trilithon* is exceeding
stately, tho’ in ruins, one of the upright stones being fallen, the
other

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

leaning. So that here, we have the cell converted full a 6th part of the
whole compass, from its true and original situation, and so in all the
schemes of Mr. *Webb's* book, not one excepted. In that, for instance,
*Scheme* I, p. 56, the high altar is plac’d at D not against a
*trilithon*, as it ought to be, opposite to the grand entrance in the
front of the temple, and to the (only) entrance below, into the *area*,
but against an angle between two. If then you suppose that hexagon
remov’d back a 6th part, so as that a *trilithon* be set behind the high
altar, as it is really in the thing its self, and upon the principal
diameter of the whole work: then this absurd consequence follows, that
the opposite *trilithon* of the cell stands in the very midst of the
entrance into the cell, upon the same principal ground-line or diameter
of the work, and quite obstructs the view and entrance into it. It is
altogether as ridiculous, as if a dead wall was built under St. Paul's
organ-loft, which is and ought to be the chief entrance into the choir.
Besides, by *Webb's* ground-plots and uprights, it seems as if, when you
[entered](errata.htm#1) this *adytum*, there were 3 *trilithons* on the
right, and 3 on the left, whereas it is most [obvious](errata.htm#2),
there are but two on the right, and two on the left; when you advance
into it, the orderly way, from the northeast grand entrance of the
avenue; which he himself p. 55. owns to be the principal. But I am tired
of so ungrateful a task, which necessity alone could have extorted from
me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](str07)
