[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](str02)  [Next](str04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Stonehenge, A Temple Restor'd to the British Druids*, by William
Stukeley, \[1740\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="img_pl01"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 1: A
Druid](tn/pl01.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl01.jpg)  
Plate 1: A Druid  
</span>

<span id="img_00100"></span> ![Title: Stonehenge: A Work of the British
Druids Describd](img/00100.jpg)

### CHAP. I.

*Of the Situation of* Stonehenge *in general. That it was a temple of
the Druids, of the patriarchal mode, who were a most ancient oriental
colony. In later times, the* Belgæ *from the continent, conquer’d this
country from them. Whence these stones were brought? Of their nature,
magnitude, weight. Of the measure of the Druids, the ancient* Hebrew
*cubit, and its proportion to the* English *foot*.

THE *Wiltshire* downs, or *Salisbury* plain, (as commonly call’d) for
extent and beauty, is, without controversy, one of the most delightful
parts of *Britain*. But of late years great encroachments have been made
upon it by the plough, which threatens the ruin of this fine champain,
and of all the monuments of antiquity thereabouts. Monuments, we can
scarce say, whether more wonderful in themselves, more observ’d, or less
understood! among them, *Stonehenge* has been eminent from the remotest
ages, tho’ ’tis not the greatest, most considerable, or most ancient.
But ’tis my intent to begin my discourse from it, because the latest,
and from thence proceed upwards in our inquiries, about the times and
authors of these stupendous works, the temples of the Druids in our
Island: for I cannot doubt that *Stonehenge* was such. The idea we
conceive of the distance of time, when these kind of works were made,
cannot be ill-form’d, if we consider, that the utmost accounts of ’em we
have in writing, are from the *Britons*, the remains of the people who
lived here, at the time of the *Roman* invasion. This is mention’d in
some manuscripts of *Ninnius* before the *Saxons* and *Danes* came over.
And the oldest *Britons* speak of this only by tradition, far above all
memorial. They wonder’d at *Stonehenge* then, and were as far to seek
about the founders and intent of it, as we now. They have recourse to
magic, as is usual, when they would account for any thing seemingly so
much above human power, to accomplish. They tell us, these stones of
immense bulk were brought from a plain, in the middle of *Ireland*, and
the like. Which reports give us only no obscure hint of their true
authors, the Druids, who were fam’d for magic,

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

and were driven last into *Ireland*, in the time of the *Romans*. There
they built such like works again, or their brethren had built before;
till Christianity, to which the greatest and purest part of their own
doctrine was akin, soon put <span class="margnote">TAB. I.</span> an end
to their polity, which the *Roman* arms could not do. And they embrac’d
that religion, to which their own opinions and rites had so direct a
tendency. This is the sentiment of *Origen* on *Ezekiel* iv. And ’tis
sufficiently evident, if we consider, that the first planters of
Christianity in *Ireland*, immediately converted the whole island,
without so much as the blood of one martyr. Nay, the Druids themselves,
at that time the only national priests, embraced it readily, and some of
them were very zealous preachers of it, and effectual converters of
others. For instance, the great *Columbanus* himself was a Druid: the
apostle of *Ireland*, *Cornwall*, *&c*. We need not be surpriz’d at
this, when we assert, that there is very much reason to believe, these
famous philosophic priests came hither, as a *Phœnician* colony, in the
very earliest times, even as soon as *Tyre* was founded: during the life
of the patriarch *Abraham*, or very soon after. Therefore they brought
along with them the patriarchal religion, which was so extremely like
Christianity, that in effect it differ’d from it only in this; they
believed in a Messiah who was to come into the world, as we believe in
him that is come. Further, they came from that very country where
*Abraham* liv’d, his sons and grandsons; a family God almighty had
separated from the gross of mankind, to stifle the seeds of idolatry; a
mighty prince, and preacher of righteousness. And tho’ the memoirs of
our Druids are extremely short, yet we can very evidently discover from
them, that the Druids were of *Abraham's* religion intirely, at least in
the earliest times, and worshipp’d the supreme Being in the same manner
as he did, and probably according to his example, or the example of his
and their common ancestors.

All this I shall prove, in the pursuit of this work. But before we come
to speculation, intend to give an exact description of their several
temples, and the like works; for such will be a good foundation for us
to build upon. That we may proceed from things evident and more known,
to those less known, and which we design to make evident, as well as we
are able, and the nature of it will permit. A matter so immers’d in the
dark mist of time, where very few scatter’d traces remain, must needs
bespeak the reader's candor. The dignity of the subject will excuse my
boldness in attempting one so difficult. And however I succeed in
accounting for these wonderful works; at least, I shall be instrumental
in preserving their memory, in giving just drawings of them.

*Stonehenge*, by the extravagant grandeur of the work, has attracted the
eyes and admiration of all ages. After the reformation, upon the revival
of learning among us, the curious began to consider it more intimately,
I cannot say successfully. Mr. *Camden* rose as the sun of antiquity,
that put out former lights, and, like *Cæsar*, affrights all that value
a reputation, from attempting any thing in his way. His great skill in
*Roman* learning, and our *English* history, only enabled him to be, as
it were, silent on *Stonehenge*. He saw with excellent judgment, that
neither *Roman* nor *English* had place there, or could serve to
illustrate it. He writes modestly, as his manner was; "Of these things I
am not able so much to give an accurate account, as mightily to grieve,
that the founders of this noble monument cannot be trac’d out." He could
not persuade himself that either *Romans*, *Saxons* or *Danes* had any
hand in it. And as for his representation of it in picture, I verily
believe, it was drawn only from fancy or memory, or by some engraver
from his oral description. *A.D.* 1620, king *James* I. being at the
earl of *Pembroke's* seat at *Wilton*, and agreeably surpriz’d with the
sight of *Stonehenge*, consulted the famous architect *Inigo Jones*,
upon it; thinking it a matter in his way. This great man, who deservedly
may be stiled the *English Vitruvius*, gave his opinion of it, as a
*Roman* work; and left, I suppose, some few indigested notes in writing
thereupon.

<span id="img_pl02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 2. Prospect
of the Roman Road and Wansdike Just above Calston, May 20, 1724. This
demonstrates that Wansdike was made before the Roman
Road.](tn/pl02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl02.jpg)  
Plate 2. Prospect of the Roman Road and Wansdike Just above Calston, May
20, 1724. This demonstrates that Wansdike was made before the Roman
Road.  
</span>

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From which his
son-in-law *John Webb* compos’d an intire treatise, endeavouring to
prove it. But they that are acquainted with *Roman* architecture, or
have consider’d *Stonehenge*, must needs be of a different opinion. And
as my Lord Bishop of *London* well observes, in his notes on *Camden*,
"it cannot be safe to close with Mr. *Jones*, tho’ his book otherwise be
a learned and ingenious piece." *Inigo Jones* lived 30 years after this,
and yet Mr. *Webb* makes an apology for his work, "that if he had
surviv’d to have done it, with his own and, it would have been better."
But ’tis very reasonably believ’d, that tho’ *Inigo Jones* was an
extraordinary genius in architecture, yet he wanted many qualifications
for an author, especially in such a work as *Stonehenge*. ’Tis my
opinion, that had his architectonic skill been united to Mr. Camden's
learning, he could never have demonstrated *Stonehenge* to be a *Roman*
work. Afterwards, Dr. *Charlton* publish’d a piece against *Webb's*
performance, and certainly has said enough to overthrow it, tho’ he
could not with equal success establish his own opinion, that it was the
work of the *Danes*. Whereas *Olaus Wormius* finds no such monuments
among the *Gothic* nations: which, as Mr. *Toland* observes, is answer
sufficient to his allegation. *Webb* answer’d the Doctor's book, and by
turns effectually demolish’d his opinion, but could not still vindicate
his own. Yet from all their disputations, no spark was struck, towards a
discovery of the real truth. What is the worst part in both performances
of Mr. *Webb*, his representation of the real monument in his drawings,
is fictitious. And, as Mr. *Aubry* rightly observes, "in endeavouring to
retrieve a piece of architecture in *Vitruvius*, he abuses the reader
with a false representation of the whole." It requires no great pains to
prove this, nor need we take much time to be satisfy’d in it: the work
is still extant. As soon as a judicious eye comes upon the spot, we
discern that *Webb's* equilateral triangles forming the cell are
fancies: his three entrances across the ditch are so too; and that he
has turn’d the cell a sixth part from its true situation, to savour his
imaginary hypothesis. But ’tis against my inclination to find fault with
the labours of others, nor do I thereby seek to bribe the reader in my
own favour. I had a great pleasure for several years together, in
viewing and examining these noble remains of our ancestors. What I wrote
about them, was for my private amusement, and that of friends. And I
publish them only for the honour of my country, and in hopes that such a
publication will not be unserviceable to religion; which is my ultimate
view.

Tho’ *Stonehenge* be the proudest singularity of this sort, in the
world, as far as we know: yet there are so many others, manifestly
form’d upon the same, or kindred design, by the same measure, and for
the same purpose, all over the *Britanic* isles; that we can have no
room to doubt of their being made by the same people, and that by
direction of the *British* Druids. There are innumerable, from the
land's end in *Cornwall*, to the utmost northern promontory in
*Scotland*, where the *Roman* power never reach’d. They are to be found
in all the islands between *Scotland* and *Ireland*, isle of *Man*, all
the *Orkney* islands, *&c*. and numerous in *Ireland* itself. And there
is no pretence, as far as I can see, for any other persons or nations
being the founders of them. They are circles of stones, generally rude,
of different diameters, upon elevated ground, barren, open heaths and
downs; chiefly made of stones taken from the surface of the ground.
There are no remembrances of the founders, any other than an
uninterrupted tradition of their being sacred; that there is medicinal
virtue in them; that they were made by the *Irish*; that they were
brought from *Afric*; that they were high-places of worship;
sanctuaries; bowing, adoring places; and what names they commonly have,
intimate the same thing. And in many places the express remembrance and
name of Druids remain, and the people bury their dead in or near them to
this day, thinking them holy ground. Mr. *Toland* in his history of the
Druids, p. 23. tells us, "In *Gealcossa's* mount in *Inifoen* in the
county of *Dunegal*, a Druidess of that name

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

name lived; it signifies white-legg’d, according to the ancient manner
in *Homer's* time. On that hill is her grave and her temple, being a
sort of diminutive *Stonehenge*, which the old *Irish*, at this day,
dare not any way profane." Many instances of this sort, of all these
particulars, we have in our island: particularly the temple on
*Temple-downs* by *Abury*. Whatever is dug up in or near these works are
manifestly remains of the Druid times; urns, bones, ornaments of amber,
glass beads, snake-stones, amulets, celts, flint-hatchets, arrow-heads,
and such things as bespeak the rudest ages, the utmost antiquity, most
early plantations of people that came into our island, soon after
*Noah*'s flood. I have all the reason in the world to believe them an
oriental colony of *Phœnicians*; at least that such a one came upon the
first *Celtic* plantation of people here: which reasons will appear in
the progress of this discourse. I suppose in matters of such
extraordinary antiquity, it would be absurd to set about a formal
demonstration; and those readers would be altogether unreasonable, that
expect we prove every fact here, as they would do by living witnesses,
before a court of judicature. When all is consider’d, that I have put
together on this affair, a judicious person, I presume, will agree, I
have made the matter sufficiently evident, and as much as the nature of
things requires.

In the times just preceding the coming of the *Romans* into *Britain*,
the *Belgæ*, a most powerful colony from the Gallic continent, had
firmly seated themselves all over the country, where *Stonehenge* is
situate, quite to the southern sea; taking in the south part of
*Wiltshire*, and all *Dorsetshire*. *Wiltshire* has its name from the
river *Willy*, which in *Welsh* is *wyli*, in *Latin*, *vagire*, from
its noise. A river of like name in *Northamptonshire*. Upon the former
river at *Wilton*, probably liv’d the *Carvilius*, one of the four kings
<span class="margnote">TAB. XXXIV.</span> that fought *Julius Cæsar*,
the picture of whole *tumulus* we have given towards the end. The
*Belgæ* came into *Britain* upon the south, as other *Celtic* nations
before had fix’d themselves from the east, *Kent*, the *Thames*, *&c*.
such as the *Cantii*, *Segontiaci*, *Atrebates*, *&c*. so that in
*Cæsar*'s time, all the south and east parts of *Britain* were
dispossess’d of their original inhabitants, and peopled from the
continent: and this very work of *Stonehenge* was in the hands of the
*Belgæ*, who built it not. In my *itinerarium curiosum*, p. 181. I
observ’d no less than four successive boundary ditches here, from the
southern shore; which with good reason, I suppos’d, were made by the
*Belgæ*, as they conquer’d the country by degrees, from the aboriginal
inhabitants. This shews, they must have been a long while about it, that
the *Britons* disputed every inch of ground with them, and that for two
reasons; as well because of the extraordinary beauty and goodness of the
country, as fighting *pro aris & focis* for their great temple of
*Stonehenge:* not to speak of that other greater temple, a little more
northward, at *Abury*. The *Segontiaci* had got *Hampshire*, to the east
of them, before, as far as the *Colinburn* river, and the *Atrebates*,
*Berkshire*. The first ditch runs between the river of *Blandford*,
formerly *Alauna*, and the river of *Bere*, the piddle in *Dorsetshire*,
two or three miles south of it. The second runs to the north of
*Cranborn* chase, upon the edge of *Wiltshire*, by *Pentridg:* it
divides the counties of *Dorset* and *Wilts*. The third is conspicuous
upon *Salisbury* plain, as we pass from *Wilton* to *Stonehenge*, about
the two-mile stone, north of *Wilton:* it is drawn between the river
*Avon* and the *Willy*, from *Dornford* to *Newton*. The fourth is the
more famous *Wansdike*, of great extent. *Gwahan* in old *British*
signifies *separatio*, *distinctio* guahanu *seperare*, and that
undoubtedly gave name to the ditch. The method of all these ditches, is,
to take the northern edge of a ridge of hills, which is always steep;
the bank is on the south side. And in my itinerary, p. 134. I show’d a
most evident demonstration, that it was made before the time of the
<span class="margnote">TAB. II.</span> *Romans*, in the passage of the
*Roman* road down *Runway* hill. TAB. II. *Wansdike* is the last
advanc'd post of the *Belgæ* northwards, and that it was

<span id="img_pl03"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 3. Prospect
of Stonehenge from the East by Vespasians camp](tn/pl03.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl03.jpg)  
Plate 3. Prospect of Stonehenge from the East by Vespasians camp  
</span>

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

made after *Stonehenge* was built, is plain, because the stones that
compose the work, were brought from *Marlborough* downs in north
*Wiltshire*, beyond the dike; and as then in an enemy's country. And
most probably it was built before the *Belgæ* set footing in *Britain*,
because of the great number of barrows or sepulchral *tumuli* about it,
which, no doubt, were made for the burial of kings and great men.

The stones of which *Stonehenge* is compos’d, beyond any controversy,
came from those called the gray weathers, upon *Marlborough* downs near
*Abury*; where is that other most wonderful work of this sort, which I
shall describe in my next volume. This is 15 or 16 miles off. All the
greater stones are of that sort, except the altar, which is of a still
harder, as design’d to resist fire. The pyramidals likewise are of a
different sort, and much harder than the rest, like those of that other
Druid temple call’d *the Weddings*, at *Stanton-drew* in
*Somersetshire*. Dr. *Halley* was at *Stonehenge* in the year 1720, and
brought a piece of it to the Royal Society. I examin’d it with a
microscope. ’Tis a composition of crystals of red, green and white
colours, cemented together by nature's art, with opake granules of
flinty or stony matter. The Doctor observ’d from the general wear of the
weather upon the stones, that the work must be of an extraordinary
antiquity, and for ought he knew, 2 or 3000 years old. But had the
Doctor been at *Abury*, which is made of the same stones, he might well
from the like argumentation conclude, that work as old again as
Stonehenge, at least much older, and I verily believe it. Nevertheless
the current of so many ages has been more merciful to *Stonehenge*, than
the insolence of rapacious hands, (besides the general saccage brought
upon the work of old) by the unaccountable folly of mankind, in breaking
pieces off with great hammers. This detestable practice arose from the
silly notion of the stones being factitious. But, alas! it would be a
greater wonder to make them by art, than to carry them 16 miles by art
and strength; and those people must be inexcusable, that deface the
monument for so trifling a fancy. Another argument of vulgar
incogitancy, is, that all the wonder of the work consists, in the
difficulty of counting the stones; and with that, the infinite numbers
of daily visitants busy themselves. This seems to be the remains of
superstition, and the notion of magic, not yet got out of peoples heads,
since Druid-times. But indeed a serious view of this magnificent wonder,
is apt to put a thinking and judicious person into a kind of ecstacy,
when he views the struggle between art and nature, the grandeur of that
art that hides itself, and seems unartful. For tho’ the contrivance that
put this massy frame together, must have been exquisite, yet the
founders endeavour’d to hide it, by the seeming rudeness of the work.
The bulk of the constituent parts is so very great, that the mortaises
and tenons must have been prepar’d to an extreme nicety, and, like the
fabric of *Solomon*'s temple, every stone tally’d; and neither axes nor
hammers were heard upon the whole structure. Nevertheless there is not a
stone at *Stonehenge*, that felt not, more or less, both ax and hammer
of the founders. Yet ’tis highly entertaining to consider the judicious
carelesness therein, really the grand gusto, like a great master in
drawing, secure of the effect: a true master-piece. Every thing proper,
bold, astonishing. The lights and shades adapted with inconceivable
justness. Notwithstanding the monstrous size of the work, and every part
of it; ’tis far from appearing heavy: ’tis compos’d of several species
of work, and the proportions of the dissimilar parts recommend the
whole, and it pleases like a magical spell. No one thinks any part of it
too great or too little, too high or too low. And we that can only view
it in its ruins, the less regret those ruins, that, if possible, add to
its solemn majesty.

The stones of the gray weathers are of a bastard sort of white marble,
and lie upon the surface of the ground, in infinite numbers, and of all
dimensions. They are loose, detach’d from any rock, and doubtless lay
there ever since the creation, being solid parts thrown out to the
surface of the fluid globe, when

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

its rotation was first impress’d. All our Druid temples are built, where
these sort of stones from the surface can be had at reasonable
distances; for they are never taken from quarries. Here is a very good
quarry at *Chilmark* in this country. *Salisbury* cathedral, and all the
great buildings are thence; but ’tis a stone quite different to our
work. It was a matter of much labour to draw them hither, 16 miles. My
friend the reverend Dr. *Stephen Hales*, the excellent author of
vegetable statics, and other works, computed them as follows. The stone
at the upper end of the cell, which is fallen down and broke in half, is
in length (says he) 25 feet, in breadth 7 feet, and in thickness at a
medium 3½, amounts to 612 cubic feet. Now a cubic foot of *Hedington*
stone weighs near 154¼ pounds troy. If *Stonehenge* stone be of the same
specific gravity, it will amount to 94,348 pounds, which is 31½ tuns.
But is this be of the same specific gravity as *Burford* stone, which
weighs to 155¼ the cubic foot, then it will weigh 95319 pounds troy, or
32 tuns. Is it be equal to *Blaidon* stone, which is 187 pounds troy
*per* cubic foot, then it weighs 114444 pounds troy, or 38 tuns. But I
am sure that the stone is of considerably larger dimensions, than what
Dr. *Hales* has stated it at, and that the sort of stone is much heavier
than that of the largest specific gravity he speaks of, and that it
amounts to more than 40 tuns, and requires more than 140 oxen to draw
it; yet this is not the heaviest stone at the place.

The notion we ought to entertain of *Stonehenge* is not a little
enhanc’d, by the discovery I made from frequent mensurations there. It
gave me the opportunity of finding out the standard and original
measure, which the people us’d, who made this and all other works of
this kind. And this precludes any tedious disputation against the
opinion of authors; for whoever makes any eminent building, most
certainly forms it upon the common measure in use, among the people of
that place. Therefore is the proportions of *Stonehenge* fall into
fractions and uncouth numbers, when measur’d by the *English*, *French*,
*Roman*, or *Grecian* foot, we may assuredly conclude, the architects
were neither *English*, *French*, *Roman* or *Greeks*. Thus, for
instance, when the accurate *Greaves* tells us, the door of the
*Pantheon* (which is of one stone) is of *English* foot-measure 19 foot
603/1004 within: should we not be apt to assert at first sight, that the
architect in so costly a work, did not chuse his measures at random, but
intended that this dimension should be 20 feet? When we consider this
building is at *Rome*, and that it amounts to 20 *Roman* feet, must we
not conclude, it was erected by the *Roman* standard? adding too, that
all the rest of the dimensions of this stately structure fall aptly and
judiciously into the same scale. So as long as any *vestigia* of St.
*Paul*'s cathedral remain, the *English* foot, by which it was built,
will easily be known. I must prepare the reader for a right
understanding of our Druid edifices, by informing him, that
*Stonehenge*, and all other works of this nature in our island, are
erected by that most ancient measure call’d a cubit, which we read of in
the holy scriptures, and in ancient profane authors. I mean the same
individual measure, call’d the *Hebrew*, *Egyptian*, *Phœnician* cubit;
most probably deriv’d from *Noah* and *Adam*. ’Tis the same that the
pyramids of *Egypt* and other \[of\] their works are projected upon; the
same as that of *Moses*'s tabernacle, *Solomon*'s temple, *&c*. and we
may reasonably pride ourselves in possessing these visible monuments of
the old measure of the world. My predecessor Bishop *Cumberland* shows,
enough to satisfy us, that the *Egyptian* and *Hebrew* measure was the
same, tho’ he has not hit upon that measure, to a nicety. My friend and
collegue Dr. *Arbuthnot* has been more successful, in applying it to
such parts of the greater pyramid, as evidently establish its
proportion, to our English foot, from the measures *Greaves* has left
us: and shows it to be 20 inches and 4/5 of *English* measure. Thus the
Doctor observes the side of the greater pyramid at base, is 693
*English* feet; which amounts exactly to 400 *Egyptian* cubits, a full
and suitable number for such a square work, and without question the
originally design’d measure,

<span id="img_pl04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 4. A View a
little beyond Woodyates where the Ikening Street crosses part of a
Druids barrow. Jun. 9, 1724.](tn/pl04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl04.jpg)  
Plate 4. A View a little beyond Woodyates where the Ikening Street
crosses part of a Druids barrow. Jun. 9, 1724.  
</span>

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

the *stadium* of old. I have taken notice that *Inigo Jones* observ’d
the like dimensions, in laying out the plot of *Lincoln's-Inn-fields*.
The Doctor adds many more instances, deduc’d in the same way, to confirm
it. I add, that *Greaves* says, the lowermost steps of the pyramid are
near 4 feet in height, which amounts to 2 cubits and 2 palms. They are 3
foot in breadth, *i.e.* 1 cubit 4 palms. The length of the declining
first entrance is 92 feet and an half, *i.e.* 55 cubits. The length of
the next gallery is 110 feet, which amounts to 60 cubits. There is
another gallery in the pyramid, of the same length. Mr. *Webb* says the
diameter of *Stonehenge* is 110 feet. This would tempt one to suspect
the same measure us’d in both. Thus the diameter of the like work at
*Rowldrich* in *Oxfordshire*, describ’d by Dr. *Plot*, is 35 yards,
*i.e.* 110 feet, grossly measur’d. Father *Brothais* in his observations
on upper *Egypt*, in our *Phil. Trans.* found a door-case made of one
stone, in a magnificent building, it was 26½ feet in height, this is 15
cubits. Dr. *Huntington*, in the same *Trans*. says, he found the sphynx
standing by the northern pyramids to be 110 feet in circuit, *i.e.* 60
cubits. *Ptolomy* in his IVth book, and *Pliny* XXXVI. speak of the
obelisk rais’d by king *Rameses* at *Heliopolis*, which Mr. *Webb*, p.
34. gives the length of in *English* feet, 136. This is 80 cubits. That
which *Augustus* set up in the *circus maximus* at Rome upon reduction
of *Egypt*, *Webb* says, is 120 feet 9 inches, which amounts to 70
cubits. Another, *Augustus* set up in the *campus martius*, which he
says is 9 foot higher, *i.e.* 5 cubits. He speaks again of that erected
by *Fontana* before St. *Peter*'s, 81 feet, which was 50 cubits. I
suppose the base being injur’d, it was cut a little shorter. This at the
base, he says, is 9 foot square, *i.e.* 5 cubits. The *Vatican* obelisk
is 170 foot high, which is too cubits. 12 foot broad at bottom, which is
7 cubits; at top a third part less.

Hence we gather, the measure of the shew-bread table of the *Jews*, a
cubit and half in height, *Exod*. xxv. 23. It had a golden crown about
it, meaning a moulding, or verge or cornish, as upon our tea-tables.
‏זר‎ *peripheria*, *corona*, because 12 loaves were to be pil’d upon it.
It was 31 inches in height, that of our ordinary eating-tables. And we
shall find by this same cubit divided into its 6 tophach's or palms, all
our Druid works are perform’d. ’Tis not to be wonder’d at, that it
should come into *Britain*, with an eastern colony under the conduct of
the *Egyptian*, *Tyrian*, *Phœnician* *Hercules*, (who was the same
person) about *Abraham*'s time, or soon after, as I have good reasons to
believe, which will be shown in its proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](str04)
