[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](str11)  [Next](str13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Stonehenge, A Temple Restor'd to the British Druids*, by William
Stukeley, \[1740\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAP. X.

*Of the barrows, or sepulchral* tumuli *about* Stonehenge*. Generally
set in groups, which are family burial places; and in sight of*
Stonehenge*. They are single burial places. How the body is posited.
What has been found in digging into these barrows*.

I COME in the last place to speak of the barrows, observable in great
numbers, round *Stonehenge*. We may very readily count fifty at a time,
in sight, from the place; easily distinguishable: but especially in the
evening, when the sloping rays of the sun shine on the ground beyond
them. These barrows are the artificial ornaments of this vast and open
plain. And it is no small entertainment for a curious person, to remark
their beauties, their variety in form and magnitude, their situation.
They are generally of a very elegant *campaniform* shape, and done with
great nicety. There is likewise a great variety in their shape, and
turn, and in their diameters, in their manner of composition. In
general, they are always upon elevated ground, and in sight of the
temple of *Stonehenge*. For they all regard it. This shews, *they* are
but superficial inspectors of things, that fancy from hence, great
battels on the plain; and that these are the tumultuary burials of the
slain. Quite otherwise; they are assuredly, the single sepulchres of
kings, and great personages, buried during a considerable space of time,
and that in peace. There are many groups of them together, and as family
burial places; the variety in them, seems to indicate

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

some note of difference in the persons there interr’d, well known in
those ages. Probably the priests and laity were someway distinguish’d;
as well as different orders and stations in them. Most of the barrows
have little ditches around, extremely well defin’d. In many is a
circular ditch 60 cubits in diameter, with a very small *tumulus* in the
center. 60 or even too cubits is a very common diameter in the large
barrows. Often, they are set in rows, and equidistant, so as to produce
a regular and pretty appearance, and with some particular regard to the
parts of the temple, the avenues, or the *cursus*. For instance, where
the avenue begins at the first elevation, from *Radfin* ford, advancing
towards *Stonehenge*, seven large and flat old barrows are on the right
hand of the avenue, towards the east end of the *cursus*, seven large
barrows <span class="margnote">TAB XXIV.</span> of a newer shape, are on
the left hand: both these groups before spoken of, are plac’d in a
similar manner, in regard to the avenue, and as wings or openings to it.
Upon every range of hills, quite round *Stonehenge*, are successive
<span class="margnote">TAB. XXXIII.</span> groups of barrows, for some
miles: and we may even observe, that great barrow by Lord *Pembroke's*
park at *Wilton*, which I call the tomb of *Carvilius*, is set within
view of *Stonehenge*.

In 1722, my late Lord *Pembroke*, Earl *Thomas*, who was pleas’d to
favour my [inquiries](errata.htm#5) at this place, open’d a barrow, in
order to find the position of the body observ’d in these early days. He
pitch’d upon one of those south of *Stonehenge*, close upon the road
thither from *Wilton:* and on the east side of the road. ’Tis one of the
double barrows, or where two are inclos’d in one ditch: one of those,
which I suppose the later kind, and of a fine turn’d bell-fashion.<span
class="margnote">TAB. IX.</span> It may be seen in *Plate*
[IX](str05.htm#img_pl09). On the west side, he made a section from the
top to the bottom, an intire segment, from center to circumference. The
manner of composition of the barrow was good earth, quite thro’, except
a coat of chalk of about two foot thickness, covering it quite over,
under the turf. Hence it appears, that the method of making these
barrows was to dig up the turf for a great space round, till the barrow
was brought to its intended bulk. Then with the chalk, dug out of the
environing ditch, they powder’d it all over. So that for a considerable
time, these barrows must have look’d white: even for some number of
years. And the notion of sanctity annex’d to them, forbid people
trampling on them, till perfectly settled and turf’d over. Hence the
neatness of their form to this day. At the top or center of this barrow,
not above three foot under the surface, my Lord found the skeleton of
the interr’d; perfect, of a reasonable size, the head lying toward
*Stonehenge*, or northward.

The year following, in order to prosecute this inquiry, by my Lord's
order, I begun upon a barrow north of *Stonehenge*, in that group south
of the *cursus*. ’Tis one of the double barrows there: and the more
easterly, and lower of the two: likewise somewhat less. It was
reasonable to believe, this was the sepulture of a man and his wise: and
that the lesser was the female: and so it prov’d, at least a daughter.
We made a large cut on the top from east to west. After the turf taken
off, we came to the layer of chalk, as before, then fine garden mould.
About three foot below the surface, a layer of flints, humouring the
convexity of the barrow. These flints are gather’d from the surface of
the downs in some places, especially where it has been plow’d. This
being about a foot thick, rested on a layer of soft mould another foot:
in which was inclos’d an urn full of bones. This urn was of unbak’d
clay, of a dark reddish colour: crumbled into pieces. It had been rudely
wrought with small mouldings round the verge, and other circular
channels on the outside, with several indentures between, made with a
pointed tool, as depicted in *Plate* [XXXII.](str14.htm#img_pl32) <span
class="margnote">TAB. XXXII.</span> where I have drawn all the sorts of
things found in this barrow. The bones had been burnt, and crouded all
together in a little heap, not so much as a hat crown would contain. The
collar bone, and one side of the under-jaw are grav’d in their true
magnitude. It appears to have been a girl of about

<span id="img_pl23"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 23. The Area
of Stonehenge](tn/pl23.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl23.jpg)  
Plate 23. The Area of Stonehenge  
</span>

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 14 years old, by
their bulk and the great quantity of female ornaments mix’d with the
bones, all which we gather’d. Beads of all sorts, and in great number,
of glass of divers colours, most yellow, one black. Many single, many in
long pieces notch’d between, so as to resemble a string of beads, and
these were generally of a blue colour. There were many of amber, of all
shapes and sizes, flat squares, long squares, round, oblong, little and
great. Likewise many of earth, of different shapes, magnitude and
colour, some little and white, many large and flattish like a button,
others like a pully. But all had holes to run a string thro’, either
thro’ their diameter, or sides. Many of the button sort seem to have
been cover’d with metal, there being a rim work’d in them, wherein to
turn the edge of the covering. One of these was cover’d with a thin film
of pure gold. These were the young lady's ornaments. And had all
undergone the fire: so that what would easily consume fell to pieces as
soon as handled. Much of the amber burnt half thro’. This person was a
heroin, for we found the head of her javelin in brass. At bottom are two
holes for the pins that fastned it to the staff. Besides, there was a
sharp bodkin, round at one end, square at the other, where it went into
a handle. I still preserve whatever is permanent of these trinkets. But
we recompos’d the ashes of the illustrious defunct, and cover’d them
with earth. Leaving visible marks at top, of the barrow having been
open’d, to dissuade any other from again disturbing them: and this was
our practice in all the rest.

Then we op’d the next barrow to it, inclos’d in the same ditch, which we
suppos’d the husband or father of this lady. At fourteen inches deep,
the mould being mix’d with chalk, we came to the intire skeleton of a
man. The skull and all the bones exceedingly rotten and perish’d, thro’
length of time. Tho’ this was a barrow of the latest sort, as we
conjecture. The body lay north and south, the head to the north, as that
Lord *Pembroke* open’d.

Next, I went westward, to a group of barrows whence *Stonehenge* bears
east north-east. Here is a large barrow ditch’d about, but of an ancient
make. On that side next *Stonehenge* are ten lesser, small, and as it
were crouded together. South of the great one is another barrow, larger
than those of the group, but not equalling the first. It would seem,
that a man and his wife were bury’d in the two larger, and that the rest
were of their children or dependants. One of the small ones, 20 cubits
in diameter, I cut thro’, with a pit nine foot in diameter, to the
surface of the natural chalk, in the center of the barrow; where was a
little hole cut. A child's body (as it seems) had been burnt here, and
cover’d up in that hole: but thro’ the length of time consum’d. From
three foot deep, we found much wood ashes soft and black as ink, same
little bits of an urn, and black and red earth very rotten. Some small
lumps of earth red as vermilion: some flints burnt thro’. Toward the
bottom a great quantity of ashes and burnt bones. From this place I
could count 128 barrows in sight. See a vast multiplicity of ’em, [TAB.
XXXI.](str14.htm#img_pl31) <span class="margnote">TAB. XXXI.</span>

Going from hence more southerly, there is a circular dish-like cavity
dug in the chalk, 60 cubits in diameter, like a barrow revers’d. ’Tis
near a great barrow, the least of the south-western group. ’Tis between
it, and what I call the bushbarrow, set with thorn-trees, [TAB.
XXXII.](str14.htm#img_pl32) This cavity is seven feet <span
class="margnote">TAB. XXXII.</span> deep in the middle, extremely well
turn’d, and out of it, no doubt, the adjacent barrow is dug. The use of
it seems to have been a place for sacrificing and feasting in memory of
the dead, as was the ancient custom. ’Tis all overgrown with that pretty
shrub *erica vulgaris*, now in flower, and smelling like honey. We made
a large cross section in its center upon the cardinal points; we found
nothing but a bit of red earthen pot.

We dug up one of those I call Druid's barrows, a small tump inclos’d in
a large circular ditch. I chose that next to bushbarrow, westward of it.
*Stonehenge* bears hence north-east. We made a cross section ten foot
each way, three foot broad over its center, upon the cardinal points. At
length we found

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

a squarish hole cut into the solid chalk, in the center of the
*tumulus*. It was three foot and a half, *i.e.* two cubits long, and
near two foot broad, *i.e.* one cubit: pointing to *Stonehenge*
directly. It was a cubit and half deep from the surface. This was the
*domus exilis Plutonia* cover’d with artificial earth, not above a foot
thick from the surface. In this little grave we found all the burnt
bones of a man, but no signs of an urn. The bank of the circular ditch
is on the outside, and is 12 cubits broad. The ditch is 6 cubits broad
(the Druid's staff) the area is 70 cubits in diameter. The whole 100.

I open’d another of these of like dimensions, next to that Lord
*Pembroke* first open’d, south of *Stonehenge*. We found a burnt body in
a hole in the chalk, as before. Mr. *Roger Gale* was with me.

In some other barrows I open’d, were found large burnt bones of horses
and dogs, along with human. Also of other animals as seem’d; of fowl,
hares, boars, deer, goats, or the like. And in a great and very flat old
fashion’d barrow, west from *Stonehenge*, among such matters, I found
bits of red and blue marble, chippings of the stones of the temple. So
that probably the interr’d was one of the builders. *Homer* tells us of
*Achilles* slaying horses and dogs, at the funeral of his friend
*Patroclus*.

Lord *Pembroke* told me of a brass sword dug up in a barrow here, which
was sent to *Oxford*. In that very old barrow near little *Ambersbury*,
was found a very large brass weapon of 20 pounds weight, like a pole-ax.
Said to be given to col. *Wyndham*. In the great long barrow farthest
north from *Stonehenge*, which I call north long barrow, and supposd to
be an Archdruid's, was found one of those brass instruments call’d
*celts*, which I hold to belong to the Druids, wherewith they cut off
the misletoe, as before mention’d. Mr. *Stallard* of *Ambersbury* gave
it to Lord *Burlington*, now in Sir *Hans Sloane*'s cabinet: 13 inches
long. They dug a cell in a barrow east of *Ambersbury*, and it was
inhabited for some time. There they found all the bones of a horse. This
is the sum of what is most material, that fell within my observation,
relating to the barrows about *Stonehenge*. We find evidently, these
ancient nations had the custom of burning their dead bodies, probably
before the name of *Rome*. So lachrymatories we read of in scripture,
ancienter than *Greek* or *Roman* times, *Psalm* lvi. 8.

 

[TAB. XXXI](str14.htm#img_pl31). the barrows in *Lake-field*. This is as
a church-yard, the burial-place of some town, or large family. I
mention’d before, that the ditches observable here, are hounds of
parishes, hundreds or lordships. The countrymen sometime call this
group, the prophets barrows. Because the *French* prophets 30 years ago,
set up a standard on the largest barrow, and preach’d to the
enthusiastic multitude.

[TAB. XXXIII](str14.htm#img_pl33). bush-barrow, a barrow planted by the
shepherds. ’Tis south of *Stonehenge*, and commands a pleasant prospect
of the temple, the *cursus*, the avenue, and of all the barrows arounds
this plain. You see the hills a little on this side *Abury*, whereon
runs the *Wansdike*, the boundary of the *Belgic* kingdom.

[TAB. XXXIV](str14.htm#img_pl34). the *tumulus* of *Carvilius* who
fought *Julius Cæsar*. ’Tis on the other side of *Wilton* (*Carvilium*)
by Lord *Pembroke*'s park: and planted with four trees, as one of the
visto's to the park.

[TAB. XXXV](str14.htm#img_pl35). one of the temples at *Persepolis* a
patriarchal one, open: but made after *Solomon*'s temple, square: with
mouldings and ornaments. I take it to be of the same age as
*Stonehenge*.

<span id="img_pl24"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 24. The back
Prospect of the beginning of the Avenue to Stonehenge, 6 Aug.
1723.&lt;br&gt; A. the beginning of the avenue. B. the old Kings
barrows. C. the 7 Kings barrows. D. Vespasians camp.](tn/pl24.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl24.jpg)  
Plate 24. The back Prospect of the beginning of the Avenue to
Stonehenge, 6 Aug. 1723.  
A. the beginning of the avenue. B. the old Kings barrows. C. the 7 Kings
barrows. D. Vespasians camp.  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](str13)
