[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](str09)  [Next](str11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Stonehenge, A Temple Restor'd to the British Druids*, by William
Stukeley, \[1740\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl18"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 18. A direct
view of the Remains of the adytum of Stonehenge](tn/pl18.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl18.jpg.md)  
Plate 18. A direct view of the Remains of the adytum of Stonehenge  
</span>

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

#### CHAP. VIII.

*Of the Avenue to* Stonehenge.

THE Avenue of *Stonehenge* was never observ’d by any who have wrote of
it, tho’ a very elegant part of it, and very apparent. It answers, as we
have said before now, to the principal line of the whole work, the
northeast, where abouts the sun rises, when the days are longest.
*Plutarch* in the life of *Numa* says, the ancients observ’d the rule of
setting their temples, with the front to meet the rising sun.
*Promachidas* of *Heracleum*, and *Dionysius Thrax* take notice of the
same thing. And this was done in imitation of the *Mosaic* tabernacle
and *Solomon*'s temple: probably a patriarchal rite. This avenue extends
itself, somewhat more than 1700 feet, in a strait line, down to the
bottom of the valley, with a delicate descent. I observe the earth of
the ditches is thrown inward, and seemingly some turf on both sides,
thrown upon the avenue: to raise it a little above the level of the
downs. The two ditches continue perfectly parallel to the bottom, 40
cubits asunder. About midway, there is a pretty depressure, natural,
which diversifies it agreeably. *Stonehenge*, I said, is not on the
highest part of the hill. I found, the reason, why the Druids set it
just where it is; because it is precisely 1000 cubits from the bottom to
the entrance of the *area*. When I began my inquiries into this noble
work, I thought it terminated here, and Mr. *Roger Gale* and myself
measur’d it so far with a chain. Another year, I found it extended
itself much farther. For at the bottom of the valley, it divides into
two branches. The eastern branch goes a long way hence, directly east
pointing to an ancient ford of the river *Avon*, called *Radfin*, and
beyond that the visto of it bears directly to *Harradon* hill beyond the
river. The western branch, from this termination at the bottom of the
hill 1000 cubits from the work at *Stonehenge*, as we said, goes off
with <span class="margnote">TAB. XXVIII.</span> a similar sweep at
first; but then it does not throw itself into a strait line immediately,
as the former, but continues curving along the bottom of the hill, till
it meets, what I call, the *cursus*. This likewise is a new unobserv’d
curiosity belonging to this work, and very much enlarges the idea we
ought to entertain, of the magnificence and prodigious extent of the
thing. The temple which we have been hitherto describing, considerable
indeed as it really is, in itself; yet now appears as a small part of
the whole. I shall therefore describe all these parts separately, to
render them more intelligible: and then show their connection, and what
relation they have, to one another, as well as I can. But it is not easy
to enter at once, into the exceeding greatness of thought, which these
people had, who founded it; bringing in all the adjacent country, the
whole of nature hereabouts, to contribute its part to the work.
Therefore I shall discourse of it backward and forward; first going from
*Stonehenge* to its termination, or more properly its beginning, and
then return again. Explaining all the way, what is its present
condition, and what, ’tis reasonable to suppose, was its original, when
the Druids made their first design. This together with the several views
I have drawn of it, will give us nearly as good a notion of the whole,
as we can at this day expect, and perhaps preserve the memory of it
hereafter, when the traces of this mighty work are obliterated with the
plough, which it is to be fear’d, will be its fate. That instrument
gaining ground too much, upon the ancient and innocent pastoritial life;
hereabouts, and everywhere else in *England:* and by destructive
inclosures beggars and depopulates the country.

At the bottom of the valley, and the end of the strait part of
*Stonehenge* <span class="margnote">TAB. XXVIII.</span> avenue, 100
cubits from *Stonehenge*, as we said, the eastern wing of the avenue
turns off to the right, with a circular sweep, and then in a strait

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

line proceeds eastward up the hill. It goes just between those two most
conspicuous groups of barrows, crowning the ridg of that hill eastward
of *Stonehenge*; between it and *Vespasian*'s camp, separated from them
both by a deep <span class="margnote">TAB. XXVI.</span> valley on each
side. These two groups of barrows are called generally the seven king's
graves, each. I call that most northerly, the old seven kings graves,
for there are really 7, tho’ but 6 most apparent; they are all set at
greater distance, all broader, flatter, and as it is most reasonable to
suppose, older than the other. The other are set closer together, of a
more elegantly turn’d figure, campaniform, and in all appearance, much
later than the former. Therefore I call these, being southward and
directly between *Stonehenge* and the town of *Ambresbury*, the new
seven kings barrows. Of the seven old, the most northerly one and
probably the oldest, is exceeding flat and as it were, almost sunk into
the earth with age; so that it is scarce visible at a distance. The
avenue runs up to the top of the hill, just between them: and they make
as it were wings to it, and I believe were design’d as such, when set
there. When the avenue first turns off in the valley, it is much
obscur’d by the wheels of carriages going over it, for a great way
together: for this is the road to *Lavington*. Nevertheless a curious
eye, without difficulty, sees all the traces of <span
class="margnote">TAB. XXIV.</span> it sufficiently, till it is got
higher up the easy ascent of the hill, and out of the common road. Then
it is very apparent and consists of the two little ditches as before,
(when coming directly from *Stonehenge*) exactly parallel, and still 40
cubits asunder. And it is made with the same degree of variation, or
about 6 degrees southward from the true east point. So that it is
evident again, the Druids intended it should go full east, but their
compass by which they set it, varied so much at that time, according to
my opinion of the matter. To perpetuate the mark of it as much as I can:
I measured the distance of it from the southern ditch thereof, to the
ditch of the nearest *i.e.* most northerly of the new 7 kings barrows,
and when in the right line of those 7 barrows: it is 257 feet. I know
not whether there was any design in it, but it is exactly 150 cubits.
From the northern ditch of the avenue here, to the nearest of the old
seven kings barrows, is 350 foot; which is exactly 200 cubits.

Whilst we are here upon the elevation of this hill, between these two
groups of barrows, ’tis 2700 feet from the beginning of this wing of the
avenue at the bottom of the valley, where it commences. It still
continues in the very same direction eastward, till unfortunately broke
off by the plow’d ground, 300 feet from hence. This plow’d ground
continues for a mile together, as far as the river's side at
*Ambersbury*. So that ’tis impossible to trace it any farther. The first
plow’d field, that southward, is Mr. *Hayward*'s; the other is <span
class="margnote">TAB. XXVII.</span> of a different estate, call’d
*Countess-farm*. And the plowing of these two go on at right angles one
of another. That piece on the north side of the avenue, of the latter
tenure, goes along the line of the avenue, is long and narrow, and has
(as usual with greedy farmers) encroach’d upon and swallow’d up so much
of the length of the avenue. And that amounts to 750 feet more in
length, which must certainly be added to the avenue. This is all along
the eastern declivity of the hill we are upon, *that* of the twice seven
kings graves, and reaches near the bottom of the valley, between it and
the hill whereon stands *Vespasian*'s camp. Now reason and the judgment
I have got in conversing with works of this kind, tell me, the founders
would never begin this avenue at the bottom of a valley, but rather on a
conspicuous height, which is visible from a great distance of country
round. We must suppose the intent of the avenue was to direct the
religious procession to the temple; and that at the beginning of it,
they made sires early in the morning of that day, when they held their
grand festivals, to give notice to all the adjacent country. Therefore
when we cross this valley still eastward, with the former direction of
the compass, and mount that next hill, whereon stands *Vespasian*'s
camp: we find exactly such a place as we could with, and extremely
suitable to that purpose. For it commands

<span id="img_pl19"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Inward View of
Stonehenge from the high altar. Aug. 1722.](tn/pl19.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl19.jpg.md)  
Inward View of Stonehenge from the high altar. Aug. 1722.  
</span>

\[This plate was damaged in my copytext--JBH\]

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

a very extensive prospect both upwards and downwards of the river, and
on the other side of it, for many miles; all about that part of the
country where it is highly reasonable to think the old *Britons* liv’d,
who frequented this temple. This eminence is north of *Vespasian*'s
camp, north-west from *Ambresbury* church. Here is a very large scene of
the country taken in. It has a fine gentle rise for half a mile and
more, even quite from the ford at *Radfin*. You see the most delightful
river *Avon* flank’d with villages on both sides, from almost as far as
new *Sarum*, and then to the head of it, 5 miles off. It was the custom
of the Druids to give notice, by fires, of the quarterly days of
sacrifice. Thus the Druids in *Ireland* before christianity, us’d to
kindle a fire call’d in their language *Tlachdgha*, on *All saints* eve,
to perform a general sacrifice: as Mr. *Llwyd* mentions in his *Irish*
dictionary. Mr. *Toland* speaks of others too. I observ’d there has been
a bank across the bottom of the valley, for the more easy passage of the
religious ceremony, and this much corroborates my conjecture of the
avenue reaching hither.

*Plate* [XXIV.](str12.htm#img_pl24.md) explains all that I have last said
about this avenue, and shews <span class="margnote">TAB. XXIV.</span>
its direction to *Haradon* Hill, on the other side the river.

I am apt to believe from the conformity I have observ’d in these works,
that there was a *sacellum* or little temple here upon this hill, where
the avenue began. We suppose this might easily be destroy’d when they
began to plow here, being so near the town. I have found several of
these kind of large stones, either travelling to *Stonehenge*, or from
it. One as big as any at *Stonehenge*, lies about 3 miles off northward,
in *Durington* fields. Another in the water at *Milford*, another at
*Fighelden*; they seem to have been carried back to make bridges,
mildams or the like, in the river. There is another in the *London*
road, east from *Ambresbury*, about a mile from the town. Another in the
water at *Bulford*. A stone stands leaning at *Preshute* farm near the
church, as big as those at *Stonehenge*. What confirms me in the
conjecture that there was a *sacellum* here originally, is, that an
innumerable company of barrows on the opposite hill, on the other side
of the river coming down *Haradon*, <span class="margnote">TAB.
XXIV.</span> and in the line of the avenue seem to regard it; as is
usual in these works. For those barrows are not in sight of *Stonehenge*
itself, by reason of the interposition of the hill whereon stand the
double groups of seven king's graves. And even those two groups seem to
regard this little temple as well as the great one, curving that way.
The distance from hence to *Stonehenge* is 4000 cubits.

In order to have a just notion of this avenue, it is necessary to go to
the neighbouring height of *Haradon* hill, on the other side the river.
The largest barrow there, which I call *Hara*'s and which probably gave
name to the hill, is in the line of the avenue; the ford of *Radfin*
lying between, as we see in the [last](#img_pl19.md) *Plate*. I stood upon
this hill *May* 11. 1724. during the total eclipse of the sun, of which
I gave an account in my *Itinerarium*. Here is a most noble view of the
work and country about *Stonehenge*. Whoever is upon the spot cannot
fail of a great pleasure in it; especially if the sun be low, either
after rising or before setting. For by that means the barrows, the only
ornaments of these plains, become very visible, the ground beyond them
being illuminated by the suns slaunting rays. You see as far as
*Clay-hill* beyond *Warminster* 20 miles off. You see the spot of ground
on the hill, whereon stands *Vespasian*'s <span class="margnote">TAB.
XXVI.</span> camp, where I conjecture the avenue to *Stonehenge* began,
and where there was a *sacellum*, as we conceive. From hence to that
spot a valley leads very commodiously to *Radfin*, where the original
ford was.

This *Radfin-farm* seems to retain its *Celtic* name: meaning a ford or
passage for chariots, the old way of carriage here used. *Rhedeg
currere, rhedegsain cursitare*, in *Irish* *reathaim*. *Fin* in the old
*Irish*, is white. It regards the chalky road which went up from the
ford. ’Tis a pretty place, seated in a flexure of the river, which from
hence seems to bend its arms both ways, to

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

embrace the beginning of the avenue. The place is very warm, shelter’d
from all winds, and especially from the north. I am persuaded it was
originally a seat of an Archdruid or Druid. See Mr. *Toland* discoursing
of the Druids houses, p. 111. The nuns of *Ambresbury* too had a chapel
there. The ford is now quite disus’d, because of the bridge by the
town's end; and the road of it is foreclos’d by hedgerows of pastures on
both sides the lane, leading northwards from *Ambresbury* to north
*Wiltshire*. This road lying between *Radfin* and the beginning of
*Stonehenge* avenue, is sweetly adorn’d with *viorna*. We are supposed
now to stand on the *tumulus* of *Hara*, an old *Irish* royal name, and
possibly the king who was coadjutor in founding *Stonehenge*, who lived,
it's likely, in the eastern part of *Wiltshire*: for which reason they
directed the avenue this way.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Et nunc servat honos sedem, tuus, ossaque nomen*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Here are very many
barrows upon this side of the hill, all looking toward the sacred work.
Hence we survey *Ambresbury*, *Vespasian*'s camp, and *Stonehenge*, the
*cursus*, and little *Ambresbury*. Likewise a very ancient barrow which
answers to that of *Vespasian*'s camp, seeming to be plac’d here with
some regularity and regard to the *sacellum* at the beginning of the
avenue. This is a long barrow, which I suppose the Archdruids who liv’d
at *Radfin*, and perhaps the chief person concern’d in projecting the
magnificent work. The reader must indulge me the liberty of these kind
of conjectures; there is no evidence positive left in such matters of
great antiquity. I have some little reason for it, which I shall mention
when we speak of the barrows. There is this present use, to affix
thereby names to things, that we may talk more intelligibly about them.

We are next to advance down *Haradon*-hill in the same direction, nearer
<span class="margnote">TAB. XXV.</span> *Radfin*, from whence I drew
*Plate* [XXV](str13.htm#img_pl25.md). This valley leads us very gently to
the river.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

-----*Qua se subducere colles  
Incipiunt, mollique jugum demittere clivo  
Usque ad aquam*.--------------                     Virg.

</div>

<span class="margnote">TAB XXVI.</span><span
class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This and the two views
in *Plate* [XXVI.](str13.htm#img_pl26.md) give us a good notion of the
country on this side. There are seven barrows together, in the road from
*Ambresbury* to *Radfin*, one great one and six little ones, which
regard the *sacellum*, but cannot possibly to *Stonehenge*. This was a
family burying-place probably of some considerable personage, who liv’d
at *Ambresbury*. These plates show us too, the avenue marching up the
next hill, where the old and new seven kings barrows receive it again,
as wings to it. This is shown more distinct in the <span
class="margnote">TAB. XXVII.</span> next plate, [TAB.
XXVII.](str13.htm#img_pl27.md) where the corn ground has began to encroach
upon it. I could scarce forbear the wish,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Pereat labor irritus anni*.--------------

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When you are gone
a little farther toward *Stonehenge*, and arriv’d at the top of <span
class="margnote">TAB. XXIV.</span> the hill, if you turn back you have
the view presented to you like that [TAB. XXIV.](str12.htm#img_pl24.md)
beyond A the beginning of the avenue, is *Radfin*, beyond that <span
class="margnote">XXVIII.</span> *Haradon*. The prospect forward, toward
*Stonehenge*, is shown [TAB. XXVIII.](str13.htm#img_pl28.md) There you see
the union of the two wings of the avenue, at the commencement of the
strait part of it C. Again, you may observe the nature of the west wing
of the avenue, going with a continued curve round the bottom of the
hill, till it enters the *Hippodrom* or *cursus*. At a distance you see
*Yansbury* camp, thought to be another of *Vespasian*'s. Next you
descend into the valley to the union of the wings of the avenue, and
ascend the agreeable part

<span id="img_pl20"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate 20. An inward
view of Stonehenge from behind ye high Altar looking toward the grand
entrance. A little oblique. Aug. 1722.&lt;br&gt; A the
altar](tn/pl20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl20.jpg.md)  
Plate 20. An inward view of Stonehenge from behind ye high Altar looking
toward the grand entrance. A little oblique. Aug. 1722.  
A the altar  
</span>

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of it, to the temple. Along here went the sacred pomp, How would it
delight one to have seen it in its first splendor!

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

-------*Jam nunc solennes ducere pompas  
Ad delubra juvat, cæsosque videre juveneos*.           Virg.

</div>

I have often admir’d the delicacy of this ascent to the temple. As soon
as you mount from the bottom, ’tis level for a great way together: and
the whole length o it is a kind of ridge, for it slopes off both ways
from it on each side; so that the rain runs off every way. Just about
half way there is a depressure, as a pause or foot pace, showing one
half of the avenue ascending, the other descending, both magnificent, in
the ancient gusto. There was a temple of *Jupiter Labradæus* near
*Mylasa* a city of *Caria*, much frequented. The way leading thither was
called sacred, and pav’d 60 furlongs, thro’ which their procession went.
*Philostratus* says, you went to the temple of *Diana* at *Ephesus*, by
a stone portico of a *stadium*. *Pausanias in Phocicis* says, the avenue
to the temple of *Minerva Cranea* near *Elatea* is ascending, but so
gently that it is imperceptible. Again in Chap. X. we read of a pav’d
way, to the oracle at *Delphos*. But the natural pavement of our avenue
is much finer. I take notice, that *Jupiter Labradæus* was a statue
holding a halbard in his hand, which instrument like a *securis* or
amazonian ax, was as a scepter to the *Lydian* kings. And apparently our
*English* halbard is the very word, with an asperate way of
pronunciation prefix’d, *Labrada*. So our Druids carried about a sharp
brass instrument which we often find, call’d a celt, (I know not whence)
with which they us’d to cut the *Misletoe*, at their great festival in
midwinter. I have represented one hanging at our Druids girdle, in [TAB.
I.](str03.htm#img_pl01.md) it <span class="margnote">TAB. I.</span> was to
be put into the slit at the end of his staff, when used. But of this
hereafter. Now with the *Poet* in his celebrated *Ode*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

       ----------------------------*-Quibus  
   Mos unde deductus per omne  
        Tempus, Amazonia securi  
Dextras obarmet, quærere distuli:  
Nec scire fas est omnia*---------                Horat.

</div>

being arriv’d again at *Stonehenge*, from the last print, [TAB.
XXVIII.](str13.htm#img_pl28.md) though <span class="margnote">TAB.
XXVIII.</span> small, we may see the beauty of the curve in the outer
circle of that work, especially from the avenue, when the eye is below
it. We observe the same in the grand front view. [TAB.
V.](str04.htm#img_pl05.md)<span class="margnote">TAB. V.</span>

And now we are return’d to the sacred fabric, we will discourse a little
upon these temples in general, and so conclude this chapter.

In Macrob. *Saturn*. I. 18. mention is made of a famous round temple in
*Thrace*, where they celebrate most magnificent religious rites. It is
upon the hill *Zilmissus*. The temple is open at top. I suppose like
ours, not a little round hole like as in the *Pantheon*, nor is it a
small round *sacellum* like those little round temples at *Rome* to
*Romulus*, to *Vesta*, *&c*. It is not reasonable to think they should
build a *Pantheon* in *Thrace*, nor can I understand it otherwise, than
that, it was like our *Stonehenge*, and in truth an ancient patriarchal
structure of a primitive model. The Deity here worshipp’d was call’d
*Sabazius* says he, some make him *Jupiter*, some the sun, some
*Bacchus*. These are the first perversions of the *Jehovah* of the
*Jews*. In my Judgment, the name *Sabazius* is a corruption of the
*Hebrew* name of God ‏צבאוֹת‎ *sabaoth*, *Deus exercituum*, a title that
would well suit the warlike *Thracians*. In time Idolatry debased every
thing. When they perform’d the religious rites of *Bacchus*, they cried
*Evohe, Sabbai*, and call’d him *Evius*, *Evan*, *Sabazius*, *&c*.
*Evohe* is a corrupt manner of pronouncing ‏יהוה‎ *Jehovah*, and this
sacred cry is

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

truly no other than what frequently occurs in holy scripture. ‏יהוה
צְבאוֹת‎ *Jehovah Sabaoth*. He is the king of glory, *Psalm* xxiv. 10.
But I have discoursed on this head in my *Paleographia Sacra*
N<sup>o</sup> I. which will be continued.

*Diodorus Siculus* in his Book II. mentions a very eminent temple of a
round form, among the *Hyperboreans*, as he calls them, who inhabit an
island situate in the ocean over-against *Gaul*, which is not less than
*Sicily*. He gives an odd account from thence mix’d with fable, and
seemingly some reports of *Stonehenge* itself.

Mr. *Toland* is confident, this hyperborean region is our *Schetland*
isles, whence *Abaris* the Druid and hyperborean philosopher, famous in
*Grecian* story. Whilst I am writing this, *March* 6. 1739-40. we had an
account read before the *Royal Society*, much confirming Mr. *Toland*'s
notion; speaking of the admirable temperature of the air there, not
subject to such extremities, such sudden changes, as even in *Britain*
itself. There are such temples as ours there.

*Arnobius* in VI. speaking of the origin of temples, "We don’t, says he,
make temples to the Gods, as is we design’d to shelter them from the
rain, the wind, the sun: but that we may therein present ourselves
before them, and by our prayers, after a sort, speak to them as if
present." We may well affirm this of our temple, built after the manner
of the patriarchal ones, tho’ probably an improvement, and somewhat more
magnificent. Ours consists of two ovals and two circles. Many in our
island, which I suppose older than *Stonehenge*, consist of one oval, or
niche-like figure made of three stones only, (of which our *adytum* is a
more magnificent specimen) and a circle of rude stones fix’d in the
ground; of which our work, crown’d with a circular cornish, is a more
magnificent specimen. Sometime I meet with a niche without a circle,
sometime a circle without a niche. We may well say, the circle is
analogous to our chapels, churches, or cathedrals, according to their
different magnitude; the niches correspond to our choirs, altars, and
more sacred part of the sacred building, the more immediate place of the
residence of the Deity. They are what now the *Turks* and *Arabians*
call the *kebla*, deriv’d, as we said before, from the patriarchal
practice, and particularly from the great patriarch *Abraham*. I doubt
not but the altars which he and his posterity made, mention’d in
scripture, were a stone upon the ground before three set in a niche-like
figure, and the whole inclos’d in a circle of stones. At other times
they set only one stone for a *kebla*, as sometime our ancestors did
likewise. This practice was propagated generally among all ancient
nations. Among many it was forgotten, or not practised, where they had
but little religion at all. Among others, after idolatry had prevail’d
with them, they thought all former manners of worship like their own,
and mistook the stones which were *kebla*'s or places of worship, for
the objects of worship. Hence *Maximus* of *Tyre* says, the *Arabians*
worshipp’d he knew not what, for he saw only a great stone. Which, no
doubt, was the *kebla* toward which they directed their devotion, as
they had learnt from *Abraham*, or the like patriarchal ancestors. So
*Pausanias* in *Achaicis* says, the ancient *Greeks* worshipp’d unhewn
stones instead of statues; more particularly among the *Pharii*, near
the statue of *Mercury*, were 30 square stones, which they worshipp’d.
If our author could not make his narration agreeable to common sense, he
might well mistake this ancient patriarchal temple, somewhat like ours
of *Stonehenge*, for a circle of deities: he himself being a stranger to
any other than image-worship. I shall handle this matter more largely
hereafter, and now let us descend again from the temple to the *cursus*.
Only I would close this chapter with this short reflection. This avenue
is proof enough (is there needed any) that our work is a temple, not a
monument, as some writers would have it. But it requires no formal
confutation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](str11.md)
