[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](trs00)  [Next](trs02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Rosetta Stone*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span id="img_rosetta"></span>

[![THE ROSETTA STONE, inscribed with a decree of the priests of Memphis,
offering divine honours on Ptolemy V., Epiphanes, King of Egypt, B.C.
193.](tn/rosetta.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/rosetta.jpg)  
THE ROSETTA STONE, inscribed with a decree of the priests of Memphis,
offering divine honours on Ptolemy V., Epiphanes, King of Egypt, B.C.
193.  

### THE ROSETTA STONE <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) AND THE STELE OF CANOPUS.

The following remarks upon the decipherment of the Egyptian
hieroglyphics may be fitly introduced by a description of the remarkable
objects of antiquity whose names stand at the head of this chapter.

<span class="margnote">Finding of the Rosetta Stone.</span>The **Rosetta
Stone** is a slab of black basalt, which is now preserved in the British
Museum (Egyptian Gallery, No. 24). It was found by a French artillery
officer called Boussard, among the ruins of Fort Saint Julien, near the
Rosetta mouth of the Nile, in 1799, but subsequently came into the
possession of the British Government at the capitulation of Alexandria.
It is inscribed with fragments of 14 lines of hieroglyphics, 32 lines of
demotic, and 54 lines of Greek. A portion of the stone has been broken
off from the top, and the right-hand bottom corner has also suffered
injury. It now measures 3 ft. 9 in. × 2 ft. 4½ in. × 11 in. We may
arrive at an idea of the original size of the Rosetta Stone by comparing
the number of lines upon it with the number of those upon the<span
class="margnote">Stele of Canopus and Rosetta Stone compared</span>
**Stele of Canopus**, which is inscribed in hieroglyphic, demotic and
Greek, measures 7 ft. 2 in. × 2 ft. 7 in. x 1 ft. 2 in., and is
inscribed with 36 lines of hieroglyphics, 73 lines of demotic, and 74
lines of Greek. The demotic inscription is on the edge of the stele.
This stele was set up at Canopus in the ninth year of the reign of
**Ptolemy III., Euergetes I.** (B.C. 247-222), to record the decree made
at Canopus by the priesthood, assembled from all parts of Egypt, in
honour of the king. It records the great benefits which he had conferred
upon Egypt, and states what festivals are to be celebrated in his
honour, and in that of Berenice, etc., and, like the Rosetta Stone,
concludes with a resolution ordering that a copy of this inscription in
hieroglyphics, Greek and demotic, shall be placed in every large temple
in Egypt. Now the Rosetta Stone is inscribed with 32 lines of demotic,
and the Stele of Canopus with 73; but as the lines on the Rosetta Stone
are rather more than double the length of those on the Stele of Canopus,
it is pretty certain that each

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

document is of about the same length. The Stele of Canopus has 74 lines
of Greek to 54 on the Rosetta Stone, but as the letters are longer and
wider, it is clear from this also that the Greek versions occupied about
the same space. Allowing then for the difference in the size of the
hieroglyphic characters, we should expect the hieroglyphic inscription
on the Rosetta Stone to occupy 14 or 15 lines. When complete the stele
must have been about twelve inches longer than it is now, and the top
was probably rounded and inscribed, like that of the Stele of Canopus,
with a winged disk, having pendent uræi, that on the right wearing <span
id="img_10900"></span> ![](img/10900.jpg), the crown of Upper Egypt, and
that on the left <span id="img_10901"></span> ![](img/10901.jpg), the
crown of Lower Egypt; by the side of each uræus, laid horizontally,
would be <span id="img_10902"></span> ![](img/10902.jpg), and above
<span id="img_10903"></span> ![](img/10903.jpg), *ṭā ānch*, "giver of
life."

<span class="margnote">Contents of Rosetta Stone.</span>The inscriptions
on the Rosetta Stone form a version of a decree of the priesthood
assembled at Memphis in honour of **Ptolemy V., Epiphanes**, King of
Egypt, B.C. 195, written in hieroglyphics, demotic and Greek. A
facsimile <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) of them was published by the
Society of Antiquaries <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2) in 1802, and
copies were distributed among the scholars who were anxious to undertake
the investigation of the texts. <span class="margnote">Principal works
on the Rosetta Stone.</span>The hieroglyphic text has been translated by
Brugsch in his *Inscriptio Rosettana*, Berlin, 1851; by Chabas,
*L’Inscription hiéroglyphique de Rosette*, Paris, 1867; and by Sharpe,
*The Rosetta Stone in hieroglyphics and Greek*, London, 1871, etc. The
Demotic text has been studied by M. de Sacy, *Lettre à M. Chaptal sur
l’inscription égypt. de Rosette*, Paris, 1802; by Akerblad, *Letter à M.
de Sacy sur l’inscription égypt. de Rosette*, Paris, 1802; by Young,
*Hieroglyphics* (collected by the Egyptian Society, arranged by Dr. T.
Young, 2 vols., fol., 100 plates, 1823-1828), pl. x ff.; by Brugsch,
*Die Inschrift von Rosette nach ihrem ägyptisch-demotischen Texte
sprachlich und sachlich erklärt*, Berlin, 1850; Salvolini, *Analyse
Grammaticale Raisonnée de* 

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

*différents textes des anciens Egyptiens*, Vol. I., *Texte
hiéroglyphique et démotique de la pierre de Rosette*, Paris, 1836. This
work was never finished. The Greek text has been edited by Heyne,
*Commentatio in inscriptionem græcam monumenti trinis titulis insigniti
ex Aegypto Londinum apportati*, in tom. xv. of Comment. Soc. R. Sc.
Gött., pp. 260-280; Ameilhon, *Eclaircissements sur l’inscription
grecque du monument trouvé à Rosette*, Paris, 1803; Drumann,
*Commentatio in inscriptionem prope Rosettam inventam*, Regiomont.,
1822; and Drumann, *Historisch-antiquarische Untersuchungen über
Aegypten, oder die Inschrift von Rosette aus dem Griechischen übersetzt
und erläutert*, Königsberg, 1823; Lenormant, *Essai sur le texte grec de
l’inscription de Rosette*, Paris, 1842; Letronne, *Recueil des
inscriptions grecques et latines d’Egypte*, Paris, 1842; by Franz in
Boeckh, *Corpus Inscriptionum Græcarum*, t. iii., 1853, p. 334 f, No.
4697, etc.

<span class="margnote">Beneficent acts of Ptolemy V.
Epiphanes.</span>The inscriptions upon the Rosetta Stone set forth that
Ptolemy V. Epiphanes, while king of Egypt, consecrated revenues of
silver and corn to the temples, that he suppressed certain taxes and
reduced others, that he granted certain privileges to the priests and
soldiers, and that when, in the eighth year of his reign, the Nile rose
to a great height and flooded all the plains, he undertook, at great
expense, the task of damming it in and directing the overflow of its
waters into proper channels, to the great gain and benefit of the
agricultural classes. In addition to the remissions of taxes which he
made to the people, he gave handsome gifts to the temples, and
subscribed to the various ceremonies which were carried on in them. In
return for these gracious acts the priesthood assembled at Memphis
decreed that a statue of the king should be set up in a conspicuous
place in every temple of Egypt, and that each should be inscribed with
the name and titles of "Ptolemy, the saviour of Egypt." Royal apparel
was to be placed on each statue, and ceremonies were to be performed
before each three times a day. It was also decreed that a gilded wooden
shrine, containing a gilded wooden statue of the king, should be placed
in each temple, and that these were to be carried out with the shrines
of the other kings in the great panegyrics. It was also decreed

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="margnote">Festivals in honour of Ptolemy
Epiphanes.</span>that ten golden crowns of a peculiar design should be
made and laid upon the royal shrine; that the birthday and coronation
day of the king should be celebrated each year with great pomp and show;
that the first five days of the month of Thoth should each year be set
apart for the performance of a festival in honour of the king; and
finally that a copy of this decree, engraved upon a tablet of hard stone
in hieroglyphic, demotic and Greek characters, should be set up in each
of the temples of the first, second and third orders, near the statue of
the ever-living Ptolemy. The Greek portion of the inscriptions appears
to be the original document, and the hieroglyphic and demotic versions
merely translations of it.

Although it is nearly certain that, without the aid of the Greek
inscription found on the socket of an obelisk at Philæ, and the
hieroglyphic inscription found on the obelisk which belonged to that
socket, the hieroglyphic alphabet could never have been recovered from
the Rosetta Stone<span class="margnote">Rosetta Stone the base of
decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics.</span>, still it is around this
wonderful document that all the interest in the decipherment of the
Egyptian hieroglyphics clings. For many hundreds of years the interest
of the learned of all countries has been excited by the hieroglyphic
inscriptions of Egypt, and the theories propounded as to their contents
were legion. Speaking broadly, the references to this subject by
classical authors <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) are not very
satisfactory; still there are some remarkable exceptions which will be
referred to presently. Inasmuch as the names of Roman emperors, as late
as the time of Decius<span class="margnote">Late use of
hieroglyphics.</span>, were written in hieroglyphics, it follows that
the knowledge of this subject must have been possessed by some one,
either Greek or Egyptian, in Egypt. "For a hundred and fifty years after
the Ptolemies began to reign, the Egyptian hieroglyphics appear to have
been commonly used, and the Egyptians were not prohibited from making
use, so far as it seemed requisite, according to ritual or otherwise
appropriate, of the native language and of its time-hallowed written
signs." <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) Little by little, however, the
Greek language displaced

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the Egyptian, and the writing in common use among the people, called
to-day "demotic" or "enchorial," and anciently "epistolographic,"
completely usurped the place of the "hieratic" or cursive form of
hieroglyphic writing. Although the Greeks and Romans appear not to have
studied hieroglyphics thoroughly, only repeating, generally, what they
were told about certain signs, nevertheless writers like Herodotus,
Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, Hermapion, Chaeremon, Clemens Alexandrinus,
and Horapollo, contribute information on this subject of considerable
value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[108:1](trs01.htm#fr_0) A cast of the Rosetta
Stone is exhibited in the Fitzwilliam Museum.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[109:1](trs01.htm#fr_1) Other facsimiles are
given in Lepsius, *Auswahl*, Bl. 18, and in Arundale and Bonomi,
*Gallery of Antiquities*, pl. 49, p. 114.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[109:2](trs01.htm#fr_2) The Greek version of the
decree of the Egyptian Priests in honour of *Ptolemy the Fifth*,
surnamed *Epiphanes*, from the stone inscribed in the sacred and vulgar
Egyptian and the Greek characters, taken from the French at the
surrender of Alexandria. London, 1802. Nichols.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[111:1](trs01.htm#fr_3) See Gutschmid,
*Scriptorum rerum Aegyptiacarum Series,* in *Philologus*, Bd. X.,
Göttingen, 1855, ss. 712 ff.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[111:2](trs01.htm#fr_4) Mommsen, *Provinces of
the Roman Empire*, Vol. II. p. 243.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancient writings about Hieroglyphics](trs02)
