[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](trs03)  [Next](trs05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Rosetta Stone*, by E.A.W. Budge, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote">Young and Champollion.</span>Here naturally comes
an account of the labours of Young and Champollion, two men who stand
out pre-eminently as the true discoverers of the right method of
decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics. As much has been written on the
works of these savants, and as some have tried to show that the whole
merit of the discovery belongs to Young, and others that it belongs to
Champollion, it will not be out of place here to make a plain statement
of facts, drawn from the best sources, and to give the opinions of the
most eminent Egyptologists on this point; a few details concerning the
lives of these remarkable men must, however, be first given.

**Dr. Thomas Young** was born at Milverton, in Somersetshire, on the
13th of June, 1773. His parents were both members of the Society of
Friends. He lived during the first seven years of his life with his
maternal grandfather, Mr. Robert Davis, at Minehead, in Somersetshire.
At the age of two he could read fluently, and before he was four he had
read the Bible through twice. <span class="margnote">Early life and
studies of Young.</span>At the age of six, he learnt by heart in six
weeks Goldsmith's *Deserted Village*. When not quite seven years of age
he went to a school, kept by a man called King, at Stapleton near
Bristol, where he stayed for a year and a half. In March 1782, when
nearly nine years of age, he went to the school of Mr. T. Thompson, at
Compton, in Dorsetshire, where he remained four years. Here he read
Phaedrus's Fables, Cornelius Nepos, Virgil, Horace expurgated by Knox,
the whole of Beza's Greek and Latin Testament, the First Seven Books of
the Iliad, Martin's Natural Philosophy, etc., etc. Before leaving this
school he had got through six chapters of the Hebrew Bible. About this
time he learnt to use the lathe, and he made a telescope and a
microscope, and the Italian, Persian, Syriac, and Chaldee languages all
occupied his attention. <span class="margnote">Young's oriental
studies.</span>From 1787 to 1792 he was private tutor to Hudson Gurney,
at Youngsbury, in Hertfordshire,

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

where he seems to have devoted himself to the study of English, French,
Italian, Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriac, Samaritan, Arabic,
Persian, Turkish, and Ethiopic, as well as to that of natural
Philosophy, Botany, and Entomology. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51.md)
<span class="margnote">Young's medical studies.</span>In 1792 Young
began to study Medicine and Anatomy in London, and in 1793 he entered
St. Bartholomew's Hospital as a pupil. In 1803 he read a paper before
the Royal Society, and was elected a Fellow the following year (balloted
for and elected, June 19). Shortly after he attended medical lectures in
Edinburgh and Göttingen, and he subsequently went to Cambridge, where he
took the degree of Bachelor of Medicine (1803), and afterwards that of
Doctor of Physic (1808). In 1798 Young received a splendid bequest from
his uncle Dr. Brocklesby, consisting of his house in Norfolk Street,
Park Lane, his library, his prints, his pictures, and about £10,000 in
money; hence he was free to form his own scheme of life. <span
class="margnote">Discovers undulatory theory of light.</span>In May,
1801, he discovered the undulatory theory of light, and his paper on
this subject was read before the Royal Society in the November
following; in the same year he accepted the office of Professor of
Natural Philosophy at the Royal Institution. In 1802 he was appointed
Foreign Secretary of the Royal Society, and on the 14th of June, 1804,
he married Eliza, the daughter of J. P. Maxwell, Esq., of Cavendish
Square, and of Trippendence, near Farnborough, Kent. The attention of
Young was called to Egyptian inscriptions by Sir W. Rouse Boughton, who
had found in a mummy case at Thebes a papyrus written in cursive
Egyptian characters, and to a notice of this which Young prepared for
his friend, he appended a translation of the demotic text of the Rosetta
Stone. <span class="margnote">Young's study of hieroglyphs.</span>As the
details of his studies on the Rosetta Stone belong to the history of the
decipherment of Egyptian hieroglyphics, they are given further on (p.
141 ff.), but the reader will understand Young's position better by
reading Dean Peacock's chapter on "hieroglyphical researches" printed in
his life of Young, pp. 258-344, and Mr. Leitch's notes in the third
volume of the collected *Works of Dr. Young*. In 1816 Young was
appointed

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Secretary to a
Commission for ascertaining the length of the seconds pendulum, for
comparing French and English standards, etc., and in 1818 he was
appointed Secretary of the Board of Longitude and Superintendent of the
Nautical Almanac. In 1825 he became Medical Referee and Inspector of
Calculations to the Palladium Insurance Company. In 1826 he was elected
one of the eight foreign Associates of the Academy of Sciences at Paris.
In February, 1829, he began to suffer from repeated attacks of asthma,
and by the April following he was in a state of great weakness; <span
class="margnote">Young's death.</span>he died on the 10th of May, not
having completed his fifty-sixth year. An excellent steel engraving of
Young, by R. Ward, from a picture by Sir Thomas Lawrence, PṚȦ., forms
the frontispiece to his life by Dean Peacock, which, according to J. J.
Champollion-Figeac, "exprime fidèlement la douceur, la grâce, les traits
d’une figure toute rayonnante d’intelligence." <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md)

**Jean François Champollion**, surnamed **le Jeune**, the immortal
discoverer of a correct system of decipherment of Egyptian
hieroglyphics, was born at Figeac on December 24, 1790. <span
class="margnote">Champollion's physical and classical studies.</span>His
family came originally from Champoléon in the High Alps, where a branch
of it still holds property. As a boy he made rapid progress in classical
studies, and he devoted himself at the same time to botany and
mineralogy; at a very early date however he showed a natural taste for
oriental languages, and like Young was, at the age of thirteen, master
of a fair knowledge of Hebrew, Syriac and Chaldee. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53.md) In 1805 his brother J. J.
Champollion-Figeac brought him to Paris, and caused him to be admitted
to the Cours de l’Ecole des Langues Orientales, and introduced him to
Silvestre de Sacy. Soon after his arrival in Paris Champollion turned
his attention to the study of the hieroglyphic inscription on the
Rosetta Stone, but his powerful friend de Sacy advised the elder brother
to warn the younger off a study which *ne pouvait donner aucun
résultat*. In 1812 he was nominated Professor of Ancient History to the
faculty of Letters at Grenoble,

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

where he still carried on his oriental studies. <span
class="margnote">Champollion's hieroglyphic and Coptic
studies.</span>When he arrived in Paris he found that the old
Egyptologists maintained that hieroglyphics were a symbolic language,
and seeking to verify this theory, he wasted a year. He made up his
mind, however, to work out this question without having regard to the
theories of others, and he sketched out a plan for a large work on Egypt
in several volumes. The first part of this appeared at Grenoble in 1811,
entitled Introduction; it was never sold, for only about thirty copies
were printed, but it appeared, without the analytical table of Coptic
geographical names, under the title *L’Egypte sous les Pharaons*, 8vo.,
2 vols., 1814. About this time Young, in England, was studying the texts
on the Rosetta Stone, and had actually begun to make a translation of
the demotic section, making use of the results obtained by de Sacy and
Akerblad, to the latter of whom great credit is due for his acuteness
and insight. Whatever may be said as to Champollion's ignorance of
Young's results, it is quite certain that he must have known of those of
Akerblad, and we know (see p. 135) that a printed copy of Young's paper
on the Rosetta Stone had been put into Champollion's hands by de Sacy.
<span class="margnote">Champollion acquainted with Young's
labours.</span>In a very short time Champollion discovered where his
predecessors had broken down, and having already written *De l’écriture
Hiératique des Anciens Egyptiens*, Grenoble, 1821, on September 17, in
the following year, he read his *Mémoire* on the hieroglyphics and
exhibited his hieroglyphic Alphabet, with its Greek and Demotic
equivalents, before the Académie des Inscriptions. Champollion's paper
created a great sensation, and Louis XVIII. wished a statement
concerning it laid before him, and M. le Duc de Doudeauville determined
that an Egyptian Museum should be formed in the Palace of the Louvre. In
the same year Champollion published his *Lettre à M. Dacier, relative à
l’Alphabet des Hiéroglyphes phonétiques*, in which he showed beyond a
doubt that his system was the correct one. In a series of *Mémoires*
read at the Institut in April, May and June, 1823, he explained his
system more fully, and these he afterwards published together entitled
*Précis du Système Hiéroglyphique des Anciens Egyptiens*, Paris, 2
vols., 1824. A second edition, revised and corrected, appeared in 1828.
In

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> June, 1824,
Champollion arrived in Turin, <span class="margnote">Champollion's
travels.</span> where he devoted himself to the study of papyri. Early
in 1825 he arrived in Rome, and thence he went to Naples, where all the
museums were opened for him. In 1826 he returned to Paris. In July,
1828, he set out on his long planned voyage to Egypt<span
class="margnote">Visits Egypt.</span>, and returned in March, 1830,
bringing with him a fine collection of antiquities, and a number of
copies of inscriptions which filled about two thousand pages. As soon as
he returned to France he set to work to publish the rich results of his
travels, but while occupied with this undertaking, death overtook him on
the 4th of March, 1832. Louis-Philippe ordered that busts of him,
executed at the expense of the civil list, should be placed in the
galleries of the palace at Versailles, and in the rooms of the Egyptian
Museum of the Louvre; he also ordered that marble for another bust
should be given to Champollion-Figeac, and that the carving thereof
should be entrusted to the famous sculptor Etex. An etched portrait of
Champollion le Jeune will be found in *Les Deux Champollion, leur Vie et
leurs Œuvres*, par Aimé Champollion-Figeac: Grenoble, 1887, p. 52.

In addition to the works of Champollion mentioned above, the following
are the most important:—

<span class="margnote">Champollion's works.</span>*Rapport à son
Excellence M. le Duc de Doudeauville, sur la Collection Egyptienne à
Livourne*, Paris, 1826.

*Lettres d M. le Duc de Blacas d’Aulps relatives au Musée royal Egyptien
de Turin* . . . . . (avec Notices chronologiques par
Champollion-Figeac): Paris, 1824-26.

*Notice sur les papyrus hiératiques et les peintures du cercueil de
Pétaménoph* (*Extr. de Voyage à Meroë* par Cailliaud de Nantes), Paris,
1827.

*Notice descriptive des Monuments Egyptiens du Musée Charles X*, Paris,
1827.

*Catalogue de la Collection Egyptienne du Louvre*, Paris, 1827.

*Catalogue des Papyrus Egyptiens du Musée du Vatican*, Rome, 1826.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

*Monuments de l’Egypte et de la Nubie*, iv vols., fol., 440 planches.
Publié par ordre du Gouvernement, pour faire suite à l’ouvrage de
l’Expédition d’Egypte, Paris, 1829-1847.

*Lettres écrites pendant son voyage en Egypte, en* 1828, 1829, Paris,
1829; 2me édition, Paris, 1833; collection complète. A German
translation by E. F. von Gutschmid was published at Quedlinburg, in
1835.

*Grammaire Egyptienne, aux Principes généraux de l’écriture sacrée
Egyptienne appliqués à la représentation de la langue parlée; . . . Avec
des prolégomènes et un portrait de l’éditeur*, M. Champollion-Figeac,
Paris, 1836-1841.

*Dictionnaire Egyptien, en écriture hiéroglyphique, publié d’après les
manuscrits autographes . . . par Champollion-Figeac*, Paris, 1841.

The results of Dr. Young's studies of the Rosetta Stone were first
communicated to the Royal Society of Antiquaries in a letter from Sir W.
E. Rouse Boughton, Bart.; the letter was read on the 19th of May, 1814,
and was published the following year in *Archæologia*, Vol. XVIII. pp.
59-72. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54.md)<span class="margnote">Young's
labours on the Rosetta Stone in 1814.</span> The letter was accompanied
by a translation of the demotic text on the Rosetta Stone, which was
subsequently reprinted anonymously in the *Museum Criticum* of
Cambridge, Pt. VI., 1815, together with the correspondence which took
place between Dr. Young and MM. Silvestre de Sacy and Akerblad. In 1802
M. Akerblad, the Swedish President at Rome, published his *Lettre sur
l’inscription Egyptienne de Rosette, adressée au citoyen Silvestre de
Sacy*, in which he gave the results of his study of the demotic text of
the Rosetta Stone; M. Silvestre de Sacy also had occupied himself in the
same way (see his *Lettre au citoyen Chaptal, au sujet de l’inscription
Egyptienne du monument trouvé d Rosette:* Paris, 1802), but neither
scholar had made any progress in the decipherment of the hieroglyphic
text. In August, 1814, Dr. Young wrote to Silvestre de Sacy, asking him
what Mr. Akerblad had been doing, and saying<span
class="margnote">Correspondence between Young and de Sacy.</span>, "I
doubt whether the alphabet which Mr. Akerblad has given us can be of
much further utility than in enabling us to decipher the proper names;
and sometimes I have

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

even suspected that the letters which he has identified resemble the
syllabic sort of characters by which the Chinese express the sounds of
foreign languages, and that in their usual acceptation they had
different significations: but of this conjecture I cannot at present
speak with any great confidence." . . . . .  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) To this M. de Sacy replied: "Je ne vous
dissimule pas, Monsieur, que malgré l’espèce<span class="margnote">De
Sacy's opinions of Akerblad’s works.</span> d’approbation que j’ai
donnée au système de M. Akerblad, dans la réponse que je lui ai
adressée, il m’est toujours resté des doutes très forts sur la validité
de l’alphabet qu’il s’est fait. . . . . Je dois vous ajouter que M.
Akerblad n’est pas le seul qui se flatte d’avoir lu le texte Egyptien de
l’inscription de Rosette. M. Champollion, qui vient de publier deux
volumes sur l’ancienne géographie de l’Egypte, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56.md) et qui s’est beaucoup occupé de la langue
Copte, prétend avoir aussi lu cette inscription. Je mets assurément plus
de confiance dans les lumières et la critique de M. Akerblad que dans
celles de<span class="margnote">De Sacy distrusts Champollion's
results.</span> M. Champollion, mais tant qu’ils n’auront publié quelque
résultat de leur travail, il est juste de suspendre son jugement."
(Leitch, Vol. III. p. 17.) Writing to M. de Sacy in October of the same
year, Young says: "I had read Mr. Akerblad’s essay but hastily in the
course of the last winter, and I was not disposed to place much
confidence in the little that I recollected of it; so that I was able to
enter anew upon the investigation, without being materially influenced
by what he had published; and though I do not profess to lay claim to
perfect originality, or to deny the importance of Mr. Akerblad’s
labours, I think myself authorised to consider my own translation as
completely independent of his ingenious researches: a circumstance which
adds much to the probability of our conjectures where they happen to
agree. It is only since I received your obliging letter, that I
have<span class="margnote">Young on Akerblad’s labours.</span> again
read Mr. Akerblad’s work; and I have found that it agrees almost in
every instance with the results of my own

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

investigation respecting the sense attributed to the words which the
author has examined. This conformity must be allowed to be more
satisfactory than if I had followed, with perfect confidence, the path
which Akerblad has traced: I must however, confess that it relates only
to a few of the first steps of the investigation; and that the greatest
and the most difficult part of the translation still remains unsupported
by the authority of any external evidence of this kind." (Leitch, p.
18.) Nearly three weeks after writing the above, Young sent another
letter to M. de Sacy, together with a Coptic and demotic alphabet
derived partly from Akerblad, and partly from his own researches, and a
list of eighty-six demotic words with the words corresponding to them in
the Greek version. Of these words, he says: "Three were observed by de
Sacy, sixteen by Akerblad, and the remainder by himself." In January,
1815, Akerblad addressed a long letter to Young, together with which he
sent a translation of some lines of the Rosetta Stone inscription, and
some notes upon it. Regarding his own work he says: "During the ten
years which have <span class="margnote">Akerblad's doubts about his own
labours.</span>elapsed since my departure from Paris, I have devoted but
a few moments, and those at long intervals, to the monument of Rosetta .
. . . . For, in fact, I have always felt that the results of my
researches on this monument are deficient in that sort of evidence which
carries with it full conviction, and you, Sir, as well as M. de Sacy,
appear to be of my opinion in this respect . . . . . I must however give
you notice beforehand, that in most cases you will only receive a
statement of my doubts and uncertainties, together with a few more
plausible conjectures; and I shall be fully satisfied if these last
shall appear to deserve your attention and approbation . . . . . If
again the inscriptions were engraved in a clear and distinct character
like the Greek and Latin inscriptions of a certain antiquity, it would
be easy, by the assistance of the proper names of several Greek words
which occur in it, some of which I have discovered since the publication
of my letter to M. de Sacy, and of many Egyptian words, the sense of
which is determined; it would be easy, I say, to form a perfectly
correct alphabet of these letters; but here another difficulty occurs;
the alphabetical characters which, without doubt, are

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

of very high antiquity in Egypt, must have been in common use for many
centuries before the date of the decree; in the course of this time,
these letters, as has happened in all other countries, have acquired a
very irregular and fanciful form, so as to constitute a kind of running
hand." (Leitch, p. 33.) In August, 1815, Young replied to Akerblad’s
letter, and discussed the passages where his own translation differed
from that of Akerblad.

<span class="margnote">De Sacy warns Young against Champollion.</span>In
July, 1815, de Sacy sent a letter to Young, which contains the following
remarkable passages: "*Monsieur, outre la traduction Latine de
l’inscription Egyptienne que vous m’avez communiquée, j’ai refit
postérieurement une autre traduction Anglaise, imprimée, que je n’ai pas
en ce moment sous les yeux, l’ayant prêtée d M. Champollion sur la
demande que son frère m’en a faite d’après une lettre qu’il m’a dit
avoir reçue de vous. . . . . Je pense, Monsieur, que vous êtes plus
avancé aujourd’hui et que vous lisez une grande partie, du moins, du
texte Egyptien. Si jai un conseil à vous donner, c’est de ne pas trop
communiquer vos découvertes d M. Champollion. Il se pourrait faire qu’il
prétendît ensuite d la priorité. Il cherche en plusieurs endroits de son
ouvrage à faire croire qu’il a découvert beaucoup des mots de
l’inscription Egyptienne de Rosette. J’ai bien peur que ce ne soit là
que du charlatanisme; j’ajoute même que j’ai de fortes raisons de le
penser. . . . . Au surplus, je ne saurais me persuader que si M.
Akerblad, Et. Quatremère, ou Champollion avait fait des progrès réels
dans la lecture du texte Egyptien, ils ne se fussent pas plus empressés
de faire part au public de leur découverte. Ce serait une modestie bien
rare, et dont aucun d’eux ne me paraît capable*." (Leitch, p. 51.)

In a letter to de Sacy, dated 3rd August, 1815, Young says: "You may,
perhaps, think me too sanguine in my expectations of obtaining a
knowledge of the hieroglyphical language in general from the inscription
of Rosetta only; and I will confess to you that the difficulties are
greater than a superficial view of the subject would induce us to
suppose. The<span class="margnote">Young on hieroglyphics.</span> number
of the radical characters is indeed limited, like that of the keys of
the Chinese; but it appears that these characters are by no means
universally independent of each

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

other, a combination of two or three of them being often employed to
form a single word, and perhaps even to represent a simple idea; and,
indeed, this must necessarily happen where we have only about a thousand
characters for the expression of a whole language. For the same reason
it is impossible that all the characters can be pictures of the things
which they represent: some, however, of the symbols on the stone of
Rosetta have a manifest relation to the objects denoted by them. For
instance, a Priest, a Shrine, a Statue, an Asp, a Mouth, and the
Numerals, and a King is denoted by a sort of plant with an insect, which
is said to have been a bee; while a much greater number of the
characters have no perceptible connexion with the ideas attached to
them; although it is probable that a resemblance, either real or
metaphorical, may have existed or have been imagined when they were
first employed; thus a Libation was originally denoted by a hand holding
a jar, with two streams of a liquid issuing from it, but in this
inscription the representation has degenerated into a bird's foot. With
respect to the epistolographic or enchorial character, it does not seem
quite certain that it could be explained even if the hieroglyphics were
perfectly understood, for many of the characters neither resemble the
corresponding hieroglyphics, nor are capable of being satisfactorily
resolved into an alphabet of any kind: in short, the two characters
might be supposed to belong to different languages; for they do not seem
to agree even in their manner of forming compound from simple terms."
(Leitch, pp. 55, 56.) Writing to de Sacy in the following year (5th May,
1816) touching the question of the alphabetic nature of the inscription
on the Rosetta Stone, he says: "Si vous lisez la lettre de M. Akerblad,
vous conviendrez, je crois, qu’au moins il n’a pas été plus heureux que
moi dans ses leçons Coptes del’inscription. Mais le vrai est que la
chose est impossible dans l’étendue que vous paraissez encore vouloir
lui donner, car assurément l’inscription *enchoriale* n’est
*alphabétique* que dans un sens très borné . . . . . Je me suis borné
dernièrement à l’étude des hiéroglyphes, ou plutôt à la collection
d’inscriptions hiéroglyphiques. . . . . . Les caractères que j’ai
découverts jettent déjà quelques lumières sur les antiquités de
l’Egypte. J’ai

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="margnote">Young deciphers the name of
Ptolemy.</span>reconnu, par exemple, le nom de Ptolémée dans diverses
inscriptions à Philæ, à Esné et à Ombos, ce qui fixe à peu près la date
des édifices où ce nom se trouve, et c’est même quelque chose que de
pouvoir distinguer dans une inscription quelconque les caractères qui
expriment les noms des personnages auxquels elle a rapport." (Leitch, p.
60.)

On 10th November, 1814, Champollion sent to the President of the Royal
Society a copy of his *L’Egypte sous les Pharaons*, and in the letter
which accompanied it said, "La base de mon travail est la lecture de
l’inscription en caractères Egyptiens, qui est l’un des plus beaux
ornemens du riche Musée Britannique; je veux parler du monument trouvé à
Rosette. Les efforts que j’ai faits pour y réussir n’ont point été, s’il
m’est permis de le dire, sans quelques succès; et les résultats que je
crois avoir obtenus après une<span class="margnote">Young and
Champollion correspond.</span> étude constante et suivie, m’en font
espérer de plus grands encore." (Leitch, p. 63.) He asked also that a
collation of the Rosetta Stone with the copy of it which he possessed
might be made, and suggested that a cast of it should be presented to
each of the principal libraries, and to the most celebrated Academies of
Europe. As Foreign Secretary of the Royal Society, Young replied saying
that the needful collation should be made, and adding, "Je ne sais si
par hasard M. de Sacy, avec qui vous êtes sans doute en correspondance,
vous aura parlé d’un exemplaire que je lui ai adressé de ma traduction
conjecturale avec l’explication des dernières lignes des caractères
hiéroglyphiques. Je lui avais déjà envoyé la traduction de l’inscription
Egyptienne au commencement du mois d’Octobre passé; l’interprétation des
hiéroglyphiques ne m’est réussie qu’à la fin du même mois." (Leitch, p.
64.) In reply to this Champollion wrote, "M. Silvestre de Sacy, mon
ancien professeur, ne m’a point donné connaissance de votre mémoire sur
la partie Egyptienne et le texte hiéroglyphique de l’inscription de
Rosette: c’est vous dire, Monsieur, avec quel empressement je
recevrai<span class="margnote">Champollion acquainted with Young's work
in 1815.</span> l’exemplaire que vous avez la bonté de m’offrir." We
have seen above from the extract from a letter of de Sacy that a copy of
Young's work was lent to Champollion between May 9 and July 20, 1815.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

On August 2, 1816, Young addressed a letter <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md) to the Archduke John of Austria, in which
he reported further progress in his hieroglyphic studies, thus: "I have
already ascertained, as I have mentioned in one of my letters to M. de
Sacy, that the enchorial inscription of Rosetta contained a number of
individual characters resembling the corresponding hieroglyphics, and I
was not disposed to place any great reliance on the alphabetical
interpretation of any considerable part of the inscription. I have now
fully demonstrated the hieroglyphical origin of the running hand, <span
id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58.md) in which the manuscripts on papyrus, found
with the mummies . . . . . ." (Leitch, p. 74) The principal contents of
Young's letters, however, incorporated with other matter, were made into
a more extensive article, which was contributed to the Supplement of the
*Encyclopædia Britannica*, <span class="margnote">Young's work
published.</span>Supplement, Vol. IV. He made drawings of the plates,
which were engraved by Mr. Turrell, and having procured separate copies,
he sent them to some of his friends in the summer of 1818, with a cover
on which was printed the title, "Hieroglyphical Vocabulary." These
plates, however, were precisely the same that were afterwards contained
in the fourth volume of the Supplement, as belonging to the article
EGYPT. The characters explained in this vocabulary amounted to about two
hundred; the number which had been immediately obtained from the stone
of Rosetta having been somewhat more than doubled by means of a careful
examination of other monuments. . . . . . The higher numerals were
readily obtained by a comparison of some inscriptions in which they
stood combined with units and with tens. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[3](#fn_59.md) Young's article in the *Encyclopædia
Britannica* obtained great celebrity in Europe; and was reprinted by

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Leitch in the
third volume of the *Works of Dr. Young*, pp. 86-197; it contains eight
sections:—

<div align="center">

|        |                                                                 |
|--------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|
| I.     | Introductory view of the latest publications relating to Egypt. |
| II\.   | Pantheon.                                                       |
| III\.  | Historiography.                                                 |
| IV\.   | Calendar.                                                       |
| V.     | Customs and Ceremonies.                                         |
| VI\.   | Analysis of the Triple Inscription.                             |
| VII\.  | Rudiments of a Hieroglyphical Vocabulary.                       |
| VIII\. | Various Monuments of the Egyptians.                             |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This article is of
very great importance in the history of<span class="margnote">Value of
Young's article in *Encyclopædia Britannica*.</span> the decipherment of
the hieroglyphics, and had Young taken the trouble of having it printed
as a separate publication, there would have been less doubt in the minds
of scholars as to the good work which he did, and results borrowed from
it by Champollion would have been more easily identified. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)

It has already been said ([p. 130](#page_130).md) that Champollion
published at Paris in 1814 the two first parts of a work entitled<span
class="margnote">Champollion on them geography of Egypt.</span>
*L’Egypte sous les Pharaons, ou recherches sur la Géographie, la
Religion, la Langue, les Ecritures et l’Histoire de l’Egypte avant
l’Invasion de Cambyse;* these parts treated simply of the geography of
Egypt. In a note to the Preface he tells us that the general plan of the
work, together with the introduction of the geographical section and the
general map of Egypt under the Pharaohs, was laid before the *Société
des Sciences et des Arts de Grenoble*, 1st September, 1807, and that the
printing began on the 1st September, 1810. On p. 22 of his Introduction,
referring to the Rosetta Stone, he says: "Ce monument intéressant est un
décret des prêtres de l’Egypte, qui décerne de grands honneurs au jeune
roi

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ptolémée Epiphane.
Ce décret est écrit en hiéroglyphes, en langue et en écriture
alphabétique Egyptiennes, et en Grec." Now by the words "en langue et en
écriture alphabétique Egyptiennes" we are clearly to understand that
part of the Rosetta inscription which is written in demotic. Having
referred to the studies of de Sacy and Akerblad, and spoken of the words
in demotic which the latter scholar had rightly compared with their
equivalents in Coptic, "que nous y avons lus ensuite," Champollion adds
in a foot-note, "Ce n’est pas ici le lieu de rendre compte du résultat
de l’étude suivie que nous avons faite du texte Egyptien de
l’Inscription de Rosette, et de l’alphabet que nous avons adopté. <span
class="margnote">Champollion's hieroglyphical studies in
1810.</span>Nous nous occuperons de cet important sujet dans la suite de
cet ouvrage. En attendant, nous prions le lecteur de regarder comme
exacts les résultats que nous lui présentons ici." From this it is clear
that as early as 1810 Champollion claimed to have made progress in the
decipherment of the demotic text (texte Egyptien) of the Rosetta Stone,
and it is now time to ask how much he was indebted to Akerblad’s letter
for ideas and results. A comparison of Plate II. at the end of
Akerblad’s *Lettre sur l’Inscription Egyptienne de Rosette*, with Plate
IV. in Champollion's *Lettre à M. Dacier relative à l’Alphabet des
Hiéroglyphes Phonétiques*, will show that sixteen of the characters of
the alphabet printed by Akerblad in 1802 were retained by Champollion in
1822; also, if Akerblad’s alphabet be compared with the "Supposed
Enchorial Alphabet" printed at the foot of Plate IV. <span
class="margnote">Akerblad attributes correct values to fourteen Demotic
characters.</span>accompanying Young's article EGYPT, printed in 1818
and published in 1819, it will be found that *fourteen* of the
characters are identical in both alphabets. Thus it seems that a greater
degree of credit is due to Akerblad than has usually been awarded to him
either by Young <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md)

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

or Champollion, <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md) or, indeed, by
writers on Egyptology generally. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md)

Having seen what foundations Young and Champollion had for their own
works on the demotic text to rest on, we may return to the consideration
of Young's hieroglyphical studies. On the four plates which appeared
with his article EGYPT, he correctly identified the names of a few of
the gods, Rd, Nut, Thoth, Osiris, Isis, and Nephthys, and he made out
the meanings of several Egyptian ideographs. His identifications of
kings' names were, however, most unfortunate. Thus of Amenḥetep, he made
Tithons; of Thi (a queen), Eoa; of Usertsen, Heron; of Psammetichus,
Sesostris; of Nectanebus, Proteus; of Seti, Psammis; of Rameses II.,
Amasis; of Autocrator, Arsinoe, etc., etc. He correctly identified the
names of Ptolemy and Berenice, although in each case he attributed wrong
values to some of the hieroglyphic characters which formed these names.
The hieroglyphic alphabet given by Young was as follows <span
id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64.md):—

<span class="margnote">Young's hieroglyphic alphabet.</span><span
id="img_14100"></span> ![Young's hieroglyphic alphabet](img/14100.jpg.md)

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

<span id="img_14200"></span> ![Young's hieroglyphic alphabet
(continued)](img/14200.jpg.md)

In 1822 Champollion published his famous *Lettre à M. Dacier relative d
l’alphabet des Hiéroglyphes Phonétiques*, in which he stated his
discovery of the Egyptian hieroglyphic alphabet in the following words:
"Vous avez sans doute remarqué, Monsieur, dans mon Mémoire sur
l’écriture démotique Egyptienne, que ces noms étrangers étaient exprimés
phonétiquement au moyen de signes plutôt *syllabiques*
qu’*alphabétiques*. La valeur de chaque caractère est reconnue et
invariablement fixée par la comparaison de ces divers noms; et de tous
ces rapprochements est résulté l’alphabet, ou plutôt <span
class="margnote">Champollion's system.</span>le syllabaire *démotique*
figuré sur ma planche I., colonne deuxième. L’emploi de ces caractères
phonétiques une fois constaté dans l’écriture démotique, je devais
naturellement en conclure que puisque les signes de cette écriture
populaire étaient, ainsi que je l’ai exposé, empruntés de l’écriture
*hiératique* ou sacerdotale, et puisque encore les signes de cette
écriture hiératique ne sont, comme on l’a reconnu par mes divers
mémoires, qu’une représentation abrégée, une véritable *tachygraphie*
des *hiérographes*, cette troisième espèce d’écriture,
*l’hiéroglyphique* pure, devait avoir aussi un certain nombre de ses
signes doués de la faculté d’exprimer les sons; en un mot, qu’il
existait également une série d’*hiéroglyphes phonétiques*. Pour
s’assurer de la vérité de cet aperçu, pour reconnaître l’existence et
discerner même la valeur de quelques-uns des signes de cette espèce, il
aurait suffi d’avoir sous les yeux, écrits en *hiéroglyphes* purs, deux
noms de rois grecs préalablement connus, et contenant plusieurs lettres
employées à la fois dans l’un et dans l’autre, tels que *Ptolémée* et
*Cléopâtre*, *Alexandre* et *Bérénice*, etc." (p. 5). Throughout this
work there

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

appears to be no mention whatever of Young's identification of *any*
letters of the hieroglyphic alphabet, although on p. 2 Champollion says:
"A l’égard de l’écriture *démotique* en particulier, il a suffi de la
précieuse inscription de Rosette pour en reconnaître l’ensemble; la
critique est redevable d’abord<span class="margnote">Champollion admits
value of Akerblad’s and Young's labours.</span> aux lumières de votre
illustre confrère, M. Silvestre de Sacy, et successivement à celles de
feu Akerblad et de M. le docteur Young, des premières notions exactes
qu’on a tirées de ce monument, et c’est de cette même inscription que
j’ai déduit la série des signes démotiques qui, prenant une valeur
syllabico-alphabétique, exprimaient dans les textes *idéographiques* les
noms propres des personnages étrangers à l’Egypte." That Champollion
should not have known of Young's article EGYPT is a thing not to be
understood, especially as advance copies were sent to Paris and
elsewhere as early as 1818.

From the facts given above we are enabled to draw up the following
statement as to the amount of work done in the decipherment of the
Egyptian language by the early workers in this field.

<span class="margnote">Statement of results of labours of Zoëga,
Akerblad, Young and Champollion.</span>Barthélemy <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) and Zoëga <span
id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md) had come to the conclusion long before the
labours of Akerblad, Young, and Champollion, that the cartouches
contained proper names. Akerblad drew up an alphabet of the demotic
character, in which fourteen signs appear to have had correct values
attributed to them. Young published a demotic alphabet in which the
greater number of Akerblad’s results were absorbed; he fixed the correct
values to six hieroglyphic characters, and to three others partly
correct values; he identified the names of Ptolemy and Alexander, the
numerals and several gods' names. Champollion published a demotic
alphabet, the greater part of which he owed, without question, to
Akerblad, and a hieroglyphic alphabet of which six characters had had
correct values assigned to them by Young, and the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

values of three others had been correctly stated as far as the
consonants were concerned. There is no doubt whatever that Champollion's
plan of work was eminently scientific, and his great knowledge of Coptic
enabled him to complete the admirable work of decipherment, which his
natural talent had induced him to undertake. The value of his
contributions to the science of Egyptology it would be difficult to
overestimate, and the amount of work which he did in his comparatively
short life is little less than marvellous. It is, however, to be
regretted that Champollion did not state more clearly what Young had
done, for a full acknowledgment of this would have in no way injured or
lessened his own immortal fame. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_67.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[128:1](trs04.htm#fr_51.md) For the list of books
read by him at this time, see the *Life of Thomas Young*, by G. Peacock,
London, 1855 pp. 14-17.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[129:1](trs04.htm#fr_52.md) *Lettre au Directeur de
la Revue Britannique au sujet des Recherches du Docteur Young*, Paris,
1857, p. II.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[129:2](trs04.htm#fr_53.md) On the subject of
Champollion's studies, at Grenoble, *see Chroniques Dauphinoises*, par
A. Champollion-Figeac, t. III. pp. 553,156,157-238.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[132:1](trs04.htm#fr_54.md) *Letter to the Rev. S.
Weston respecting some Egyptian Antiquities*. With 4 copper plates.
London, 1814.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[133:1](trs04.htm#fr_55.md) For these letters I am
indebted to the third volume of the *Miscellaneous Works of the late
Thomas Young*, MḌ., FṚṢ., &c., ed. John Leitch, London, 1855.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[133:2](trs04.htm#fr_56.md) *L’Egypte sous les
Pharaons, ou recherches sur la Géographie, la Religion, la Langue, les
Ecritures, et l’Histoire de l’Egypte*, Paris, 1814.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[138:1](trs04.htm#fr_57.md) This letter was printed
in 1816, and circulated in London, Paris, and elsewhere; it did not
appear in the *Museum Criticum* until 1821.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[138:2](trs04.htm#fr_58.md) "Que ce second système
(l’Hiératique) n’est qu’une simple modification du système
Hiéroglyphique, et n’en diffère uniquement que par la forme des signes."
Champollion, *De l’Ecriture Hiératique des Anciens Egyptiens:* Grenoble,
1821. We should have expected some reference by Champollion to Young's
discovery quoted above.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[138:3](trs04.htm#fr_59.md) Young. *An Account of
some recent discoveries in Hieroglyphical Literature*, p. 17.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[139:1](trs04.htm#fr_60.md) Ich halte mich daher
verpflichtet, alles auf unsern Gegenstand bezügliche dem Leser
nachträglich genau mitzutheilen und zwar mit einer um so grössem
Gewissenhaftigkeit, je höher durch dessen Kenntniss die Achtung gegen
den trefflichen Forscher steigen wird, der besonders in der Erklärung
der symbolischen Hieroglyphen so Manches zuerst aussprach, was man ohne
den Artikel der Encyclopaedie gelesen zu haben, meistens als das
Eigenthum Champollion's zu betrachten gewohnt ist. Schwartze, *Das Alte
Aegypten*, p. 446.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[140:1](trs04.htm#fr_61.md) Mr. Akerblad was far
from having completed his examination of the whole enchorial
inscription, apparently from the want of some collateral encouragement
or co-operation to induce him to continue so laborious an inquiry; and
he had made little or no effort to understand the first inscription of
the pillar which is professedly engraved in the sacred character, except
the detached observation respecting the numerals at the end; he was even
disposed to acquiesce in the correctness of Mr. Palin's interpretation,
which proceeds on the supposition that parts of the first lines of the
hieroglyphics are still remaining on the stone, Young, *An Account*, p.
10.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[141:1](trs04.htm#fr_62.md) "Feu Akerblad essaya
d’étendre ses lectures hors des noms propres grecs, et il échoua
complètement." Champollion, *Précis*, 1 éd., p. 14.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[141:2](trs04.htm#fr_63.md) See Schwartze, *Das
Alte Aegypten*, pp. 160, 162.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[141:3](trs04.htm#fr_64.md) No. 205, which is
omitted here, is really two demotic characters the values of which are
BA and R: to these Young gave the value BERE, and so far he was right,
but he failed to see that what he considered to be one sign was, in
reality, two. In Nos. 253 and 214 his consonants were right but his
vowels were wrong. We are thus able to see that out of a total of
fourteen signs, he assigned correct values to six, partly correct values
to three, and wholly wrong values to five. Champollion-Figeac in his
*Lettre au Directeur de la Revue Britannique au sujet des Recherches du
Docteur Young sur les Hiéroglyphes Egyptiens*, p. 5, gives Young no
credit whatever for the three partly correct values assigned to
hieroglyphic characters by him.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[143:1](trs04.htm#fr_65.md) Caylus, *Recueil
d’Antiquités Egyptiennes, Etrusques*, etc., Tom. V. p. 79.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[143:2](trs04.htm#fr_66.md) In *De Origine et Usu
Obeliscorum*, p. 465. Conspiciuntur autem passim in Aegyptiis monumentis
schemata quaedam ovata sive elliptica planae basi insidentia, quae
emphatica ratione includunt certa notarum syntagmata, sive ad propria
personarum nomina exprimenda, sive ad sacratiores formulas designandas.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[144:1](trs04.htm#fr_67.md) We have seen above that
Champollion did know of Young's work, yet in his *Précis du Système
Hiéroglyphique*, p. 18, he says that he had arrived at results similar
to those obtained by Dr. Young, without having any knowledge of his
opinion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How Champollion deciphered the Egyptian Alphabet](trs05.md)
