<span class="small">[Sacred-Texts Main Index](../../index.md)  [Northern
European Index](../index)  [Graal Index](index)  [Previous](branch06.md) 
[Next](branch08.md) </span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch VII

TITLE I.

Here the story is silent of Messire Gawain and beginneth to speak of
Lancelot, that entereth into a forest and rideth with right great ado
and meeteth a knight in the midst of the forest that was coming full
speed and was armed of all arms.

"Sir," saith Lancelot, "Whence come you?"

"Sir," saith Lancelot, "I come from the neighbourhood of King Arthur's
Court."

"Ha, Sir, can you tell me tidings of a knight that beareth a green
shield such as I bear? If so, he is my brother."

"What name hath he?" saith Lancelot.

"Sir," saith he, "His name is Gladoens, and he is a good knight and a
hardy, and he hath a white horse right strong and swift."

"Be there other knights in your country that bear such arms as your
shield and his besides you and he?"

"Certes, Sir, none."

"And wherefore do you ask?" saith Lancelot.

"For this, that a certain man hath reft him of one of his castles for
that he was not there. Howbeit, I know well that he will have it again
through his good knighthood."

"Is he so good knight?" saith Lancelot.

"Certes, Sir, yea! He is the best of the Isles of the Moors."

"Sir, of your mercy, lower your coif."

He quickly thereon lowereth his coif, and Lancelot looketh at him in the
face. "Certes, Sir Knight," saith he, "you very much resemble him."

"Ha, Sir," saith the knight, "Know you then any tidings of him?"

"Certes, Sir," saith he, "Yea! and true tidings may I well say, for he
rode at my side five leagues Welsh, nor never saw I one man so like
another as are you to him."

"Good right hath he to resemble me," saith the knight, "for we are
twins, but he was born first and hath more sense and knighthood than I;
nor in all the Isles of the Moors is there damsel that hath so much
worth and beauty as she of whom he is loved of right true love, and more
she desireth to see him than aught else that liveth, for she hath not
seen him of more than a year, wherefore hath she gone seek her prize, my
brother, by all the forests of the world. Sir," saith the knight, "Let
me go seek my brother, and tell me where I may find him."

"Certes," saith Lancelot, "I will tell you though it grieve me sore."

"Wherefore?" saith the knight, "Hath he done you any mis-deed?"

"In no wise," saith Lancelot, "Rather hath he done so much for me that I
love you thereof and offer you my service."

"Sir," saith the knight, "I am going my way, but for God's sake tell me
where I shall find my brother."

"Sir," saith Lancelot, "I will tell you. This morning did I bid his body
farewell and help to bury him."

"Ha, Sir," saith the knight, "Do you tell me true?"

"Certes," saith Lancelot, "True it is that I tell you."

"Is he slain then, my brother?" saith the knight.

"Yea, and of succouring me," saith Lancelot.

"Ha, sir," saith the knight, "For God's sake tell me nought that is not
right."

"By God, Sir," saith he, "Sore grieved am I to tell it you, for never
loved I knight so much in so brief a time as I loved him. He helped to
save me from death, and therefore will I do for you according to that he
did for me."

"Sir," saith the knight, "If he be dead, a great grief is it to myself,
for I have lost my comfort and my life and my land without recovery."

"Sir," saith Lancelot, "He helped me to save my life, and yours will I
help to save henceforth for ever and so be that I shall know of your
jeopardy."

The knight heareth that his brother is dead and well believeth Lancelot,
and beginneth to make dole thereof the greatest that was ever heard. And
Lancelot saith to him, "Sir Knight, let be this dole, for none recovery
is there; but my body do I offer you and my knighthood in any place you
please, where I may save your honour."

"Sir," saith the knight, "With good will receive I your help and your
love, sith that you deign to offer me the same, and now have I sorer
need of them than ever. Sir," saith the knight, "Sith that my brother is
dead, I will return back and bear with my wrong, though well would he
have amended it had he been on live."

"By my head," saith Lancelot, "I will go with you, that so may I reward
you of that he hath done for me. He delivered his body to the death for
me, and in like manner freely would I fain set mine own in jeopardy for
love of you and of him."

II\.

"Sir," saith the knight, "Right good will do I owe you of this that you
say to me, so your deeds be but the same herein."

"Yea, so help me God," saith Lancelot, "The same shall they be, if God
lend me the power."

With that, they go on their way together, and the knight comforteth him
much of that which Lancelot hath said to him, but of the death of his
brother was he right sorrowful. And they ride until they come to the
land of the Moors; then espy they a castle upon a rock, and below was a
broad meadow-land.

"Sir," saith the Knight of the Green Shield to Lancelot, "This castle
was my brother's and is now mine, and much it misliketh me that it hath
fallen to me on this wise. And the knight that reft it of my brother is
of so great hardihood that he feareth no knight on live, and you will
presently see him issue forth of this castle so soon as he shall
perceive you."

Lancelot and the knight ride until they draw nigh the castle. And the
knight looketh in the way before him, and seeth a squire coming on a
hackney, that was carrying before him a wild boar dead. The Knight of
the Green Shield asketh him whose man he is, and the squire maketh
answer: "I am man of the Lord of the Rock Gladoens, that cometh there
behind, and my lord cometh all armed, he and others, for the brother of
Gladoens hath defied him on behalf of his brother, but right little
recketh my lord of his defiance."

III\.

Lancelot heareth how he that is coming is the enemy of him to whom had
he been alive, his love most was due. The Knight of the Green Shield
pointed him out so soon as he saw him.

"Sir," saith he to Lancelot, "Behold him by whom I am disherited, and
yet worse would he do to me and he knew that my brother were dead."

Lancelot, without saving more, so soon as he had espied the Knight of
the Rock, smiteth his horse with his spurs and cometh toward him. The
Lord of the Rock, that was proud and hardy, seeth Lancelot coming and
smiteth with his spurs the horse whereon he sitteth. They come with so
swift an onset either upon other that they break their spears upon their
shields, and hurtle together so sore that the Knight of the Rock
Gladoens falleth over the croup of his horse. Lancelot draweth his sword
and cometh above him, and he crieth him mercy and asketh him wherefore
he wisheth to slay him? Lancelot saith for the sake of Gladoens from
whom he hath reft his land and his castle. "And what is that to you?"
saith the knight. "Behoveth his brother challenge me thereof."

"As much it behoveth me as his brother," saith Lancelot.

"Wherefore you?"

"For this," saith Lancelot, "That as much as he did for me will I do to
you."

He cutteth off his head and giveth it incontinent to the Knight of the
Green Shield.

"Now tell me," saith Lancelot, "Sith that he is dead, is he purged of
that whereof you appeached him?"

"Sir," saith the knight, "I hold him rightly quit thereof, for, sith
that he is dead, all claim on behalf of his kindred is abated by his
death."

"And I pledge you my faith loyally," saith Lancelot, "as I am a knight,
that never shall you be in peril nor in jeopardy of aught wherein I may
help you, so I be in place and free, but my help shall you have for
evermore, for that your brother staked his life to help me."

IV\.

Lancelot and the knight lay the night at the Rock Gladoens, and the
Knight of the Green Shield had his land at his pleasure, and all were
obedient to him. And the upright and loyal were right glad, albeit when
they heard the tidings of Gladoens' death they were right sorrowful
thereof. Lancelot departed from the castle on the morrow, and the knight
remained therein, sorrowful for his brother that he had lost, and glad
for the land that he had gotten again. Lancelot goeth back right amidst
the forest and rideth the day long, and meeteth a knight that was
coming, groaning sore. And he was stooping over the fore saddle-bow for
the pain that he had. He meeteth Lancelot and saith to him: "Sir, for
God's sake, turn back, for you will find there the most cruel pass in
the world there where I have been wounded through the body. Wherefore I
beseech you not go thither."

"What pass is it then?" saith Lancelot.

"Sir," saith he, "It is the pass of the Castle of Beards, and it hath
the name of this, that every knight that passeth thereby must either
leave his beard there or challenge the same, and in such sort have I
challenged my beard that meseemeth I shall die thereof."

"By my head," saith Lancelot, "I hold not this of cowardize, sith that
you were hardy to set your life in jeopardy to challenge your beard, but
now would you argue me of cowardize when you would have me turn back.
Rather would I be smitten through the body with honour, so and I had not
my death thereof, than lose with shame a single hair of my beard."

"Sir," saith the knight, "May God preserve you, for the castle is far
more cruel than you think, and God guide the knight that may destroy the
evil custom of the castle, for right shameful is the custom to strange
knights that pass thereby."

V.

Lancelot departeth from the knight and cometh toward the castle. Just as
he had passed over a great bridge, he looketh about and seeth two
knights come all armed to the entrance of the castle, and they made hold
their horses before them, and their shields and spears are before them
leaning against the wall. Lancelot looketh at the gateway of the castle
and seeth the great door all covered with beards fastened thereon, and
heads of knights in great plenty hung thereby. So, as he was about to
enter the gate, two knights issue therefrom over against him.

"Sir," saith the one, "Abide and pay your toll!"

"Do knights, then, pay toll here?" saith Lancelot.

"Yea!" say the knights, "All they that have beards, and they that have
none are quit. Sir, now pay us yours, for a right great beard it is, and
thereof have we sore need."

"For what?" saith Lancelot.

"I will tell you," saith the knight. "There be hermits in this forest
that make hair-shirts thereof."

"By my head," saith Lancelot, "Never shall they have hair-shirt of mine,
so I may help it."

"That shall they," say the knights, "Of yours as of the other, or dearly
shall you pay therefor!"

VI\.

Right wroth waxeth Sir Lancelot, and cometh to the knight, and smiteth
him with his spear amidst the breast with such a thrust that it passeth
half an ell beyond, and overthroweth him and his horse together. The
other knight seeth his fellow wounded to the death, and cometh towards
him with a great sweep and breaketh his spear upon his shield. Howbeit,
Lancelot beareth him to the ground right over his horse-croup and maketh
him fall so heavily that he breaketh one of his legs. The tidings are
come to the Lady of the Castle that a knight hath come to the pass that
hath slain one of her knights and wounded the other. The Lady is come
thither, and bringeth two of her damsels with her. She seeth Lancelot
that is fain to slay the knight that lieth wounded on the ground.

"Sir," saith the Lady to Lancelot, "Withdraw yourself back and slay him
not, but alight and speak to me in safety."

"Lady," saith one of the maidens, "I know him well. This is Lancelot of
the Lake, the most courteous knight that is in the court of King
Arthur."

He alighteth and cometh before the Lady. "Lady," saith he, "what is your
pleasure?"

"I desire," saith she, "that you come to my hostel to harbour, and that
you make me amends of the shame you have done me."

VII\.

"Lady," saith Lancelot, "Shame have I never done you nor shall do, but
the knights took in hand too shameful a business when they were minded
to take the beards of stranger knights by force."

"Sir," saith she, "I will forego mine ill-will on condition that you
harbour herewithin to-night."

"Lady," saith Lancelot, "I desire not your ill-will, wherefore will I
gladly do your pleasure."

He setteth him within the castle and maketh his horse be led in after
him, and the Lady hath the dead knight brought into the chapel and
buried. The other she biddeth be disarmed and clothed and commandeth
that his wounds be searched. Then maketh she Lancelot be disarmed and
clad right richly in a good robe, and telleth him that she knoweth well
who he is.

"Lady," saith Lancelot, "It is well for me."

Thereupon they sit to eat, and the first course is brought in by knights
in chains that had their noses cut off; the second by knights in chains
that had their eyes put out; wherefore they were led in by squires. The
third course was brought in by knights that had but one hand and were in
chains. After that, came other knights that had each but one foot and
brought in the fourth course. At the fifth course came knights right
fair and tall, and each brought a naked sword in his hand and presented
their heads to the Lady.

VIII\.

Lancelot beheld the martyrdom of these knights, and sore misliking had
he of the services of such folk. They are risen from meat and the lady
goeth to her chamber and sitteth on a couch.

"Lancelot," saith the Lady, "you have seen the justice and the lordship
of my castle. All these knights have been conquered at the passing of my
door."

"Lady," saith Lancelot, "foul mischance hath befallen them."

"The like mischance would have befallen you had you not been knight so
good. And greatly have I desired to see you this long time past. And I
will make you lord of this castle and myself."

"Lady," saith he, "the lordship of this castle hold I of yourself
without mesne, and to you have I neither wish nor right to refuse it.
Rather am I willing to be at your service."

"Then," saith she, "you will abide with me in this castle, for more do I
love you than any other knight that liveth."

"Lady," saith Lancelot, "Gramercy, but in no castle may I abide more
than one night until I have been thither whither behoveth me to go."

"Whither are you bound?" saith she.

"Lady, saith he, "to the Castle of Souls."

"Well know I the castle," saith she. "The King hath the name Fisherman,
and lieth in languishment on account of two knights that have been at
his castle and made not good demand. Would you fain go thither?" saith
the Lady.

"Yea," saith Lancelot.

"Then pledge me your faith that you will return by me to speak to me, so
the Graal shall appear to you and you ask whereof it serveth."

"Yea, truly, saith Lancelot, "were you beyond sea!"

"Sir," saith one of the damsels, "So much may you well promise, for the
Graal appeareth not to no knight so wanton as be ye. For you love the
Queen Guenievre, the wife of your lord, King Arthur, nor so long as this
love lieth at your heart may you never behold the Graal."

IX\.

Lancelot heard the damsel and blushed of despite.

"Ha, Lancelot," saith the Lady, "Love you other than me?"

"Lady," saith he, "the damsel may say her pleasure."

Lancelot lay the night at the castle, and right wroth was he of the
damsel that calleth the love of him and the Queen disloyal. And the
morrow when he had heard mass, he took leave of the Lady of the Castle,
and she besought him over and over to keep his covenant, and he said
that so would he do without fail. Therewithal he issueth forth of the
castle and entereth into a tall and ancient forest, and rideth the day
long until he cometh to the outskirt of the forest, and seeth a tall
cross at the entrance of a burying-ground enclosed all round about with
a hedge of thorns. And the way lay through the burying ground. Lancelot
entered therein and the night was come. He seeth the graveyard full of
tombs and sepulchres. He looketh behind and seeth a chapel wherein were
candles burning. Thitherward goeth he, and passeth beyond without saying
aught more by the side of a dwarf that was digging a grave in the
ground.

"Lancelot," saith the dwarf, "you are right not to salute me, for you
are the man of all the world that most I hate; and God grant me
vengeance of your body. So will He what time you are stricken down here
within!"

Lancelot heard the dwarf, but deigned not to answer him of nought. He is
come to the chapel, and alighteth and maketh fast the bridle of his
horse to a tree, and leaneth his shield and spear without. After that he
entereth into the chapel, and findeth a damsel laying out a knight in
his winding-sheen. As soon as Lancelot was entered therewithin the
wounds of the knight were swollen up and began to bleed afresh.

"Ha, Sir Knight, now see I plainly that you slew him that I am wrapping
in his windingsheet!"

X.

Thereupon, behold you, two knights that are carrying other two knights
dead. They alight and then set them in the chapel. And the dwarf crieth
out to them: "Now shall it be seen how you avenge your friends of the
enemy that fell upon you!"

The knight that had fled from the forest when Messire Gawain came
thither where the three lay dead, was come therewithin and knew
Lancelot, whereupon saith he: "Our mortal enemy are you, for by you were
these three knights slain."

"Well had they deserved it," saith Lancelot, "and in this chapel am I in
no peril of you, wherefore as at this time will I depart not hence, for
I know not the ways of the forest."

He was in the chapel until the day broke, when he issued forth thereof,
and sore it weighed upon him that his horse was still fasting. He taketh
his arms and is mounted. The dwarf crieth out aloud: "What aileth you?"
saith he to the two knights, "Will you let your mortal enemy go thus?"

With that the two knights mount their horses and go to the two issues of
the grave-yard, thinking that Lancelot is fain to flee therefrom; but no
desire hath he thereof, wherefore he cometh to the knight that was
guarding the entrance whereby he had to issue out, and smiteth him so
stiffly that he thrusteth the point of his spear right through his body.
The other knight that was guarding the other entrance, that had fled out
of the forest before, had no mind to avenge his fellow, and fled
incontinent so fast as he might. And Lancelot taketh the horse of the
knight he had slain and driveth him before him, for he thinketh that
some knight may haply have need thereof. He rideth on until he cometh to
a hermitage in the forest where he alighteth and hath his horses
stabled, and the Hermit giveth them of the best he hath. And Lancelot
heard mass, and afterward are a little and fell on sleep. Thereafter,
behold you, a knight that cometh to the Hermit and seeth Lancelot that
was about to mount.

"Sir," saith he, "Whither go you?"

"Sir Knight," saith Lancelot, "thither shall I go where God may please;
but you, whitherward are you bound to go?"

"Sir, I go to see one of my brethren and my two sisters, for I have been
told that he hath fallen on such mishap as that he is called the Poor
Knight, whereof am I sore sorrowful."

"Certes," saith Lancelot, "poor he is, the more the pity! Howbeit, will
you do him a message from me?"

"Sir," saith the knight, "Right willingly!"

"Will you present him with this horse on my behalf, and tell him how
Lancelot that harboured with him hath sent it?"

"Sir," saith the knight, "Right great thanks, and blessed may you be,
for he that doth a kindness to a worshipful man loseth it not."

"Salute the two damsels for me," saith Lancelot.

"Sir, right willingly!"

The knight delivereth the horse to his squire, and taketh leave of
Lancelot.

XI\.

Thereupon, Lancelot departeth from the hermitage and rideth on until he
cometh forth of the forest, and findeth a waste land, a country broad
and long wherein wonned neither beast nor bird, for the land was so poor
and parched that no victual was to be found therein. Lancelot looketh
before him and seeth a city appear far away. Thither rideth he full
speed and seeth that the city is so great that it seemeth him to
encompass a whole country. He seeth the walls that are falling all
around, and the gates ruined with age. He entereth within and findeth
the city all void of folk, and seeth the great palaces fallen down and
waste, and the great grave-yards full of sepulchres, and the tall
churches all lying waste, and the markets and exchanges all empty. He
rideth amidst the streets, and findeth a great palace that seemeth him
to be better and more ancient than all the others. He bideth awhile
before it and heareth within how knights and ladies are making great
dole. And they say to a knight: "Ha, God, sore grief and pity is this of
you, that you must needs die in such manner, and that your death may not
be respited! Sore hatred ought we to bear toward him that hath adjudged
you such a death."

The knights and ladies swoon over him as he departeth. Lancelot hath
heard all this and much marvelleth he thereof, but nought thereof may he
see.

XII\.

Thereupon, lo you, the knight that cometh down into the midst of the
hall, clad in a short red jerkin; and he was girt with a rich girdle of
gold, and had a rich clasp at his neck wherein were many rich stones,
and on his head had he a great cap of gold, and he held great axe. The
knight was of great comeliness and young of age. Lancelot seeth him
coming, and looketh upon him right fainly when he seeth him appear. And
the knight saith to him, "Sir, alight!"

"Certes," saith Lancelot, "Willingly."

He alighteth and maketh his horse fast to a ring of silver that was on
the mounting-stage, and putteth his shield from his neck and his spear
from his hand.

"Sir," saith he to the knight, "What is your pleasure?"

"Sir, needs must you cut me off my head with this axe, for of this
weapon hath my death been adjudged, but and you will not, I will cut off
your own therewith."

"Hold, Sir," saith Lancelot, "What is this you tell me?"

"Sir," saith the knight, "you must needs do even as I say, sith that you
are come into this city."

"Sir," saith Lancelot, "Right foolish were he that in such a jeopardy
should not do the best for himself, but blamed shall I be thereof and I
shall slay you when you have done me no wrong."

"Certes," saith the Knight, "In no otherwise may you go hence."

"Fair Sir," saith Lancelot, "So gentle are you and so well nurtured, how
cometh it that you take your death so graciously? You know well that I
shall kill you before you shall kill me, sith that so it is."

"This know I well for true," saith the Knight, "But you will promise me
before I die, that you will return into this city within a year from
this, and that you will set your head in the same jeopardy without
challenge, as I have set mine."

"By my head," saith Lancelot, "Needeth no argument that I shall choose
respite of death to dying here on the spot. But I marvel me of this that
you are so fairly apparelled to receive your death."

XIII\.

"Sir," saith the Knight, "He that would go before the Saviour of the
World ought of right to apparel him as fairly as he may. I am by
confession purged of all wickedness and of all the misdeeds that ever I
have committed, and do repent me truly thereof, wherefore at this moment
am I fain to die."

Therewithal he holdeth forth the axe, and Lancelot taketh it and seeth
that it is right keen and well whetted.

"Sir," saith the Knight, "Hold up your hand toward the minster that you
see yonder."

"Sir," saith Lancelot, "Willingly."

"Thus, then, will you swear to me upon the holy relics that are within
this minster, that on this day year at the hour that you shall have
slain me, or before, you yourself will come back here and place your
head in the very same peril as I shall have placed mine, without
default?"

"Thus," saith Lancelot, "do I swear and give you thereto my pledge."

With that, the Knight kneeleth and stretcheth his neck as much as he
may, and Lancelot taketh the axe in his hands, and then saith to him,
"Sir Knight, for God's sake, have mercy on yourself!"

"Let cut off my head!" saith the Knight, "For otherwise may I not have
mercy upon you!"

"In God's name," saith Lancelot, "fain would I deny you!"

With that, he swingeth the axe and cutteth off the head with such a
sweep that he maketh it fly seven foot high from the body. The Knight
fell to the ground when his head was cut off, and Lancelot flung down
the axe, and thinketh that he will make but an ill stay there for
himself. He cometh to his horse, and taketh his arms and mounteth and
looketh behind him, but seeth neither the body of the Knight nor the
head, neither knoweth he what hath become of them all, save only that he
heard much dole and a great cry far off in the city of knights and
ladies, saying that he shall be avenged, please God, at the term set, or
before. Lancelot hath heard and understood all that the knights say and
the ladies, and issueth forth of the city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small">[Next: The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch
VIII](branch08.md)  
</span>
