<span class="small">[Sacred-Texts Main Index](../../index.md)  [Northern
European Index](../index)  [Graal Index](index)  [Previous](branch24.md) 
[Next](branch26.md) </span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch XXV

TITLE I.

Here the story is silent of Lancelot and the knights that are at
Cardoil, and saith that King Arthur and Messire Gawain are in the castle
where the priest told Messire Gawain how he was born. But they cannot
depart thence at their will, for Ahuret the Bastard that was brother of
Nabigant of the Rock, that Messire Gawain slew on account of Meliot of
Logres, knoweth well that they are therewithin, and hath assembled his
knights and holdeth them within so strait that they may not depart
without sore damage. For he hath on the outer side a full great plenty
of knights, and the King and Messire Gawain have with them but only five
of the forest and the country that are upon their side, and they hold
them so strait within that they may not issue out from thence; yea, the
brother of Nabigant sweareth that they shall not depart thence until
such time as he shall have taken Messire Gawain, and taken vengeance on
his fellow of his brother whom he slew. The King saith to Messire Gawain
that he hath much shame of this that they are so long shut up
therewithin, and that he better loveth to die with honour than to live
with shame within the castle. So they issued forth, spears in rest, and
Ahuret and his knights, whereof was there great plenty, made much joy
thereat.

II\.

The King and Messire Gawain strike among them, and each overthroweth his
man; but Ahuret hath great shame of this that he seeth his knights put
to the worse by so few folk. He setteth his spear in rest and smiteth
one of King Arthur's knights through the body and beareth him down dead.
Then returneth he to Messire Gawain, and buffeteth him so strongly that
he pierceth his shield, but he maketh drop his own spear and loseth his
stirrups, and Messire Gawain waxeth wroth and smiteth him so grimly and
with such force that he maketh him bend back over the hinder bow of his
saddle. But Ahuret was strong and of great might, and leapeth back
between the bows and cometh toward King Arthur that he saw before him,
but he knew him not. He left Messire Gawain, and the King smiteth him
with such a sweep that he cutteth off his arm, spear and all. There was
great force of knights, so that they ran upon them on all sides; and
never would they have departed thence sound and whole, but that
thereupon Meliot of Logres cometh thither with fifteen knights, for that
he had heard tidings of Messire Gawain, how he was besieged in a castle
there, where he and King Arthur between them were in such plight that
they had lost their five knights, so that they were not but only two
that defended themselves as best they might, as they that had no thought
but to remain there, for the odds of two knights against thirty was too
great.

III\.

Thereupon, behold you, Meliot of Logres with fifteen knights, and they
come thither where the King and Messire Gawain are in such jeopardy, and
they strike so stoutly among them that they rescue King Arthur and
Messire Gawain from them that had taken them by the bridle, and so slay
full as many as ten of them, and put the others to flight, and lead away
their lord sore maimed. And Messire Gawain giveth Meliot much thanks of
the bounty he hath done, whereby he hath saved them their lives; and he
giveth him the castle, and is fain that he hold it of him, for in no
place might he have better employment, and that well hath he deserved it
of his service in such need. Meliot thanketh him much, and prayeth
Messire Gawain instantly that and he shall have need of succour he will
come to aid him, in like manner as he would do by him everywhere. And
Messire Gawain telleth him that as of this needeth him not to make
prayer, for that he is one of the knights of the world that most he
ought of right to love. The King and Messire Gawain take leave of
Meliot, and so depart, and Meliot garnisheth the castle that was right
fair and rich and well- seated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small">[Next: The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch
XXVI](branch26.md)  
</span>
