<span class="small">[Sacred-Texts Main Index](../../index)  [Northern
European Index](../index)  [Graal Index](index)  [Previous](branch02) 
[Next](branch04) </span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch III

INCIPIT.

Here beginneth another branch of the Graal in the name of the Father,
and in the name of the Son, and in the name of the Holy Ghost.

TITLE I

Here is the story silent of the three damsels and the Car and saith that
Messire Gawain hath passed throughout the evil forest and is entered
into the forest passing fair, the broad, the high, the plenteous of
venison. And he rideth a great pace, but sore abashed is he of that the
damsel had said to him, and misdoubteth him but he shall have blame
thereof in many places. He rode hard the day long till that it was
evensong and the sun was about to set. And he looketh before him and
seeth the house of a hermit and the chapel in the thick of the forest;
and a spring flowed forth in front of the chapel right clear and fresh,
and above it was a tree full broad and tall that threw a shadow over the
spring. A damsel sate under the tree and held a mule by the reins and at
the saddle-bow had she the head of a knight hanging. And Messire Gawain
cometh thitherward and alighteth.

"Damsel," saith he, "God give you good adventure!"

"Sir," saith she, "And you always."

When she was risen up over against him, "Damsel," saith he, "For whom
are you a-waiting here?"

"Sir," saith she, "I am waiting for the hermit of this holy chapel, that
is gone into the forest, and I would fain ask him tidings of a knight."

"Think you he will tell you them and he knoweth any?"

"Yea, sir, I think so, according to that I have been told."

Therewithal behold you the hermit that was coming, and saluteth the
damsel and Messire Gawain and openeth the door of the house and setteth
the two steeds within and striketh off the bridles and giveth them
green-meat first and barley after, and fain would he have taken off the
saddles when Messire Gawain leapeth before: "Sir," saith he, "Do not so!
This business is not for you!"

"Hermit though I be," saith he, "yet well know I how to deal withal, for
at the court of King Uther Pendragon have I been squire and knight
two-score years, and a score or mort have I been in this hermitage."

And Messire Gawain looketh at him in wonderment. "Sir," saith he,
"Meseemeth you are not of more than forty years."

"That know I well of a truth," saith the hermit, and Messire Gawain
taketh off the saddles and bethinketh him more of the damsel's mule than
of his own horse. And the hermit taketh Messire Gawain by the hand and
the damsel and leadeth them into the chapel. And the place was right
fair.

"Sir," saith the hermit to Messire Gawain, "You will disarm you not,"
saith he, "for this forest is passing adventurous, and no worshipful man
behoveth be disgarnished."

He goeth for his spear and for his shield and setteth them within the
chapel. He setteth before them such meat as he hath, and when they have
eaten giveth them to drink of the spring.

"Sir," saith the damsel, "Of a knight that I go seek am I come to ask
you tidings."

"Who is the knight?" saith the hermit.

"Sir, he is the Chaste Knight of most holy lineage. He hath a heart of
gold, the look of a lion, the navel of a virgin maid, a heart of steel,
the body of an elephant, and without wickedness are all his conditions."

"Damsel," saith the hermit, "Nought will I tell you concerning him, for
I know not of a certainty where he is, save this, that he hath lain in
this chapel twice, not once only, within this twelvemonth."

"Sir," saith she, "Will you tell me no more of him, nor none other
witting?"

"In no wise," saith the hermit.

"And you, Messire Gawain?" saith she.

"Damsel," saith he, "As fainly would I see him as you, but none find I
that may tell me tidings of him."

"And the damsel of the Car, Sir, have you seen her?"

"Yea, lady," saith he, "It is but just now sithence that I left her."

"Carried she still her arm slung at her neck?"

"Yea," saith Messire Gawain, "in such wise she carried it."

"Of a long while," saith the damsel, "hath she borne it thus."

"Sir," saith the hermit, "how are you named?"

"Sir," saith he, "Gawain am I called, King Arthur's nephew."

"Thereof I love you the better," saith the hermit.

"Sir," saith the damsel, "You are of kindred to the worst King that is."

"Of what King speak you?" saith Messire Gawain.

"I speak," saith she, "of King Arthur, through whom is all the world
made worser, for he began doing well and now hath become evil. For
hatred of him hate I a knight that found me nigh S. Augustine's Chapel,
and yet was he the comeliest knight that saw I ever. He slew a knight
within the bar right hardily. I asked him for the head of the knight and
he went back for the same and set himself in sore peril. He brought it
me, and I made him great joy, but when he told me his name was Arthur I
had no fainness of the bounty he had done me, for that he had the name
of that evil King."

II\.

"Damsel," saith Messire Gawain, "You may say your pleasure. I tell you
that King Arthur hath held the richest court that he hath held ever, and
these evil conditions whereof you blame him is he minded to put away for
evermore, and more will he do of good and more of largesse than was ever
known aforetime so long as he shall live; nor know I none other knight
that beareth his name."

"You are right," saith the damsel, "to come to his rescue, for that he
is your uncle, but your rescue will scarce avail him and he deliver not
himself."

"Sir," saith the hermit to Messire Gawain, "The damsel will say her
pleasure. May God defend King Arthur, for his father made me knight. Now
am I priest, and in this hermitage ever sithence that I came hither have
I served King Fisherman by the will of Our Lord and His commandment, and
all they that serve him do well partake of his reward, for the place of
his most holy service is a refuge so sweet that unto him that hath been
there a year, it seemeth to have been but a month for the holiness of
the place and of himself, and for the sweetness of his castle wherein
have I oftentimes done service in the chapel where the Holy Graal
appeareth. Therefore is it that I and all that serve him are so youthful
of seeming."

"Sir," saith Messire Gawain, "By what way may a man go to his castle?"

"Sir," saith the hermit, "None may teach you the way, save the will of
God lead you therein. And would you fain go thither?"

"Sir," saith Messire Gawain, "It is the most wish that I have."

"Sir," saith the hermit, "Now God give you grace and courage to ask the
question that the others to whom the Graal hath appeared would ask not,
whereof have many mischances sithence befallen much people."

III\.

With that, they left of talking, and the hermit led Messire Gawain into
his house to rest, and the damsel abode still in the chapel. On the
morrow when dawn appeared, Messire Gawain that had lain all armed, arose
and found his saddle ready and the damsel, and the bridles set on, and
cometh to the chapel and findeth the hermit that was apparelled to sing
mass, and seeth the damsel kneeling before an image of Our Lady, and she
prayed God and the sweet Lady that they would counsel her that whereof
she had need, and wept right tenderly so that the tears ran down her
face. And when she had prayed of a long space she ariseth, and Messire
Gawain biddeth her God give her good day, and she returneth his salute.

"Damsel," saith he, "Meseemeth you are not over joyous."

"Sir," saith she, "I have right, for now am I nigh unto my desolation,
sith that I may not find the Good Knight. Now must I needs go to the
castle of the Black Hermit, and bear thither the head that hangeth at my
saddle-bow, for otherwise shall I not be able to pass through the forest
but my body should there be cast in prison or shamed, and this shall be
the quittance for my passing. Then will I seek the Damsel of the Car and
so shall I go in safer through the forest."

With that the hermit had begun the mass and Messire Gawain and the
damsel heard it. When mass was sung, Messire Gawain took leave of the
hermit and the damsel also. And Messire Gawain goeth one way and the
damsel the other, and either biddeth other to God.

IV\.

Hereupon the story is now silent of the damsel, and saith that Messire
Gawain goeth through the high forest and rideth a great pace, and
prayeth God right sweetly that He will set him in such way as that
thereby he may go to the land of the rich King Fisherman. And he rideth
until the hour of noon, and cometh into the fulness of the forest and
seeth under a tree a squire alighted of a horse of the chase. Messire
Gawain saluteth him, and the squire saith: "Sir, right welcome may you
be!"

"Fair sweet friend," saith Messire Gawain, "Whither go you?"

"Sir, I go to seek the lord of this forest."

"Whose is the forest?" saith Messire Gawain. "Sir, it belongeth to the
best knight in the world."

"Can you tell me tidings of him?"

"He ought to bear a shield banded azure and argent with a red cross
thereon and a boss of gold. I say that he is good knight, but little
call have I to praise him, for he slew my father in this forest with a
javelin. The Good Knight was squire what time he slew him, and fain
would I avenge my father upon him and I may find him, for he reft me of
the best knight that was in the realm of Logres when he slew my father.
Well did he bereave me of him what time he slew him with his javelin
without defiance, nor shall I never be at ease nor at rest until I shall
have avenged him."

"Fair sweet friend," saith Messire Gawain, "Sith that he is knight so
good take heed you increase not your wrong of your own act, and I would
fain that you had found him, so as that no evil had befallen him
thereof."

V.

"So would not I," saith the squire, "for never shall I see him in this
place but I shall run upon him as my mortal enemy!"

"Fair sweet friend," saith Messire Gawain, "you may say your pleasure,
but tell me is there no hold in this forest wherein I ú may harbour me
the night?"

"Sir," saith the squire, "No hold know I within twenty league of your
way in any quarter. Wherefore no leisure have you to tarry, for it is
high noon already."

So Messire Gawain saluteth the squire and goeth a great pace as he that
knoweth neither highway nor byway save only as adventure may lead him.
And the forest pleaseth him well for that it is so fair and that he
seeth the deer pass by before him in great herds. He rode on until it
drew toward evensong at a corner of the forest. The evening was fair and
calm and the sun was about to set. And a score league Welsh had he
ridden sithence that he parted from the squire, and sore he misdoubted
him that he should find no hold. He found the fairest meadow-land in the
world, and looked before him when he had ridden a couple of bow-shot
lengths and saw a castle appear nigh the forest on a mountain. And it
was enclosed of high walls with battlements, and within were fair halls
whereof the windows showed in the outer walls, and in the midst was an
ancient tower that was compassed round of great waters and broad
meadow-lands. Thitherward Messire Gawain draweth him and looketh toward
the gateway of the castle and seeth a squire issue forth a great pace
upon a hackney, and he came the way that Messire Gawain was coming. And
when the squire seeth him, and hath drawn somewhat anigh, he saluteth
him right nobly.

VI\.

"Sir, right welcome may you be!"

"Good adventure may you have!" saith Messire Gawain. "Fair sweet friend,
what is this castle here, sir?"

"Sir, it is the castle of the Widow Lady."

"What is the name thereof;"

"Camelot; and it belonged to Alain li Gros, that was a right loyal
knight and worshipful man. He is dead this long time, and my Lady hath
remained without succour and without counsel. Wherefore is the castle
warred upon of them that would fain reave her thereof by force. The Lord
of the Moors and another knight are they that war upon her and would
fain reave her of this castle as they have reft he of seven other
already. Greatly desireth she the return of her son, for no counsel hath
she save only of her one daughter and of five old knights that help her
to guard the castle. Sir," saith he, "The door is made fast and the
bridge drawn up, for they guard the castle closely, but, so please you,
you will tell me your name and I will go before and make the bridge be
1owered and the gate unfastened, and will say that you will lodge within
to-night."

"Gramercy," saith Messire Gawain, "right well shall my name be known or
ever I depart from the castle."

The squire goeth his way a great pace, and Messire Gawain tided softly
at a walk for he had yet a long way to go. And he found a chapel that
stood between the forest and the castle, and it was builded upon four
columns of marble and within was a right fair sepulchre. The chapel had
no fence of any kind about it so that he seeth the coffin within full
clearly, and Messire Gawain bideth awhile to look thereon. And the
squire entered into the castle and hath made the bridge be lowered and
the door opened. He alighteth and is come into the hall when was the
Widow Lady and her daughter. Saith the Lady to the squire: "Wherefore
have you returned from doing my message? Lady, for the comeliest knight
that I have seen ever, and fain would he harbour within to-night, and he
is garnished of all arms and rideth without company."

"And what name hath he?" saith the Lady.

"Lady, he told me you should know it well or ever he depart from this
castle."

Therewithal the Lady gan weep for joy and her daughter also, and,
lifting her hands towards heaven, "Fair Lord God!" saith the Widow Lady,
"And this be indeed my son, never before have I had joy that might be
likened to this! Now shall I not be disherited of mine honour, neither
shall I lose my castle whereof they would fain reave me by wrong, for
that no Lord nor champion have I!"

VII\.

Thereupon the Widow Lady ariseth up and her daughter likewise, and they
go over the bridge of the castle and see Messire Gawain that was yet
looking on the coffin within the chapel.

"Now haste!" saith the Lady; "At the tomb shall we be well able to see
whether it be he!"

They go to the chapel right speedily, and Messire Gawain seeth them
coming and alighteth. "Lady, saith he, "Welcome may you be, you and your
company."

The Lady answereth never a word until that they are come to the tomb.
When she findeth it not open she falleth down in a swoon. And Messire
Gawain is sore afraid when he seeth it. The Lady cometh back out of her
swoon and breaketh out into great lamentation.

"Sir," saith the damsel to Messire Gawain, "Welcome may you be! But now
sithence my mother supposed that you had been her son and made great joy
thereof, and now seeth she plainly that you are not he, whereof is she
sore sorrowful, for so soon as he shall return, this coffin behoveth
open, nor until that hour shall none know who it is that lieth therein."

The Lady riseth up and taketh Messire Gawain by the hand. "Sir," saith
she, "What is your name?"

"Lady," saith he, "I am called Gawain, King Arthur's nephew."

"Sir," saith she, "You shall be he that is welcome both for the sake of
my son and for your own sake."

The Lady biddeth a squire lead his horse into the castle and carry his
shield and spear. Then they enter into the castle and lead Messire
Gawain into the hall, and make disarm him. After that, they fetch him
water to wash his hands and his face, for he was distained of the rust
of his habergeon. The Lady maketh apparel him in a rich robe of silk and
gold, and furred of ermine. The Widow Lady cometh forth of her chamber
and maketh Messire Gawain sit beside her. "Sir," saith she, "Can you
tell me any tidings of my son that I have not seen of this long time
past, and of whom at this present am I sore in need?"

VIII\.

"Lady," saith he, "No tidings of him know I to tell you, and right heavy
am I thereof, for he is the knight of the world that fainest I would see
and he be your son as I am told. What name hath he?"

"Sir," saith she, "His name in right baptism is Perceval, and a right
comely squire was he when he departed hence. Now as at this time is it
said that he is the comeliest knight on live and the most hardy and the
cleanest of all wickedness. And sore need have I of his hardiment, for
what time that he departed hence he left me in the midst of a great
warfare on behalf of the Knight of the Red Shield that he slew. Within
the se'nnight thereafter he went away, nor never once have I seen him
sithence, albeit a full seven year hath passed already. And now the
brother of the knight that he slew and the Lord of the Moors are warring
upon me and are fain to reave me of my castle and God counsel me not.
For my brothers are too far away from me, and King Pelles of the Lower
Folk hath renounced his land for God's sake and entered into a
hermitage. But the King of Castle Mortal hath in him as much of
wickedness and felony as these twain have in them of good, and enough
thereof have they. But neither succour nor help may they give me, for
the King of Castle Mortal challengeth my Lord King Fisherman both of the
most Holy Graal and of the Lance whereof the point bleedeth every day,
albeit God forbid he should ever have them."

IX\.

"Lady," saith Messire Gawain, "There was at the hostel of King Fisherman
a knight before whom the Holy Graal appeared three times, yet never once
would he ask whereof it served nor whom it honoured."

"Sir," saith the Widow Lady's daughter, "You say true, and the Best
Knight is he of the world. This say I for love of my brother, and I love
all knights for the love of him, but by the foolish wit of the knight
hath mine uncle King Fisherman fallen into languishment."

"Sir," saith the Lady, "Behoveth all good knights go see the rich King
Fisherman. Will you not therefore go?"

"Lady," saith Messire Gawain, "Yea, that will I, so speedily as I may,
for not elsewhither have I emprised my way."

"Sir," saith she, "Then are you going to see my son, wherefore tell my
son, and you see him, of mine evil plight and my misease, and King
Fisherman my brother. But take heed, Messire Gawain, that you be better
mindful than was the knight."

"Lady," saith Messire Gawain, "I shall do as God shall teach me."

In the meanwhile as they were speaking thus together, behold you
therewithal the Widow Lady's five knights that were come in from the
forest and make bring harts and hinds and wild swine. So they alighted
and made great joy of Messire Gawain when they knew who he was.

X.

When the meat was ready they sate to eat, and full plenteously were they
provided and right well were they served. Thereupon, behold, cometh the
squire that had opened the door for Messire Gawain, and kneeleth before
the Widow Lady.

"And what tidings?" saith she.

"Lady, there is to be a right great assembly of tourney in the valleys
that aforetime were ours. Already have they spread the Welsh booths, and
thither are come these two that are warring upon you and great store
other knights. And they have ordained that he which shall do best at the
assembly shall undertake the garrison of this castle in such sort as
that he shall hold it for his own alone against all other."

The Widow Lady beginneth to weep: "Sir," saith she to Messire Gawain,
"Now may you understand that the castle is not mine own, sith that these
knights say it is theirs as you hear."

"Certes, Lady," saith he, "Herein do they great dishonour and a sin."

XI\.

When the table was removed the damsel fell at Messire Gawain's feet,
weeping. He raiseth her forthwith and saith to her, "Damsel, herein do
you ill."

"For God's sake, Sir, take pity on my Lady mother and me!"

"Certes, damsel, great pity have I of you."

"Sir, now shall it be seen in this strait whether you be good knight,
for good is the knighthood that doeth well for God's sake."

The Widow Lady and her daughter go into the chamber, and Messire
Gawain's bed was made in the midst of the hall. So he went and lay down
as did also the five knights. All the night was Messire Gawain in much
thought. The morrow, when he was risen, he went to hear mass in a chapel
that was within and ate thereafter three sops in wine and then armed
him, and at the same time asked the five knights that were there in the
hall whether they would go see the assembly.

"Yea, Sir," say they, "and you be going thither."

"In faith, thither verily will I go!" saith Messire Gawain.

The knights are armed forthwith, and their horses brought and Messire
Gawain's, and he goeth to take leave of the Widow Lady and her daughter.
But great joy make they of this that they have heard say that he will go
with their knights to the assembly.

XII\.

Messire Gawain and the five knights mounted and issued forth of the
castle and rode a great gallop before a forest. Messire Gawain looketh
before him about the foreclose of the forest, and seeth the fairest
purlieus that he had seen ever, and so broad they be that he may not see
nor know the fourth part thereof. They are garnished of tall forests on
one hand and on the other, and there are high rocks in the midst with
wild deer among.

"Sir," say the knights, "Lo, these be the Valleys of Camelot whereof my
Lady and her daughter have been bereft, and bereft also hath she been of
the richest castles that be in Wales to the number of seven."

"A wrong is it and a sin!" saith Messire Gawain.

So far have they ridden that they see the ensigns and the shields there
where the assembly is to be held, and they see already mounted the more
part of the knights all armed and running their horses down the
meadow-land. And they see the tents stretched on the one hand and on
another. And Messire Gawain bideth, and the five knights under a tree,
and see the knights assembling on one hand and on another. One of the
five knights that were with him gave him witting of the Lord of the
Moors and the brother of the knight of the Red Shield that had to name
Chaos the Red. So soon as the tournament was assembled, Messire Gawain
and the knights come to the assembly, and Messire Gawain goeth to a
Welsh knight and beareth him to the ground, both him and his horse, all
in a heap. And the five come after at a great gallop and each
overthroweth his own, and greatly pride they themselves of Messire
Gawain. Chaos the Red seeth Messire Gawain but knoweth him not. He goeth
toward him a full career, and Messire Gawain receiveth him on the point
of his spear and hurtleth against him so sore that he all to-brast his
collarbone and maketh the spear fly from his fist. And Messire Gawain
searcheth the fellowships of one part and the other, and findeth not nor
encountereth no knight before him in his way but he putteth him off his
horse or woundeth him, either by himself or by one of the five knights,
that make right great joy of that they see him do. They show him the
Lord of the Moors that was coming with a full great fellowship of folk.
He goeth thitherward a great gallop. They mell together either upon
other of their spears that they bent and all to-brast in flinders, and
hurtle together so stoutly both of their horses and their bodies that
the Lord of the Moors loseth his stirrups and hath the hinder saddlebow
to-frushed, and falleth down to the ground over his horse croup in such
sort that the peak of his helm dinteth a full palm's breadth into the
turf. And Messire Gawain taketh the horse that was right rich and good,
maugre all of his fellowship, and giveth it to one of the five knights
that maketh it be led to Camelot of a squire. Messire Gawain searcheth
the ranks on the one hand and on the other, and doeth such feats of arms
as never no knight might do the same again. The five knights also showed
great hardiment, and did more of arms that day than ever had they done
tofore, for not one of them but had overthrown at least a single knight
and won his horse. The Lord of the Moors was mounted again on another
rich horse and had great shame for that Messire Gawain had overthrown
him. He espieth Messire Gawain and goeth toward him a great gallop and
thinketh to avenge his shame. They come together either on other with a
great shock, and Messire Gawain smiteth him with the truncheon of his
spear that he had still left, in the midst of his breast, so that it was
all to-splintered. The Lord of the Moors likewise again to-brast his
spear upon him. Messire Gawain draweth his sword and flingeth the
truncheon to the ground. The Lord of the Moors doth likewise and
commandeth his folk not to mell betwixt them twain, for never yet had he
found no knight that he had not conquered. They deal them great buffets
on the helms, either upon other, in such sort that the sparks fly
thereout and their swords are blunted. The buffets of Messire Gawain are
heavier than the other's, for he dealeth them so mighty and horrible
that the blood rayeth out from the Lord of the Moors by the mouth and
the nose so that his habergeon is all bloody thereof and he may no more
endure. Thereupon he yieldeth him prisoner to Messire Gawain, that is
right glad thereof and his live knights likewise. The Lord of the Moors
goeth to his tent to alight, and Messire Gawain with him and alighteth.
And Messire Gawain taketh the horse and saith to one of the knights,
"Keep this for me."

And all the knights are repaired to their tents, and with one accord say
they all that the knight of the Red Shield with the eagle of gold
thereon hath done better than we, and they ask the Lord of the Moors
whether he accordeth with them, and he saith "Aye."

" Sir," saith he to Messire Gawain, "You, then, are the warden of this
castle of Camelot."

"Gramercy, lord!" saith Messire Gawain. He calleth the five knights and
saith unto them: "Lords, my will is that you be there on my behalf and
that you shall safeguard the same by consent of the knights that are
here present."

"Sir, right gladly do we agree thereto."

"Sir," saith Messire Gawain to the Lord of the Moors, "I give you
moreover as my prisoner to the Widow Lady that harboured me last night."

"Sir," saith he, "This have you no right to do. Assembly of tourney is
not war. Hence have you no right to imprison my body in castle, for well
am I able to pay my ransom here. But tell me, what is your name?"

"I am called Gawain."

"Ha, Messire Gawain, many a time have I heard tell of you albeit never
tofore have I seen you. But sith that the castle of Camelot is in your
keeping, I promise you loyally that before a year and a day neither the
castle nor none of the Lady's land need fear nought from me nor from any
other so far forth as I may hinder him, and hereto do I pledge me in the
presence of all these knights that are here. And, so you would have of
me gold or silver, thereof will I give you at your will."

"Sir," saith Messire Gawain, "Gramercy! I consent freely to as much as
you have said."

Messire Gawain taketh leave and turneth him again toward the castle of
Camelot, and sendeth by a squire the horse of the Lord of the Moors to
the daughter of the Widow Lady, that made great joy thereof. And the
five knights drive before them the horses they have taken booty. Whereof
great also was the joy. No need to wonder whether Messire Gawain were
well harboured that night at the castle. He recounted to the Lady how
the castle was in the keeping of these knights. When it came to
morning-tide, Messire Gawain took leave and departed from the castle,
but not before he had heard mass, for such was his custom. The Widow
Lady and her daughter commend him to God, and the castle remaineth in
better keeping than he had found it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small">[Next: The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch
IV](branch04)  
</span>
