<span class="small">[Sacred-Texts Main Index](../../index)  [Northern
European Index](../index)  [Graal Index](index)  [Previous](branch03) 
[Next](branch05) </span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch IV

INCIPIT.

Here beginneth another branch of the Graal in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

TITLE I.

And the story is silent here of the mother of the Good Knight, and saith
that Messire Gawain goeth so as God and adventure lead him toward the
land of the rich King Fisherman. And he entereth into a great forest,
all armed, his shield at his neck and his spear in his hand. And he
prayeth Our Lord that He counsel him of this holy errand he hath
emprised so as that he may honourably achieve it. He rode until that he
came at evensong to a hold that was in the midst of the forest. And it
was compassed about of a great water, and had about it great clumps of
trees so as that scarce with much pains might he espy the hall, that was
right large. The river that compassed it about was water royal, for it
lost not its right name nor its body as far as the sea. And Messire
Gawain bethought him that it was the hold of a worshipful man, and
draweth him thitherward to lodge. And as he drew anigh the bridge of the
hold, he looketh and seeth a dwarf sitting on a high bench. He leapeth
up: "Messire Gawain," saith he, "Welcome may you be!"

"Fair, sweet friend," saith Messire Gawain, "God give you good
adventure! You know me, then?" saith he.

"Well do I know you," saith the dwarf, "For I saw you at the tournament.
At a better moment could you not have come hither, for my lord is not
here. But you will find my lady, the fairest and most gentle and most
courteous in the realm of Logres, and as yet is she not of twenty
years."

"Fair friend," saith Messire Gawain, "What name hath the lord of the
hold?"

"Sir, he is called of Little Gomeret. I will go tell my lady that
Messire Gawain is come, the good knight, and bid her make great joy."

Howbeit, Messire Gawain marvelleth much that the dwarf should make him
such cheer, for many knaveries hath he found in many places within the
bodies of many dwarfs. The dwarf is come into the chamber where the lady
was.

"Now, haste, Lady!" saith he, "Make great joy, for Messire Gawain is
come to harbour with you."

"Certes," saith she, "Of this am I right glad and right sorry; glad, for
that the good knight will lie here to-night, sorry, for that he is the
knight that my lord most hateth in the world. Wherefore he warneth me
against him for love of him, for oftentimes hath he told me that never
did Messire Gawain keep faith with dame nor damsel but he would have his
will of them."

"Lady," saith the dwarf, "It is not true albeit it is so said."

II\.

Thereupon Messire Gawain entereth into the courtyard and alighteth, and
the lady cometh to meet him and saith to him: "May you be come to joy
and good adventure."

"Lady," saith he, "May you also have honour and good adventure."

The lady taketh him by the hand and leadeth him into the hall and maketh
him be seated on a cushion of straw. And a squire leadeth his horse to
stable. And the dwarf summoneth two other squires and doeth Messire
Gawain be disarmed, and helpeth them right busily, and maketh fetch
water to wash his hands and his face.

"Sir," saith the dwarf, "Your fists are still all swollen of the buffets
you gave and received at the tournament."

Messire Gawain answered him nought. And the dwarf entereth into the
chamber and bringeth a scarlet robe furred of ermine and maketh it be
done on Messire Gawain. And meat was made ready and the table set, and
the lady sate to eat. Many a time looked he upon the lady by reason of
her great beauty, and, had he been minded to trust to his heart and his
eyes, he would have all to-changed his purpose; but so straitly was his
heart bound up, and so quenched the desires thereof, that nought would
he allow himself to think upon that might turn to wickedness, for the
sake of the high pilgrimage he had emprised. Rather 'gan he withdraw his
eyes from looking at the lady, that was held to be of passing great
beauty. After meat Messire Gawain's bed was made, and he apparelled
himself to lie down. The lady bade him God give him good adventure, and
he made answer the like. When the lady was in her chamber, the dwarf
said to Messire Gawain: "Sir, I will lie before you, so as to keep you
company until you be asleep."

"Gramercy," saith he, "And God allow me at some time to reward you of
the service."

The dwarf laid himself down on a mattress before Messire Gawain, and
when he saw that he slept, he ariseth as quickly as he may, and cometh
to a boat that was on the river that ran behind the hall, and entereth
thereinto and roweth up-stream of the river. And he cometh to a fishery,
where was a right fair hall on a little eyot enclosed by a marshy arm of
the river. The jealous knight was come thither for disport, and lay in
the midst of the hall upon a couch. The dwarf cometh forth of his boat
thereinto, and lighteth a great candle in his fist and cometh before the
couch. "What ho, there!" saith the dwarf, "Are you sleeping?"

And the other waketh up sore startled, and asketh what is the matter and
wherefore is he come?

"In God's name," saith he, "You sleep not so much at your ease as doth
Messire Gawain!"

"How know you that?" saith he.

"Well know I," saith the dwarf, "For I left him but now in your hall,
and methinketh he and your lady are abed together arm to arm."

"How?" saith he, "I forbade her she should ever harbour Messire Gawain."

"In faith," said the dwarf, "She hath made him greater cheer than ever
saw I her make to none other! But haste you and come, for great fear
have I lest he carry her away!"

"By my head!" saith the knight; "I will go not, howsoever it be! But she
shall pay for it, even though she go!"

"Then of wrong will it be!" saith the dwarf, "as methinketh!"

III\.

Messire Gawain lay in the hall that was ware of nought of this. He seeth
that day hath broken fair and clear, and ariseth up. The lady cometh to
the door of the hall and seeth not the dwarf, whereby well she
understandeth his treachery. She saith to Messire Gawain, "Sir, for
God's sake have pity upon me, for the dwarf hath betrayed me! And you
withdraw yourself forth of our forest and help not to rescue me from the
smart that my lord will make me suffer, great sin will you have thereof.
For well know you. that of right ought I not to be held guilty toward my
lord nor toward any other, for aught that you have done toward me or I
toward you."

"You say true," saith Messire Gawain. Thereupon is he armed, and taketh
leave of the lady and issueth forth of the fair hold and setteth him in
an ambush in the forest nigh thereby. Straightway behold the jealous
knight where he cometh, he and his dwarf. He entereth into the hall. The
lady cometh to meet him.

"Sir," saith she, "Welcome may you be!"

"And you," saith he, "Shame and evil adventure may you have, as the most
disloyal dame on live, for that this night have you harboured in my
hostel and in my bed him that most have I warned you against!"

"Sir," saith she, "In your hostel did I harbour him, but never hath your
bed been shamed by me, nor never shall be!"

"You lie!" saith he, "like a false woman!"

He armeth himself all incontinent and maketh his horse be armed, then
maketh the lady go down and despoil her to her shirt, that crieth him
mercy right sweetly and weepeth. He mounteth his horse and taketh his
shield and his spear, and maketh the lady be taken of the dwarf by her
tresses and maketh her be led before him into the forest. And he bideth
above a pool where was a spring, and maketh her enter into the water
that flowed forth full cold, and gathereth saplings in the forest for
rods and beginneth to smite and beat her across upon her back and her
breast in such sort that the stream from the spring was all bloody
therewithal. And she began to cry out right loud, until at last Messire
Gawain heareth her and draweth forth of the ambush wherein he was, and
cometh thitherward a great gallop.

"By my faith," saith the dwarf, "Look you here where Messire Gawain
cometh!"

"By my faith," saith the knight, "Now know I well that nought is there
here but treachery, and that the matter is well proven!"

By this time, Messire Gawain is come, and saith: "Avoid, Sir knight!
Wherefore slay you the best lady and most loyal that ever have I seen?
Never tofore have I found lady that hath done me so much honour, and
this ought you to be well pleased to know, for neither in her bearing,
nor in her speech, nor in herself found I nought save all goodness only.
Wherefore I pray you of franchise and of love that you forbear your
wrath and that you set her forth of the water. And so will I swear on
all the sacred hallows in this chapel that never did I beseech her of
evil nor wantonness nor never had I no desire thereof."

The knight was full of great wrath when he saw that Messire Gawain had
not gone his way thence, and an anguish of jealousy burneth him heart
and body and overburdeneth him of folly and outrage, and Messire Gawain
that is still before him moveth him to yet further transgression.
Natheless, for the fear that he hath of him he speaketh to him: "Messire
Gawain," saith he, "I will set her forth thence on one condition, that
you joust at me and I at you, and, so you conquer me, quit shall she be
of misdoing and of blame, but and if I shall conquer you, she shall be
held guilty herein. Such shall be the judgment in this matter."

"I ask no better," saith Messire Gawain.

IV\.

Thereupon, the knight biddeth the dwarf make set the lady forth of the
pool of the spring and make her sit in a launde whereas they were to
joust. The knight draweth him back the better to take his career, and
Messire Gawain cometh as fast as his horse may carry him toward Marin
the Jealous. And when Marin seeth him coming, he avoideth his buffet and
lowereth his spear and cometh to his wife that was right sore
distraught, and wept as she that suffered blameless, and smote her
through, out the body and slew her, and then turneth him again so fast
as his horse might carry him toward his hold. Messire Gawak seeth the
damsel dead and the dwarf that fleeth full speed after his lord. He
overtaketh him and trampleth him under his horses feet so that he
bursteth his belly in the midst. Then goeth he toward the hold, for he
thinketh to enter therein. But he found the bridge shut up and the gate
barred. And Marin crieth out upon him.

"This shame and misadventure hath befallen me along of you, but you
shall pay for it yet and I may live."

Messire Gawain hath no mind to argue with him, but rather draweth him
back and cometh again to where the lady lay dead, and setteth her on the
neck of his horse all bleeding, and then beareth her to a chapel that
was without the entrance of the hold. Then he alighted and laid her
within the chapel as fairly as most he might, as he that was sore
grieved and wrathful thereof. After that, he shut the door of the chapel
again as he that was afeared of the body for the wild beasts, and
bethought him that one should come thither to set her in her shroud and
bury her after that he was departed.

V.

Thereupon Messire Gawain departeth, sore an-angered, for it seemed him
that never had no thing tofore befallen him that weighed so heavy on his
heart. And he rideth thoughtful and down-cast through the forest, and
seeth a knight coming along the way he came. And in strange fashion came
he. He bestrode his horse backwards in right outlandish guise, face to
tail, and he had his horse's reins right across his breast and the base
of his shield bore he topmost and the chief bottommost, and his spear
upside down and his habergeon and chausses of iron trussed about his
neck. He seeth Messire Gawain coming beside the forest, that hath great
wonderment of him when he seeth him. Natheless, when they draw nigh, he
turneth him not to look at Messire Gawain, but crieth to him aloud:
"Gentle knight, you that come there, for God's sake do me no hurt, for I
am the Knight Coward."

"By God," saith Messire Gawain, "You look not like a man to whom any
ought to do hurt!" And, but for the heaviness of his heart and the sore
wrath that he had, he would have laughed at his bearing with a right
good will.

"Sir Knight," saith Messire Gawain, "nought have you to be afeard of
from me!"

With that he draweth anigh and looketh on him in the face and the Knight
Coward on him. "Sir," saith he, "Welcome may you be!"

"And you likewise!" saith Messire Gawain. "And whose man are you, Sir
knight?"

"The Damsel's man of the Car."

"Thereof I love you the better," saith Messire Gawain.

"God be praised thereof," saith the Knight Coward, "For now shall I have
no fear of you."

"Nay, truly," saith Messire Gawain, "Thereof be well assured!"

The Knight Coward seeth Messire Gawain"s shield and knoweth it. "Ha,
Sir," saith he, "Now know I well who you are. Now will I alight and ride
the right way and set my arms to rights. For you are Messire Gawain, nor
hath none the right to claim this shield but only you."

The knight alighteth and setteth his armour to rights, and prayeth
Messire Gawain abide until he be armed. So he abideth right willingly,
and helpeth him withal. Thereupon behold you a knight where he cometh a
great gallop athwart the forest like a tempest, and he had a shield
party black and white. "Abide, Messire Gawain!" saith he, "For on behalf
of Marin the Jealous do I defy you, that hath slain his wife on your
account."

"Sir knight," saith Messire Gawain, "Thereof am I right heavy of heart,
for death had she not deserved."

"That availeth nor," saith the Party Knight, "For I hold you to answer
for the death. So I conquer you, the wrong is yours; but, and you
conquer me, my lord holdeth his blame and shame for known and will hold
you to forfeit and you allow me to escape hence on live."

"To this will I not agree," saith Messire Gawain, "For God well knoweth
that no blame have I herein."

"Ha, Messire Gawain," saith the Knight Coward, "Fight him not as having
affiance in me, for of me will you have neither succour nor help!"

"Heretofore," saith Messire Gawain, "have I achieved adventures without
you, and this also, and God help me, will I yet achieve."

They come together a full career and break their lances on their
shields, and Messire Gawain hurtleth against the horse and passeth
beyond and overthroweth him and his horse together. Then draweth he his
sword and runneth upon him. And the knight crieth out: "Hold, Messire
Gawain! Are you minded to slay me? I yield me conquered, for no mind
have I to die for another's folly, and so I cry you mercy hereof."

Messire Gawain thinketh that he will do him no further harm, for that of
right behoveth him do his lord's bidding. Messire Gawain holdeth his
hands, and he doth him homage on behalf of his lord for his hold and all
of his land and becometh his man.

VI\.

Thereupon the knight departeth and Messire Gawain remaineth there.

"Sir," saith the Knight Coward to Messire Gawain, "I have no mind to be
so hardy as are you; for, so God help me, had he defied me in such-wise
as he defied you, should have fled away forthwith, or elsewise I should
hay fallen at his feet and cried him of mercy."

"You wish for nought but peace," saith Messire Gawain.

"By S. James," saith the Coward, "Therein are you quite right, for of
war cometh nought but evil; nor never have I had no hurt nor wound saw
some branch of a tree or the like gave it me, and I see your face all
seamed and scarred in many places. So God help me, of such hardiesse
make I but small account, and every day I pray God that He defend me.
And so to God I commend you, for I am going after my Damsel of the Car."

"Not thus shall you go," saith Messire Gawain, "save you tell me first
wherefore your Damsel of the Car beareth her arm slung to her neck in
such-wise."

"Sir, this may I will tell you. With this hand serve she of the most
Holy-Graal the knight that was in the hostel of King Fisherman that
would not ask whereof the Graal served; for that she held therein the
precious vessel whereinto the glorious blood fell drop by drop from the
point of the lance, so that none other thing is she minded to hold
therein until such time as she shall come back to the holy place where
it is. Sir," saith the Knight Coward, "Now, so please you, may I well go
hence, and see, here is my spear that I give you, for nought is there
that I have to do therewithal."

Messire Gawain taketh it, for his own was broken short, and departeth
from the knight and commendeth him to God. And he goeth his way a great
pace, and Messire Gawain also goeth amidst the forest, and full weary is
he and forspent with travail. And he rode until the sun was due to set.
And he meeteth a knight that was coming athwart the forest and came
toward Messire Gawain a great gallop like as he were smitten through the
body, and crieth over all the forest: "What is your name, Sir knight?"

"My name is Gawain."

"Ha, Messire Gawain," saith the other, "In your service am I wounded
thus!"

"How in my service?" saith Messire Gawain.

"Sir, I was minded to bury the damsel that you bare into the chapel, and
Marin the Jealous ran upon me and wounded me in many places in such
manner as you see. And I had already dug a grave with my sword to bury
the body when he seized it from me and abandoned it to the wild beasts.
Now go I hence yonder to the chapel of a hermit that is in this forest
to confess me, for well know I that I have not long to live for that the
wound lieth me so nigh my heart. But I shall die the more easily now
that I have found you and shown you the hurt that hath been done me for
your sake."

"Certes," saith Messire Gawain, "this grieveth me."

VII\.

Therewithal the knights depart asunder, and Messire Gawain rode on until
he found in the forest a castle right fair and rich, and met an ancient
knight that was issued forth of the castle for disport, and held a bird
on his fist. He saluteth Messire Gawain and he him again, and he asked
him what castle is this that he seeth show so fair? And he telleth him
it is the castle of the Proud Maiden that never deigned ask a knight his
name.

"And we, that are her men, durst not do it on her behalf. But right well
will you be lodged in the castle, for right courteous is she otherwise
and the fairest that ever any may know. Nor never hath she had any lord,
nor deigned to love no knight save she heard tell that he was the best
knight in the world. And I will go to her with you of courtesy."

"Gramercy, Sir," saith Messire Gawain. They enter into the castle both
twain together, and alight at the mounting-stage before the hall. The
knight taketh Messire Gawain by the hand and leadeth him up, and maketh
disarm him, and bringeth him a surcoat of scarlet purfled of vair and
maketh him do it on. Then leadeth he the lady of the castle to Messire
Gawain, and he riseth up to meet her.

"Lady," saith he "Welcome may you be!"

"And you, Sir, be welcome!" saith she, "Will you see my chapel?"

"Damsel," saith he, "At your pleasure."

And she leadeth him and taketh Messire Gawain by the hand, and he
looketh at the chapel and it well seemeth him that never before had he
come into none so fair nor so rich, and he seeth four tombs within, the
fairest that he had seen ever. And on the right hand side of the chapel
were three narrow openings in the wall that were wrought all about with
gold and precious stones, and beyond the three openings he seeth great
circlets of lighted candles that were before three coffers of hallows
that were there, and the smell thereof was sweeter than balm.

"Sir knight," saith the damsel, "See you these tombs?"

"Yea, damsel," saith Messire Gawain.

"These three are made for the three best knights in the world and the
fourth for me. The one hath for name Messire Gawain and the second
Lancelot of the Lake. Each of them do I love for love's sake, by my
faith! And the third hath for name Perceval. Him love I better than the
other two. And within these three openings are the hallows set for love
of them. And behold what I would do to them and their three heads were
therein; and so I might not do it to the three together, yet would I do
it to two, or even to one only."

She setteth her hand toward the openings and draweth forth a pin that
was fastened into the wall, and a cutting blade of steel droppeth down,
of steel sharper than any razor, and closeth up the three openings.

"Even thus will I cut off their heads when they shall set them into
those three openings thinking to adore the hallows that are beyond.
Afterward will I make take the bodies and set them in the three coffins,
and do them be honoured and enshrouded right richly, for joy of them in
their life may I never have. And when the end of my life shall be come
as God will, even so will I make set me in the fourth coffin, and so
shall I have company of the three good knights."

Messire Gawain heard the word. whereof he marvelled right sore, and
would right fain that the night were overpassed. They issue forth of the
chapel. The damsel maketh Messire Gawain be greatly honoured that night,
and there was great company of knights within that served him and helped
guard the castle. They show Messire Gawain much worship, but they knew
not that it was he, nor did none ask him, for such was the custom of the
castle. But well she knew that he oftentimes passed to and fro amidst
the forest, and four of the knights that watched the forest and the
passers-by had she commanded that and if any of these three knights
should pass they should bring him to her without gainsay, and she would
increase the land of each for so doing.

VIII\.

Messire Gawain was in the castle that night until the morrow, and went
to hear mass in the chapel or ever he removed thence. Afterward, when he
had heard mass and was armed, he took leave of the damsel and issued
forth of the castle as he that had no desire to abide there longer. And
he entereth into the forest and rideth a long league Welsh and findeth
two knights sitting by a narrow path in the forest. And when they see
him coming they leap up on their horses all armed and come against
Messire Gawain, shields on sides and spears in fists.

"Bide, Sir knight!" say they, "And tell us your name without leasing!"

"Lords," saith he, "Right willingly! never hath my name been withholden
when it hath been asked for. I am called Gawain, King Arthur"s nephew."

"Nay, then, Sir, welcome may you be! One other demand have we to make of
you. Will you come with us to the lady in the world who most desireth
you, and will make much joy of you at Castle Orguelleux where she is?"

"Lord," saith Messire Gawain, "No leisure have I at this time, for I
have emprised my way else-whither."

"Sir," say they, "Needs must you come thither without fail, for in such
wise hath she commanded us that we shall take you thither by force an
you come not of your own good-will."

"I have told you plainly that thither will I not go," saith Messire
Gawain. With that, they leap forward and take him by the bridle,
thinking to lead him away by force. And Messire Gawain hath shame
thereof, and draweth his sword and smiteth one of them in such wrath
that he cutteth off his arm. And the other letteth the bridle go and
turneth him full speed; and his fellow with him that was maimed. And
away go they toward Castle Orguelleux and the Proud Maiden of the castle
and show her the mischief that hath befallen them.

"Who hath mis-handled you thus?" saith she.

"Certes, lady, Messire Gawain."

"Where found you him?"

"Lady," say they, "In the forest, where he came toward us a full gallop,
and was minded to pass by the narrows of the way, when we bade him abide
and come to you. But come he would not. We offered him force, and he
smote my fellow"s arm off."

She biddeth a horn be sounded incontinent, and the knights of the castle
arm, and she commandeth them follow Messire Gawain, and saith that she
will increase the land and the charge of him that shall bring him to
her. They were a good fifteen knights armed. Just as they were about to
issue out of the castle, behold you forthwith two keepers of the forest
where they come, both twain of them smitten through the body. The damsel
and the knights ask who hath done this to them, and they say it was
Messire Gawain that did it, for that they would have brought him to the
castle.

"Is he far away?" saith the damsel.

"Yea," say they, "Four great leagues Welsh."

"Wherefore the greater folly would it be to follow him," saith one of
the sixteen knights, "For nought should we increase thereby save only
our own shame and hurt, and my Lady hath lost him through her own
default, for well know we that he it was that lay within, for that he
beareth a shield sinople with a golden eagle."

"Yea," saith the wounded knight, "Without fail."

"Is this then he?" saith the damsel. "I know him well now that I have
lost him by my pride and by my outrage; nor never more will knight lie
in my hostel sith that he will be estranged for that I ask not his name.
But it is too late! Herein have I failed of this one for ever and ever
save God bring him back to me, and through this one shall I lose the
other two!"

IX\.

Herewithal cometh to a stay the pursuit of Messire Gawain, that goeth
his way and prayeth God that He send him true counsel of that he hath
emprised, and that He allow him to come into some place where he may
hear true witting of the hostel of King Fisherman. And while he was thus
thinking, he heareth a brachet questing, and he cometh toward him a
great pace. When he is come anigh Messire Gawain he setteth his nose to
the ground and findeth a track of blood through a grassy way in the
forest, and when Messire Gawain was minded to leave the way where the
track of blood was, the brachet came over against him and quested.
Messire Gawain is minded not to abandon the track, wherefore he
followeth the brachet a great pace until he cometh to a marish in the
midst of the forest, and seeth there in the marish a house, ancient and
decayed. He passeth with the brachet over the bridge, that was right
feeble, and there was a great water under it, and cometh to the hall,
that was wasted and old. And the brachet leaveth of his questing.
Messire Gawain seeth in the midst of house a knight that was stricken
right through the breast unto the heart and there lay dead. A damsel was
issuing forth of the chamber and bare the winding-sheer wherein to
enshroud him.

"Damsel," saith Messire Gawain, "Good adventure may you have!"

The damsel that was weeping right tenderly, saith to him: "Sir, I will
answer you not."

She cometh toward the dead knight, thinking that his wounds should have
begun to bleed afresh, but they did not.

"Sir," saith she to Messire Gawain, "Welcome may you be!"

"Damsel," saith he. "God grant you greater joy than you have!"

And the damsel saith to the brachet: "It was not this one I sent you
back to fetch, but him that slew this knight."

"Know you then, damsel, who hath slain him?" saith Messire Gawain.

"Yea," saith she, "well! Lancelot of the Lake slew him in this forest,
on whom God grant me vengeance, and on all them of King Arthur's court,
for sore mischief and great hurt have they wrought us! But, please God,
right well shall this knight yet be avenged, for a right fair son hath
he whose sister am I, and so hath he many good friends withal."

"Damsel, to God I commend you!" saith Messire Gawain. With that, he
issueth forth of the Waste Manor and betaketh him back to the way he had
abandoned, and prayeth God grant he may find Lancelot of the Lake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small">[Next: The High History of the Holy Graal: Branch
V](branch05)  
</span>
