---
layout: seclanding
title: "Intangible Textual Heritage: Copyrights"
---
Â 

### Copyrights

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This page is a 'plain English' explanation of the copyright issues at
this site. This can be considered a continuation of the [Terms of
Service](tos.md) file.

#### Using public domain files at this site

Most of the files at this site are in the public domain *in the United
States*. This is because they were originally *printed in the US* and:

-   Their copyright has expired normally (they were published in or
    prior to 1922), or
-   They were published between 1923 and 1964 (inclusive) and the
    copyright was not renewed, or
-   They were published by the US Government.

In addition, books printed outside the US in or before 1922 are in the
public domain in the US.

Books and other content become public domain in different ways in
different countries. *So if you reside outside the US, you will have to
use different criteria to determine if a text is in the public domain.*
In some countries, this is determined by the date of death of the
author. For instance, in the United Kindom or European Union books
become public domain 70 years after the death of the author. This means
that some books are in the public domain in the US but not the UK. For
instance, the book 'The Tarot Unveiled' was published in 1910 in
England. This means that it is in the public domain in the US (it was
published prior to 1922). However, the author, A.E. Waite, died in 1942.
For this reason this book will not enter the public domain in the UK or
the EU until 2012.

Public domain files from this site can be used for *any* purposes. **You
may**:

-   Download, print and make copies of them for personal purposes
-   Email them to a friend
-   Use them for your class or study group
-   Link your website to them
-   Post copies of them on your website
-   Embed the copy at Intangible Textual Heritage in a frame at your
    website
-   Use them in a paper for school
-   Quote them in part or entirety in print: in a book, magazine, etc.
-   Create derivative works: edited versions, anthologies, software
    products which use quotes from them, etc.
-   Translate them into other languages
-   etc. etc. etc.

**without asking anyone (including sacred-texts) for permission**. In
fact, we encourage these activities. It is considered good netiquette
(but not absolutely required) to identify sacred-texts as the source of
the file. Therefore we request that leave any notices of attribution in
the file intact, and add a link to sacred-texts if possible.

The public domain files at this site have been prepared for free
distribution at great labor and expense. Public domain files prepared at
Intangible Textual Heritage *may* be licensed for commercial use as a
way of supporting the Internet Sacred Text Archive and the production of
additional etexts. These files are listed in the [. Some other public
domain files at this site may have some trivial commercial-use
restrictions, particularly files from Project Gutenberg. Most other
public domain files at this site can be used in commercial projects
without any payment.](stbib.md)

.

Note that this doesn't restrict you from using these books for
commercial use if you are willing to make your own transcription of
them. We have no objection to this as we do not claim to own these
works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Copyrighted files at this site

Some texts are copyrighted but released by their copyright holders for
*non-commercial* use. Most of these files also have stipulations that
the file must be distributed in entirety and intact, including any
copyright and usage messages.

In other cases the file may be copyrighted and posted in error. If this
is the case, and you are the copyright holder, please contact us and we
will promptly remove it.

Some texts which are copyrighted or have unknown copyright status have
the following icon next to their index listing:
[![](cnote.gif)](#cnote.md). When this icon is present on a page, or added
after a given file, it indicates that the file has copyright issues
which you need to consider before using it (particularly for commercial
purposes). The absence of this icon indicates that we believe that the
file is in the public domain.

Files marked \[External Site\] may be copyrighted and have other
restrictions on their use. Consult the particular sites' policy before
using these files.

Some files are copyrighted because they are original material produced
especially for sacred-texts. This includes index files, the sub-section
graphics and any of the descriptive material. These files, graphics and
text may not be reproduced in any form without the permission of the
copyright holder, J.B. Hare. These files will have explicit copyright
notices.

All copyrighted images at this site have explicit copyright notices,
either directly underneath the graphic or at the bottom of the page. If
you want to use any of these files, you **must** [to obtain copyright
clearance.](https://ith.oarc.science/contact.md)

If an image does *not* have such a notice, it *may* be in the public
domain.

Note: the Javascript Tarot reader and all associated HTML files is
likewise copyrighted material. You must obtain permission from the
copyright holder, J.B. Hare, if you wish to include this program in
another website or a commercial product.

If you have any other questions about copyright issues at this site,
[](https://ith.oarc.science/contact)

The

has more information about copyright issues at this site. We recommend
that you read it before email us, as it may answer your questions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="pdhowto"></span>

#### How do you determine if a file is in the public domain in the United States?

Since my site is located in the United States, I follow US Copyright
law.

This is my criteria for determining whether a work is in the public
domain or not. First of all:

1\. Anything prior to 1922 inclusive (i.e. published in 1922 or prior to
1922) is in the public domain.

2\. Anything published in the US between 1923 (inclusive) and 1963
(inclusive) is in the public domain if it was not renewed at the US
copyright office 28 years after the date of publication.

Anything else is not in the public domain, particularly books published
outside the US after 1922.

So first you need to do some research. You need to answer two questions:
1) was it published first in the United States? 2) What year was it
published? This is not always apparent from the copyright page of a
book, particularly if you are looking at a modern reprint of an older
work.

First I go to the MELVYL catalog (the University of California library
catalog, which has practically every book ever published--even the Dee
Necronomicon!). Their web address is <https://melvyl.cdlib.org/>.

I fill in the form and get the earliest publication for the book I'm
trying to locate.

If it's not there (or I don't see an early entry for it) I also check
the Library of Congress (<https://catalog.loc.gov/>). If it's not there
I check Alibris ([www.alibris.com](https://www.alibris.com/).md) and
ABEbooks ([www.abebooks.com](https://www.abebooks.com).md) for information
about used copies.

If it was first published in the US in or before 1922, it's in the
public domain.

If it was first published in the US after 1922, but in or before 1963,
then I go to the Catalog of Copyright Renewals (

).

This has a table with each year that something could be renewed (the
year of publication plus 28 years) between 1922 and 1963.

You pick a year (say 1931) go to that page and find the particular pages
with the authors' name organized alphabetically. Works from 1931 could
be renewed in 1958 and 1959. There are two pages for each alphabetic
range. So there are four pages total to download (they are in TIF
format, so you can't view them in your browser, you need to download
them to your hard drive and use a image editor to view them). These TIFs
have been now been converted into searchable text by Distributed
Proofing and Project Gutenberg. This is broken down into files for each
six-month period which can be downloaded via links at the CCR site.
However, it's still a good idea to check the page images as well.

If you find the book listed as renewed in one of these TIFs, then it's
not in the public domain.

If you don't find it in the TIFs for that particular renewal year, it is
in the public domain.

If there are no TIFs for that particular year at the Catalog of
Copyright Renewals, then there is one last stop, the US Copyright Office
search form (<https://www.copyright.gov/records/>). This only has
renewals after 1978, so it is only conclusive for books published after
1950 or so (since the book needed to be renewed in the 28th year after
publication). There are some entries that go back further. So consulting
this database can be inconclusive.

If it was published mid-50s to 1963 and not listed here at all then it's
probably public domain.

If there is a listing at the copyright office, you have to scrutinize it
a bit.

In some cases a book has an entry in the database because some
overzealous publisher filed a claim on some new material on an older
public domain book, in that case the record will state that the
application only applies to NEW MATERIAL. If you omit that from the
etext, you're probably in good shape. This is why I check for the
earliest date of publication first. It's usually apparent what is 'New
Material'.

If you want to get a conclusive determination, I recommend that you
contact Thompson and Thompson, 1-800-356-8630, a legal firm in
Washington DC which specializes in intellectual property. Ask for their
$90 special renewal searches. They go to the copyright office on foot,
and about a week later will email (and/or fax and send by postal mail,
if you wish) you a comprehensive report of any traces they find of a
registration or renewal. You *can* have the copyright office do this but
it will cost you quite a bit more and it takes months. If this search
turns up a renewal, it's not in the public domain, otherwise, it's in
the public domain. For instance, this is how I nailed down the public
domain status of 'The Flying Saucers are Real' and 'The Kumulipo'.

However, if it was first published between 1923 and 1964 inclusive, and
renewed in a timely fashion, it's locked up for a good 95 years by
current copyright law. Forget about it appearing on the Internet unless
you can track down the author and their heirs and get permission;
obviously this could be expensive and time consuming.
