
# Privacy Policy

Â 

### Privacy Policy

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Intangible Textual Heritage Archive is committed to the privacy and
anonymity of its viewers. This page answers questions about the level of
privacy you can expect at our site. Recent events on the web have
created an atmosphere of paranoia which can only be dispelled by factual
information. Viewers of this site are entitled to full disclosure
concerning exactly what information is tracked here, what that
information is used for, and who it is shared with. These policies are
subject to change. If we change them we will update this page.

[There is a page for privacy issues specific to purchasing the CD-ROM at this link.](cdshop/privacy.md)

### Who runs this site?

Intangible Textual Heritage is owned, maintained and funded by [and is
not sponsored by, or affiliated with, any religious (or other)
organization, corporation or academic
institution.](https://ith.oarc.science/contact.md)


### What information is provided to third parties?

We do not sell or exchange any specific or general information about our
viewers with any third party. We do not attach any hidden information to
our pages to monitor your page views (cookies).

In some cases our pages contain an embedded view of a third party site
(frameset) or link to a third party site. These links are labelled
\[external site\]. Some of these sites collect additional information
about your page visits or set cookies in your browser, particularly
amazon.com. We cannot be responsible for their privacy policies.

Some of the pages here have hidden indexing information embedded in
them, (META tags) for instance, the main index page. This hidden
information can be viewed in your browser by selecting the menu items
'View\|Page Source' (Netscape) or 'View\|Source' (Internet Explorer).
This information is provided so that search engines can categorize pages
at this site. It does not allow us or anyone else to track individual
browsing behavior.

### About information *not* collected by this site.

We can't monitor individuals' browsing history (i.e. how many times a
particular viewer comes back to the site); we don't know your email
address or actual name (unless you provide this information by sending
us email); and rest assured that we can't track what you do with the
information provided here or what you think about it.
