---
title: "Intangible Textual Heritage: Terms of Service"

Â 

### Terms of Service

------------------------------------------------------------------------

1\. The Internet Sacred Text Archive ('ISTA'), Intangible Textual
Heritage ('This site') is intended to provide, anonymously and free of
charge over the Internet, access to certain documents ('the texts').
Intangible Textual Heritage is run by Jean Lelievre, dba Internet Sacred
Text Archive ('the proprietor'), and is not affiliated with any
religious organization or institution. ISTA is located in Santa Cruz,
California, USA, and can be contacted [via email or postal
mail](contact.md). By accessing this site you agree to the following terms
of service.

2\. The texts are presented for entertainment and research purposes
only, and should not be considered a source of medical or legal
information. This site and its proprietor shall not be held responsible
for any damages, direct or indirect, caused by the use of the texts.

3\. The site does not guarantee or warrant that these texts are free of
defect or factually accurate. Should you believe you have discovered a
defect in any of the texts, or factual inaccuracies, you are requested
to provide information about this to the proprietor of the site. Any
changes to the site based on this information are made solely at the
discretion of the proprietor.

4\. The texts at this site are believed to be in the public domain in
the United States, or freely redistributable for non-commercial
purposes. **For a discussion of what this means in plain English, please
refer to [the copyrights page](cnote.md)**. If any of the texts are in
violation of a copyright, the copyright holder may, if they wish,
contact the proprietor of the site and have the text removed from the
site, or request that the text be altered, or to correctly identify the
terms under which it can be distributed, or to attribute the author
correctly. The proprietor agrees to promptly address any such requests.

5\. Certain texts at this site were produced by or for the site ('ISTA
produced texts') at great labor and expense. This includes but is not
limited to files listed at
[*https://ith.oarc.science/stbib.htm*](https://ith.oarc.science/stbib.md).
ISTA produced texts are clearly identified by a notice of attribution.
ISTA produced texts are believed to be in the public domain. These texts
may be copied electronically for any non-commercial purpose, provided
the notice of attribution is left intact in the text, and a link or
reference back to Intangible Textual Heritage is provided in the copy in
a location visible to anyone accessing the file. *You are explicitly
forbidden to claim a new copyright on ISTA produced texts.*

<span id="commercialuse"></span>

6\. Commercial uses of ISTA produced texts *in their entirety* are
prohibited without a written licensing agreement and payment of a
licensing fee to ISTA. The licensing fee may be waived at the discretion
of the proprietor. Commercial use includes any product for sale which
incorporates ISTA produced texts *in their entirety*, or any use where
customers must pay money to view said texts.

7\. Copyrighted content at this site developed at or for ISTA, not
derived from public domain texts or images may not be used without
explicit permission of the copyright holder. Said copyrighted content
includes, but is not limited to any page named 'index', any graphic with
an explicit or embedded copyright message or a copyright message in its
ALT tag, and any introductory material to the public domain content with
a byline, as well as all javascript programs at this site (e.g. the
Calendars, Ephemeris programs, and Tarot Card javascripts). In addition,
a collection copyright is claimed on the selection and arrangement of
the material at this site. Thus, copying the top level files of this
site to another site *without permission* is forbidden.

8\. Certain recently authored material, including but not limited to the
Internet Book of Shadows is covered by active copyrights, but has been
permitted either passively or explicitly by the copyright holders to by
posted at this and other sites on a non-commercial basis. Reuse of this
material in commercial projects, without permission of the respective
copyright holder, is a violation of Federal and International copyright
laws.

9\. You are permitted to link your website to the home page of this site
or any file or files at this site. You may embed (frameset) text content
from this site at your website, provided that the material is clearly
identified as not being affiliated with your site. Linking directly to
an image at this site is not permitted (for instance, the tarot card
images, or the I Ching hexagrams), unless a link to the page that image
is embedded in at this site is provided as well. Unattributed direct
links to images at this site, either on a webpage or in a weblog
("Blog") may result in that image being taken offline or labelled
temporarily.

10\. Use of software designed to access the site automatically ('web
robots') is permitted for the following purposes: 1. To create or update
a search engine's database index of the site. 2. To download one copy of
one text from the site per day for permitted uses per the terms of
service. Any robots accessing the site shall abide by the robots.txt
protocol. All other use of web robots at this site are considered to be
in violation of the terms of service, including but not limited to
downloading the entire site multiple times in one day, accessing the
site for the sole purpose of extracting email addresses, repeatedly
accessing a file or files at the site at high speeds, or probing the
site for 'formmail', Microsoft FrontPage files, or other scripts. The
proprietor reserves the right to disable such excess usage, and may
contact the administrator of hosts who use web robots to abuse the site,
particularly if it slows down or disables the normal use of the site.

11\. You are permitted to copy portions of this site at another website
provided 1) you retain all 'NOTICE OF ATTRIBUTION' text in the copied
files 2) you do not represent that Intangible Textual Heritage or the
proprietor of Intangible Textual Heritage endorses or is a contributor
to your website, 3) you strip out all material which is covered by
copyright (see section 7 and 8 for a definition of what is covered by
copyright).

12\. Notwithstanding any other statements at this site, the following
entities may freely use any of the material derived from public domain
books for any purpose without restriction, and, if needed, without
attribution:

-   Project Gutenberg  
-   Distributed Proofreading  
-   Wikipedia, Wikisource, Wikimedia Commons and other websites run by
    the Wikimedia foundation, Inc.  
-   Christian Classics Ethereal Library (CCEL)  
