[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe24084)  [Next](sbe24086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part III (SBE24)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XV.

1\. Another *thing* I publish is a feeble story (nisang) about the
inconsistency, unbounded statements, and incoherent disputations of
Christian (Tarsâk) believers.

2\. Since, inasmuch as all three <span id="fr_1004"></span>[1](#fn_996)
are from the one origin of Judaism—(3) that *implying that*, when
*anything* is said within the one, it is for them mutually helping their
own delusion of every kind—(4) you should know whence the original sect
of Christianity came forth. 5. That in the town of Jerusalem <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[2](#fn_997) *there* was a woman of the same Jews
who was known for incapacity <span id="fr_1006"></span>[3](#fn_998), (6)
*and* pregnancy became manifest in her <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[4](#fn_999). 7. When asked by them thus: 'Whence is
this pregnancy of thine?' (8) she said in reply thus: 'The angel
Gabriel <span id="fr_1008"></span>[5](#fn_1000) came unto me, and he
spoke thus: "Thou art pregnant by the pure wind (holy spirit) <span
id="fr_1009"></span>[6](#fn_1001)."'

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

9\. *As to* that, you should observe thus: 'Who, apart from that woman,
saw the angel Gabriel? *And* on what account is it expedient to consider
that woman truthful?' 10. If they say that, on account of the spiritual
state of that angel, no one is able to see *him*, (11) that *implies*—if
the cause of not seeing that angel be *his* spiritual nature—*that* the
sight of that woman also, for the same reason, is not unrestricted. 12.
If they say that the sacred being made *him* visible to that woman, and
on account of the worthiness of that woman, (13) no other person *being*
made worthy, (14) *observe* this, where is the evidence that the woman
spoke truthfully? 15. Or, if that woman were conspicuous to *any* one
for truth, it is fitting for him to demonstrate that also to other
persons, so that, through that evidence, she might be more fully
considered as very truthful by them. 16. *But* now the showing of him
(the angel), to that woman only; is not considered *by* any one as true.
17. Now you should also observe *that* the origin of their religion
*has* all come forth from this testimony of a woman, which *was* given
by her about her own *condition*.

18. Observe, again, that if they say the Messiah arose from the pure
wind of the sacred being, that *implies*—if the only wind that is pure
*and* from the sacred being be that one—that the other wind, which is
distinct from that, is not *from* the sacred being and not pure, (19)
*and* another producer is manifested inevitably. 20. If the wind be all
from

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

the sacred being and sacred, it ought to be all pure. 21. If only that
one wind be pure, the other wind is polluted and not sacred. 22. As
there is no producer whatever except the sacred being, that pollution
and impurity of the other wind are likewise from the sacred. being. 23.
And if the other wind be that of the sacred being and sacred, it ought
to be all pure. 24. Now, that one *being* considered as purity, why was
the other polluted?

25\. Again, *observe* this, that, if the Messiah were the son of the
sacred being for the reason that the sacred being is the father of all,
through productiveness, creativeness, and cherishing, (26) that Messiah,
through sonship to the sacred being, is not otherwise than the meaner
creatures which the sacred being produced and created. 27. If he were
born through the means of male and female, (28) that *implies*—if birth
through male and female be suitable unto the sacred being—*that* it is
also *so* unto the archangels *and* spirits; *in* like manner, on
account of the existence of birth <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[1](#fn_1002), the occurrence of death also is
suitable. 29. Thus, about the arising of *that* same sacred being
*there* is no doubt, (30) because there where birth of that kind
*exists*, eating, drinking, *and* even death are certain.

31\. And, there are *some* even who say that the Messiah is the sacred
being himself. 32. Now this is very strange, when the mighty sacred
being, the maintainer *and* cherisher of the two existences, became of
human nature, *and* went into the womb of a woman who *was* a Jew. 33.
To leave the lordly throne, the sky *and* earth, the *celestial* sphere

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

*and* other similar *objects* of *his* management and protection, he
fell (aûpast), for concealment, into a polluted and straitened <span
id="fr_1011"></span>[1](#fn_1003) place, (34) and, finally, delivered
his own body to scourging, execution on the tree (dâr-kar*d*îh), and the
hands of enemies, (35) while, apart from death, much brutality *and*
lawlessness *were* arranged by them.

36\. If they speak of his *having* been inside the womb of a woman for
the reason that the sacred being exists *in* every place, (37) that
*implies that being* inside the womb of a woman, through existence *in*
every place, is not more antagonistic than *being in any* very polluted
and very fetid place; (38) *and, along* with that, that the faultiness
of speaking of all places *as having* been the property of the sacred
being is manifold, (39) because, if *they were so, in* like manner the
speaking of anything whatever that is devoid of the existence of the
sacred being is strange <span id="fr_1012"></span>[2](#fn_1004).

40\. Again, *as to* that which they say, that death and execution on the
tree *were* accepted by him, as a yoke <span
id="fr_1013"></span>[3](#fn_1005), for the sake of demonstrating the
resurrection to mankind, (41) that *implies*—if it were not possible for
him to [demonstrate](errata.htm#4) the resurrection to mankind, except
through that disgrace <span id="fr_1014"></span>[4](#fn_1006) and death
and brutal treatment of himself—*that* that omnipotence of his is not
effectual. 42. Or, when no opponent and adversary whatever of his arose,
why

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

are they not made without doubt of that sort of clear knowledge which is
*imparted* by seeing the resurrection, so that *there* would not have
been a necessity for this mode of demonstrating it brutally,
disgracefully <span id="fr_1015"></span>[1](#fn_1007), distressingly,
*and* through the will of *his* enemies. 43. If that death *were*
accepted by him; as a yoke of a new description, through his own will,
(44) that *implies that* now his outcry of woe and curses for the
executioners <span id="fr_1016"></span>[2](#fn_1008), *and his*
considering those Jews as *it were* wrathfully are unreasonable. 45. *He
ought*, indeed, not to cause curses and *imprecations of* woe upon them,
but it is fitting for them to be worthy of recompense through that deed.

46\. Again, *as to* this which they state, that the father and son and
pure wind are three names which are not separate one from the
other <span id="fr_1017"></span>[3](#fn_1009), (47) nor is one foremost,
(48) *and* this, too, that, though a son, *he* is not less than the
father, *but in* every knowledge equal *to* the father <span
id="fr_1018"></span>[4](#fn_1010), why now is *one* to call him by a
different name? 49. If it be proper *for* three to be one, that *implies
that* it is certainly possible *for* three to be nine and *for* nine to
be

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

three; (50) *and* it is possible to speak *of* other numbers, in this
sequence, unlimitedly.

51\. *Observe* this, too, that if a son *be* not less than a father,
that father also is not greater than the son. 52. That is possible if
the father is said *to be* from the son, or the son not from the father.
53. And this is certain, that it is possible *for* every one
*originating* from *any* one to be less than him from <span
id="fr_1019"></span>[1](#fn_1011) whom he is, who is the essential
origin <span id="fr_1020"></span>[2](#fn_1012) of himself; (54) if *he
be so* in *point of* time, *and* likewise if *so* in *point of*
relationship. 55. If the son *be* not less than the father, that
*implies that* the maker is not before the *thing* made, nor yet is
greater; (56) both must be original evolutions, (57) and the creation is
not less than the creator, nor the creator greater than the creation,
(58) however he *may* be said *to be* unlimited.

59\. *Observe* this, too, that if the son *be* equal to the father in
all knowledge, that father also is as ignorant as the son who was
unaware of his own death and execution on the tree <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[3](#fn_1013), (60) until *he was* slain by their
capturing *him* and causing *his* wretched death, brutal treatment,
*and* disgrace <span id="fr_1022"></span>[4](#fn_1014). 61. He did not
know about it because they enquired of him thus: 'When is the day of
resurrection?' And he answered thus: 'Of this no one is aware but the
father <span id="fr_1023"></span>[5](#fn_1015).' 62. Just as when the
son is formed (tâ*s*tîk)

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

as *it were* ignorant, the father *must be* as *it were* just the same.

63\. *Observe* this, too, that all the creatures and creation, *and*
even his own adversary, being created and produced by him out of
nothing, the executioners of his son are themselves deluded *by him*.
64. *And* if the sacred being himself created the executioners of his
son, *and* even his own adversary, without a purpose *and* without a
cause, (65) and the son *was* slain by them altogether with, his
knowledge, (66) that *implies that* it is now possible to be without
doubt that the slayer of his son was he himself, (67) if he knew that
when he produces <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1](#fn_1016) a son they
*will* then slay him, and *in* the end he produced *him* foolishly and
unwisely. 68. If he did not know *it, he* is deficient in knowledge.

69\. Again, *observe* this, that, if the sacred being created these
creatures and creation out of nothing, and created and produced even his
adversary similarly out of nothing, that *implies that* their nature
ought to be one. 70. Now, why is not the adversary preserved *in* the
*same* manner as the other creatures?

71\. Another *point* is about the inconsistency of the statements
*derived* from the scriptures of their high-priest <span
id="fr_1025"></span>[2](#fn_1017), (72) and that which he says that no
*one* falls, nor anything from a tree, and no outcry arises in a
district <span id="fr_1026"></span>[3](#fn_1018), nor two birds fight
together

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

without the command of the father <span
id="fr_1027"></span>[1](#fn_1019), (73) which is a demonstration <span
id="fr_1028"></span>[2](#fn_1020) of these statements, that the original
evolution is single and all *things* are by his will.

74\. Now for what purpose *was* the Messiah appointed, who is his son;
and which way is the demonstration, through that, of his (the father's)
*being* unwilling; (75) when all is *by* his will, and nothing whatever
is said *about* his *being* unwilling? 76. Even this is *evident* from
the same explanation, that the Jews slew the Messiah, who is his son,
through the will of the father.

77\. Again, he speaks inconsistently about the free will
(â*z*â*d*-kâmîh) of the faithful, (78) that mankind are produced by him
*with* free will. 79. Thus the iniquity of the sin which mankind commit
is freely willed, (80) and the freedom of will *was* produced by him
himself for mankind. 81. That *implies that* it is fitting to consider
him likewise a sinner who is the original cause of sin. 82. If mankind
commit sin and crime by their own free will through. the will of the
sacred being, (83) through what free will and sin are the sin and crime
of the lion, serpent, wolf, *and* scorpion—the stinging *and* slaying
noxious creatures—which are the natural actions that ever proceed from
them?

84\. So also, who *has* maintained the origin of the deadly poison which
is in the Bêsh *herb* <span id="fr_1029"></span>[3](#fn_1021) and other
species of plants, the cause of which is not owing to free will? 85: If
they say that those poisons

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

are advantageous *and* suitable in many medicines which are removers of
the disease of the sick, (86) it should be asked of them thus: 'Who
produced the disease itself and the harm that *arises* from it, and what
is the necessity of it, (87) that, afterwards, medicine and deadly
poison *were* created by him for it; and were necessary?' 88. Or, *as
to* that disease, 'it would be more expedient if he had produced an
antidotal (anôsh) medicine for carrying *it* away than a medicine of
poison.' 89. Also this, that is, 'from what origin is the term itself
"doing harm," and against whom is the advantageousness necessary?' 90.
On this subject it is possible to speak abundantly for a summary
compiled.

91\. Another *instance* is from the words of Paul (Pâvarô*s*), who *was*
their high-priest—(92) that *one* who was afflictive with <span
id="fr_1030"></span>[1](#fn_1022) them at their own beginning <span
id="fr_1031"></span>[2](#fn_1023)—even this, they say, (93) is thus:
'Not the good works which I desire, but the iniquity (94) which I do not
desire, I do <span id="fr_1032"></span>[3](#fn_1024). 95. And *it* is
not I *that* do *so*, but that which is collected within me does *it*,
(96) because I always see that *it* is striving with me day and
night <span id="fr_1033"></span>[4](#fn_1025).'

97\. Again, they say, from the words of the

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Messiah, that the
original evolution *from* the sacred being is light and goodness; (98)
evil and darkness are separate from him <span
id="fr_1034"></span>[1](#fn_1026). 99. Also this, that is, 'just as a
shepherd who provides protection for his hundred sheep, (100) *and* the
wolves carry *off* one from him, (101) goes after that one which the
wolves carried *off* until he leads it back to the flock, (102) and
leaves the ninety-nine of them in the wilderness (da*s*t) <span
id="fr_1035"></span>[2](#fn_1027), (103) even so I am come to take care
of the defiled, not for the just, (104) because *it* is needless to
bring him who is just into the *right* way <span
id="fr_1036"></span>[3](#fn_1028).' 105. That *implies*, if the original
evolution *be* one, and his will *be* wholly *that* no one whatever of
it *shall be* astray and defiled, (106) *that* even the wolf's slaying
the sheep is likewise his will, (107) and the wolf itself *was* also
created by him.

108\. The word of the Messiah is specially inconsistently a demonstrator
as regards the two original evolutions. 109. As they say this is one of
*those* same statements of the Messiah, that there is another original
evolution, 'an enemy of my father, *and* I am of that sacred being doing
good works <span id="fr_1037"></span>[4](#fn_1029).' 110. From this
statement *it* is evident that his own father separates from that enemy,
*and* acts differently.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

111\. This, too, *he says*, that is, 'I am produced *by* the sacred
being for truth and through truth <span
id="fr_1038"></span>[1](#fn_1030); (112) and Aharman, the iniquitous,
came for my death (va*d*ar*d*anŏ), (113) and I am desired by him to
deceive in many ways <span id="fr_1039"></span>[2](#fn_1031).' 114. Now,
if the original evolution *be* one, and there be nothing competing with
it, why *was* Aharman so powerful that he desired to delude the son of
the sacred being? 115. If the sacred being himself created that
iniquitous *one*, then the producing of that delusion by the *latter
was* with the knowledge and will of *the former* himself, (116) and the
deluder of the son *was* in like manner himself.

117\. This, too, it says, that, when the Jews stood disputing against
*him*, he spoke to the Jews thus: 'You are from that which is a lower
*region*, and I am from an upper *region*; (118) you are of this
country, I am not of it <span id="fr_1040"></span>[3](#fn_1032).' 119.
And he also said this, that is, 'I know that you are of the seed of
Abraham, *and* he <span id="fr_1041"></span>[4](#fn_1033) who had slain
mankind from aforetime (120) *has* wished to slay even me. 121. I do
that which is seen of my father, *and* you do that which is seen by you
as to your own father <span id="fr_1042"></span>[5](#fn_1034).' 122.
This,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

too, *he said*, 'If the sacred being be that father of yours, he would
be a friend of me *for* your *sake*, (123) because I have sprung from
the sacred being; I have not come of my own will; (124) I am appointed
*by* that sacred being doing good works <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1](#fn_1035). Why do you not hear those words of
mine? 125. Only because you are from the iniquitous *one it* is not
possible for you to hear them, (126) and you wish to do the will of your
own father. 127. By him truth is not spoken; whatever he speaks he tells
a lie of it, therefore you are false yourselves *together* with your
father. 128. *As for* me, who speak the truth, you do not believe it of
me <span id="fr_1044"></span>[2](#fn_1036): 129. And he who is from the
sacred being hears the words of the sacred being, but you, because you
are not from the sacred being, do not hear my words <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[3](#fn_1037).' 130. By all these sayings it is
demonstrated by him that there are two original evolutions, 'one by
which I am produced, *and* one by which the Jews *are*,' (131) and that
*latter* is not his doer of good works, but is called by him the
iniquitous *one*. . .

132\. And this, too, *was* said by him, that 'not

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

unrestricted (atang) is the tree of merit (kirfak) to produce the fruit
of offensiveness (ba*z*ak), nor yet that of offensiveness *as to* the
fruit of merit <span id="fr_1046"></span>[1](#fn_1038).' 133. This, too,
*he said*, that 'he either makes the whole tree with fruit of merit, or
the whole tree with fruit of offensiveness <span
id="fr_1047"></span>[2](#fn_1039), (134) for every tree becomes manifest
by *its* fruit, if *it be of* merit and *if it be of* offensivenes <span
id="fr_1048"></span>[3](#fn_1040).' 135. And the whole tree *was*
mentioned by him, not half the tree. 136. Now, how is it suitable *for*
half a tree *to be* light and half dark, (137) half merit and half
offensiveness, (138) half truth and half falsehood? 139. When these
remain both competing together, (140) they cannot become one tree.

141\. And, again, a Jewish *sect was* called by him 'the hill-serpent of
the Jews <span id="fr_1049"></span>[4](#fn_1041),' (142) and he spoke
thus: 'How is *it* possible for you to do good works when you are Jewish
evil-doers <span id="fr_1050"></span>[5](#fn_1042)?' 143. And *it was*
not his own father he called an evil-doer <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[6](#fn_1043).

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

144\. This, too, he says, that 'every tree which the father *has* not
sown should be dug *up*, and should be cast into the fire <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1](#fn_1044).' 145. Wherefore it is fitting to
understand from these words that there is a tree, which the father *has*
not sown; *that* it is necessary to dig *up and* cast *away*.

146\. Again, *he says* this, that 'I am come to my own, and I am not
received *by* my own <span id="fr_1053"></span>[2](#fn_1045).' 147.
Wherefore it is fitting to understand that *what is* his own and *what
is* not his own are two *things*.

148\. This, too, he says, that is, 'Our father, that *art* in the sky,
let thy empire arise! And may it be thy will *that* shall take place on
earth as in the sky! 149. Also give us daily bread! And do not bring us
to a cause of doubt <span id="fr_1054"></span>[3](#fn_1046)!' 150. From
these words *it* is evident that his will is not so unalloyed
(a*v*ê*z*ak) on earth as in the sky. 151. Also this, that the cause of
the doubt of mankind is not owing to the sacred being.

152\. And this, too, *was* said by him at first, that I am not come for
the *purpose* that I *may* destroy the law of Moses (Mûshâê), (153) but
I am come for the *purpose* that I *may* make *it* altogether more
complete <span id="fr_1055"></span>[4](#fn_1047).' 154. And *yet* all
his sayings and

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

commands were those that are dissipaters and afflictive for the rules
and laws of Moses.

155\. Upon this subject, however, as far as here is complete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_996"></span>[229:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1004) The three defects
mentioned in § 1.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[229:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1005) Nêr. reads
Hurû*s*arm for Pahl. Aûrû*s*alem.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[229:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1006) Sans. has
'misconduct,' but this is more than Pahl. dû*s*â*z*akîh seems to imply.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[229:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1007) 'Now the birth of
Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was espoused to
Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of the Holy
Ghost' (Mat. i. 18).

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[229:5](sbe24085.htm#fr_1008) Pahl. Gêprîl is
misread Sparagar by Nêr. These two names would be written alike in
Pahlavi.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[229:6](sbe24085.htm#fr_1009) 'The angel
Gabriel was sent from God . . . to a virgin espoused to a man whose name
was Joseph . . . and the angel <span id="page_230">p. 230</span>
answered and said unto her, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; therefore also that holy
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God"' (Luke
i. 26, 27, 35).

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[231:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1010) The Pâz. of JE
interpolates the words 'from a mother.'

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[232:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1011) Assuming that
Pâz. u vada*n*g stands for Pahl. va tang.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[232:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1012) Assuming that
Pâz. vâhar (Sans. an*ri*ta) stands for Pahl. nâhâr.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[232:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1013) See Chap. X, 67
n.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[232:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1014) Assuming that
Pâz. rasûnâî stands for Pahl. rûsvâih. Sans. has 'binding with cords.'

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[233:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1015) Sans. 'by
binding with cords.'

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[233:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1016) 'Woe unto you,
scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! . . . behold, I send unto you
prophets, and wise men, and scribes: and *some* of them ye shall kill
and crucify; and *some* of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and
persecute *them* from city to city: that upon you may come all the
righteous blood shed upon the earth. . . . All these things shall come
upon this generation' (Mat. xxiii. 29, 34-36).

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[233:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1017) 'For there are
three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost: and these three are one' (1 John v. 7).

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[233:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1018) 'And in this
Trinity none is afore, or after other: none is greater, or less than
another' (Athanasian Creed).

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[234:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1019) Assuming that
Pâz. vas is a misreading of Pahl. a*g*a*s*.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[234:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1020) Literally 'the
maternal source.'

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[234:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1021) This is at
variance with Mat. xxvi. 2:—'Ye know that after two days is *the feast
of* the passover; and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.' But
the author explains in § 61 that he is thinking of another instance of
want of knowledge.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[234:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1022) Sans. has
'binding.'

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[234:5](sbe24085.htm#fr_1023) 'Tell us, when
shall these things be? . . . Of that day and <span id="page_235">p.
235</span> *that* hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in
heaven, neither the Son, but the Father' (Mark xiii. 4, 32).

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[235:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1024) Literally 'I
produce.'

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[235:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1025) In § 91 Paul is
called 'their high-priest,' but the term may be here applied to any
other writer of the Christian scriptures.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[235:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1026) So in Sans., but
the Pâz. of JE has merely 'no district arises.'

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[236:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1027) Compare Mat. X.
29, 30:—'Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall
not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very hairs of your
head are all numbered.'

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[236:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1028) Literally
'demonstrator.'

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[236:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1029) A poisonous
plant, Napellus Moysis (see Bd. XIV, 22, XXVII, 1).

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[237:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1030) Reading
hanbêshin, but it may be 'well-afflicting to' if we read hû-bêshin.

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[237:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1031) 'As for Saul, he
made havoc of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and
women, committed *them* to prison. . . . Saul who also is *called* Paul'
(Acts viii. 3; xiii. 9).

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[237:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1032) 'For the good
that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that I do' (Rom.
vii. 19).

<span id="fn_1025"></span>[237:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1033) 'It is no more I
that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. . . . I see another law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin which is in my members' (Rom. vii. 20, 23).

<span id="fn_1026"></span>[238:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1034) 'God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all' (I John i. 5).

<span id="fn_1027"></span>[238:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1035) 'What man of
you, having an hundred sheep, if he lose one of them, doth not leave the
ninety and nine in the wilderness, and go after that which is lost,
until he find it?' (Luke. xv. 4).

<span id="fn_1028"></span>[238:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1036) 'For the Son of
man is come to save that which was lost' (Mat. xviii. 11). 'They that
are whole need not a physician.; but they that are sick. I came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance' (Luke v. 31, 32).

<span id="fn_1029"></span>[238:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1037) 'He that soweth
the good seed is the Son of man: the field is the world: the good seed
are the children of the kingdom; but the tares are the children of the
wicked *one:* the enemy that sowed them is the devil' (Mat. xiii.
37-39).

<span id="fn_1030"></span>[239:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1038) 'And the Word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us . . . full of grace and truth' (John
i. 14).

<span id="fn_1031"></span>[239:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1039) See the account
of the temptation of Jesus in Mat. iv. 3-10.

<span id="fn_1032"></span>[239:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1040) 'And he said
unto them, Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world; I
am not of this world' (John viii. 23).

<span id="fn_1033"></span>[239:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1041) The iniquitous
one of § 125, whom he calls their father, the devil.

<span id="fn_1034"></span>[239:5](sbe24085.htm#fr_1042) 'I know that ye
are Abraham's seed: but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no
place in you. I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye do
that which ye have seen with your father' (John viii. 37, 38).

<span id="fn_1035"></span>[240:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1043) 'If God were
your Father, ye would love me: for I proceeded forth and came from God;
neither came I of myself, but he sent me' (John viii. 42).

<span id="fn_1036"></span>[240:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1044) 'Why do ye not
understand my speech? *even* because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of
your *father* the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. He was
a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there
is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for
he is a liar, and the father of it. And because I tell *you* the truth,
ye believe me not' (John viii. 43-45).

<span id="fn_1037"></span>[240:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1045) 'He that is of
God heareth God's words: ye therefore hear *them* not, because ye are
not of God' (John viii. 47).

<span id="fn_1038"></span>[241:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1046) 'A good tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither *can* a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit' (Mat. vii. 18).

<span id="fn_1039"></span>[241:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1047) 'Even so every
good tree bringeth forth good fruit; but a corrupt tree bringeth forth
evil fruit' (Mat. vii. 17).

<span id="fn_1040"></span>[241:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1048) 'For every tree
is known by his own fruit: for of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of
a bramble bush gather they grapes' (Luke vi. 44).

<span id="fn_1041"></span>[241:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1049) 'But when he saw
many of the Pharisees and Sadducees come to his baptism, he said unto
them, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath
to come? . . . *Ye* serpents, *ye* generation of vipers! how can ye
escape the damnation of hell?' (Mat. iii. 7; xxiii. 33).

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[241:5](sbe24085.htm#fr_1050) 'O generation of
vipers! how can ye, being evil, speak good things?' (Mat. xii: 34).

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[241:6](sbe24085.htm#fr_1051) As he would have
implied if he considered him the father of those Jews. The author is
still arguing that the New Testament really confirms the existence of
two creators.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[242:1](sbe24085.htm#fr_1052) 'Every tree
which bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the
fire. . . . Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall
be rooted up' (Mat. iii. 10; xv. 13).

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[242:2](sbe24085.htm#fr_1053) 'He came unto
his own, and his own received him not' (John i. 11).

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[242:3](sbe24085.htm#fr_1054) 'Our Father
which art in heaven. . . . Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth,
as *it is* in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. . . . And lead
us not into temptation' (Mat. vi. 9-11, 13).

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[242:4](sbe24085.htm#fr_1055) 'Think not that
I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy,
but to fulfil' (Mat. v. 17).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](sbe24086)
