[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Zoroastrianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe24070)  [Next](sbe24072) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402156081/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Pahlavi Texts, Part III (SBE24)*, E.W. West, tr. \[1885\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

# *S*IKAND-GÛMÂNÎK VI*G*ÂR

### CHAPTER I.

1\. *In* the name of Aûha*r*ma*zd*, the lord, the greatest and wise,
\[the all-ruling, all-knowing, and almighty, (2) who is a spirit even
among spirits, (3) and from his self-existence, single in unity, *was*
the creation of the faithful. 4. He also created, by his own unrivalled
power, the seven supreme archangels <span
id="fr_634"></span>[1](#fn_626),\] all the angels of the spiritual *and*
worldly *existences*, (5) and the seven worldly characteristics <span
id="fr_635"></span>[2](#fn_627) which are man, animals, fire, metal,
earth, water, *and* plants.

6\. And man *was* created by him, as a control of the creatures, for the
advancement of *his* will. 7. From him likewise came <span
id="fr_636"></span>[3](#fn_628) *at* various times, through

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

his own compassion, mercifulness to his own creatures, religion, and a
natural desire of the knowledge of purity *and* contamination. 8. So,
also, *as to* the intellect, understanding, wisdom, knowledge,
consciousness, *and* guardian spirit—which are the appliances of the
soul that are seeking information of these spiritual appliances, the
five which are the sight, hearing, smell, taste, *and* touch, (9)
through the five worldly appliances, which are the eye, the ear, the
nose, the mouth, and the rubbing surfaces of the whole body—(10) he
likewise created man with the accompaniment of these appliances, for the
management of the creatures.

11\. He also created the religion of omniscience like an immense tree,
(12) of which *there* are one stem, two branches, three boughs, four
twigs, *and* five shoots <span id="fr_637"></span>[1](#fn_629). 13. And
its one stem is agreement. 14. The two branches are performance and
abstinence. 15. The three boughs are Humat, Hûkht, *and* Huvar*s*t,
which are good thoughts, good words, *and* good deeds. 16. The four
twigs are the four classes of the religion, by whom the religion *and*
world are prepared, (17) which are priesthood, warriorship, husbandry,
*and* artisanship. 18. The five shoots are the five rulers whose
scriptural names are the house-ruler, the village-ruler, the
tribe-ruler, the province-ruler, *and* the supreme Zaratû*s*t. 19. And
the one chief of chiefs, who is the king of kings, is the ruler of the
world.

20\. Likewise, the work manifested by him in the world—which is man—is
in the likeness of these four

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

classes of the world. 21. As unto <span id="fr_638"></span>[1](#fn_630)
the head is priesthood, (22) unto the hand is warriorship, (23) unto the
belly is husbandry, (24) *and* unto the foot is artisanship.

25\. So, also, of the four capabilities (hunarân) that are in man—which
are temper, ability, wisdom, *and* diligence—(26) unto temper (khîm) is
priesthood, as the greatest duty of priests is the temper that they do
not commit sin on account of shame and fear; (27) unto ability (hunar)
is warriorship, that is, the most princely adornment of warriors is the
ability which is expended, the manliness which is owing to
self-possession (khva*d*îh); (28) unto husbandmen is the wisdom
(khira*d*) which is strenuous performance of the tillage *of* the world,
*and* continuance unto the renovation *of the universe;* (29) *and* unto
artisans is the diligence (tukhshâkîh) which is the greatest advancement
of their class.

30\. This arrangement <span id="fr_639"></span>[2](#fn_631) of every
kind is upon one stem, truth and agreement, opposing the fiend and his
appliances which are co-existent. 31. These <span
id="fr_640"></span>[3](#fn_632), which are recounted by me, are of many
kinds *and* many species, as many are religious *and* many believing at
a period that all are mutually afflicting <span
id="fr_641"></span>[4](#fn_633),

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

co-existent destroyers *and* injurers, one as regards the other. 32.
*And* with the mutual afflictiveness, destructiveness, and combativeness
which are theirs, one towards the other, they <span
id="fr_642"></span>[1](#fn_634) afterwards also contend against the one
truth co-operatively *and* with united strength.

33\. The possession of truth is the one power of the faithful, through
the singleness of truth. 34. The many kinds of falsehood, *which* must
become confused *and* mutually afflicting to many, are, in the
aggregate, from one source of deceitfulness.

35\. *As to* that, this composition is provided by me, *who* am
Mar*d*ân-farukh <span id="fr_643"></span>[2](#fn_635) *son* of
Aûha*r*ma*zd*-dâ*d*, as I saw in the age much religiousness *and* much
good consideration of sects (kêshân) of many species; (36) and I have
been fervent-mindedly, *at* all times in my whole youthful career, an
enquirer *and* investigator of the truth of them. 37. For the same
reason I have wandered forth also to many realms and <span
id="fr_644"></span>[3](#fn_636) the seashore. 38. And of these
compendious statements which, owing thereto <span
id="fr_645"></span>[4](#fn_637), are an enquiry of those desiring the
truth, and <span id="fr_646"></span>[5](#fn_638) a collection and
selection (vi*g*î*d*anŏ) of

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

it, for these memoranda, from the writings and memoranda of the ancient
sages *and* high-priests of the just—and especially those of the
glorified Âtûr-pâ*d*îyâvand <span id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_639)—the
name *S*ikand-gûmânîk Vi*g*âr <span id="fr_648"></span>[2](#fn_640) is
appointed by me. 39. As it is very suitable for explaining away the
doubts of new learners about the thorough understanding of the truth,
the blessedness and truth of the good religion, and the inward dignity
of those free from strife.

40\. And it is composed and arranged by me not for the wise and
talented, but *for* preceptors (farhangîkân) <span
id="fr_649"></span>[3](#fn_641) *and* those newly qualified. 41. So
that, while many become freer from doubt about the miraculousness and
blessedness of the statements of the good religion and primitive faith,
(42) I am still begging of distinguished sages, (43) that whoever wants
to look, should not look <span id="fr_650"></span>[4](#fn_642) to the
religion of the particular speaker *and* composer, but to the greatness
of the truth, blessedness, and definite statements of the ancient sages.
44. Because I, who am the composer, do not hold the station of teaching,
but that of learning.

45\. And it seemed to me, through liberal thought, a statement, from
that knowledge of the religion, destined and important even for new
learners. 46. Because *he* who distributes to the worthy, out of the
little knowledge which is his, is more acceptable than *he* who knows
much *and* the worthy are without benefit *and* without help from him.

47\. Since those ancient sages decided, (48) that liberality is of three
kinds, of thought, of word, *and*

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

of deed. 49. Liberality of thought *being* that whose wishing of
happiness for any others whatever, of a like disposition, is as much as
for its own. 50. Liberality in word *being* that which teaches to the
worthy *something* out of every virtuous knowledge and information which
have come to it; (51) just as that which a *certain* sage said (52)
thus: 'I desire that I *may* understand all information which is
advantageous, and I *will* teach *it* to friends and acquire the result
which is obtainable.' 53. *And* the liberality which is in deed *being*
that which, out of any benefit whatever that has come to it, is a
benefit to the worthy.

54\. Again, *it* is a reminding of the good as to the preservation of
the soul; (55) *and* for the same reason I *have* arranged that while
the wise are kindly observant of me, through their own compassion, they
*may* remember about the immortality of the soul. 56. Since it is said,
that the eye of him who observes all good creatures with kind eyes is
the eye of the sun; (57) because the sun is, indeed, an observer and
beautifier with kind eyes for all creatures.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_626"></span>[117:1](sbe24071.htm#fr_634) The passage in
brackets is omitted in several Pahl. MSS., many of which commence at
this point, but it is found in K28, BM, and others, and also in the Pâz.
MSS. and Sans. version. The first epithet, 'all-ruling,' which it
contains is likewise omitted in a few Pâz. MSS., while others add a
further laudatory passage at that point, which is evidently a modern
interpolation. The seven archangels include Aûha*r*ma*zd* himself (see
Bd. I, 26 n).

<span id="fn_627"></span>[117:2](sbe24071.htm#fr_635) So in the Pahl.
MSS. and Sans. version, and also in MH 19 and PB3, which latter follows
the oldest Pâz. MS. (AK) very closely; but §§ 1-16 have been lost from
AK itself. Several other Pâz. MSS. substitute 'creations.'

<span id="fn_628"></span>[117:3](sbe24071.htm#fr_636) So understood by
Nêryôsang, but the original Pahlavi could have been translated by 'he
likewise sent,' because the Huzvâri*s* yâtûn*d*, 'came,' and
*s*e*dr*un*d*, 'sent,' are written alike.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[118:1](sbe24071.htm#fr_637) The last two terms
were, no doubt, Pahl. *s*âk and barg-gâh, of which the Pâz. dê*s*aa and
brî*s*aa are merely misreadings.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[119:1](sbe24071.htm#fr_638) Or 'over.' This
comparison of these four parts of the body to the four classes of men is
mentioned several times in the Dînka*rd*, especially in the latter part
of the fourth book.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[119:2](sbe24071.htm#fr_639) That is, the
ordinances of religion (see §§ 11-13).

<span id="fn_632"></span>[119:3](sbe24071.htm#fr_640) The various
heterodox religions, here assumed to be appliances of the fiend for
misleading mankind, which the author discusses in the course of his
arguments hereafter.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[119:4](sbe24071.htm#fr_641) Assuming that Pâz.
a*n*basã stands for Pahl. hanbêshin, as in Mkh. I, 37. It might be
hû-bêshin, 'well-afflicting,' but this would not be so easily reconciled
with the meaning 'inconsistent' which the word often assumes, as in
Chaps. XIII, 145, 147, XV, 77, XVI, 42.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[120:1](sbe24071.htm#fr_642) The heterodox
religions.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[120:2](sbe24071.htm#fr_643) As this name has
not been found elsewhere, nothing further is known about the author of
this work than can be gathered from the few statements he has made in
the work itself. He lived probably in the eighth or ninth century of the
Christian era, as he mentions the Dînka*rd* edited by Âtû*r*-frôbag in
Chaps. IV, 107, V, 92, IX, 1, 4, X, 57, XII, 1, and also the Rôshan
commentary prepared by Âtû*r*-frôbag's son (see Chaps. X, 53, 54, XI,
213); but he does not allude to the later edition of the Dînka*rd*,
prepared by .Âtûr-pâ*d*, son of Hêmî*d*, who was living in the latter
part of the ninth century (see Bd. XXXIII, ix n).

<span id="fn_636"></span>[120:3](sbe24071.htm#fr_644) Sans. 'on.' This
statement is very similar to that in Mkh. I, 35.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[120:4](sbe24071.htm#fr_645) Reading a*g*a*s*,
instead of the similarly-written afa*s*, 'and of it.'

<span id="fn_638"></span>[120:5](sbe24071.htm#fr_646) Reading afa*s*,
instead of a*g*a*s* here.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[121:1](sbe24071.htm#fr_647) See Chap. IV, 106.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[121:2](sbe24071.htm#fr_648) 'Doubt-dispelling
explanation.'

<span id="fn_641"></span>[121:3](sbe24071.htm#fr_649) Sans. has
'students.'

<span id="fn_642"></span>[121:4](sbe24071.htm#fr_650) Sans. has 'you
should not look.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](sbe24072)
