[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [The
Pacific](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](lww00) [Next](lww1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

## INTRODUCTION.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

A<span class="small">S THE</span> matter contained in this volume is
almost entirely new, and hitherto unknown to Europeans, it is necessary
to explain the source from which it was derived. It is in fact the
teachings of some of the old Tohungas (or priests, teachers, &c.) as
taught in the Whare-wānanga, or Maori College, for such that ancient
institution was in reality. In the late fifties of last century there
was a large gathering of Maoris in the Wairarapa District, East Coast of
New Zealand, the object being to discuss some political affairs; and on
the conclusion of the business it was suggested by some of the people
that the learned men there present should explain to the assembled
tribes how and when New Zealand was first peopled by the Maori race.
After three of the priests had consented to do so, one—Te
Matorohanga—was appointed to lecture on the subject, the other two to
assist by recalling matters that the lecturer might omit, and also to
supplement the story from their own knowledge. It was also decided that
the lectures should be written down, a work that was undertaken by two
young men named H. T. Whatahoro<span
id="page_i_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_i_note_*) and Aporo Te Kumeroa,<span
id="page_i_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_i_note_dagger) who had been
educuted at the Mission schools.

   Much matter was written down at that time; but it was amplified
subsequently by the old priest named above, and by one of his confrères
named Nepia Pohuhu, when H. T. Whatahoro spent some years, off and on,
in recording to the dictation of these old men, the ancient beliefs and
the history of their branch of the Maori people. The instruction given
by the priests was in every respect on the same lines, and dealt with
the same matter, as had been taught in the Maori College; that is, the
Scribe was subjected to all the ancient forms and rituals accompanying
the teaching, such as is described in Chapter I. hereof. A special
building was erected in which the teaching took place, and where the
matter taught was written down.

   The old priest Te Matorohanga died in 1884, and Nepia Pohuhu in
1882,<span id="page_i_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_i_note_ddagger) both
being at the time of their deaths about eighty years <span
id="page_ii">p. ii</span> old. It will thus be seen that they had been
taught in the Maori College long before the influences of Christianity
reached their tribe—indeed, it was not till about the end of the
thirties of last century, that the tribes of Wairarapa had Christian
teachers amongst them, though Christianity had been introduced in the
north in 1814, but little of its doctrines understood till many years
afterwards.

   The matter written down by H. T. Whatahoro during those years has
remained in his possession for over fifty years; it is contained in
several volumes of folio size, much of which has recently been copied
under the auspices of the tribal Committee known as 'Tāne-nui-a-rangi,'
and the copies deposited in the Dominion Museum, Wellington. The matter
in this volume, however, was copied by myself from the original
documents which were lent me for the purpose, and the whole of them bear
the seal of the 'Tāne-nui-a-rangi' Committee, and therefore shew that
the matter contained therein has the approval of that body, consisting
of the most learned men left of the Ngati-Kahu-ngunu tribe.

   It is strange that this valuable information should have remained in
their owners' hands for so long a period without becoming known to the
many collectors who have been at work for years past. As a matter of
fact the existence of the documents was known, but not the high value
attaching to them; and, therefore, the Polynesian Society is to be
congratulated on having obtained access to them. These ancient
traditions have, until lately, been considered by the tribe to be of too
sacred a nature to be disclosed to Europeans. But the advance of
civilization amongst the people, and the knowledge of the risk the
papers ran of being destroyed by fire or other accident, at last induced
their owner to allow them to be copied and be preserved in print.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   As explained in Chapter I., those old traditions were divided into
two distinct parts. The first dealing with 'Things Celestial'—Te
Kauwae-runga—(the supreme god Io; the birth of the minor gods through
the parentage of Heaven and Earth; the wars of the gods; creation of
Man, &c., &c.), and the second with 'Things Terrestrial'—Te
Kauwae-raro-(the more particularly historical parts dealing with the
history, migrations, &c., of the people). This volume will treat of the
first part only; the second will occupy another volume when funds allow
of its publication. Both parts will modify somewhat our present
knowledge of ancient Polynesian beliefs, and the history of the people;
for, hitherto, we have had to trust largely to the traditions collected
by Sir George Grey, Mr. John White, members of the Polynesian <span
id="page_iii">p. iii</span> Society, and others; but none of those
collectors ever obtained such valuable information as is herein given
for the first time; for instance, such as relates to the god Io and many
other things, nor, so far as is known, has any other branch of the
Polynesian race preserved the ancient beliefs in so complete a form as
these East Coast tribes of New Zealand.

   The transcription and translation of the matter contained in this
volume has occupied the writer some eighteen months. Luckily they were
clearly written and required no help from the original scribe on that
score. But when it came to the translation, the number of obsolete words
would have proved a serious embarrassment, had not the Scribe willingly
assisted in their elucidation. In the numerous interviews I had with him
he was able from his full knowledge to supply a large number of meanings
and of illustrative notes, which are now embodied in the text, or given
as foot-notes. Having been a student of the Polynesian languages and
traditions for over fifty years, during which time some of the most
learned men in this country have personally contributed to my
collections, I can say with certainty that H. T. Whatahoro is the most
learned man on these subjects it has ever been my lot to meet. And,
moreover, if he could not answer any of my questions—and they were very
numerous—he had the honesty to say so.

   I have endeavoured to make the translation follow the originals as
closely as the difference between English and Maori idioms admit
of—sometimes, perhaps, to the sacrifice of clearness. But it was deemed
better to do so, and to follow closely the original text, rather than to
write an essay on Maori Beliefs and Religion, which may possibly be
accomplished later on, when freedom from the limitations attaching to a
word to word translation will allow of a clearer exposition of such
beliefs. A frequent difficulty has met the translator in finding concise
English equivalents to the many obsolete words in the Maori text; the
Scribe informs me the frequency of these unknown words was pointed out
to the Sages, and their reply was that it was not proper to use ordinary
words for matters referred to in their teaching.

   The numerous notes that accompany the English Text will tend to a
better understanding of the subjects dealt with; but it is exceedingly
difficult for the European mind to occupy the same stand-point as that
of the Polynesian, and thus many things that are to the latter people
quite clear are to us very obscure. This is illustrated by the Sage's
description of the Pō—the æons of darkness preceding the birth of the
gods—the Pō, or ages of Hades, and their connection with the pō, or
night when the Sun is below the horizon, all apparently <span
id="page_iv">p. iv</span> clearly understood by the teachers of the
race, and yet to us presenting infinite difficulties of apprehension.

   Assuredly these ancient beliefs of a people that was less than a
hundred years ago in the stone-age, will offer to the student of
Comparative Mythology, an additional light on the working of the mind of
primitive man, in his efforts to account for the phenomena of nature.
And from the mere fact that these people have been isolated for,
probably, over two thousand years and having no contact with other races
of a higher culture, we have in their beliefs a practically unworked
field of inquiry dating from a very early period of the stone-age. The
Polynesian people, from the beginning of the Christian era when they
left Indonesia, have been 'side-tracked' as it were, and completely
isolated from contact with all other races of a higher civilization than
themselves, and have thus preserved a Mythology and Philosophy unique in
its nature, and perhaps purer and more free from outside influences than
that of most other races. At the same time there are many points of
contact with the beliefs of other peoples. Probably the identities or
similarities in belief are immensely ancient, and carry us back to a
period when one original cult was the common possession of the primitive
race from which the Polynesians sprang, subsequently modified and added
to according to the environment in which each branch found itself.

   This is not the place to dwell on the question as to where the
Polynesian race originally came from prior to its entrance into the
Pacific, though the writer believes that they can be traced back to
India, where at the present day, possibly, the Angami tribes of Assam
represent a belated branch, driven to the hills when the ancestors of
the Polynesians were expelled, and in those hills have been subjected to
many waves of Mongolian influence that have modified their race and
their language. But it may be suggested as a tentative theory that these
Caucasian Polynesians are an early branch of the Proto-Aryan migration
into India, and, it is thought, the matter in this volume, and in that
to follow, will afford support to that theory.<span
id="page_iv_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_iv_note_*) It is certain that many
of the Polynesian Myths and Traditions find their counterpart in those
of the Scandinavian, Celtic, Indian, and other branches of the Aryan
race; and it is suggested that in the Polynesian versions we are
frequently nearer to the originals as they obtained in primitive times
than in any other branch of the Caucasian race, because of the long
isolation of the people in <span id="page_v">p. v</span> their island
homes—just as so many of the northern myths have been preserved in their
greatest purity by the Icelanders, and from the same cause.

   In connection with this question of the origin of the people, it is
desirable to impress on the mind of the reader that so far as the
historical matter which is to follow this volume shews, the strong
probability is, that the ancestors of the Maori tribes, to whom is due
the preservation of these particular records, formed a later and
separate migration into the Pacific, the date of which cannot at present
be stated until a fuller and more complete study of the historical part
of the papers has been made. The early migrations of the Polynesians
seem to have made their first permanent home in the western portion of
the Southern Ocean—in the Fijian and Samoan Archipelagos—from whence
they spread to the east. But it is tolerably clear, that the East Coast
tribes of New Zealand, on leaving Indonesia, struck boldly across the
North Pacific and made the Hawaiian Islands where they settled for some
generations, and then, from causes which are not yet clear, departed due
south to Tahiti, where, after dwelling several generations, and during
which New Zealand was discovered by the navigator Kupe (a full history
of whose voyage is amongst the 'historical records,' to follow), the
people departed again for the newly discovered land, and settled down on
the East Coast of New Zealand in the middle of the fourteenth century.
The evidence of this cannot be given here; but if it is true that the
East Coast tribes were a separate and later migration into the Pacific,
some matters in which their history and traditions differ from those of
other tribes of New Zealand may be accounted for.

   In considering the teachings of the Ruanukus, or learned men, as
detailed in the following pages, the reader must ever bear in mind the
particular stand-point from which they were dictated—we must not lose
sight of the fact that the oriental plane of thought differs materially
from the occidental, as already pointed out. The gods were ever at hand,
continually interfering in the affairs of mankind, even becoming the
fathers of offspring by human women—not, however, that this is
peculiarly Polynesian. The spiritual enters into all relations of life,
whilst the gods are always, as is only to be expected, of an
anthropomorphic nature. There are many things related herein which we
unbelieving white people cannot give our assent to, but they were firmly
believed in by the old-time Maori, and probably in many such cases the
incidents, or the words used, had, to the old teachers an esoteric
meaning, most of which are now lost—see what the Sage says as to the
story of the 'fishing up' of lands in Chapter VI., it is according <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> to him a 'winter night's tale,' the esoteric
meaning of which has reference to the great catastrophe—the Polynesian
Ragnarok—that upset the world. Again, we have in part of the Sage's
teaching a story so full of obsolete words and names that the Scribe
could not help in the translation, but explained that it was a
recitation intended to be delivered to the common people, whilst its
true meaning was known only to the priests of old.

   It may be explained just here that the larger part of the teaching of
the Whare-wānanga (or College, house of learning) was never known to the
common people—it was too sacred. Especially was the name and all
connected with the supreme god Io, particularly sacred. His name was
never mentioned in the haunts of man. On the few occasions when he was
invoked the priests hied them away to the innermost recesses of the
forests and there invoked the all powerful supreme god-creator. So that
the common people never even heard his name except on some very rare
occasions when it entered into one of the invocations—and how rare this
was is proved by the absence of the name in the hundreds of *karakias*
(prayers, invocations, incantations, etc., etc.) that have been
collected and printed. In the same manner the genealogies from the gods
down to the Māui family were specially sacred, and never recited outside
the Whare-wānanga except on rare occasions; though from that period
onwards, i.e., from about fifty generations ago, these pedigrees were
the property of all. It is believed that the few prayers to Io, herein
incorporated, are the only ones in existence; they differ a good deal in
the form of composition from ordinary *karakias*, and are certainly of a
higher order than usual, though the translation is sadly lacking in the
power of the originals.

   It will be observed how frequently the number twelve enters into
these myths; there are twelve heavens<span
id="page_vi_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_vi_note_*), seventy gods (there are
indications that the number was seventy-two originally), the offspring
of Heaven and Earth, and in many other cases also this appears to be a
favourite or sacred number. When we consider also the thread of
Astronomical and Meteorological ideas that permeate much of the Sage's
teaching, we can scarce avoid a suspicion that the whole philosophy was
based largely and originally on Astronomy. It is certain that that
Polynesians were accurate observers of celestial phenomena; as even the
slight notices in Chapter V. hereof will show. They gave a name to the
celestial equator, and every prominent star, and were fully aware of the
rotundity of the earth as proved by the fact of finding new stars <span
id="page_vii">p. vii</span> as they went further north or south. It may
be that the number (twelve) of the Heavens is connected with the twelve
months and the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and that this is the origin
of their cosmogony. Had someone with a knowledge of Astronomy been
enabled to question these old Sages, I feel persuaded a great deal of
information on that subject might have been obtained, but now, alas! it
is too late. It will be remembered that the myths of northern Europe are
in like manner interwoven with Astronomical and Meteorological threads.
Like the northern myths also we have in these Polynesian beliefs, the
same ideas of the descent of natural phenomena and objects from the gods
in genealogical sequence; in other words the many gods—offsprings of
Heaven and Earth—were the creators of and ruled over many natural
objects—the waters, rocks, different species of animals, the elements,
etc.—but all acting as agents of the supreme god Io, who dwelt in the
twelfth Heaven, the final abode of those human spirits whose belief in
and love towards Io, entitled them to the entry into that heaven of
everlasting rest.

   It will possibly be thought that the idea of Io as the one supreme
god creator of all things, is derived from the Christian teachers of the
Maori people, and that it has been engrafted on to Maori beliefs in
modern times since Christianity was introduced. But I am assured not
only by the positive statement of the Scribe, but by internal
evidence—more particularly perhaps by the prayers to Io, which contain
so many obsolete words, and differ a good deal in form of composition
from ordinary *karakias*—that there is no foundation for such an idea.
The doctrine of Io is evidently a *bona-fide* relic of very ancient
times, handed down with scrupulous care generation after generation, as
the centre and core of the esoteric teaching of the Whare-wānanga. Had
this grand old legend been derived from European sources, there can be
no reasonable doubt that the the and doings of Jesus Christ would also
have been incorporated. But there is nothing like it; not the slightest
hint of it. Even the two incidents in Polynesian traditions which at
first sight might support the idea of a knowledge of our Lord's
life—those of Tawhaki and Māui—can be shown to have nothing to do with
it; the first named hero (who is not a god) can be identified with the
Greek hero Peleus, and Māui's visit to Hades (Māui was not a god, but a
hero) to destroy death in mankind is older than the commencement of the
Christian era, and probably also has its analogue in old world myths.

   The European knowledge of the god Io, dates from the early fifties of
last century, and is due to the late C. O. Davis, the well-known
Government Interpreter and Maori linguist. In his little book "The <span
id="page_viii">p. viii</span> Life and Times of Patuone," Auckland,
1876, p. 13, Mr. Davis says, . . . . "while travelling with a
distinguished Maori chieftain some years ago, he inadvertently revealed
the fact the Maoris in olden times worshipped a Supreme Being whose name
was held to be so sacred that none but a priest might utter it at
certain times and places. The name was Io, perhaps an abbreviation of
Io-uru. Witnessing my anxiety to obtain further information on the
subject, he refused to disclose any more Maori secrets as he called
them, and politely referred me to an old priest who resided about one
hundred miles off." Mr. Davis' Maori chieftain was one of the Nga-Puhi
tribe of the Bay of Islands, north New Zealand.

   Mr. John White, also one of the Government Interpreters, was
acquainted with the fact of the Maoris having a supreme god Io, but he
has left little on record about him.

   Mr. C. E. Nelson, a very learned Maori scholar, gathered from the
Ngati-whatua *ariki*, or head chief and priest, Te Otene-kikokiko, that
there was such a god, and he gave me the following names, or attributes
of the god Io:—Io-mua, Io-moa, Io-hunga, Io-uru, Io-hawai and Io-hana.
Mr. Nelson's informant would not mention these names near his village,
but took his friend away into the open land far from any buildings or
other contaminating object, and there disclosed these names. All of this
information comes from the north of New Zealand.

   There is little doubt that the late Judge F. E. Maning, author of
that charming book "Old New Zealand" was acquainted with the name of Io,
and much of the ritual pertaining to his cult. All these old settlers,
and excellent Maori scholars, knew a great deal more about the god Io
then they ever disclosed, I feel persuaded. They all had a sympathetic
loyalty to their old teachers and refrained from imparting what was
considered sacred knowledge. Times have, however, now changed and the
necessity for this reticence no longer exists.

   In addition to the knowledge of the East Coast Maoris, of the god Io,
I have in my possession an account of him and of the other minor gods
written for me by an old Ruanuku of the Tuhua country, on the branches
of the Upper Whanganui river, which, though much briefer than the
account herein given, is essentially the same, and goes to prove that
the idea of the supreme god was not derived from Christian sources.

   Whilst many of the chief gods of the 'Whanau-rangi,' or offspring of
the Sky father and Earth mother, were occasionally represented by wooden
figures, I have never heard the slightest indication that Io was ever so
materialized in the same manner. And here let it be said that these
wooden or stone figures were by no means idols; they were <span
id="page_ix">p. ix</span> simply the temporary resting places of the
spiritual gods, when the priests found occasion to call on them as
oracles.

   The Translator has been tempted to render into English many of the
proper names in the following chapters, hoping thereby to throw some
light on the origin of the myths—if they are true myths—and many names
are so obvious in meaning that there is no difficulty in translating
them, and are therefore given. Others present great difficulties, and
come within Max Muller's definition: "It is the essential character of
the true myth that it should no longer be intelligible by a reference to
a spoken language." ('Comparative Mythology,' p. 91, Routledge edition.)
Again he says, page 87: "It is in vain to attempt to solve the secret of
every name (in Aryan and other Mythologies); and no one has expressed
this with greater modesty than he who laid the most lasting foundation
of Comparative Mythology," viz: Grimm. There is always the doubt whether
the meanings of the names are correctly rendered by those of their
component parts as used in the ordinary and existing language. Since the
matter contained herein was originally composed, the Polynesian, like
all other languages, has been subject to secular changes, and therefore
the apparent meanings of words may not represent the original ideas
intended to be conveyed. It is only necessary to compare the various
dialects of Polynesian with Maori of the present day to understand what
changes may occur in even so short a period as 500 years, when the
latter people separated from the other branches of the race.

   There are some things in this series of religious traditions that
causes one to speculate as to whether, mixed up with them, there are not
some faint indications of a truly historical nature; such as stories of
very ancient migrations of the people related in the form of myth. Take
Tāne's visit to the uppermost Heaven to obtain 'the three baskets of
knowledge and the two sacred stones.' Can this not be rendered as the
return of some leading chief to an ancient Fatherland to procure the
knowledge of ritual and laws lost, or becoming corrupted, by a migrant
people? Possibly some support is given to this idea by another
tradition, which relates that Tāne went to some foreign country named
Taranga (the Kalana of Hawaiian story), and brought back from there some
trees, plants and fruits which he planted in his own country. Again, the
story of Mataora's visit to Hades (Chapter VI.), where he found a white
race whose customs differed from his own, and from whence he brought the
knowledge of tattooing and carving—is this not the account of a visit to
some country adjacent to the Fatherland, more advanced in civilization,
than his own? It is difficult, however, to point to a white or fair
people with flaxen hair, who practised <span id="page_x">p. x</span>
tattooing. The only fair people that might possibly answer the
description were the colonists left in Bactria and Parthia, and even in
the Punjab, by Alexander the Great in the fourth century before Christ,
but whether they were 'flaxen haired' or used tattoo, the absence of
books of reference precludes me from ascertaining. The Rarotongan
genealogies which are probably more extensive (and at the same time
accurate) than those of most branches of the race, carry their history
back to the fourth century before Christ, when they were living in a
country which so many things seem to indicate as India, and therefore
the ancestors of Polynesians might have known Alexander's fair Greek
colonists. All this, however, is mere speculation; but still, the white
race known to Polynesian traditions has to be accounted for, and the
above may serve some future investigator as an indication where to look
for it.

   Again, another subject for speculation arises in 'the sanctification
of Tāne' prior to his ascent of Maunga-nui (the great mountain) where he
received the command of the supreme god Io to visit him in order to
obtain the 'three branches of knowledge and the two sacred stones' (see
Chapter III.). One cannot help seeing in this incident a certain
similarity to the visit of Moses to Mount Sinai to receive the 'tables
of the law.' In connection with the sacred stones acquired by Tāne,
there are not wanting some indications, faint though they be, that they
were inscribed, as were those of Holy writ, but what the nature of the
inscription was is utterly lost. There are a few indications in Maori
lore to the effect that in very ancient times the people were acquainted
with some kind of script, though of what nature is now entirely lost.
The Easter Island inscriptions are perhaps a degenerate recollection of
this old script; that is—which remains to be proved—if those tablets are
really of Polynesian origin. In suggesting a coincidence between the
stories of Moses and Tāne, in this particular instance, it must not be
supposed that the writer would derive the one incident from the other.
To do so would only add to the more than once suggested idea that the
Polynesians are one of the 'lost tribes of Israel,' for which there is,
we think, no real foundation, notwithstanding many similarities between
Polynesian and Semitic customs, and some affinities perhaps in the
structure of their two languages. Most things seem to point to an Aryan
rather than a Semitic connection; and perhaps this acquisition of the
*wānanga* (knowledge) by Tāne may have its analogue in the records of
other ancient nations, to ascertain which requires access to libraries
of reference not open to the writer. I content myself, therefore, with
merely indicating the apparent coincidence, leaving it to the future
student of the Polynesian race to explain it.

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

   In the account of the "Overturning of the Earth" (Chapter III. and
VI.) we have also the idea of a general dispersion of mankind to the
four quarters of the earth, after the cataclysm, which in Holy Writ took
place after the building of the Tower of Babel, a very ancient story,
originating, it is said, from early Babylonia. The account given by our
Sage of this event is very brief and only used by him as an
illustration, but in the other legends it is described much more fully,
and is therein closely akin to the Biblical and Babylonian story of the
Deluge; whilst another account appears to assign a mental rather than a
physical character to this 'overturning.' Whether the Polynesian
accounts are derived from the Babylonian (or visa versa) is open to
discussion; but in both there is the same idea of a great catastrophe
followed by the dispersal of mankind to the four quarters of the earth.
This great cataclysm is of course known to other races than the two
mentioned above, and in some form or other appear to be of world-wide
extent. We shall return to this question of a Polynesian knowledge of
Babylonians, when dealing in the 'Historical records' with the people
who came from 'the Land of the Uru' (Maspero's rendering of 'the Ur of
the Chaldees'), and which people expelled the Polynesians from their
Fatherland, which we hold to be India.

   In considering this series of religious beliefs a question arises as
to whether, in very ancient days, there has not been an amalgamation of
two separate beliefs—whether, in fact, it is not the case that the
doctrine of Io, the one supreme god, has not been superposed on that of
the doctrine of Rangi and Papa (the Sky-father and Earth-mother), or
*visa versa*. The extreme sacredness of all connected with the name of
Io, the much higher plane of thought which is embodied in an his
attributes, the fact that his name was practically known to none but the
few innitiates, seems to point to a much higher degree of culture than
the doctrines of Rangi and Papa, the knowledge of whose doings was the
property of all, high and low. This, it is suggested, is a matter worthy
of further consideration by those who have the time to study the
question with the light that other ancient beliefs may throw on it.<span
id="page_xi_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_xi_note_*)

   It will be noticed in what follows that the souls, or spirits, of the
dead on their arrival at Hawaiki, the temple situated in the Fatherland,
were divided into two classes—those who 'shewed love for' Io; ascended
after purification to the twelfth Heaven to live in everlasting peace
with <span id="page_xii">p. xii</span> the supreme god; whilst those who
'shewed love to' Whiro, the evil spirit, descended to Hades to dwell
there with him and the other god and goddess of that realm. There is
nothing to indicate that any system of judgment was applied to these
spirits; it was a matter of choice, of free will, as to which should be
their future home. It is true the Scribe informs me that those spirits
that in their human form had been guilty of the two heinous sins of
treachery and murder, perforce were relegated to Hades. But I am
doubtful if his knowledge of Christian doctrines has not here coloured
his statement, for it is not supported by anything in the teaching of
the Sages. This belief in the free will of the spirits seems to be
derived from the incidents connected with the 'wars of the gods' (see
Chapter III.), where some of the gods elected to support the side of
Tāne, others that of Whiro, and as "gods are immortal men," according to
Max Muller, it was a natural deduction that men should possess this
freedom of choice exercised by the gods.

   We have referred above to the 'three baskets of knowledge and the two
stones' brought down from Heaven by the god Tāne—for particulars of
which see Chapter III. The word used is *kete*, which is the common term
for a basket; but the Scribe tells me it is so used emblematically for a
'repository,' and in the description of the contents of the 'baskets'
given in Chapter III., we there learn that these were the three main
divisions of knowledge as taught in the Whare-wānanga. Each 'basket' may
be roughly described as a syllabus pertaining to these 'baskets' was
also the knowledge of the *karakias*, or invocation, etc., necessary to
the ritual of the Whare-wānanga, some of which are given in Chapters I.
and III. It is these latter, no doubt, Whiro, the evil spirit, was so
anxious to obtain from Tāne on his return from Heaven, for without these
*karakias* the teaching lost its character of permanancy and its *măna*,
or power, prestige, etc.

   The *Whatu-kura*, or stones brought down by Tāne, are described as
like *huka-a-tai* and *rehu-tai*, sea-foam and sea-spray, evidently
brilliantly white in colour; and these particular 'heavenly stones' have
become the forerunners of all such stones right through the ages when
used in the ceremonies of the Whare-wānanga, even from the Fatherland
down to the time when the 'house of learning' ceased as an institution.
The probability is that these white *whatu-kura* were large crystals as
first used in the original homes of the people; and on their migrations
they would be carried with them and used as links connecting each new
Whare-wānanga with those of old in other lands. The use of sacred stones
is characteristic of the Polynesians as we may learn from many things.
So far as their use in the Whare-wānanga is concerned <span
id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span> they were considered to give authority to
those who taught, and permanency in the matters taught, on the part of
the pupils. They were talismanic in nature. Of course the belief in the
sacredness, power, and *măna* of similar stones is not confined to the
Polynesians. Do we not place great faith in the virtues of the stone
that underlies the Coronation Throne of our Sovereigns?

   The reader must not confuse the name for these stones, *whatu-kura*,
with the similar one for a certain class of gods, called also
Whatu-kura.

   The heavenly origin and sacred character of these *whatu-kura*
(which, by the way, means 'stone of knowledge,' or 'precious stone'—for
*kura* is knowledge of a high order, and equally means precious), is
also ascribed to the two famous *toki*, or axes, 'Te Awhio-rangi' and
'Te Whiro-nui,' both used by the god Tāne when he severed the limbs of
the Sky-father and Earth-mother as they clung to one another at the time
the gods separated them. The second of these axes was left behind in
Tahiti when Tamatea-ariki-nui and his followers departed from that
island in the 'Taki-timu' canoe for New Zealand in the middle of the
fourteenth century. The first one—'Te Awhio-rangi' was brought with the
migration, and evidently, at that period had come to be looked on much
as a god. It is said that by its aid the storms encountered on the
voyage were 'felled'—for such is the term used. It is difficult for the
occidental mind to understand any process by which an axe, however
gifted with *măna*, could effectually oppose the elements in their
might. But such is the Maori belief; and their explanation to the effect
that it was the *măna* of the axe, i.e. its supernatural power, scarcely
seems to us a sufficient one. This celebrated axe was given as a
marriage dower by its then owners to Tāne-roroa, daughter of Turi,
captain of the 'Aotea' canoe, some time after the great migration to New
Zealand *circa* 1350, and still remains a venerated and sacred property
of the Nga-Rauru tribe of the West Coast. No white man has been allowed
to see it—it is far too sacred—but it is known by description to differ
much in shape and material from the ordinary axe.<span
id="page_xiii_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_xiii_note_*) The 'heavenly origin'
of these sacred axes may possibly be translated as expressing the fact
that they were brought away from the Fatherland when the people first
migrated from there, and have accompanied them on their wanderings for
many centuries, until the one found a final resting place
(traditionally) in Tahiti, the other in New Zealand.

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

   We may witness in these ancient myths the effort of primitive man to
get behind the veil of nature and adduce therefrom a sufficient cause
for all phenomena, and an endeavour also to deduce from them an
authority and a precedent for many of their (lately) existing customs.
In this manner they have produced a system of philosophy that to their
minds furnished a sufficient explanation of all things, the why and the
wherefore thereof, and their origin. That the generative principle
acting through the male and female sexes (a principle with which all
things are imbued) permeates their whole philosophy, is, perhaps, only
to be expected; for after all that is the most natural cause tending to
production that would first present itself to the primitive mind of
mankind from daily observations of nature around him. But although the
above is generally true, an exception must be made as to one of their
customs—that of the *tapu*—for neither in these traditions, nor any
others from any part of Polynesia, is any explanation of its origin
given. We are, therefore, reduced to surmise as to the origin of the
custom, and it is perhaps a fair inference to deduce it from the strict
prohibition at the command of the supreme god Io, to the effect that
neither god, nor spirit, nor man, might enter his presence without due
command. His realm was most strictly *tapu*. It is obvious that such an
origin of the *tapu* could only be assigned after the whole system of
belief had taken due form.

   It is probable a little difficulty will be experienced by the reader
who goes through this volume for the first time, in understanding the
positions and functions of the various classes of gods mentioned. In
order to render the task easier, and to bring these classes into one
purview for reference, the divisions are given as follows, such classes
being, however, merely for the convenience of the reader, and are not
described as classes by the Sage.

<table data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP">   1.</td>
<td><strong>Io</strong>—the supreme god, creator of all things, dwelling in the twelfth, or uppermost Heaven, where no man or god might enter except by command.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP">   2.</td>
<td><strong>The Whatu-kura</strong>, the male gods, or spirits, dwelling in the eleven Heavens, beneath the uppermost, who frequently acted as the means of communication between Io and the gods in the sixth class. Of these gods there were a few who were allowed to dwell in the uppermost Heaven as guardians of the 'Heavenly treasures'; their names were Rehua, Aitu-pawa, Rua-matua (or Rua-tau), Puhao-rangi and Tau-o-Rongo.<br />
   They were used by Io as special messengers on special occasions to communicate his commands to the gods of class <span id="page_xv">p. xv</span> six. There is nothing to indicate that these four had wives, though the others had.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP">   3.</td>
<td><strong>The Mareikura</strong>, tho female gods of the eleven Heavens; they were the wives of the Whatu-kura. Both these gods and goddesses are sometimes called Apa-Whatu-kura and Apa-Mareikura.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP">   4.</td>
<td><strong>The Apa</strong>, or messengers, and servitors of the Whatu-kura; these were both male and female; they are sometimes symbolically represented by whirlwinds.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="TOP">   5.</td>
<td><strong>The Pou-tiri-ao</strong>, the guardian spirits; all things in Heaven and Earth had their guardian spirits. They were appointed to their duties by Io through Tāne, the most famous of the sixth class and one of the offspring of Heaven and Earth. All Pou-tiri-ao were subservient to the Whatu-kuras whose duty it was to oversee and regulate their operations.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="TOP">   6.</td>
<td><strong>The Whanau-a-Rangi</strong>. The seventy gods (or atua) offspring of the Sky-father (Rangi-nui) and Earth-mother (Papa-tua-nuku) who after coming forth from within the embrace of their parents, dwelt on earth and the space between Earth and Heaven, making occasional visits to the other Heavens on command of Io, the Supreme God. Their names will be found in Chapter III.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The word *Atua* (god, spirit) is applied to all the above beings. There
is another class of gods in the Maori Pantheon, none of which find
mention in the doctrines of the 'Kauwae-runga,' or 'Things Celestial.'
These latter gods are the war and tribal gods, who, so far as can be
made out, were always men deified for their valour, knowledge, or other
quality appealing to the Maori. Max Muller says, "Men are mortal gods,
and gods are immortal men."

   Of the offspring of Heaven and Earth in class six above, there were a
few who took a very prominent part in the proceedings of those gods when
they once had forced ther way into the Ao-marama, or World of Light, and
this they continued to do down to the introduction of Christianity. Of
these Tāne, or Tāne-matua (Tāne-the-parent) or Tāne-nui-a-rangi
(Great-Tāne-of-Heaven) occupied the foremost place notwithstanding that
he was the sixty-eighth son of his parents. After Tāne (which means
'male of mankind,' not of animals—as we shall see), it was he who made
the first human woman, and hence is he called Tāne-matua
(Tāne-the-parent) came Tangaroa-a-mua, eighth son of his parents, who,
on being appointed a god of ocean, together with Kiwa, took the name of
Tangaroa-a-tai (Tangaroa-of-the-sea). Then <span id="page_xvi">p.
xvi</span> came Tu-mata-uenga (Tu-of-the-angry-face) with many other
sobriquets, eleventh son, the powerful and dreaded god of war. After Tu
came Tamakaka, and then Rongo-marae-roa, fourteenth son, the god of
peace and all agricultural pursuits. These were the principal gods of
the 'world of light,' whilst Whiro-te-tipua, sixth son, was a god of the
Pō, of darkness, of Hades, and representative of all evil in this world,
the under-world and the heavens above. With Whiro in his function of god
of Hades, was associated Whakaru-au-moko, the seventieth and youngest
son of the Sky-father and Earth-mother, who was god of volcanic force,
eruptions, earthquakes,<span
id="page_xvi_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_xvi_note_*) etc.; and as goddess of
those regions was Hine-nui-te-Pō—Great-lady-of-night—(the daughter of
the god Tāne), who 'drags men down to death.' The functions of the other
gods forming the Whanau-a-Rangi (the family of the Sky-father) will be
learned from Chapters III. and IV.

   To these principal members of the Whanau-a-Rangi—Tāne, Tangaroa, Tu,
Rongo and Whiro—the old recitations, *karakias*, and songs are full of
references, and, moreover, the same five gods are known to every branch
of the Polynesian people, though not in some cases holding the places of
supreme importance assigned them by the Maori branch. We shall see in
the chapters that follow what an important rôle Tāne plays in the family
of gods; and there are evidence in the traditions of some other branches
of the race that he held the same exalted position in former times in
their beliefs. But through causes that are not quite clear, he has, in
some branches, been superseded by Tangaroa, who indeed, in the cases of
Samoa and Tahiti appears to hold the place of the god-creator. In later
times the local god Oro (or as the Rarotongans call him, Koro—the
Tahitians do not now use the letter 'K') seems to have superseded all
others in Tahiti. That Oro was not one of the principal gods originally
is proved by not finding his name in the Pantheons of any other branch
of the race. He was, it is suggested, like many of the tribal gods, a
deified man originally, only obtaining eminence after the Maori people
left Tahiti in the fourteenth century, otherwise, his name would be
found embodied in Maori traditions. Again, Rongo (or to give his full
name according to the Maoris—Rongo-marae-roa, which may be translated as
Rongo-of-the-far-extending-plaza (or fields), referring to the
culturable portions of the earth subject to his domain as god of
agriculture), seems to have taken a supreme place in the beliefs of the
Mangaia islanders of the Cook group, about whom we know a good <span
id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> deal, thanks to Dr. Wyatt Gill's writings.
As to how it comes about that the Maori god of peace and agriculture
should develop into the fierce, 'man-eating' god of Mangaia, is not yet
explained. Whiro, the personification of evil, is known to all branches
of the race, generally as the 'god of thieves,' originally so called, it
is suggested, through his stealing the souls of the dead and placing
them in the realms of Hades, over which he presides. Whakaru-au-moko,
the second god of Hades is known to other branches of the race as
Mauika, Mauiké, Maufuié, etc., and appears to be represented in Hawaii
by Pele, or Pele-honua-mea, goddess of volcanoes, which name is in
Maori, Para-whenua-mea, a synonym for the overturning of the earth, the
deluge, and the effect thereof, and a goddess, offspring of one of the
'family of the Sky-father.' In Maori traditions, Mahuika plays a
prominent part, and was the father of the great hero Māui, from whom the
latter obtained fire in the underworld.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   In this account of "Things Celestial," two of the Sages of the
Whare-wānanga have been quoted, and principally Nepia Pohuhu. The
teaching of the other—Te Matorohanga—are much fuller than those of the
former; but financial considerations have obliged us to adopt Pohuhu's
matter because they are briefer, though, at the same time, containing
nearly all that is essential; and his teaching has been supplemented
occasionally by those of Te Matorohanga where necessary. It is to be
hoped that the latter's teaching may be printed in full some time.

   The Translator's notes of explanation are shown in square
brackets—\[   \].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](lww1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_i">p. i</span>

<span id="page_i_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_i_fr_*) A member of the
Polynesian Society. Still hale and hearty at the age of 72.

<span id="page_i_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_i_fr_dagger) A member of
the Polynesian Society. Died 1911.

<span id="page_i_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_i_fr_ddagger) These
teachers will be referred to generally in what follows: as 'the Sage';
and H. T. Whatahoro as 'the Scribe.'

<span id="footnotes_page_iv">p. iv</span>

<span id="page_iv_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_iv_fr_*) See the
Translator's views on this question in "Hawaiki, the original home of
the Maori," 3rd Edition, Whitcombe and Tombs, Christchurch, N.Z., 1910.

<span id="footnotes_page_vi">p. vi</span>

<span id="page_vi_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_vi_fr_*) It should be noted
that with other tribes of New Zealand and Polynesia the heavens are ten
in number.

<span id="footnotes_page_xi">p. xi</span>

<span id="page_xi_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_xi_fr_*) In this connection
it is worth while studying what Prof. Gustav Oppert says in his work,
"The Original Inhabitants of Bharatavarsa or India," where he deduces
the Hindu belief in one Supreme God, from the ancient belief in a large
number of gods, all powerful in their periods, but finally superseded by
one Supreme God, who is in many of his attributes very similar to Io.

<span id="footnotes_page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

<span id="page_xiii_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_xiii_fr_*) See 'Journal
Polynesian Society,' Vol. IX., p. 229, for full account of this axe.

<span id="footnotes_page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

<span id="page_xvi_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_xvi_fr_*) In one place the
Sage includes Mataaho, as a god of the under-world, after whom is named
the 'overturning of the world,' but he is not one of the 'family of the
Sky-father.'

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
