[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [The
Pacific](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](lww1) [Next](lww3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

## CHAPTER II.

> <span class="small">The Sage's warning and admonition to this and
> succeeding generations—The Philosophy of the Whare-wānanga; the nature
> of Matter, &c., of the Pou-tiri-ao, or Guardian Spirits—Io-matua, the
> Supreme God—The Temple named Hawaiki.</span>

 

### THE SAGE'S WARNING AND ADMONITION TO THE PRESENT GENERATION.

NOW, I \[Te Matorohanga\] have another word to say; so you may be clear
on this subject. Be very careful in reciting these valuable teachings
that your ancestors have collected during the past generations right
away from the period of Rangi \[the Sky-father\] and Papa \[the
Earth-mother\] down to the present day. Notwithstanding, that the
teachings from the Whare-wānanga are now mere shreds, because they are
no longer combined, some still remain whilst others are lost; some parts
diverge \[from the originals\] and to some additions have been made.
This is in consequence of the decadence of the power, authority and
prestige of the conduct of the various rituals, of the \[abrogation of\]
the *tapu*, of the \[unbelief in\] the gods, until, at the present time,
there is none of the ancient *măna*, or power left—all things have
changed. The *tapu* has ended; the true teaching has been lost; as well
as the *karakia* \[invocations, etc.\], the meanings of which are now
\[comparatively\] unknown. Because the *tapu* was all important—the
first of all things; without it none of the powers of the gods were
available, and without the aid of the gods all things are without
authority and ineffectual;<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#note_1) the \[mind
of man\] is now in a state of confusion \[literally, like a whirlwind\],
as are all his deeds; the land is the same. The Whare-wānangas, the
*karakias*, the *tuāhus* \[altars\], the *pures* \[or sanctification\]
of man of different kinds, baptism of men with water, are all abandoned.
So also are the powers to <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> attract fish
and birds,<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#note_2) or to influence the growth
of food-plants. At the present time, different *karakias*, different
methods, different *tapus*, even a different language prevails. Hence it
is that the present teaching differs from that of the old priests, such
as has been explained above \[and as follows in later chapters\]; and
hence also it is that I impress on you the \[former\] aspect of these
things, that you may be clear as to the descent of the *măna-atua*,
\[the god-like powers\] even from Io \[the Supreme God\], and from the
Whatu-kuras, Mareikuras, and the Apas of each separate heaven, down to
the Patu-pai-arehe and Turehu.<span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#note_3) At the
present time those kinds of gods no longer exist; they have become
degraded into reptiles, stones, and trees—such are the present gods. And
the \[true, original\] reptile-gods, stone-gods, tree-gods no longer
exist. Men now live in a wilderness; they are careless of these things;
of everything. It is for this reason that no *măna* \[adequate power to
make use of and apply this ancient knowledge\] will be attained by you;
and I also say to you that those things which you are writing \[from my
dictation\] are but the ends, fragments, of the truth, a portion only of
sacred things; the \[anciently\] established and true teaching has
become effaced, as well as the \[science of\] the *tapu*, together with
the true god-like powers that descended from Io-the-great,
Io-the-parentless. Enough of these words to you.

 

### THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE WHARE-WANANGA— THE NATURE OF MATTER, ETC.

   Now, let it be clearly understood about Tama-nui-te-rā
\[the-great-son—the sun\], and Te Marama-i-whanake \[the-waxing-moon\]
and their younger brethren, the stars. All of these are worlds \[with
their\] earth, waters, rocks, trees, mountains, open places and plains.
\[On this earth\] the ocean and the rivers made the plains and open
places which we see. It was the gods Mataaho and Whakaru-au-moko<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#note_4) that <span id="page_106">p. 106</span>
changed \[the surface of the earth\] and caused the present ill
condition of the plains and rivers.

   This is to be clearly understood: All things have their being through
water and fire. If there were soil alone, the land would be dead,
without water and fire; water without land and fire would be dead; fire
without water and land would be dead. Hence, these three things combined
give life to the land, and to each other, and to all things that grow
and live and have their own forms, whether trees, rocks, birds,
reptiles, fish, animals, or men. It is these three things that give life
to them all. It is the same with the sun, the moon and the stars; they
are worlds; earth, water and fire give them their form; and the same
actuate all things.

   Now, the *hau*, or *hau-mapu*, the air, is the complement<span
id="fr_5"></span>[5](#note_5) of all things, whether of the earth or the
heavens, the sun, the moon, or the stars. It is this that continues, or
holds, the life of all things—hence are there four in all. If there were
the earth, the ocean, fire, or air alone, nothing would exist, nor have
shape, or growth—nothing would have life. Hence, be ye clear, it is
through the *earth, water, fire and air* combined, that all things have
form and life.

   \[This idea of the four elements is not Polynesian alone, as the
following quotation shews. The Yezidi are an Aryan people, and hence the
belief of the old Maoris in the four elements may be claimed as another
"Aryan and Polynesian point of contact."

   'Journal of the Royal Anthropological Society,' Vol. XLI., p. 217. In
Mr. W. H. Heard's paper—"Notes on the Yezidis"—a peculiar people living
in the Mosul district of Asiatic Turkey, on the Tigris river, will be
found this statement:—"I have created four elements of the earth to
fulfil the needs of men, which are water, earth, wind and fire." This is
the second verse of the IV. Chapter of the Holy Book of the Yezidis,
called Jelwet, and is supposed to have been written by their god.

   Also on the same page as above, being the last verse of Chapter IV.,
we find:—

   "Ye must not utter my name, nor speak of my shape, for if ye do it is
a sin. . . . " This, also, is exactly the doctrine of the cult of Io;
his name was never mentioned outside the inner circle of priesthood
<span id="page_107">p. 107</span> and the pupils who afterwards became
high-chiefs, or priests. It was only by the mearest accident that his
name first became known to Europeans—the Missionaries never heard of it,
and it was not until the old and learned Maoris came to know that there
were Europeans who took a real interest in their ancient knowledge, and
could be trusted not to despise their knowledge, that some further items
were learnt by degrees, but never so fully as in these pages.

   But, of course, the idea of the four elements is not confined to
Polynesians and the Yezidi, it was the common belief of our ancestors at
one time. The interesting question arises, did the Polynesians evolve
the idea from their own study of nature, or did they learn it from some
other race or nation?\]

   It is the same with the Rangi-tu-haha \[the whole of the heavens\],
including the Toi-o-nga-rangi \[the upper-most heaven, the abode of
Io\], each has its own form of everything \[within them\]; with its own
form of life suited to each. The earth has its own form of life, as has
the water, fire, trees, rocks; all plants of every description have
their own particular form of life. The air, the sun, the moon, the
stars, have their own form of life. Whatever there is in this world, or
in the Rangi-tu-haha, all have the same \[i.e., their own special form
and life\]. Everything, also, that has been mentioned above has a spirit
\[*wairua*, spirit, soul\] of its own similar to itself, each one has a
spirit.<span id="fr_6"></span>[6](#note_6)

   Io-te-wānanga \[Io-the-omnierudite\] of the heavens is the origin of
all things. These are the things that Io-mata-ngaro
\[lo-the-unseen-face\] retained to himself; the spirit and the life and
the form; it is by these that all things have form according to their
kind. Now this is clear to you.

   You must also be clear on this point: There is nothing made by the
god Io that has not an end; everything has a termination, whether it be
a drought, burning by fire, injury by water, by the wind, by earthly
injuries,<span id="fr_7"></span>[7](#note_7) by the sun, or the moon,
excepting always those forms that the god himself decreed should have an
end in this world, or other worlds.<span id="fr_8"></span>[8](#note_8)

   \[At this point one of the audience, Rihari Tohī, exclaimed, 'O Sir!
How did the things you are teaching become known? Perhaps they <span
id="page_108">p. 108</span> are only things that you Tohungas (priests)
think?' Te Matorohanga replied,\]

   I have told you that the *wānanga* \[or knowledge\] was brought down
by Tāne-nui-a-rangi \[Great Tane-of-heaven, see Chapter III.\] from Te
Toi-o-nga-rangi \[the highest of the heavens\], from the place named
Rauroha—the great *pa* \[enclosure, a fort\] of the Whatu-kuras,
Marei-kuras, and the innumerable hosts of the Rangi-tu-haha \[the twelve
heavens\], from the temple Rangi-atea \[see introduction to Chapter I.\]
where were suspended the *wānanga* of each world, of each heaven, of
each 'plane'<span id="fr_9"></span>[9](#note_9) of the heavens and the
worlds. Tāne-nui-a-rangi begged \[of Io\] the delivery to him of the
*wānanga* of Rangi-nui and Papa-tua-nuku \[the Sky-father and
Earth-mother\]. This was assented to by Io-the-father; and this
knowledge was then brought from Rauroha in heaven to Whare-kura<span
id="fr_10"></span>[10](#note_10) on earth, and there deposited. Enough!
This \[that I am teaching you\] is that same *wānanga* \[learning\],
abstracted from the three 'baskets' \[divisions of knowledge\]. What
would be the good of the teaching if these things were not contained
therein, the *wānanga* would not be a valuable property—there would be
no value in such a *wānanga*.<span id="fr_11"></span>[11](#note_11)

   O Son! Be strong! You have nearly completed the Kauwae-runga
\[Celestial things\], and then we shall go to the Kauwae-raro
\[Terrestrial things\] so that you may quickly gather all these matters.
Now, my word to you is: Do not disclose these matters to strangers.
Leave them as a 'strengthening knowledge' for you, your brethren, your
children and your grand-children, to enable you to hold your own in the
*marae*<span id="fr_12"></span>[12](#note_12) of strangers. For thou art
the descendant of Nuku-tama-roro, Nuku-te-moko-ta-hou<span
id="fr_13"></span>[13](#note_13) as also am I that address thee. I would
not disclose to you all the precious things of the Whare-wānanga, had
thou been quite a stranger; but I observe that thou art intelligent and
quick to learn, and that thou wilt retain what is taught. I am much
pleased that thou art preserving these matters in writing; and my word
to you is, collect the matter of both the Kauwaes, and do <span
id="page_109">p. 109</span> not gossip about your ancestors or the Apas
\[messengers of the gods\]. Do not defile these things, lest evil befall
you. \[I thus warn thee because\] I notice that the present day houses
are used solely for storing food; there are no *tapu* houses as thy
ancestors had. Hence, I thus direct thee, that thou mayest ever bear it
in thy mind.

 

### THE POU-TIRI-AO, OR GUARDIAN ANGELS<span id="fr_14"></span>[14](#note_14) OR SPIRITS.

   Behold! At the time that the *wānanga* \[knowledge\] was brought down
to Whare-kura \[the fifth temple, see introduction to Chapter I.\] by
Tāne-the-water-of-life, \[identical with Tāne-matua and many other
names\], by Ruatau, Pawa, and the Whatu-kuras of Te Toi-o-nga-rangi
\[the uppermost heaven\]; the Pou-tiri-ao were appointed by them to all
places; to the sun, to the moon, to the stars, to the clouds, to the
winds, to the oceans, to Hades—that is, to Rarohenga at Te Muriwai-hou.
. . . . . . .

   The Pou-tiri-ao, of the heavens and the planes of those heavens are
eleven in number.<span id="fr_15"></span>[15](#note_15) They have been
appointed by the Whatu-kuras of Io to the heavens and planes, with all
pertaining to them. Now, the following is obvious to the thoughts; the
sun causes death, in that \[his rays\] kill growing things; it is not
the case that he produces good only. The moon also causes destruction to
earthly things, the wind does likewise, as do the trees. But I will be
brief: Hence, there is nothing in the world without evil; and, hence,
also all things have evil as well as good.

   This was the reason that the Pou-tiri-ao were appointed to all things
to take care that they run their courses properly, and lest the things
of this world quarrelled among themselves; and to prevent anger, which
was wrong according to the ideas of the Pou-tiri-ao; to help forward the
good, and the life that was approved by the Pou-tiri-ao; to maintain the
existence of good in each thing in this world. Everything whether of the
Earth itself or the waters thereof, each had its guardian Pou-tiri-ao.
Should the Pou-tiri-ao perceive anything in the world going wrong, or
changing its purpose, its life, its form, its proceedings, they diverted
it, put a stop or an end to it. If no Pou-tiri-aos had been appointed in
the world, the growth, the life, the death, <span id="page_110">p.
110</span> of all things would have been a perpetual struggle; and
consequently growth and life in this world would have been wasted. It
was for these reasons that Io gave these powers to the Pou-tiri-aos.

 

### IO-MATUA, THE SUPREME GOD.

   Behold, also! Io, his Whatu-kuras and Marei-kuras, took though lest
estrangement and disputes arose amongst the Pou-tiri-ao themselves.
Io-the-great-one commanded the Whatu-kuras to become guardians over the
Pou-tiri-ao lest they fall out amongst themselves, and thus they and the
Marei-kuras held a position enabling them to assist \[and direct\] the
Pou-tiri-aos in all their works; so that they all might have one mind in
supervising the growth, and the life; and to prevent divergence in the
form of all things in the world. Seeing that this was the mutual
position of the Pou-tiri-aos, the Whatu-kuras and the Marei-kuras, it
followed that the Pou-tiri-aos were subservient to the Whatu-kuras; unto
whom alone was delegated the *măna-ariki* \[or over-lordship\]. And
hence was it, because of the over-lordship in the Whatu-kuras of the
Toi-o-nga-rangi \[the uppermost Heaven\], that they had the power and
authority to enter into every part of the Heavens, the Moons, the Stars
and Hades. It also follows, as can be clearly seen that all things were
subject to the Pou-tiri-aos, and that they themselves were in like
manner subject to the Whatu-kuras to whom had been delegated the
lordship, the power, the life, and death, in the presence \[or with the
countenance\] of Io-the-great-one. And this again shows that the
Pou-tiri-aos, the Marei-kuras, the Whatu-kuras, and all the Apas of the
twelve heavens were subservient to Io, the Supreme God.

   All things were subservient to Io-the-great-one, and hence the truth
of the names of Io:—

|                                   |                                                   |
|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
| Io-nui                            |    Io-the-great-god-over-all                      |
| Io-roa                            |    Io-the-enduring (or everlasting)               |
| Io-matua                          |    Io-the-all-parent (omniparent)                 |
| Io-te-wānanga                     |    Io-of-all-knowledge (omnierudite)              |
| Io-te-taketake                    |    Io-the-origin-of-all-things (the one true god) |
| Io-tamaua-take                    |    Io-the-immutable                               |
| Io-te-Toi-o-nga-rangi             |    Io-the-summit-of-heaven                        |
| Io-mata-putahi                    |    Io-the-god-of-one-command                      |
| Io-mata-ngaro                     |    Io-the-hidden-face                             |
| Io-mata-wai                       |    Io-god-of-Iove                                 |
| Io-mata-aho                       |    Io-only-seen-in-a-flash-of-light               |
| Io-te-hau-e-rangi                 |    Io-presiding-in-all-heavens                    |
| <span id="page_111">p. 111</span> |                                                   |
| Io-tikitiki-o-rangi               |    Io-the-exalted-of-heaven                       |
| Io-matua-kore                     |    Io-the-parentless (self created)               |

   These two names are from Pohuhu's teaching:—

|               |                                                     |
|---------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| Io-te-waiora  |    Io-the-life-giving                               |
| Io-te-whiwhia |    Io-who-renders-not-to-man-that-which-he-witholds |

   Each of these names has a cause, a reason. Io is his name in short.
Io-nui, he is the god of all other gods; Io-matua, he is the parent of
all things, the life and being of all things; Io-te-wānanga, he is the
*wānanga* of all things; Io-tikitiki, he is the god of the heavens, of
all things therein, and in the Kauwhangas \[planes\], on earth, and also
in Hades. He is the exalted one of all those things. Io-mataaho; if he
visits the \[other\] heavens, or the other worlds, the planes, it is as
a flash of light only—man never sees him. Io-matua-kore, he has no
parents; Io-mata-ngaro, he is never seen by man; Io-mata-putahi, he is a
god of one word \[command\], not of two \[i.e., his single word is
obeyed, is never altered\]; Io-mata-wai, he is a loving god;
Io-te-hau-e-rangi, he presides over all the heavens<span
id="fr_16"></span>[16](#note_16); Io-tamaua-take, nothing of his can be
changed from what has been decreed. This ends this subject.

   \[The name of Io was so sacred that it was rarely mentioned, and then
only away from the contaminating influence of food and dwellings. The
priests alone had a complete knowledge of him, and ordinary people knew
nothing, or never heard his name, except when used in some rarely
repeated *karakias*.\]

   Now, it is clear, that all things, the worlds and their belongings,
all gods of mankind, his own gods, all are gathered in his presence
\[i.e., proceed from him\]. There is nothing outside or beyond him; with
him is the power of life, of death, of godship. Enough of this.
Everything that proceeds from other than Io and his commands, death is
the collector of those.<span id="fr_17"></span>[17](#note_17) If all his
commands are obeyed and fulfilled by every one, safety and well-being
result therefrom.

   Now, it is obvious that ail things of life and death are combined in
<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> the presence of \[or are due to\]
Io-the-hidden-face; there is nothing outside or beyond him. All godships
are in him and he appoints them their places; the gods of the dead and
the gods of the living. All things are named \[i.e., created\] by god—of
the worlds, in the heavens, the planes, and the water, each has its own
function, even the smallest atoll, such as grains of dust, or pebbles,
have their place—to hold the boundaries of the ocean or the waters \[for
example\].

   It is now clear that there are gods \[presiding\] in all the worlds,
the planes, the stars, the moons, and the sun; and because they have
such gods in the twelve heavens that are above, this also is clear; that
the female is the bringer-forth of offspring that increase the gods,
mankind, fish, birds, animals, reptiles and other things of this or
other worlds or other heavens, moons, or stars. But, let my word be
thus: let the suns be left out of these my words; for it is the mirage
or reflection of everything in the worlds; hence, is it said it is a
*whatu* \[eye ? body\] only, without legs, or arms, or head; it is a
body only.<span id="fr_18"></span>[18](#note_18)

   \[From Pohuhu's teaching we take the following: "The Toi-o-nga-rangi
\[the uppermost Heaven\] is unapproachable by the Apas \[messengers of
the gods\] of the other heavens—there is no other entrance thereto
except through Tawhiri-rangi \[the house, or guard-house at the entrance
to the upper Heaven\], the door of which is below—that is one reason:
The other is the effulgent glory of that Heaven, at which no man's eyes
can look. But it is different with the Whatu-kuras of this upper Heaven;
they have been prepared by purification and the *tohinga* rite \[baptism
in the old Maori form\], and thus can enter there. It was thus that
Tāne-matua was able to ascend by the *toi-hua-rewa* to the presence of
Io."\]

 

### THE TEMPLE NAMED HAWAIKI.

   Now, Hawaiki was the name of the house \[temple\] at
Te-Hono-i-wai-rua \['the gathering place of spirits'—in the
Fatherland\]. It had four doors, one facing the east, one the south, one
the west, another the north.<span id="fr_19"></span>[19](#note_19) Now,
commencing from the period of Rangi and Papa, the \[spirits\] of the
people of this world, have always followed the four winds <span
id="page_113">p. 113</span> named \[in their journey to spirit-land\],
and each dead one follows its own wind. It was the same with every wind,
east, south, west and north. When anyone died he returned by his own
wind, to his own particular door; and so it is even down to our own
times. Arrived at Hawaiki they separated; some went to the Heavens
appointed for them; the door by which they left Hawaiki was \[named\] Te
Rawhiti \[the east\]; whence they ascended by the Ara-toi-huarewa \[see
below\] (one name for which is Te Ara-tiatia). Another division passed
out by the south door, and by the way Tahekeroa descended to Rarohenga,
at the Muriwai-hou \[Hades\].

   \[The Scribe says, "The origin of the name Hawaiki"—so wide spread
all over Polynesia—"is derived hom this temple, a very sacred place in
Hawaiki-nui \[the Fatherland\], situated at Te Hono-i-wairua \[The
gathering place of spirits\]. It was built four square, with a door on
each side facing the cardinal points, each door having its own name. The
spirits from each quarter of the earth entered the temple by their own
doors. Those spirits which by their evil conduct on this earth, such as
murderers and those guilty of treachery, left the temple by the
Takeke-roa (or long rapid, descent) to Rarohenga, or Hades, presided
over by the evil spirits, Whiro-te-tipua, Hine-nui-te-po<span
id="fr_20"></span>[20](#note_20) \[Great-mother-of-Hades\], and
Whakaru-ai-moko \[god of volcanic phenomena\]; whilst the others
ascended the mountain Tawhiti-nui (not to be confounded with the island
of that name, about which we shall learn later) sometimes called
Maunga-nui, great mountain, where they were purified and then further
ascended to the Heavens by the way called Te Ara-tiatia (the
way-of-steps) or by the other named Te Toi-huarewa (the dangling or
floating way—the idea is of a suspended rope), where they entered the
realm of Io the Supreme God. In this temple called Hawaiki were four
*takuahi*, or fireplaces in the centre, one opposite each door." It is
not apparent what these fireplaces were for, but probably had some
connection with purification—the proper name for them is *kauwhanga*,
*takuahi* being that used in ordinary houses, and the first name is
applicable to such fireplaces in all sacred houses, as in the
Whare-wānanga.

   The idea of the spirits being conveyed on the winds to their final
resting place is not confined to the Polynesians, as the following
quotation from Prof. T. G. Tucker's "Things Worth Thinking About," under
the heading of 'Our earliest Ancestors and their Beliefs,' page 43. The
Professor says, "I will give one more. The wind, I have <span
id="page_114">p. 114</span> said, was the agent whereby the departed
soul was carried away. In Greek legend this appears as the wind-god
Hermes, the psychopomp, he who leads the soul by the hand into the
nether world. In the Vedic myths the wind is the dog Yama. . . ." This
last sentence, I suggest, will find its analogue in the 'dogs of
Tawhaki' who accompanied him, or led him onward, to the twelfth heaven.
It is possible that this legend as known to the Greeks is another 'Aryan
and Polynesian point of Contact.'

   Apparently the Rarotongan branch of the Polynesians had much the same
belief in this temple of Hawaiki and the ascent of the soul therefrom to
the gods. In Vol. VIII., p. 75, 'Journal of the Polynesian Society,' in
describing the final exodus of Māui from this world, ". . . . then he
arrived at Rarotonga to search for the way to Avaiki (Hawaiki—the
Rarotongans do not pronounce the 'h'). This is the meaning of that
name—it is a road of the gods, where the gods collect; their house is at
the base of that mountain. The door of the house which is always open,
is called Kati-enua."

 

   I hold that the foregoing teaching of the Sage, Te Matorohanga,
completely destroys the apparent belief of many writers on Polynesian
matters, who trace the soul only as fur as the local Reinga (or place of
'jumping off,' 'the boundary between this world and the next,' from
*rei*, a boundary); and shews what was really the belief of the
Polynesians, that the spirit, or soul, of man had an existence after
death, and that it returned to the Fatherland before joining the company
of the gods. On this subject see "Hawaiki," third edition, page 51.

   It is interesting to note that the Rarotongan "gathering place of
spirits," called by them Te Koro-tuatini, is also known to the Maoris by
the same name, a fact which my numerous questions to the Scribe
elicited. The Sage told the Scribe this was the second name of the
temple Whare-kura (see number five, Introduction to Chapter I.) after
the teaching of the *wānanga*, brought down from heaven by Tāne had been
removed to the next, or temple number six. It was here the spirits
gathered; it is the same place as Te Hono-i-wairua, and was so called
because of the innumerable (*tinitini, manomano, whaioio*) spirits
assembled there—hence *tuatini*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](lww3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_104">p. 104</span>

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1). *Waimeha*, without *măna*,
powerless. The Scribe says, although the words of the *karakias* are
still known, they have lost their ancient power. As a matter of fact
many hundred *karakias* have been reoorded, as witness the columns of
the 'Journal of the Polynesian Society,' 'Nga Moteatea,' and other
publications.

<span id="footnotes_page_105">p. 105</span>

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2). Many interesting *karakias* are
still extant, the recitation of which with the proper ritual, were held
to have power to attract fish to the bait, birds to the snares, and
other things, in which the old-time Maori had the firmest belief.

<span id="note_3"></span>[3](#fr_3). All knowledge of these matters was
brought from the highest Heaven by the god Tāne, and through him beoame
known to mankind, as will be described later on. The names mentioned are
those of the male and female guardians, gods and goddesses of the
various Heavens, the two last being the so-called Fairies, the Apsaras
of Sanskrit Holy Writ.

<span id="note_4"></span>[4](#fr_4). Mataaho: 'Te hurihanga-i-a-Mataaho'
is the name given to some great terrestrial catastrophe that, acoording
to the Maoris, changed the appearance of the surface of the earth, and
left its former plains and pleasant places in hills and valleys. Some
authorities give the same name to the traditional flood, but there is
<span id="footnotes_page_106">p. 106</span> reason to think the two
catastrophes are distinct. The name means, 'the-overturning-by-Mataaho.'
Whakaru-au-moko is one of the fallen gods, relegated to Hades after the
great Celestial war of 'Pae-rangi,' and is the author of all
earthquakes, volcanic outbursts, thermal phenomena, etc.

<span id="note_5"></span>[5](#fr_5). *Whakatutuki*, is the word in the
original. It ordinarily means 'to bring to a finish,' 'to effectually
complete.'

<span id="footnotes_page_107">p. 107</span>

<span id="note_6"></span>[6](#fr_6). According to the Rarotongans, every
island known to them had a spirit and a body, developing into a
spiritual and bodily name for each island; e.g., Tumu-te-varovaro is the
spiritual name of Rarotonga itself. The people plainly distinguished
these differences, as *ingoa-vairua* and *ingoa-kopapa*.

<span id="note_7"></span>[7](#fr_7). ? Earthquakes, volcanoes, etc.

<span id="note_8"></span>[8](#fr_8). This is not very clear. Probably,
the interruption following put the Sage off as he did not complete his
explanation.

<span id="footnotes_page_108">p. 108</span>

<span id="note_9"></span>[9](#fr_9). Kauwhanga, the imaginery place that
divided the heavens from one another.

<span id="note_10"></span>[10](#fr_10). See Whare-kura in introduction
to Chapter I.

<span id="note_11"></span>[11](#fr_11). The Sage here expressed his
annoyance at such interruption, and said that but for the attention and
perseverance of the Scribe, he would cease any further teaching. He went
on to address the latter, as in the text.

<span id="note_12"></span>[12](#fr_12). *Marae*, the court yard, or
meeting place in a *pa*, where speeches and ceremonies were held.

<span id="note_13"></span>[13](#fr_13). The first of these names is that
of the presiding priest in the Whare-wānaga, named Nga-mahanga \[see
introduction to Chapter I.\]; the second is that of a very famous
warrior and leader of the Wai-rarapa people, who was killed near where
Napier now is by being crushed under a canoe, somewhat about 1830-40.

<span id="footnotes_page_109">p. 109</span>

<span id="note_14"></span>[14](#fr_14). It is perhaps rather stretching
the term 'angel' to apply it in this case; but the Pou-tiri-ao were
guardian spirits, a kind of minor gods, as we shall see. Pou means a
pillar, a high-chief, and to appoint; *tiri*, is to scatter as seed;
*ao*, is the world. Many of the gods were the special Pou-tiri-ao, or
guardians, over different realms of nature, as in the case of Tāne, who
was the special guardian of plants and all work connected with wood.

<span id="note_15"></span>[15](#fr_15). The twelfth heaven: the abode of
Io is excluded.

<span id="footnotes_page_111">p. 111</span>

<span id="note_16"></span>[16](#fr_16). The Scribe informs me, the
meaning of this is, that Io's presence is in all winds or air, the word
*hau*, meaning wind, air; hence, perhaps, the name is better translated
'all pervading,' 'omnipresent.' The idea of the Diety being present in
the wind is common to all old Maoris. I have often in former days heard
them say as the wind blew through their hair, that the *atua* \[god\]
was there.

<span id="note_17"></span>[17](#fr_17). This sentence is somewhat
contradictory of the preceding; it is, however just as the original has
it.

<span id="footnotes_page_112">p. 112</span>

<span id="note_18"></span>[18](#fr_18). The teaching here is obscure. It
depends greatly on the word *koroirangi*, translated as mirage, or
reflection, or refraction, which is its ordinary meaning, and is held by
the Scribe to be that of the word in the text. But, probably, the true
meaning in this connection is that which may be gathered from an
expression of Pohuhu's, where he says that the upper heaven is too
*koroirangi* to be looked on by the eye, in which he means, 'too
effulgent, too lustrous.'

<span id="note_19"></span>[19](#fr_19). *Marangai*, usually the
north-east, but the Scribe says it means north here.

<span id="footnotes_page_113">p. 113</span>

<span id="note_20"></span>[20](#fr_20). Later on we shall see the
peculiar development of Hine-nui-te po. Whakaru-ai-moko is god of
volcanic phenomena.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
