[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap02.md) 
[Next](chap04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER 3

### About Men Who Are To Be Held in Contempt

Know, O My Brother (to whom God be merciful), that a man who is
misshapen, of coarse appearance, and whose member is short, thin and
flabby, is contemptible in the eyes of women.

When such a man has a bout with a woman, he does not do his business
with vigour and in a manner to give her enjoyment. He lays himself down
upon her without previous toying, he does not kiss her, nor twine
himself round her; he does not bite her, nor suck her lips, nor tickle
her.

He gets upon her before she has begun to long for pleasure, and then he
introduces with infinite trouble a member soft and nerveless. Scarcely
has he commenced when he is already done for; he makes one or two
movements, and then sinks upon the woman's breast to spend his sperm;
and that is the most he can do. This done he withdraws his affair, and
makes all haste to get down again from her.

Such a man--as was said by a writer--is quick in ejaculation and slow as
to erection; after the trembling, which follows the ejaculation of the
seed, his chest is heavy and his sides ache.

Qualities like these are no recommendation with women. Despicable also
is the man who is false in his words; who does not fulfil the promise he
has made; who never speaks without telling lies, and who conceals from
his wife all his doings, except the adulterous exploits which he
commits.

Women cannot esteem such men, as they cannot procure them any enjoyment.

  
It is said that a man of the name of Abbes, whose member was extremely
small and slight, had a very corpulent wife, whom he could not contrive
to satisfy in coition, so that she soon began to complain to her female
friends about it.

This woman possessed a considerable fortune, whilst Abbes was very poor
and when he wanted anything, she was sure not to let him have what he
wanted.

One day he went to see a wise man, and submitted his case to him.

The sage told him: 'If you had a fine member you might dispose of her
fortune. Do you not know that women's religion is in their vulvas? But I
will prescribe you a remedy which will do away with your troubles.'

Abbes lost no time in making up the remedy according to the recipe of
the wise man, and after he had used it his member grew to be long and
thick. When his wife saw it in that state she was surprised; but it was
still better when he made her feel in the matter of enjoyment quite
another thing than she had been accustomed to experience; he began in
fact to work her with his tool in quite a remarkable manner, to such a
point that she trembled and sighed and sobbed and cried out during the
operation.

As soon as the wife found in her husband such eminently good qualities
she gave him her fortune, and placed her person and all she had at his
disposal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4: About Women Who Are To Be Held in Contempt](chap04.md)
