[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap15.md) 
[Next](chap17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER 16

### Undoing of Aiguillettes (Impotence for a Time)

Know, O Vizir (God be good to you!), that impotence arises from three
causes:

Firstly, from the tying of aiguillettes.

Secondly, from a feeble and relaxed constitution.

And thirdly, from too premature ejaculation.

To cure the tying of aiguillettes you must take galanga, cinnamon from
Mecca, cloves, Indian cachou, nutmeg, Indian cubebs, sparrowwort,
cinnamon, Persian pepper, Indian thistle, cardamoms, pyrether, laurel
seed, and gilly flowers. All these ingredients must be pounded together
carefully, and one drinks of it as much as one can, morning and night,
in broth, particularly in pigeon broth; fowl broth may, however, be
substituted just as well. Water is to be drunk before and after taking
It. The compound may likewise be taken with honey, which is the best
method, and gives the best results.

The man whose ejaculation is too precipitate must take nutmeg and
incense (*oliban*) mixed together with honey.

If the impotence arises from weakness, the following ingredients are to
be taken in honey: viz., pyrether, nettleseed, a little spurge (or
cevadille), ginger, cinnamon of Mecca, and cardamom. This preparation
will cause the weakness to disappear and effect the cure, with the
permission of God the Highest!

I can warrant the efficacy of all these preparations, the virtue of
which has been tested.

The impossibility of performing the coitus, owing to the absence of
stiffness in the member, is also due to other causes. It will happen,
for instance, that a man with his verge in erection will find it getting
flaccid just when he is on the point of introducing it between the
thighs of the woman. He thinks this is impotence, while it is simply the
result, may he, of an exaggerated respect for the woman, may be of a
misplaced bashfulness, may be because one has observed something
disagreeable, or on account of an unpleasant odour; finally, owing to a
feeling of jealousy, inspired by the reflection that the woman is no
longer a virgin, and has served the pleasures of other men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17: Prescriptions for Increasing the Dimensions of Small
Members and for Making Them Splendid](chap17.md)
