[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap11.md) 
[Next](chap13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER 12

### Concerning Sundry Observations Useful to Know for Men and Women

Know, O Vizir (to whom God be good!), that the information contained in
this chapter is of the greatest utility, and it is only in this book
that such can be found. Assuredly to know things is better than to be
ignorant of them. knowledge may be bad, but ignorance is still more so.

The knowledge in question concerns matters unknown to you, and relating
to women.

There was once a woman, named Moârbeda, who was considered to be the
most knowing and wisest person of her time. She was a philosopher. One
day various queries were put to her, and among them the following, which
I shall give here, with her answers.

'In what part of a woman's body does her mind reside?'

'Between her thighs.'

'And where her enjoyment?'

'In the same place.'

'And where the love of men and the hatred of them?'

'In the vulva,' she said; adding, 'To the man whom we love we give our
vulva, and we refuse it to him we hate. We share our property with the
man we love, and are content with whatever little he may be able to
bring to us; if he has no fortune, we take him as he is. But, on the
other hand. we keep at a distance him whom we hate, were he to offer us
wealth and riches.'

'Where, in a woman, are located knowledge, love and taste?'

'In the eye, the heart, and the vulva.'

When asked for explanations on this subject, she replied: 'knowledge
dwells in the eye, for it is the woman's eye that appreciates the beauty
of form and of appearance. By the medium of this organ, love penetrates
into the heart and dwells in it, and enslaves it. A woman in love
pursues the object of her love, and lays snares for it. If she succeed,
there will be an encounter between the beloved one and her vulva. The
vulva tastes him and then knows his sweet or bitter flavour. It is, in
fact, the vulva which knows how to distinguish, by tasting, the good
from the bad.'

'Which virile members are preferred by women? What women are most eager
for coitus, and which are those who detest it? Which are the men
preferred by women, and which are those whom they abominate?'

She answered, 'Not all women have the same conformation of vulva, and
they also differ in their manner of making love, and in their love for
and their aversion to things. The same disparities exist in men, both
with regard to their organs and their tastes. A woman of plump form and
with a shallow uterus will look out for a member which is both short and
thick, which will completely fill her vagina, without touching the
bottom of it; a long and large member would not suit her. A woman with a
deep lying uterus, and consequently a long vagina, only yearns for a
member which is long and thick and of ample proportions, and thus fills
her vagina in its whole extension; she will despise the man with a small
and slender member for he could never satisfy her in coition.

'The following distinctions exist in the temperaments of women: the
bilious, the melancholy, the sanguine, the phlegmatic, and the mixed.
Those with a bilious or melancholy temperament are not much given to
coitus, and like it only with men of the same disposition. Those who are
sanguine or phlegmatic love coition to excess, and if they encounter a
member, they would never let it leave their vulva if they could help it.
With these also it is only men of their own temperament who can satisfy
them, and if such a woman were married to a bilious or melancholy man,
they would lead a sorry life together. As regards mixed temperaments,
they exhibit neither a marked predilection for, nor aversion against
coitus.

'It has been observed that under all circumstances little women love
coitus more and evince a stronger affection for the virile member than
women of a large size. Only long and vigorous members suit them; in them
they find the delight of their existence and of their couch.

'There are also women who love the coitus only on the edge of their
vulva, and when a man lying upon them wants to get his member into the
vagina, they take it out with the hand and place its gland between the
lips of the vulva.'

I have every reason to believe that this is only the case with young
girls or with women not used to men. I pray God to preserve us from
such, or from women for whom it is a matter of impossibility to give
themselves up to men.

'There are women who will do their husband's behests, and will satisfy
them and give them voluptuous pleasure by coition, only if compelled by
blows and ill-treatment. Some people ascribe this conduct to the
aversion they feel either against coition or against the husband; but
this is not so; it is simply a question of temperament and character.

'There are also women who do not care for coition because all their
ideas turn upon the grandeurs, personal honours, ambitious hopes, or
business cares of the world. With others this indifference springs, as
it may be, from purity of the heart, or from jealousy, or from a
pronounced tendency of their souls towards another world, or lastly from
past violent sorrows. Furthermore, the pleasures which they feel in
coition depend not alone upon the size of the member, but also upon the
particular conformation of their own natural parts. Amongst those the
vulva called from its form *el mortebâ*, the square one, and *el
mortafâ*, the projecting, is remarkable. This vulva has the peculiarity
of projecting all round when the woman is standing up and closes her
thighs. It burns for the coitus, its slit is narrow, and it is also
called *el keulihimi*, the pressed one. The woman who has such a one
likes only large members, and they must not let her wait long for the
crisis. But this is a general characteristic of women.

'As to the desire of men for coition, I must say that they also are
addicted to it more or less according to their different temperaments,
five in number, like the women's, with the difference that the hankering
of the woman after the member is stronger than that of the man after the
vulva.'

'What are the faults of women?'

Moârbeda replied to this question, 'The worst of women is she who
immediately cries out aloud as soon as her husband wants to touch the
smallest amount of her property for his necessities. In the same line
stands she who divulges matters which her husband wants to be kept
secret.'

'Are there any more?' she is asked. She adds, 'The woman of a jealous
disposition and the woman who raises her voice so as to drown that of
her husband; she who disseminates scandal; the woman that scowls; the
one who is always burning to let men see her beauty, and cannot stay at
home; and with respect to this last let me add that a woman who laughs
much, and is constantly seen at the street door, may be taken to be an
arrant prostitute.

'Bad also are those women who mind people's affairs; those who are
always complaining; those who steal things belonging to their husbands;
those of a disagreeable and imperious temper; those who are not grateful
for kindnesses received; those that will not share the conjugal couch,
or who incommode their husbands by the uncomfortable positions they take
in it; those who are inclined to deceit, treachery, calumny and ruse.

Then there are still women who are unlucky in whatever they undertake;
those who are always inclined to blame and censure; those who invite
their husbands to fulfil their conjugal duty only when it is convenient
for them; those that make noises in bed; and lastly those who are
shameless, without intelligence, tattlers and curious.

Here you have the worst specimens amongst women.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13: Concerning the Causes of Enjoyment in the Act of
Generation](chap13.md)
