[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](chap13) 
[Next](chap15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## CHAPTER 14

### Description of the Uterus of Sterile Women, and Treatment of the Same

Know, O Vizir (God be good to you!), that wise physicians have plunged
into this sea of difficulties to very little purpose. Each one has
looked at the matter from his own point of view, and in the end the
question has been left in the dark.

Amongst the causes which determine the sterility of women may be taken
the obstruction of the uterus by clots of blood, the accumulation of
water, the want of or defective sperm of the man, organic malformation
of the parts of the latter, internal defects in the uterus, stagnation
of the courses and the corruption of the menstrual fluid, and the
habitual presence of wind in the uterus. Other savants attribute the
sterility of women to the action of spirits and spells. Sterility is
common in women who are very corpulent, so that their uterus gets
compressed and cannot conceive, not being able to take up the sperm,
especially if the husband's member is short and his testicles are very
fat; in such a case the act of copulation can only be imperfectly
completed.

One of the remedies against sterility consists of the marrow from the
hump of a camel, which the woman spreads on a piece of linen, and rubs
her sexual parts with, after having been purified subsequently to her
courses. To complete the cure, she takes some fruits of the plant called
'jackal's grapes', squeezes the juice out of them into a vase, and then
adds a little vinegar; of this medicine she drinks, fasting for seven
days, during which time her husband will take care to have copulation
with her.

The woman may besides pound a small quantity of sesame grain and mix its
juice with a bean's weight of sandarach powder; of this mixture she
drinks during three days after her periods; she is then fit to receive
her husband's embraces.

The first of these beverages is to be taken separately, and in the first
instance; after this the second, which will have a salutary effect, if
so it pleases the Almighty God!

There is still another remedy. A mixture is made of nitre, gall from a
sheep or a cow, a small quantity of the plant named *el meusk*, and of
the grains of that plant. The woman saturates a plug of soft wool with
this mixture, and rubs her vulva with it after menstruation; she then
receives the caresses of her husband, and, with the will of God the
Highest, will become pregnant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15: Concerning the Causes of Impotence in Men](chap15)
