[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](title)  [Next](intro.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Notes of the Translator Respecting the Sheikh Nefzaoui

The name of the Sheikh has become known to posterity as the author of
this work, which is the only one attributed to him.

In spite of the subject-matter of the book, and the manifold errors
found in it and caused by the negligence and ignorance of the copyists,
it is manifest that this treatise comes from the pen of a man of great
erudition, who had a better knowledge in general of literature and
medicine than is commonly found with Arabs.

According to the historical notice contained in the first leaves of the
manuscript, and notwithstanding the apparent error respecting the name
oft he Bey who was reigning in Tunis, it may be presumed that this work
was written in the beginning of the sixteenth century, about the year
925 of the Hegira.

As regards the birthplace of the author, it may be taken for granted,
considering that the Arabs habitually joined the name of their
birth-place to their own, that he was born at Nefzaoua, a town situated
in the district of that name on the shore of the lake Sebkha Melrir, in
the south of the kingdom of Tunis.

The Sheikh himself records that he lived in Tunis, and it is most
probable the book was written in that city. According to tradition, a
particular motive induced him to undertake a work entirely at variance
with his simple tastes and retired habits.

His knowledge of law and literature, as well as of medicine, having been
reported to the Bey of Tunis, this ruler wished to invest him with the
office of Cadi, although he was unwilling to occupy himself with public
functions.

As he, however, desired not to give the Bey cause for offence, whereby
he might have incurred danger, he merely requested a short delay, in
order to be able to finish a work which he had in hand.

This having been granted, he set himself to compose the treatise which
was then Occupying his mind, and which, becoming known, drew so much
attention upon the author, that it became henceforth impossible to
confide to him functions of the nature of those of a Cadi.

But this version, which is not supported by any authenticated proof, and
which represents the Sheikh Nefzaoui as a man of light morals, does not
seem to be admissible. One need only glance at the book to be convinced
that its author was animated by the most praiseworthy intentions, and
that, far from being in fault, he deserves gratitude for the services he
has rendered to humanity. Contrary to the habits of the Arabs, there
exists no commentary on this book; the reason may, perhaps, be found in
the nature of the subject of which it treats, and which may have
frightened, unnecessarily, the serious and the studious. I say
unnecessarily, because this book, more than any other, ought to have
commentaries; grave questions are treated in it, and open out a large
field for work and meditation.

What can be more important, in fact, than the study of the principles
upon which rest the happiness of man and woman, by reason of their
mutual relations; relations which are themselves dependent upon
character, health, temperament and the constitution, all of which it is
the duty of philosophers to study.

In doubtful and difficult cases, and where the ideas of the author did
not seem to be clearly set out, I have not hesitated to look for
enlightenment to the savants of sundry confessions, and by their kind
assistance many difficulties, which I believed insurmountable, were
conquered. lam glad to render them here my thanks.

Amongst the authors who have treated of similar subjects, there is not
one that can be entirely compared with the Sheikh; for his book reminds
you, at the same time, of Aretin, of the book *Conjugal Love*, and of
Rabelais. But what makes this treatise unique as a book of its kind, is
the seriousness with which the most lascivious and obscene matters are
presented. It is evident that the author is convinced of the importance
of his subject, and that the desire to be of use to his fellowmen is the
sole motive of his efforts.

With the view to giving more weight to his recommendations, he does not
hesitate to multiply his religious citations, and in many cases invokes
even the authority of the Koran, the most sacred book of the Mussulmans.

It may be assumed that this book, without being exactly a compilation,
is not entirely due to the genius of the Sheikh Nefzaoui, and that
several parts may have been borrowed from Arabian and Indian writers.
For instance, all the record of Mo&aced;ailama and of Chedja is taken
from the work of Mohammed ben Djerir el Taberi; the description of the
different positions for coition, as well as the movements applicable to
them, are borrowed from Indian works; finally, the book *Birds and
Flowers* by Azeddine el Mocadecci seems to have been consulted with
respect to the interpretation of dreams. But an author certainly is to
be commended for having surrounded himself with the lights of former
savants, and it would be ingratitude not to acknowledge the benefit
which his books have conferred upon people who were still in their
infancy in the art of love.

It is only to be regretted that this work, so complete in many respects,
is defective in so fir as it makes no mention of a custom too common
with the Arabs not to deserve particular attention. I speak of the taste
so universal with the old Greeks and Romans, namely, the preference they
give to a boy before a woman, or even to treat the latter as a boy.

There might have been given on this subject sound advice as well with
regard to the pleasures mutually enjoyed by the women called tribades.
The same reticence has been observed by the author with regard to
bestiality. Nevertheless he does speak, in one story (i.e. 'The History
of Zohra', in the concluding chapter of the work), of the mutual
caresses of women; and he relates an anecdote concerning a woman who
provoked the caresses of an ass \[which has been eliminated from the
present edition\], thus revealing that he knew of such matters.

Lastly, the Sheikh does not mention the pleasures which the mouth or the
hand of a pretty woman can give, nor the *cunnilinges*.

What may have been the motive for these omissions? The author's silence
cannot be attributed to ignorance, for in the course of his work he has
given proofs of an erudition too extended and various to permit a
suspicion of his knowledge.

Should we look for the cause of this gap to the contempt which the
Mussulman in reality feels for woman, and owing to which he may think
that it would be degrading to his dignity as a man to descend to
caresses otherwise regulated than by the laws of nature? Or did the
author, perhaps, avoid the mention of similar matters out of fear that
he might be suspected of sharing tastes which many people look upon as
depraved?

However this may be, the book contains much useful information and a
large number of curious cases, and I have undertaken the translation
because, as the Sheikh Nefzaoui says in his preamble: 'I swear before
God, certainly! the knowledge of this book is necessary. It will be only
the shamefully ignorant, the enemy of all science, who does not read it,
or who turns it into ridicule.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translators Note](intro.md)
