[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060051)  [Next](0060053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I.

(Joseph the son of both, p. 127.)

The opinion that Luke's genealogy is that of *Mary* was unknown to
Christian antiquity. In the fifteenth century it was first propounded by
Latin divines to do honour (as they supposed) to the Blessed Virgin. It
was first broached by Annius of Viterbo, a.d. 1502.Christian antiquity
is agreed that:-

1\. Both genealogies are those of Joseph.

2\. That Joseph was the son of Jacob or of Heli, either by adoption, or
because Jacob and Heli were either own brothers or half-brothers; so
that,-

3\. On the death of one of the brothers, without issue, the surviving
brother married his widow, who became the mother of Joseph by this
marriage; so that Joseph was reckoned the son of Jacob and the son of
Heli.<sup>[9](footnote/fn24.htm#P2419_685195)</sup>

4\. Joseph and Mary were of the same lineage, but the Hebrews did not
reckon descent from the side of the woman. *For them* St. Luke's
genealogy is the sufficient register of Christ's royal descent and
official claim. St. Luke gives his *personal* pedigree, ascending to
Adam, and identifying Him with the whole human race.

II.

(Conclusion, cap. xix. p. 138.)

On Jewish genealogies, note Dean
Prideaux,<sup>[10](footnote/fn24.htm#P2427_685699)</sup> vol. i. p. 296,
and compare Lardner, vol. ii. 129, *et alibi*. Stilling
fleet<sup>[11](footnote/fn24.htm#P2428_685851)</sup> should not be
overlooked in what he says of the *uncertainties* of heathen chronology.

Lardner repeatedly calls our author a "great man; "and his most valuable
account,<sup>[12](footnote/fn24.htm#P2430_686059)</sup> digested from
divers ancient and modern writers, must be consulted by the student. Let
us observe the books of Scripture which his citations attest, and the
great value of his attestation of the two genealogies of our Lord.
Lardner dates the Letter to
Origen<sup>[13](footnote/fn24.htm#P2431_686352)</sup> a.d. 228 or 240,
according to divers conjectures of the learned. He concludes with this
beautiful tribute: "We may glory in Africanus as a Christian" among
those "whose shining abilities rendered them the ornament of the age in
which they lived,-men of unspotted characters, giving evident proofs of
honesty and integrity."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note.](0060053)
