[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060097)  [Next](0060099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Translator's Introductory Notice.<sup>[2](footnote/fn42.htm#P4221_1238564)</sup>

Eusebius alone, of the more ancient writers, speaks in terms of the
highest praise of Peter, Bishop of Alexandria. He was, says he, a divine
bishop, both for the sanctity of his life, and also for his diligent
study and knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures;<sup>[3](footnote/fn42.htm#P4223_1238893)</sup> and in
another place he styles him "that excellent doctor of the Christian
religion," who, indeed, during the whole period of his episcopate, which
he held for twelve years, obtained for himself the highest renown. He
obtained the bishopric of Alexandria next in succession to Theonas. He
governed that church about three years before the persecution broke
out:<sup>[4](footnote/fn42.htm#P4224_1239457)</sup> the rest of his time
he spent in the exercise of a closer discipline over himself, yet did he
not in the meanwhile neglect to provide for the common interests of the
Church. In the ninth year of the persecution he was beheaded, and gained
the crown of martyrdom. So far we have the account of Eusebius, whom
Dodwell<sup>[5](footnote/fn42.htm#P4225_1239846)</sup> proves to have
accurately distributed the years of Peter's episcopate. After Peter had
spent twelve years as bishop, and in the ninth year of the persecution
which broke out under Maximin, he was beheaded; so that his martyrdom
falls in the year of our Lord 311-as the Egyptians reckon on the 29th
day of the month Athyr, which answers to our 25th of November, as
Lequien,<sup>[6](footnote/fn42.htm#P4226_1240282)</sup> after
Renaudot,<sup>[7](footnote/fn42.htm#P4227_1240342)</sup> has observed.

St. Peter wrote in the fourth year of the persecution, A.D. 306, some
Canons Penitential with reference to those who had lapsed. They are to
be met with in every collection of Canons. In the *Pandecta Canonum* of
Bishop Beveridge,<sup>[8](footnote/fn42.htm#P4229_1240628)</sup> they
are accompanied by the notes of Joannes Zonaras and Theodorus Balsamon.
Upon these Penitential Canons, however,
Tillemont<sup>[9](footnote/fn42.htm#P4230_1240804)</sup> should be
consulted. Moreover, according to
Renaudot,<sup>[10](footnote/fn42.htm#P4231_1240895)</sup> Echmimensis,
Ebnapalus, Abulfaragius, and other Oriental Christians of every sect,
make use of the testimony of these Canons; and in the anonymous
collections of them called *Responsa*, some fragments of other works of
Peter are extant. Some of these are praised by the Jacobites, in the
work which they call *Fides patrum*. In another work, entitled *Unio
pretiosus*, occurs a homily of Peter on the baptism of Christ.

The fragments of the other writings of this holy martyr, which have been
preserved by the Greeks, are here appended to the Penitential Canons.
For instance: (1) An extract from his book *De Deitate*, which is extant
in the *Acta Conciliorum Ephesini et Chalcedonensis*; (2) Another
fragment from the homily *De Adventu Salvatoris*, cited by Leontius
Byzantinus in his first book against Nestorius and Eutyches; (3) An
epistle of the same prelate to the Alexandrine Church recently
published, together with some other old ecclesiastical monuments by
Scipio Maffei.<sup>[11](footnote/fn42.htm#P4233_1241900)</sup> Peter is
said to have written this epistle after one addressed to Meletius,
Bishop of Lycopolis. In it, after interdicting the Alexandrians from
communion with Meletius, he says that he will himself come in company
with some wise doctors, and will examine into his tenets; alluding, most
probably, to the synod held afterwards at Alexandria, in which Meletius
was deposed from his office. Athanasius
says,<sup>[12](footnote/fn42.htm#P4234_1242361)</sup> respecting this
synod, "Peter, who was amongst us as bishop before the persecution, and
who died a martyr in the persecution, deposed in common council of the
bishops, Meletius, an Egyptian bishop, who had been convicted of many
crimes." But with respect to the time in which the mournful Meletian
schism commenced, Maffei<sup>[13](footnote/fn42.htm#P4235_1242747)</sup>
defends the opinions of
Baronius,<sup>[14](footnote/fn42.htm#P4236_1242807)</sup> who connects
it with the year A.D. 306, against Pagius and Montfaucon, both from this
epistle of Petrus Alexandrinus, and also from another of the four
bishops, of which Peter makes mention in his own; (4) A passage from the
*Sermo in Sanctum Pascha*, or from some other work of Peter's on the
same subject, is given in the *Diatriba de Paschate*, prefixed to the
*Chronicon Alexandrinum S. Paschale*, and published separately in the
*Uranologion* of Petavius, fol. Paris, 1630, p. 396.

By the American Editor.

Here may be noted the historic fact that this terrible epoch of
persecutions had driven many to the deserts, where they dwelt as
hermits.<sup>[15](footnote/fn42.htm#P4240_1243503)</sup> It now
introduced *monasticism*, in its earliest and least objectionable forms,
into Egypt, whence it soon spread into the Church at large. For a
favourable view of the character and life of St. Antony, see Neale's
history<sup>[16](footnote/fn42.htm#P4241_1243789)</sup> of this period;
but, if he turns it into an indirect plea for the subsequent history of
monasticism, we shall find in Canon Kingsley's *Hypatia* a high-wrought
testimony of an antagonistic character.
Bingham,<sup>[17](footnote/fn42.htm#P4242_1244084)</sup> avoiding the
entanglements of primitive with mediaeval history, affords a just view
of what may be said of the rise of this mighty institution, based upon
two texts<sup>[18](footnote/fn42.htm#P4243_1244281)</sup> of Holy
Scripture, proceeding from the Incarnate Word Himself, which impressed
themselves on the fervid spirit of Antony. Who can wonder that fire and
sword and ravening wolves predisposed men and women to avoid the
domestic life, and the bringing of hapless families into existence as a
prey to the remorseless cruelty of the empire? Far be it from me to
forget what the world owes, directly and indirectly, to the nobler and
purer orders,-what learning must ever acknowledge as its debt to the
Benedictines of the
West.<sup>[19](footnote/fn42.htm#P4244_1244840)</sup> But, on the other
hand, after the melancholy episcopate of Cyril, we cannot but trace, in
the history of Oriental monasticism, not only the causes of the decay of
Alexandrian scholarship and influence, but of the ignominious fate of
the Byzantine Empire, and of that paltry devotion to images which seemed
to invoke the retributions of a "jealous god," and which favoured the
rise of an impostor who found in his "abhorrence of idols" an excuse for
making himself the "Scourge of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Genuine Acts of Peter.](0060099)
