[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060100)  [Next](0060102) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Note by the American Editor.

Here may be noted the historic fact that this terrible epoch of
persecutions had driven many to the deserts, where they dwelt as
hermits.<sup>[64](footnote/fn44.htm#P4467_1354308)</sup> It now
introduced *monasticism*, in its earliest and least objectionable forms,
into Egypt, whence it soon spread into the Church at large. For a
favourable view of the character and life of St. Antony, see Neale's
history<sup>[65](footnote/fn44.htm#P4468_1354594)</sup> of this period;
but, if he turns it into an indirect plea for the subsequent history of
monasticism, we shall find in Canon Kingsley's *Hypatia* a high-wrought
testimony of an antagonistic character.
Bingham,<sup>[66](footnote/fn44.htm#P4469_1354890)</sup> avoiding the
entanglements of primitive with mediaeval history, affords a just view
of what may be said of the rise of this mighty institution, based upon
two texts<sup>[67](footnote/fn44.htm#P4470_1355087)</sup> of Holy
Scripture, proceeding from the Incarnate Word Himself, which impressed
themselves on the fervid spirit of Antony. Who can wonder that fire and
sword and ravening wolves predisposed men and women to avoid the
domestic life, and the bringing of hapless families into existence as a
prey to the remorseless cruelty of the empire? Far be it from me to
forget what the world owes, directly and indirectly, to the nobler and
purer orders,-what learning must ever acknowledge as its debt to the
Benedictines of the
West.<sup>[68](footnote/fn44.htm#P4471_1355646)</sup> But, on the other
hand, after the melancholy episcopate of Cyril, we cannot but trace, in
the history of Oriental monasticism, not only the causes of the decay of
Alexandrian scholarship and influence, but of the ignominious fate of
the Byzantine Empire, and of that paltry devotion to images which seemed
to invoke the retributions of a "jealous god," and which favoured the
rise of an impostor who found in his "abhorrence of idols" an excuse for
making himself the "Scourge of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fragments from the Writings of Peter.](0060102)
