[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060019)  [Next](0060021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  On the Subject of the Soul.<sup>[1](footnote/fn10)</sup>

------------

You have instructed us, most excellent
Tatian,<sup>[2](footnote/fn10.htm#P1054_264836)</sup> to forward for
your use a discourse upon the soul, laying it out in effective
demonstrations. And this you have asked us to do without making use of
the testimonies of Scripture,-a method which is opened to us, and which,
to those who seek the pious mind, proves a manner of setting forth
doctrine more convincing than any reasoning of
man.<sup>[3](footnote/fn10.htm#P1055_265202)</sup> You have said,
however, that you desire this, not with a view to your own full
assurance, taught as you already have been to hold by the Holy
Scriptures and traditions, and to avoid being shaken in your convictions
by any subtleties of man's disputations, but with a view to the
confuting of men who have different sentiments, and who do not admit
that such credit is to be given to the Scriptures, and who endeavour, by
a kind of cleverness of speech, to gain over those who are unversed in
such discussions. Wherefore we were led to comply readily with this
commission of yours, not shrinking from the task on account of
inexperience in this method of disputation, but taking encouragement
froth the knowledge of your good-will toward us. For your kind and
friendly disposition towards us will make you understand how to put
forward publicly whatever you may approve of as rightly expressed by us,
and to pass by and conceal whatever statement of ours yon may judge to
come short of what is proper. Knowing this, therefore, I have betaken
myself with all confidence to the exposition. And in my discourse I
shall use a certain order and consecution, such as those who are very
expert in these matters employ towards those who desire to investigate
any subject intelligently.

First of all, then, I shall propose to inquire by what criterion the
soul can, according to its nature, be apprehended; then by what means it
can be proved to exist; thereafter, whether it is a *substance* or an
*accident*;<sup>[4](footnote/fn10.htm#P1057_266782)</sup> then
consequently on these points, whether it is a body or is incorporeal;
then, whether it is simple or compound; next, whether it is mortal or
immortal; and finally, whether it is rational or irrational.

For these are the questions which are wont, above all, to be discussed,
in any inquiry about the soul, as most important, and as best calculated
to mark out its distinctive nature. And as demonstrations for the
establishing of these matters of investigation, we shall employ those
common modes of
consideration<sup>[5](footnote/fn10.htm#P1059_267338)</sup> by which the
credibility of matters under hand is naturally attested. But for the
purpose of brevity and utility, we shall at present make use only of
those modes of argumentation which are most cogently demonstrative on
the subject of our inquiry, in order that clear and
intelligible<sup>[6](footnote/fn10.htm#P1060_267639)</sup> notions may
impart to us some readiness for meeting the gainsayers. With this,
therefore, we shall commence our discussion.

All things that exist are either known by
sense<sup>[7](footnote/fn10.htm#P1064_267889)</sup> or apprehended by
thought.<sup>[8](footnote/fn10.htm#P1065_267930)</sup> And what falls
under sense has its adequate demonstration in sense itself; for at once,
with the application, it creates in us the
impression<sup>[9](footnote/fn10.htm#P1066_268084)</sup> of what
underlies it. But what is apprehended by thought is known not by itself,
but by its operations.<sup>[10](footnote/fn10.htm#P1067_268204)</sup>
The soul, consequently, being unknown by itself, shall be known property
by its effects.

Our body, when it is put in action, is put in action either from without
or from within. And that it is not put in action from without, is
manifest from the circumstance that it is put in action neither by
impulsion<sup>[11](footnote/fn10.htm#P1071_268554)</sup> nor by
traction,<sup>[12](footnote/fn10.htm#P1072_268588)</sup> like soulless
things. And again, if it is put in action from within, it is not put in
action according to nature, like fire. For fire never loses its action
as long as there is fire; whereas the body, when it has become dead, is
a body void of action. Hence, if it is put in action neither from
without, like soulless things, nor according to nature, after the
fashion of fire, it is evident that it is put in action by the soul,
which also furnishes life to it. If, then, the soul is shown to furnish
the life to our body, the soul will also be known for itself by its
operations.

That the soul is a
substance,<sup>[13](footnote/fn10.htm#P1076_269255)</sup> is proved in
the following manner. In the first place, because the definition given
to the term substance suits it very well. And that definition is to the
effect, that substance is that which, being ever identical, and ever one
in point of numeration with itself, is yet capable of taking on
contraries in succession.<sup>[14](footnote/fn10.htm#P1077_269588)</sup>
And that this soul, without passing the limit of its own proper nature,
takes on contraries in succession, is, I fancy, clear to everybody. For
righteousness and unrighteousness, courage and cowardice, temperance and
intemperance, are seen in it successively; and these are contraries. If,
then, it is the property of a substance to be capable of taking on
contraries in succession, and if the soul is shown to sustain the
definition in these terms, it follows that the soul is a substance. And
in the second place, because if the body is a substance, the soul must
also be a substance. For it cannot be, that what only has life imparted
should be a substance, and that what imparts the life should be no
substance: unless one should assert that the non-existent is the cause
of the existent; or unless, again, one were insane enough to allege that
the dependent object is itself the cause of that very thing in which it
has its being, and without which it could not
subsist.<sup>[15](footnote/fn10.htm#P1078_270683)</sup>

That the soul is in our body, has been shown above. We ought now,
therefore, to ascertain in what manner it is in the body. Now, if it is
in juxtaposition with it, as one pebble with another, it follows that
the soul will be a body, and also that the whole body will not be
animated with soul,<sup>[16](footnote/fn10.htm#P1082_271256)</sup>
inasmuch as with a certain part it will only be in juxtaposition. But if
again, it is mingled or fused with the body, the soul will become
multiplex,<sup>[17](footnote/fn10.htm#P1083_271421)</sup> and not
simple, and will thus be despoiled of the rationale proper to a soul.
For what is multiplex is also divisible and dissoluble; and what is
dissoluble, on the other hand, is
compound;<sup>[18](footnote/fn10.htm#P1084_271628)</sup> and what is
compound is separable in a threefold manner. Moreover, body attached to
body makes weight;<sup>[19](footnote/fn10.htm#P1085_271747)</sup> but
the soul, subsisting in the body, does not make weight, but rather
imparts life. The soul, therefore, cannot be a body, but is incorporeal.

Again, if the soul is a body, it is put in action either from without or
from within. But it is not put in action from without; for it is moved
neither by impulsion nor by traction, like soulless things. Nor is it
put in action from within, like objects animated with soul; for it is
absurd to talk of a soul of the soul: it cannot, therefore, be a body,
but it is incorporeal.

And besides, if the soul is a body, it has sensible qualities, and is
maintained by nurture. But it is not thus nurtured. For if it is
nurtured, it is not nurtured corporeally, like the body, but
incorporeally; for it is nurtured by reason. It has not, therefore,
sensible qualities: for neither is righteousness, nor courage, nor any
one of these things, something that is seen; yet these are the qualities
of the soul. It cannot, therefore, be a body, but is incorporeal.

Still further, as all corporeal substance is divided into animate and
inanimate, let those who hold that the soul is a body tell us whether we
are to call it animate or inanimate.

Finally, if every body has colour, and quantity, and figure, and if
there is not one of these qualities perceptible in the soul, it follows
that the soul is not a
body.<sup>[20](footnote/fn10.htm#P1090_273101)</sup>

We prove, then, that the soul is simple, best of all, by those arguments
by which its incorporeality has been demonstrated. For if it is not a
body, while every body is compound, and what is composite is made up of
parts, and is consequently multiplex, the soul, on the other hand, being
incorporeal, is simple; since thus it is both uncompounded and
indivisible into parts.

It follows, in my opinion, as a necessary consequence, that what is
simple is immortal. And as to how that follows, hear my explanation:
Nothing that exists is its own
corrupter,<sup>[21](footnote/fn10.htm#P1097_273824)</sup> else it could
never have had any thorough consistency, even from the beginning. For
things that are subject to corruption are corrupted by contraries:
wherefore everything that is corrupted is subject to dissolution; and
what is subject to dissolution is compound; and what is compound is of
many parts; and what is made up of parts manifestly is made up of
diverse parts; and the diverse is not the identical: consequently the
soul, being simple, and not being made up of diverse parts, but being
uncompound and indissoluble, must be, in virtue of that, incorruptible
and immortal.

Besides, everything that is put in action by something else, and does
not possess the principle of life in itself, but gets it from that which
puts it in action, endures just so long as it is held by the power that
operates in it; and whenever the operative power ceases, that also comes
to a stand which has its capacity of action from it. But the soul, being
self-acting, has no cessation of its being. For it follows, that what is
self-acting is ever-acting; and what is ever-acting is unceasing; and
what is unceasing is without end; and what is without end is
incorruptible; and what is incorruptible is immortal. Consequently, if
the soul is self-acting, as has been shown above, it follows that it is
incorruptible and immortal, in accordance with the mode of reasoning
already expressed.

And further, everything that is not corrupted by the evil proper to
itself, is incorruptible; and the evil is opposed to the good, and is
consequently its corrupter. For the evil of the body is nothing else
than suffering, and disease, and death; just as, on the other hand, its
excellency is beauty, life, health, and vigour. If, therefore, the soul
is not corrupted by the evil proper to itself, and the evil of the soul
is cowardice, intemperance, envy, and the like, and all these things do
not despoil it of its powers of life and action, it follows that it is
immortal.

That our soul is rational, one might demonstrate by many arguments. And
first of all from the fact that it has discovered the arts that are for
the service of our life. For no one could say that these arts were
introduced casually and accidentally, as no one could prove them to be
idle, and of no utility for our life. If, then, these arts contribute to
what is profitable for our life, and if the profitable is commendable,
and if the commendable is constituted by reason, and if these things are
the discovery of the soul, it follows that our soul is rational.

Again, that our soul is rational, is also proved by the fact that our
senses are not sufficient for the apprehension of things. For we are not
competent for the knowledge of things by the simple application of the
faculty of sensation. But as we do not choose to rest in these without
inquiry,<sup>[22](footnote/fn11.htm#P1104_276684)</sup> that proves that
the senses, apart from reason, are felt to be incapable of
discriminating between things which are identical in form and similar in
colour, though quite distinct in their natures. If, therefore, the
senses, apart from reason, give us a false conception of things, we have
to consider whether things that are can be apprehended in reality or
not. And if they can be apprehended, then the power which enables us to
get at them is one different from, and superior to, the senses. And if
they are not apprehended, it will not be possible for us at all to
apprehend things which are different in their appearance from the
reality. But that objects are apprehensible by us, is clear from the
fact that we employ each in a way adaptable to utility, and again turn
them to what we please. Consequently, if it has been shown that things
which are can be apprehended by us, and if the senses, apart from
reason, are an erroneous test of objects, it follows that the
intellect<sup>[23](footnote/fn11.htm#P1105_277716)</sup> is what
distinguishes all things in reason, and discerns things as they are in
their actuality. But the intellect is just the rational portion of the
soul, and consequently the soul is rational.

Finally, because we do nothing without having first marked it out for
ourselves; and as that is nothing else than just the high
prerogative<sup>[24](footnote/fn11.htm#P1107_278062)</sup> of the
soul,-for its knowledge of things does not come to it from without, but
it rather sets out these things, as it were, with the adornment of its
own thoughts, and thus first pictures forth the object in itself, and
only thereafter carries it out to actual fact,-and because the high
prerogative of the soul is nothing else than the doing of all things
with reason, in which respect it also differs from the senses, the soul
has thereby been demonstrated to be rational.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations.](0060021)
