[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060074)  [Next](0060076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Fragments of the Epistle of Phileas to the People of Thmuis.<sup>[1](footnote/fn29.htm#P2936_766512)</sup>

I.

Having before them all these examples and signs and illustrious tokens
which are given us in the divine and holy Scriptures, the blessed
martyrs who lived with us did not hesitate. but, directing the eye of
their soul in sincerity to that God who is over all, and embracing with
willing mind the death which their piety cost them, they adhered
steadfastly to their vocation. For they learned that our Lord Jesus
Christ endured man's estate on our behalf, that He might destroy all
sin, and furnish us with the provision needful for our entrance into
eternal life. "For He thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but
made Himself of no reputation, taking upon Him the form of a servant:
and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself unto death, even
the death of the cross."<sup>[2](footnote/fn29.htm#P2940_767344)</sup>
For which reason also these
Christ-bearing<sup>[3](footnote/fn29.htm#P2941_767405)</sup> martyrs
sought zealously the greater gifts, and endured, some of them, every
kind of pain and all the varied contrivances of torture not merely once,
bat once and again; and though the guards showed their fury against them
not only by threatenings m word, but also by deeds of violence, they did
not swerve from their resolution, because *perfect love casteth out
fear*.<sup>[4](footnote/fn29.htm#P2942_767883)</sup>

II.

And to narrate their virtue and their manly endurance under every
torment, what language would suffice? For as every one who chose was at
liberty to abuse them, some beat them with wooden
clubs,<sup>[5](footnote/fn29.htm#P2946_768099)</sup> and others with
rods, and others with scourges, and others again with thongs, land
others with ropes. And the spectacle of these modes of torture had great
variety in it, and exhibited vast malignity. For some had their hands
bound behind them, and were suspended on the rack and bad every, limb in
their body stretched with a certain kind of
pulleys.<sup>[6](footnote/fn29.htm#P2947_768627)</sup> Then after all
this the torturers, according to their orders, lacerated with the sharp
iron claws<sup>[7](footnote/fn29.htm#P2948_768746)</sup> the whole body,
not merely, as in the case of murderers, the sides only, but also the
stomach and the knees and the cheeks. And others were hung up in
mid-air, suspended by one hand from the portico, and their sufferings
were fiercer than any other kind of agony by reason of the distention of
their joints and limbs. And others were bound to pillars, face to face,
not touching the ground with their feet, but hanging with all the weight
of the body, so that their chains were drawn all the more tightly by
reason of the tension. And this they endured not simply as long as the
governor<sup>[8](footnote/fn29.htm#P2949_769554)</sup> spoke with them,
or had leisure to hear them, but well-nigh through the whole day. For
when he passed on to others he left some of those under his authority to
keep watch over these former, and to observe whether any of them, being
overcome by the torture, seemed likely to yield. But he gave them orders
at the same time to cast them into chains without sparing, and
thereafter, when they were expiring, to throw them on the ground and
drag them along. For they said that they would not give themselves the
slightest concern about us, but would look upon us and deal with us as
if we were nothing at all. This second mode of torture our enemies
devised then over and above the scourging.

III.

And there were also some who, after the tortures, were placed upon the
stocks and had both their feet stretched through all the four holes, so
that they were compelled to lie on their back on the stocks, as they
were unable (to stand) in, consequence of the fresh wounds they had over
the whole body from the scourging. And others being thrown upon the
ground lay prostrated there by the excessively frequent application of
the tortures; in which condition they exhibited to the onlookers a still
more dreadful spectacle than they did when actually undergoing their
torments, bearing, as they did, on their bodies the varied and manifold
tokens of the cruel ingenuity of their tortures. While this state of
matters went on some died under their tortures putting the adversary to
shame by their constancy. And others were thrust half-dead into the
prison, where in a few days, worn out with their agonies, they met their
end. But the rest, getting sure recovery under the application of
remedies, through time and their lengthened detention in prison, became
more confident. And thus then, when they were commanded to make their
choice between these alternatives, namely, either to put their hand to
the unholy sacrifice and thus secure exemption from further trouble, and
obtain from them their abominable sentence of absolution and
liberation,<sup>[9](footnote/fn29.htm#P2953_771655)</sup> or else to
refuse to sacrifice, and thus expect the judgment of death to be
executed on them, they never hesitated, but went cheerfully to
death.<sup>[10](footnote/fn29.htm#P2954_771835)</sup> For they knew the
sentence declared for us of old by the Holy Scriptures: "He that
sacrificeth to other gods," it is said, "shall be utterly
destroyed."<sup>[11](footnote/fn29.htm#P2955_772252)</sup> And
again<sup>[12](footnote/fn29.htm#P2956_772283)</sup> "Thou shalt have no
other gods before Me."<sup>[13](footnote/fn29.htm#P2957_772344)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle of the Same Phileas of Thmuis to Meletius, Bishop of
Lycopolis.](0060076)
