[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060009)  [Next](0060011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I.

(The title, p. 18.)

This is a genuine epistle, all but the eleventh canon. It is addressed
to an anonymous bishop; one of his suffragans, some think. I suppose,
rather, he consults, as Cyprian did, the bishop of the nearest Apostolic
See, and awaits his concurrence. It refers to the ravages of the Goths
in the days of Gallienus (a.d. 259-267), and proves the care of the
Church to maintain discipline, even in times most unfavourable to order
and piety. The last canon is an explanatory addition made to elucidate
the four degrees or classes of penitents. It is a very interesting
document in this respect, and sheds light on the famous canonical
epistles of St. Basil.

II.

(Basil the Great, p. 18, note.)

The "Canonical Epistles" of St. Basil are not private letters, but
canons of the churches with which he was nearest related. When there was
no art of printing, the chief bishops were obliged to communicate with
suffragans, and with their brethren in the Apostolic See nearest to
them. See them expounded at large in Dupin, *Ecclesiastical Writers of
the Fourth Century, Works*, vol. i., London, 1693 (translated), p. 139,
etc.

III.

(Most holy father, p. 18.)

This expression leads me to think that this epistle is addressed to the
Bishop of Antioch or of some other Apostolic See. It must not be taken
as a prescribed formula, however, as when we say "Most Reverend" in our
days; e.g., addressing the Archbishop of Canterbury. Rather, it is an
expression of personal reverence. As yet, titular distinctions, such as
these, were not known. In the West existing usages seem to have been
introduced with the Carlovingian system of dignities, expounded by
Gibbon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Oration and Panegyric Addressed to Origen.](0060011)
