[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060056)  [Next](0060058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Translator's Biographical Notice.

\[a.d. 230-270-280.\] From Jerome<sup>[2](footnote/fn24)</sup> we learn
that Anatolius flourished in the reign of Probus and Carus, that he was
a native of Alexandria, and that he became bishop of Laodicea. Eusebius
gives a somewhat lengthened account of
him,<sup>[3](footnote/fn24.htm#P2471_688440)</sup> and speaks of him in
terms of the strongest laudation, as one surpassing all the men of his
time in learning and science. He tells us that he attained the highest
eminence in arithmetic, geometry, and astronomy, besides being a great
proficient also in dialectics, physics, and rhetoric. His reputation was
so great among the Alexandrians that they are said to have requested him
to open a school for teaching the Aristotelian philosophy in their
city.<sup>[4](footnote/fn24.htm#P2472_688973)</sup> He did great service
to his fellow-citizens in Alexandria on their being besieged by the
Romans in a.d. 262, and was the means of saving the lives of numbers of
them. After this he is said to have passed into Syria, where Theotecnus,
the bishop of *Caesareia*, ordained him, destining him to be his own
successor in the bishopric. After this, however, having occasion to
travel to Antioch to attend the synod convened to deal with the case of
Paul of Samosata, as he passed through the city of Laodicea, he was
detained by the people and made bishop of the place, in succession to
Eusebius. This must have been about the year 270 a.d. How long he held
that dignity, however, we do not know. Eusebius tells us that he did not
write many books, but yet enough to show us at once his eloquence and
his erudition. Among these was a treatise on the *Chronology of Easter*;
of which a considerable extract is preserved in Eusebius. The book
itself exists now only in a Latin version, which is generally ascribed
to Rufinus, and which was published by Aegidius Bucherius in his
*Doctrina Temporum*, which was issued at Antwerp in 1634. Another work
of his was the *Institutes of Arithmetic*, of which we have some
fragments in the qeologou/mena th=j a0riqmhtikh=j, which was published
in Paris in 1543. Some small fragments of his mathematical works, which
have also come down to us, were published by Fabricius in his
*Bibliotheca Graeca* , iii. p. 462.

--------

I.

As we are about to speak on the subject of the order of the times and
alternations of the world, we shall first dispose of the positions of
diverse calculators; who, by reckoning only by the course of the moon,
and leaving out of account the ascent and descent of the sun, with the
addition of certain problems, have constructed diverse
periods,<sup>[1](footnote/fn24.htm#P2477_691016)</sup>
self-contradictory, and such as are never found in the reckoning of a
true computation; since it is certain that no mode of computation is to
be approved, in which these two measures are not found together. For
even in the ancient exemplars, that is, in the books of the Hebrews and
Greeks, we find not only the course of the moon, but also that of the
sun, and, indeed, not simply its course in the
general,<sup>[2](footnote/fn24.htm#P2478_691473)</sup> but even the
separate and minutest moments of its hours all calculated, as we shall
show at the proper time, when the matter in hand demands it. Of these
Hippolytus made up a period of sixteen years with certain unknown
courses of the moon. Others have reckoned by a period of twenty-five
years, others by thirty, and some by eighty-four years, without,
however, teaching thereby an exact method of calculating Easter. But our
predecessors, men most learned in the books of the Hebrews and Greeks,-I
mean Isidore and Jerome and Clement,-although they have noted similar
beginnings for the months just as they differ also in language, have,
nevertheless, come harmoniously to one and the same most exact reckoning
of Easter, day and month and season meeting in accord with the highest
honour for the Lord's
resurrection.<sup>[3](footnote/fn24.htm#P2479_692349)</sup> But Origen
also, the most erudite of all, and the acutest in making calculations,-a
man, too, to whom the epithet
xalkenth/j<sup>[4](footnote/fn24.htm#P2480_692743)</sup> is given,-has
published in a very elegant manner a little hook on Easter. And in this
book, while declaring, with respect to the day of Easter, that attention
must be given not only to the course of the moon and the transit of the
equinox, but also to the passage (*transcensum*) of the sun, which
removes every foul ambush and offence of all darkness, and brings on the
advent of light and the power and inspiration of the elements of the
whole world, he speaks thus: In the (matter of the) day of Easter, he
remarks, I do not say that it is to be observed that the Lord's day
should be found, and the
seven<sup>[5](footnote/fn24.htm#P2481_693410)</sup> days of the moon
which are to elapse, but that the sun should pass that division, to wit,
between light and darkness, constituted in an equality by the
dispensation of the Lord at the beginning of the world; and that, from
one hour to two hours, from two to three, from three to four, from four
to five, from five to six hours, while the light is increasing in the
ascent of the sun, the darkness should
decrease.<sup>[6](footnote/fn24.htm#P2482_693901)</sup> ... and the
addition of the twentieth number being completed, twelve parts should be
supplied in one and the same day. But if I should have attempted to add
any little drop of mine<sup>[7](footnote/fn24.htm#P2483_694122)</sup>
after the exuberant streams of the eloquence and science of some, what
else should there be to believe but that it should be ascribed by all to
ostentation, and, to speak more truly, to mad ness, did not the
assistance of your promised prayers animate us for a little? For we
believe that nothing is impossible to your power of prayer, and to your
faith. Strengthened, therefore, by this confidence, we shall set
bashfulness aside, and shall enter this most deep and unforeseen sea of
the obscurest calculation, in which swelling questions and problems
surge around us on all sides.

II.

There is, then, in the first year, the new moon of the first month,
which is the beginning of every cycle of nineteen years, on the six and
twentieth day of the month called by the Egyptians
Phamenoth.<sup>[8](footnote/fn24.htm#P2487_694933)</sup> But, according
to the months of the Macedonians, it is on the two-and-twentieth day of
Dystrus. And, as the Romans would say, it is on the eleventh day before
the Kalends of April. Now the sun is found on the said six-and-twentieth
day of Phamenoth, not only as having mounted to the first segment, but
as already passing the fourth day in it. And this segment they are
accustomed to call the first dodecatemorion (twelfth part), and the
equinox, and the beginning of months, and the head of the cycle, and the
starting-point<sup>[9](footnote/fn24.htm#P2488_695957)</sup> of the
course of the planets. And the segment before this they call the last of
the months, and the twelfth segment, and the last dodecatemorion, and
the end of the circuit<sup>[10](footnote/fn24.htm#P2489_696291)</sup> of
the planets. And for this reason, also, we maintain that those who place
the first month in it, and who determine the fourteenth day of the
Paschal season by it, make no trivial or common blunder.

III.

Nor is this an opinion confined to ourselves alone. For it was also
known to the Jews of old and before Christ, and it was most carefully
observed by them.<sup>[11](footnote/fn24.htm#P2493_696665)</sup> And
this may be learned from what Philo, and Josephus, and Musaeus have
written; and not only from these, but indeed from others still more
ancient, namely, the two
Agathobuli,<sup>[12](footnote/fn24.htm#P2494_696892)</sup> who were
surnamed the Masters, and the eminent
Aristobulus,<sup>[13](footnote/fn24.htm#P2495_697274)</sup> who was one
of the Seventy who translated the sacred and holy Scriptures of the
Hebrews for Ptolemy Philadelphus and his father, and dedicated his
exegetical books on the law of Moses to the same kings. These writers,
in solving some questions which are raised with respect to Exodus, say
that all alike ought to sacrifice the
Passover<sup>[14](footnote/fn24.htm#P2496_698762)</sup> after the vernal
equinox in the middle of the first month. And that is found to be when
the sun passes through the first segment of the solar, or, as some among
them have named it, the zodiacal circle.

IV.

But this Aristobulus also adds, that for the feast of the Passover it
was necessary not only that the sun should pass the equinoctial segment,
but the moon also. For as there are two equinoctial segments, the vernal
and the autumnal, and these diametrically opposite to each other, and
since the day of the Passover is fixed for the fourteenth day of the
month, in the evening, the moon will have the position diametrically
opposite the sun; as is to be seen in full moons. And the sun will thus
be in the segment of the vernal equinox, and the moon necessarily will
be at the autumnal equinox.

V.

I am aware that very many other matters were discussed by them, some of
them with considerable probability, and others of them as matters of the
clearest demonstration,<sup>[15](footnote/fn25)</sup> by which they
endeavour to prove that the festival of the Passover and unleavened
bread ought by all means to be kept after the equinox. But I shall pass
on without demanding such copious demonstrations (on
subjects<sup>[16](footnote/fn25.htm#P2504_700186)</sup> ) from which the
veil of the Mosaic law has been removed; for now it remains for us with
unveiled face to behold ever as in a glass Christ Himself and the
doctrines and sufferings of Christ. But that the first month among the
Hebrews is about the equinox, is clearly shown also by what is taught in
the book of Enoch.<sup>[17](footnote/fn25.htm#P2505_700707)</sup>

VI.

And, therefore, in this concurrence of the sun and moon, the Paschal
festival is not to be celebrated, because as long as they are found in
this course the power of darkness is not overcome; and as long as
equality between light and darkness endures, and is not diminished by
the light, it is shown that the Paschal festival is not to be
celebrated. Accordingly, it is enjoined that that festival be kept after
the equinox, because the moon of the
fourteenth,<sup>[18](footnote/fn25.htm#P2509_701447)</sup> if before the
equinox or at the equinox, does not fill the whole night. But after the
equinox, the moon of the fourteenth, with one day being added because of
the passing of the equinox, although it does not extend to the true
light, that is, the rising of the sun and the beginning of day, will
nevertheless leave no darkness behind it. And, in accordance with this,
Moses is charged by the Lord to keep seven days of unleavened bread for
the celebration of the Passover, that in them no power of darkness
should be found to surpass the light. And although the outset of four
nights begins to be dark, that is, the 17th and 18th and 19th and 20th,
yet the moon of the 20th, which rises before that, does not permit the
darkness to extend on even to midnight.

VII.

To us, however, with whom it is impossible for all these things to come
aptly at one and the same time, namely, the moon's fourteenth, and the
Lord's day, and the passing of the equinox, and whom the obligation of
the Lord's resurrection binds to keep the Paschal festival on the Lord's
day, it is granted that we may extend the beginning of our celebration
even to the moon's twentieth. For although the moon of the 20th does not
fill the whole night, yet, rising as it does in the second watch, it
illumines the greater part of the night. Certainly if the rising of the
moon should be delayed on to the end of two watches, that is to say, to
midnight, the light would not then exceed the darkness, but the darkness
the light. But it is clear that in the Paschal feast it is not possible
that any part of the darkness should surpass the light; for the festival
of the Lord's resurrection is *one of* light, and there is no fellowship
between light and darkness. And if the moon should rise in the third
watch, it is clear that the 22d or 23d of the moon would then be
reached, in which it is not possible that there can be a true
celebration of Easter. For those who determine that the festival may be
kept at this age of the moon, are not only unable to make that good by
the authority of Scripture, but turn also into the crime of sacrilege
and contumacy, and incur the peril of their souls; inasmuch as they
affirm that the true light may be celebrated along with something of
that power of darkness which dominates all.

VIII.

Accordingly, it is not the case, as certain calculators of Gaul allege,
that this assertion is opposed by that passage in
Exodus,<sup>[19](footnote/fn25.htm#P2516_703997)</sup> where we read:
"In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the first month, at even,
ye shall eat unleavened bread until the one-and-twentieth day of the
month at even. Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your
houses." From this they maintain that it is quite permissible to
celebrate the Passover on the twenty-first day of the moon;
understanding that if the twenty-second day were added, there would be
found eight days of unleavened bread. A thing which cannot be found with
any probability, indeed, in the Old Testament, as the Lord, through
Moses, gives this charge: "Seven days ye shall eat unleavened
bread."<sup>[20](footnote/fn25.htm#P2517_704649)</sup> Unless perchance
the fourteenth day is not reckoned by them among the days of unleavened
bread with the celebration of the feast; which, however, is contrary to
the Word of the Gospel which says: "Moreover, on the first day of
unleavened bread, the disciples came to
Jesus."<sup>[21](footnote/fn25.htm#P2518_704961)</sup> And there is no
doubt as to its being the fourteenth day on which the disciples asked
the Lord, in accordance with the custom established for them of old,
"Where wilt Thou that we prepare for Thee to eat the Passover? "But they
who are deceived with this error maintain this addition, because they do
not know that the 13th and 14th, the 14th and 15th, the 15th and 16th,
the 16th and 17th, the 17th and 18th, the 18th and 19th, the 19th and
20th, the 20th and 21st days of the moon are each found, as may be most
surely proved, within a single day. For every day in the reckoning of
the moon does not end in the evening as the same day in respect of
number, as it is at its beginning in the morning. For the day which in
the morning, that is up to the sixth hour and half, is numbered the 13th
day of the month, is found at even to be the 14th. Wherefore, also, the
Passover is enjoined to be extended on to the 21st day at even; which
day, without doubt, in the morning, that is, up to that term of hours
which we have mentioned, was reckoned the 20th. Calculate, then, from
the end of the 13th<sup>[22](footnote/fn25.htm#P2519_706107)</sup> day
of the moon, which marks the beginning of the 14th, on to the end of the
20th, at which the 21st day also begins, and you will have only seven
days of unleavened bread, in which, by the guidance of the Lord, it has
been determined before that the most true feast of the Passover ought to
be celebrated.

IX.

But what wonder is it that they should have erred in the matter of the
21st day of the moon who have added three days before the equinox, in
which they hold that the Passover may be celebrated? An assertion which
certainly must be considered altogether absurd, since, by the best-known
historiographers of the Jews, and by the Seventy Elders, it has been
clearly determined that the Paschal festival cannot be celebrated at the
equinox.

X.

But nothing was difficult to them with whom it was lawful to celebrate
the Passover on any day when tile fourteenth of the moon happened after
the equinox. Following their example up to the present time all the
bishops of Asia-as themselves also receiving the rule from an
unimpeachable authority, to wit, the evangelist John, who leant on the
Lord's breast, and drank in instructions spiritual without doubt-were in
the way of celebrating the Paschal feast, without question, every year,
whenever the fourteenth day of the moon had come, and the lamb was
sacrificed by the Jews after the equinox was past; not acquiescing, so
far as regards this matter, with the authority of some, namely, the
successors of Peter and Paul, who have taught all the churches in which
they sowed the spiritual seeds of the Gospel, that the solemn festival
of the resurrection of the Lord can be celebrated only on the Lord's
day. Whence, also, a certain contention broke out between the successors
of these, namely, Victor, at that time bishop of the city of Rome, and
Polycrates, who then appeared to hold the primacy among the bishops of
Asia. And this contention was adjusted most rightfully by
Irenaeus,<sup>[23](footnote/fn25.htm#P2526_708075)</sup> at that time
president of a part of Gaul, so that both parties kept by their own
order, and did not decline from the original custom of antiquity. The
one party, indeed, kept the Paschal day on the fourteenth day of the
first month, according to the Gospel, as they thought, adding nothing of
an extraneous kind, but keeping through all things the rule of faith.
And the other party, passing the day of the Lord's Passion as one
replete with sadness and grief, hold that it should not be lawful to
celebrate the Lord's mystery of the Passover at any other time but on
the Lord's day, on which the resurrection of the Lord from death took
place, and on which rose also for us the cause of everlasting joy. For
it is one thing to act in accordance with the precept given by the
apostle, yea, by the Lord Himself, and be sad with the sad, and suffer
with him thatsuffers by the cross, His own word being: "My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death;
"<sup>[24](footnote/fn25.htm#P2527_709159)</sup> and it is another thing
to rejoice with the victor as he triumphs over an ancient enemy, and
exults with the highest triumph over a conquered adversary, as He
Himself also says: "Rejoice with Me; for I have found the sheep which I
had lost."<sup>[25](footnote/fn25.htm#P2528_709422)</sup>

XI.

Moreover, the allegation which they sometimes make against us, that if
we pass the moon's fourteenth we cannot celebrate the beginning of the
Paschal feast in light,<sup>[26](footnote/fn25.htm#P2532_709608)</sup>
neither moves nor disturbs us. For, although they lay it down as a thing
unlawful, that the beginning of the Paschal festival should be extended
so far as to the moon's twentieth; yet they cannot deny that it ought to
be extended to the sixteenth and seventeenth, which coincide with the
day on which the Lord rose from the dead. But we decide that it is
better that it should be extended even on to the twentieth day, on
account of the Lord's day, than that we should anticipate the Lord's day
on account of the fourteenth day; for on the Lord's day was it that
light was shown to us in the beginning, and now also in the end, the
comforts of all present and the tokens of all future blessings. For the
Lord ascribes no less praise to the twentieth day than to the
fourteenth. For in the book of
Leviticus<sup>[27](footnote/fn25.htm#P2533_710429)</sup> the injunction
is expressed thus: "In the first month, on the fourteenth day of this
month, at even, is the Lord's Passover. And on the fifteenth day of this
month is the feast of unleavened bread unto the Lord. Seven days ye
shall eat unleavened bread. The first day shall be to you one most
diligently attended<sup>[28](footnote/fn25.htm#P2534_710766)</sup> and
holy. Ye shall do no servile work thereon. And the seventh day shall be
to you more diligently
attended<sup>[29](footnote/fn25.htm#P2535_710911)</sup> and holier; ye
shall do no servile work thereon." And hence we maintain that those have
contracted no guilt<sup>[30](footnote/fn25.htm#P2536_711032)</sup>
before the tribunal of Christ, who have held that the beginning of the
Paschal festival ought to be extended to this day. And this, too, the
most especially, as we are pressed by three difficulties, namely, that
we should keep the solemn festival of the Passover on the Lord's day,
and after the equinox, and yet not beyond the limit of the moon's
twentieth day.

XII.

But this again is held by other wise and most acute men to be an
impossibility, because within that narrow and most contracted limit of a
cycle of nineteen years, a thoroughly genuine Paschal time, that is to
say, one held on the Lord's day and yet after the equinox, cannot occur.
But, in order that we may set in a clearer light the difficulty which
causes their in credulity, we shall set down, along with the courses of
the moon, that cycle of years which we have mentioned; the days being
computed before in which the year rolls on in its alternating courses,
by Kalends and Ides and Nones, and by the sun's ascent and descent.

XIII.

The moon's age set forth in the Julian Calendar.

January, on the Kalends, one day, the moon's first (day); on the Nones,
the 5th day, the moon's 5th; on the Ides, the 13th day, the moon's 13th.
On the day before the Kalends of February, the 31st day, the moon's 1st;
on the Kalends of February, the 32d day, the moon's 2d; on the Nones,
the 36th day, the moon's 6th; on the Ides, the 44th day, the moon's
14th. On the day before the Kalends of March, the 59th day, the moon's
29th; on the Kalends of March, the 60th day, the moon's 1st; on the
Nones, the 66th day, the moon's 7th; on the Ides, the 74th day, the
moon's 15th. On the day before the Kalends of April, the 90th day, the
moon's 2d; on the Kalends of April, the 91st day, the moon's 3d; on the
Nones, the 95th day, the moon's 7th; on the Ides, the 103d day, the
moon's 15th. On the day before the Kalends of May, the 120th day, the
moon's 3d; on the Kalends of May, the 121st day, the moon's 4th; on the
Nones, the 127th day, the moon's 10th; on the Ides, the 135th day, the
moon's 18th. On the day before the Kalends of June, the 151st day, the
moon's 3d; on the Kalends of June, the 152d day, the moon's 5th; on the
Nones, the 153d day, the moon's 9th; on the Ides, the 164th day, the
moon's 17th. On the day before the Kalends of July, the 181st day, the
moon's 5th; on the Kalends of July, the 182d day, the moon's 6th; on the
Nones, the 188th day, the moon's 12th; on the Ides, the 196th day, the
moon's 20th. On the day before the Kalends of August, the 212th day, the
moon's 5th; on the Kalends of August, the 213th day, the moon's 7th; on
the Nones, the 217th day, the moon's 12th; on the ides, the 225th day,
the moon's 19th. On the day before the Kalends of September, the 243d
day, the moon's 7th; on the Kalends of September, the 244th day, the
moon's 8th; on the Nones, the 248th day, the moon's 12th; on the Ides,
the 256th day, the moon's 20th. On the day before the Kalends of
October, the 273d day, the moon's 8th; on the Kalends of October, the
247th day, the moon's 9th; on the Nones, the 280th day, the moon's 15th;
on the Ides, the 288th day, the moon's 23d. On the day before the
Kalends of November, the 304th day, the moon's 9th; on the Kalends of
November, the 305th day, the moon's 10th; on the Nones, the 309th day,
the moon's 14th; on the Ides, the 317th day, the moon's 22d. On the day
before the Kalends of December, the 334th day, the moon's 10th; on the
Kalends of December, the 335th day, the moon's 11th; on the Nones, the
339th day, the moon's 15th; on the Ides, the 347th day, the moon's 23d.
On the day before the Kalends of January, the 365th day, the moon's
11th; on the Kalends of January, the 366th day, the moon's 12th.

XIV.

The Paschal or Easter Table of Anatolius.

Equinox

Moon

Easter

Moon

1\. Sabbath

XXVI

XVth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 17th April

XVIII

2\. Lord's Day

VII

Kalends of April, i.e., 1st April

XIV

3\. IId Day (ferial)

XVIII

XIth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 21st April

XVI

4\. IIId Day

XXIX

Ides of April, i.e., 13th April

XIX

IVth Day

X

IVth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 29th April

XIV

Vth Day

XXI

XIVth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 27th March

XVI

7\. Sabbath2

II

VIth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 27th March

XVII

8\. Lord's Day

XIII

Kalends of April, i.e., 1st of April

XX

9\. IId Day

XXIV

XVIIIth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 14th March

XV

10\. IIId Day

V

VIIIth before the Ides of April, i.e., 6th April

XV

11\. IVth Day

XVI

IVth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 29th March

XX

12\. Vth Day

XXVII

IIId before the Ides of April, i.e., 11th April

XV

13\. VIth Day

VIII

IIId before the Nones of April, i.e., 3rd April

XVII

14\. Sabbath

XX

IXth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 23rd April

XX

15\. Lord's Day

I

VIth before the Ides of April, i.e., 8th April

XV

16\. IId Day

XII

IId before the Kalends of April, i.e., 31st March

XVIII

17\. IVth Day2

XXIII

XIVth before the Kalends of May, i.e., 18th April

XIX

18\. Vth Day

IV

IId before the Nones of April, i.e., 4th April

XIV

19\. VIth Day

XV

VIth before the Kalends of April, i.e.

Now, then, after the reckoning of the days and the exposition of the
course of the moon, whereon the whole revolves on to its end, the cycle
of the years may be set forth from the
commencement).<sup>[31](footnote/fn26.htm#P2632_716393)</sup> This makes
the Passover (Easter season) circulate between the 6th day before the
Kalends of April and the 9th before the Kalends of May, according to the
following table:

XV.

This cycle of nineteen years is not approved of by certain African
investigators who have drawn up larger cycles, because it seems to be
somewhat opposed to their surmises and opinions. For these make up the
best proved accounts according to their calculation, and determine a
certain beginning or certain end for the Easter season, so as that the
Paschal festival shall not be celebrated before the eleventh day before
the Kalends of April, i.e., 24th March, nor after the moon's
twenty-first, and the eleventh day before the Kalends of May, i.e., 21st
April. But we hold that these are limits not only not to be followed,
but to be detested and overturned. For even in the ancient law it is
laid down that this is to be seen to, viz., that the Passover be not
celebrated before the transit of the vernal equinox, at which the last
of the autumnal *term* is
overtaken,<sup>[32](footnote/fn26.htm#P2636_717483)</sup> on the
fourteenth day of the first month, which is one calculated not by the
beginnings of the day, but by those of the
moon.<sup>[33](footnote/fn26.htm#P2637_717657)</sup> And as this has
been sanctioned by the charge of the Lord, and is in all things
accordant with the Catholic faith, it cannot be doubtful to any wise man
that to anticipate it must be a thing unlawful and perilous. And,
accordingly, this only is it sufficient for all the saints and Catholics
to observe, namely, that giving no heed to the diverse opinions of very
many, they should keep the solemn festival of the Lord's resurrection
within the limits which we have set forth.

XVI.

Furthermore, as to the proposal subjoined to your epistle, that I should
attempt to introduce into this little book some notice of the ascent and
descent of the sun, which is made out in the distribution of days and
nights. The matter proceeds thus: In fifteen days and half an hour, the
sun ascending by so many minutes, that is, by four in one day, from the
eighth day before the Kalends of January, i.e., 25th December, to the
eighth before the Kalends of April, i.e., 25th March, an hour is taken
up;<sup>[34](footnote/fn26.htm#P2641_718662)</sup> at which date there
are twelve hours and a twelfth. On this day, towards evening, if it
happen also to be the moon's fourteenth, the lamb was sacrificed among
the Jews. But if the number went beyond that, so that it was the moon's
fifteenth or sixteenth on the evening of the same day, on the fourteenth
day of the second moon, in the same month, the Passover was celebrated;
and the people ate unleavened bread for seven days, up to the
twenty-first day at evening. Hence, if it happens in like manner to us,
that the seventh day before the Kalends of April, 26th March, proves to
be both the Lord's day and the moon's fourteenth, Easter is to be
celebrated on the fourteenth. But if it proves to be the moon's
fifteenth or sixteenth, or any day up to the twentieth, then our regard
for the Lord's resurrection, which took place on the Lord's day, will
lead us to celebrate it on the same principle; yet this should be done
so as that the beginning of Easter may not pass beyond the close of
their festival, that is to say, the moon's twentieth. And therefore we
have said that those parties have committed no trivial offence who have
ventured either on anticipating or on going beyond this number, which is
given us in the divine Scriptures themselves. And from the eighth day
before the Kalends of April, 25th March, to the eighth before the
Kalends of July, 24th June, in fifteen days an hour is taken up: the sun
ascending every day by two minutes and a half, and the sixth part of a
minute. And from the eighth day before the Kalends of July, 24th June,
to the eighth before the Kalends of October, 24th September, in like
manner, in fifteen days and four hours, an hour is taken up: the sun
descending every day by the same number of minutes. And the space
remaining on to the eighth day before the Kalends of January, 25th
December, is determined in a similar number of hours and minutes. So
that thus on the eighth day before the Kalends of January, for the hour
there is the hour and half. For up to that day and night are
distributed. And the twelve hours which were established at the vernal
equinox in the beginning by the Lord's dispensation, being distributed
over the night on the eighth before the Kalends of July, the sun
ascending through those eighteen several degrees which we have noted,
shall be found conjoined with the longer space in the twelfth. And,
again, the twelve hours which should be fulfilled at the autumnal
equinox in the sun's descent, should be found disjoined on the sixth
before the Kalends of January as six hours divided into twelve, the
night holding eighteen divided into twelve. And on the eighth before the
Kalends of July, in like manner, it held six divided into twelve.

XVII.

Be not ignorant of this, however, that those four determining
periods,<sup>[35](footnote/fn26.htm#P2645_721529)</sup> which we have
mentioned, although they are approximated to the Kalends of the
following months, yet hold each the middle of a season, viz., of spring
and summer, and autumn and winter. And the beginnings of the seasons are
not to be fixed at that point at which the Kalends of the month begin.
But each season is to be begun in such way that the equinox divides the
season of spring from its first day; and the season of summer is divided
by the eighth day before the Kalends of July, and that of autumn by the
eighth before the Kalends of October, and that of winter by the eighth
before the Kalends of January in like
manner.<sup>[36](footnote/fn26.htm#P2646_722181)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fragments of the Books on Arithmetic.](0060058)
