[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060066)  [Next](0060068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  TRANSLATOR'S BIOGRAPHICAL NOTICE.

\[a.d. 275.\] Among the very eminent men who flourished near his own
time, Eusebius mentions Pierius, a presbyter of Alexandria, and speaks
of him as greatly renowned for his voluntary poverty, his philosophical
erudition and his skill in the exposition of Scripture and in
discoursing to the public assemblies of the
Church.<sup>[2](footnote/fn28.htm#P2810_741845)</sup> He lived in the
latter part of the third century, and seems to have been for a
considerable period president of the Catechetical school at Alexandria.
Jerome says that he was called *Origenes, junior*; and according to
Photius, he shared in some of the errors of Origen, on such subjects
especially as the doctrine of the Holy Ghost and the pre-existence of
souls.<sup>[3](footnote/fn28.htm#P2811_742239)</sup> In his manner of
life he was an ascetic. After the persecution under Galerius or Maximus
he lived at Rome. He appears to have devoted himself largely to sacred
criticism and the study of the text of Scripture; and among several
treatises written by him, and extant in the time of Photius, we find
mention made of one on the prophet Hosea. And, in addition to the
*Commentary on the First Epistle to the Corinthians*, Photius notices
twelve books of his, and praises both their composition and their
matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I.--A Fragment of a Work of Pierius on the First Epistle of Paul
to the Corinthians.](0060068)
