[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060136)  [Next](0060138) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Book IV.

------------

1\. We would ask you, and you above all, O Romans, lords and princes of
the world, whether you think that Piety, Concord, Safety, Honour,
Virtue, Happiness, and other such names, to which we see you
rear<sup>[1](footnote/fn74)</sup> altars and splendid temples, have
divine power, and live in
heaven?<sup>[2](footnote/fn74.htm#P7467_2352057)</sup> or, as is usual,
have you classed them with the deities merely for form's sake, because
we desire and wish these blessings to fall to our lot? For if, while you
think them empty names without any substance, you yet deify them with
divine honours,<sup>[3](footnote/fn74.htm#P7468_2352341)</sup> you will
have to consider whether that is a childish frolic, or tends to bring
your deities into
contempt,<sup>[4](footnote/fn74.htm#P7469_2352594)</sup> when you make
equal, and add to their number vain and feigned names. But if you have
loaded them with temples and couches, holding with more assurance that
these, too, are deities, we pray you to teach *us in* our ignorance, by
what course, in what way, Victory, Peace, Equity, and the others
mentioned among the gods, can be understood to be gods, to belong to the
assembly of the immortals?

2\. For we-but, perhaps, you c rob and deprive us of common-sense-feel
and perceive that none of these has divine power, or possesses a form of
its own;<sup>[5](footnote/fn74.htm#P7471_2353180)</sup> but that, *on
the contrary*, they are the excellence of
manhood,<sup>[6](footnote/fn74.htm#P7472_2353294)</sup> the safety of
the safe, the honour of the respected, the victory of the conqueror, the
harmony of the allied, the piety of the pious, the recollection of the
observant, the good fortune, indeed, of him who lives happily and
without exciting any ill-feeling. Now it is easy to perceive that, in
speaking thus, we speak most reasonably when we
observe<sup>[7](footnote/fn74.htm#P7473_2353664)</sup> the contrary
qualities opposed *to them*, misfortune, discord, forgetfulness,
injustice, impiety, baseness of spirit, and
unfortunate<sup>[8](footnote/fn74.htm#P7474_2353997)</sup> weakness of
body. For as these things happen accidentally,
and<sup>[9](footnote/fn74.htm#P7475_2354088)</sup> depend on human acts
*and* chance moods, so their contraries,
named<sup>[10](footnote/fn74.htm#P7476_2354245)</sup> after more
agreeable qualities, must be found in others; and from these,
originating in this wise, have arisen those invented names.

3\. With regard, indeed, to your bringing forward to us other bands of
unknown<sup>[11](footnote/fn74.htm#P7478_2354568)</sup> gods, we cannot
determine whether you do that seriously, and from a belief in its
certainty; or, *merely* playing with empty fictions, abandon yourselves
to an unbridled imagination. The goddess Luperca, you tell us on the
authority of Varro, was named because the fierce wolf spared the exposed
children· Was that goddess, then, disclosed, not by her own power, *but*
by the course of events? and was it *only* after the wild beast
restrained its cruel teeth, that she both began to be herself and was
marked by<sup>[12](footnote/fn74.htm#P7479_2355181)</sup> her name? or
if she was already a goddess long before the birth of Romulus and his
brother, show us what was her name and title. Praestana was named,
according to you, because, in throwing the javelin, Quirinus excelled
all in strength;<sup>[13](footnote/fn74.htm#P7480_2355461)</sup> and the
goddess Panda, or Pantica, was named because Titus Tatius was allowed to
open up and make passable a road, that he might take the Capitoline.
Before these events, then, had the deities never existed? and if Romulus
had not held the first place in casting the javelin, and if the Sabine
king had been unable to take the Tarpeian rock, would there be no
Pantica, no Praestana? And if you say that
they<sup>[14](footnote/fn74.htm#P7481_2355910)</sup> existed before that
which gave rise to their name, a question which has been discussed in a
preceding section,<sup>[15](footnote/fn74.htm#P7482_2356076)</sup> tell
us also what they were called.

4\. Pellonia is a goddess mighty to drive back enemies. Whose enemies,
say, if it is convenient? Opposing armies meet, and fighting together,
hand to hand, decide the battle; and to one this side, to another that,
is hostile. Whom, then, will Pellonia turn to flight, since on both
sides there will be fighting? or in favour of whom will she incline,
seeing that she should afford to both sides the might and services of
her name? But if she
indeed<sup>[16](footnote/fn74.htm#P7484_2356698)</sup> did so, that is,
if she gave her good-will and favour to both sides, she would destroy
the meaning of her name, which was formed with regard to the beating
back of one side. But you will perhaps say, She is goddess of the Romans
only, and, being on the side of the Quirites alone, is ever ready
graciously to help them.<sup>[17](footnote/fn74.htm#P7485_2357136)</sup>
We wish, indeed, that it were so, for we like the name; but it is a very
doubtful matter. What! do the Romans have gods to themselves, who do not
help<sup>[18](footnote/fn74.htm#P7486_2357340)</sup> other nations? and
how can they be gods, if they do not exercise their divine power
impartially towards all nations everywhere? and where, I pray you, was
this goddess Pellonia long ago, when the national honour was brought
under the yoke at the Caudine Forks? when at the Trasimene lake the
streams ran with blood? when the plains of
Diomede<sup>[19](footnote/fn74.htm#P7487_2357708)</sup> were heaped up
with dead Romans when a thousand other blows were sustained in countless
disastrous battles? Was she snoring and
sleeping;<sup>[20](footnote/fn74.htm#P7488_2357880)</sup> or, as the
base often do, had she deserted to the enemies' camp?

5\. The sinister deities preside over the regions on the left hand only,
and are opposed to those<sup>[21](footnote/fn74.htm#P7490_2358067)</sup>
on the right. But with what reason this is said, or with what meaning,
we do not understand ourselves; and we are sure that you cannot in any
degree cause it to be clearly and generally
understood.<sup>[22](footnote/fn74.htm#P7491_2358289)</sup> For in the
first place, indeed, the world itself has in itself neither right nor
left neither upper nor under regions, neither fore nor after *parts*.
For whatever is round, and bounded on every side by the
circumference<sup>[23](footnote/fn74.htm#P7492_2358590)</sup> of a solid
sphere, has no beginning, no end; where there is no end and beginning,
no part can have<sup>[24](footnote/fn74.htm#P7493_2358713)</sup> its own
name and form the beginning. Therefore, when we say, This is the right,
and that the left side, we do not refer to
anything<sup>[25](footnote/fn74.htm#P7494_2358865)</sup> in the world,
which is everywhere very much the same, but to our own place and
position, we being<sup>[26](footnote/fn74.htm#P7495_2359003)</sup> so
formed that we speak of some things as on our right hand, of others as
on our left; and yet these very things which we name left, and the
others *which we name right*, have in us no continuance, no fixedness,
but take their forms from our sides, just as chance, and the accident of
the moment, may have placed us. If I look towards the rising sun, the
north pole and the north are on my left hand; and if I turn my face
thither, the west will be on my left, for it will be regarded as behind
the sun's back. But, again, if I turn my eyes to the region of the west,
the wind and country of the south are now said to be
on<sup>[27](footnote/fn74.htm#P7496_2359845)</sup> my left. And if I am
turned to this side by the necessary business of the moment, the result
is, that the east is said *to be* on the left, owing to a further change
of position,<sup>[28](footnote/fn74.htm#P7497_2360112)</sup> -from which
it can be very easily seen that nothing is either on our right or on our
left by nature, but from position,
time,<sup>[29](footnote/fn74.htm#P7498_2360296)</sup> and according as
our bodily position with regard to surrounding objects has been taken
up. But in this case, by what means, in what way, will there be gods of
the regions of the left, when it is clear that the same regions are at
one time on the right, at another on the left? or what have the regions
of the right done to the immortal gods, to deserve that they should be
without any to care for them, while they have ordained that these should
be fortunate, and ever *accompanied* by lucky omens?

6\. Lateranus,<sup>[30](footnote/fn75)</sup> as you say, is the god and
genius of hearths, and received this name because men build that kind of
fireplace of unbaked bricks. What then? if hearths were made of baked
clay, or any other material whatever, will they have no genii? and will
Lateranus, whoever he is, abandon his duty as guardian, because the
kingdom which he possesses has not been formed of bricks of clay? And
for what purpose,<sup>[31](footnote/fn75.htm#P7501_2361354)</sup> I ask,
has that god received the charge of hearths? He runs about the kitchens
of men, examining and discovering with what kinds of wood the heat in
their fires is produced; he gives
strength<sup>[32](footnote/fn75.htm#P7502_2361581)</sup> to earthen
vessels that they may not fly in pieces, overcome by the violence of the
flames; he sees that the flavour of unspoilt dainties reaches the taste
of the palate with their own pleasantness, and acts the part of a
taster, and tries whether the sauces have been rightly prepared. Is not
this unseemly, nay-to speak with more truth-disgraceful, impious, to
introduce some pretended deities for this only, not to do them reverence
with fitting honours, but to appoint them over base things, and
disreputable actions?<sup>[33](footnote/fn75.htm#P7503_2362145)</sup>

7\. Does Venus Militaris, also, preside over the
evil-doing<sup>[34](footnote/fn75.htm#P7505_2362237)</sup> of camps, and
the debaucheries of young men? Is there one
Perfica,<sup>[35](footnote/fn75.htm#P7506_2362414)</sup> also, of the
crowd of deities, who causes those base and filthy delights to reach
their end with uninterrupted pleasure? Is there also Pertunda, who
presides over the
marriage<sup>[36](footnote/fn75.htm#P7507_2362932)</sup> couch? Is there
also Tutunus, on whose huge
members<sup>[37](footnote/fn75.htm#P7508_2363062)</sup> and horrent
*fascinum* you think it auspicious, and desire, that your matrons should
be borne? But if facts themselves have very little effect in suggesting
to volt a right understanding of the truth, are you not able, even from
the very names, to understand that these are the inventions of a most
meaningless superstition, and the false gods of
fancy?<sup>[38](footnote/fn75.htm#P7509_2363807)</sup> Puta, you say,
presides over the pruning of trees, Peta over prayers;
Nemestrinus<sup>[39](footnote/fn75.htm#P7510_2364171)</sup> is the god
of groves; Patellana is a deity, and Patella, of whom the one has been
set over things brought to light, the other over those yet to be
disclosed. Nodutis is spoken of as a god, because
he<sup>[40](footnote/fn75.htm#P7511_2364425)</sup> brings that which has
been sown to the knots: and she who presides over the treading out of
grain, Noduterensis;<sup>[41](footnote/fn75.htm#P7512_2364630)</sup> the
goddess Upibilia<sup>[42](footnote/fn75.htm#P7513_2364760)</sup>
delivers from straying from the *right* paths; parents bereaved of their
children are under the care of Orbona,-those very near to death, under
that of Naenia. Again,<sup>[43](footnote/fn75.htm#P7514_2365027)</sup>
Ossilago herself is mentioned *as she* who gives firmness and solidity
to the bones of young children. Mellonia is a goddess, strong and
powerful in regard to bees, caring for and guarding the sweetness of
their honey.

8\. Say, I pray you,-that Peta, Puta, Patella may graciously favour
you,-if there were no<sup>[44](footnote/fn75.htm#P7516_2365458)</sup>
bees at all on the earth then, or if we men were born without bones,
like some worms, would there be no goddess
Mellonia;<sup>[45](footnote/fn75.htm#P7517_2365623)</sup> or would
Ossilago, who gives bones their solidity, be without a name of her own?
I ask truly, and eagerly inquire whether you think that gods, or men, or
bees, fruits, twigs, and the rest, are the more ancient in nature, time,
long duration? No man will doubt that you say that the gods precede all
things whatever by countless ages and generations. But if it is so, how,
in the nature of things, can it be that, from things produced
afterwards, they received those names which are earlier in point of
time? or that the gods were charged with the
care<sup>[46](footnote/fn75.htm#P7518_2366242)</sup> of those things
which were not yet produced, and assigned to be of use to men? Or were
the gods long without names; and was it only after things began to
spring up, and be on the earth, that you thought it right that they
should be called by these
names<sup>[47](footnote/fn75.htm#P7519_2366540)</sup> and titles? And
whence could you have known what name to give to each, since you were
wholly ignorant of their existence; or that they possessed *any* fixed
powers, seeing that you were equally unaware which of them had any
power, and over what he should be placed to suit his divine might?

9\. What then? you say; do you declare that these gods exist nowhere in
the world, and have been created by unreal fancies? Not we alone, but
truth itself, and reason, say so, and that common-sense in which all men
share. For who there who believes that there are gods of gain, and that
they preside over the getting of it, seeing that it springs very often
from the basest employments, and is always at the expense of others? Who
believes that Libentina, who that
Burnus.<sup>[48](footnote/fn75.htm#P7521_2367320)</sup> is set over
*those* lusts which wisdom bills us avoid, and which, in a thousand
ways, vile and filthy
wretches<sup>[49](footnote/fn75.htm#P7522_2367583)</sup> attempt and
practise? Who that Limentinus and Lima have the care of thresholds, and
do the duties of their keepers, when every day we see *the thresholds*
of temples and private houses destroyed and overthrown, and that the
infamous approaches to stews are not without them? Who believes that the
Limi<sup>[50](footnote/fn75.htm#P7523_2368092)</sup> watch over
obliquities? who that Saturnus presides over the sown crops? who that
Montinus is the guardian of mountains;
Murcia,<sup>[51](footnote/fn75.htm#P7524_2368303)</sup> of the slothful?
Who, finally, would believe that Money is a goddess, whom your writings
declare, as though *she were* the greatest deity, to give golden
rings,<sup>[52](footnote/fn75.htm#P7525_2368544)</sup> the front seats
at games and shows, honours in the greatest number, the dignity of the
magistracy, and that which the indolent love most of all,-an undisturbed
ease, by means of riches.

10\. But if you urge that bones, *different kinds of* honey, thresholds,
and all the other things which we have either run over rapidly, or, to
avoid prolixity, passed by altogether,
have<sup>[53](footnote/fn75.htm#P7527_2368942)</sup> their own peculiar
guardians, we may in like manner introduce a thousand other gods, who
should care for and guard innumerable things. For why should a god have
charge of honey only, and not of gourds, rape, cunila, cress, figs,
beets, cabbages? Why should the bones alone have found protection, and
not the nails, hair, and all the other things which are placed in the
hidden parts and members of which we feel ashamed, and are exposed to
very many accidents, and stand more in need of the care and attention of
the gods? Or if you say that these parts, too, act under the care of
their own tutelar deities, there will begin to be as many gods as there
are things; nor will the cause be stated why the divine care does not
protect all things, if you say that there are certain things over which
the deities preside, and for which they care.

11\. What say you, O fathers of new religions, and
powers?<sup>[54](footnote/fn75.htm#P7529_2370240)</sup> Do you cry out,
and complain that these gods are dishonoured by us, and neglected with
profane contempt, viz. Lateranus, the genius of hearths; Limentinus, who
presides over thresholds;
Pertunda,<sup>[55](footnote/fn75.htm#P7530_2370898)</sup> Perfica,
Noduterensis:<sup>[56](footnote/fn75.htm#P7531_2371045)</sup> and do you
say that things have sunk into ruin, and that the world itself has
changed its laws and constitution, because we do not bow humbly in
supplication to Mutunus<sup>[57](footnote/fn75.htm#P7532_2371266)</sup>
and Tutunus? But now look and see, lest while you imagine such monstrous
things, and form such conceptions, you may have offended the gods who
most assuredly exist, if only there are any who are worthy to bear and
hold that most exalted title; and it be for no other reason that those
evils, of which you speak, rage, and increase by accessions every
day.<sup>[58](footnote/fn75.htm#P7533_2371911)</sup> Why, then, some one
of you will perhaps say, do you
maintain<sup>[59](footnote/fn75.htm#P7534_2372124)</sup> that it is not
true that these gods exist? And, when invoked by the diviners, do they
obey the call, and come when summoned by their own names, and give
answers which may be relied on, to those who consult them? We can show
that what is said is false, either because in the whole matter there is
the greatest room for distrust, or because we, every day, see many of
their predictions either prove untrue or baffled expectation *to suit*
the opposite issues.

12\. But let them<sup>[60](footnote/fn75.htm#P7536_2372633)</sup> be
true, as you maintain, yet will you have us also
believe<sup>[61](footnote/fn75.htm#P7537_2372721)</sup> that Mellonia,
for example, introduces herself into the entrails, or Limentinus, and
that they set themselves to make
known<sup>[62](footnote/fn75.htm#P7538_2372889)</sup> what you seek to
learn? Did you ever see their face their deportment, their countenance?
or can even these be seen in lungs or livers? May it not happen, may it
not come to pass, although you craftily conceal it, that the one should
take the other's place, deluding, mocking, deceiving, and presenting the
appearance of the *deity* invoked? If the magi, *who are* so much akin
to<sup>[63](footnote/fn75.htm#P7539_2373338)</sup> soothsayers, relate
that, in their incantations, pretended
gods<sup>[64](footnote/fn75.htm#P7540_2373428)</sup> steal in frequently
instead of those invoked; that some of these, moreover, are spirits of
grosser substance,<sup>[65](footnote/fn75.htm#P7541_2373557)</sup> who
pretend that they are gods, and delude the ignorant by their lies and
deceit,-why<sup>[66](footnote/fn75.htm#P7542_2373678)</sup> should we
not similarly believe that here, too, others substitute themselves for
those who are not, that they may both strengthen your superstitious
beliefs, and rejoice that victims are slain in sacrifice to them under
names not their own?

13\. Or, if you refuse to believe this on account of its
novelty,<sup>[67](footnote/fn75.htm#P7544_2374071)</sup> how can you
know whether there is not some one, who comes in place of all whom yon
invoke, and substituting himself in all parts of the
world,<sup>[68](footnote/fn75.htm#P7545_2374250)</sup> shows to you what
appear to be<sup>[69](footnote/fn75.htm#P7546_2374359)</sup> many gods
and powers? Who is that one? some one will ask. We may perhaps, being
instructed by truthful authors, be able to say; but, lest you should be
unwilling to believe us, let my opponent ask the Egyptians, Persians,
Indians, Chaldeans, Armenians, and all the others who have seen and
become acquainted with these things in the more recondite arts. Then,
indeed, you will learn who is the one God, or who the very many under
Him are, who pretend to be gods, and make sport of men's ignorance.

Even now we are ashamed to come to the point at which not only boys,
young and pert, but grave men also, cannot restrain their laughter, and
*men who have been* hardened into a strict and stern
humour.<sup>[70](footnote/fn75.htm#P7548_2375103)</sup> For while we
have all heard it inculcated and taught by our teachers, that in
declining *the names* of the gods there was no plural number, because
the gods were individuals, and the ownership of each name could not be
common to a great many;<sup>[71](footnote/fn75.htm#P7549_2375409)</sup>
you in fogetfulness, and putting away the memory of your early lessons,
both give to several gods the same names, and, although you are
elsewhere more moderate as to their number, have multiplied them, again,
by community of names; which subject, indeed, men of keen discernment
and acute intellect have before now treated both in Latin and
Greek.<sup>[72](footnote/fn75.htm#P7550_2375895)</sup> And that might
have lessened *our
labour*,<sup>[73](footnote/fn75.htm#P7551_2376406)</sup> if it were not
that at the same time we see that some know nothing of these books; and,
also, that the discussion which we have begun, compels us to bring
forward something on these subjects, although *it has been already* laid
hold of, and related by those *writers*.

14\. Your theologians, then, and authors on unknown antiquity, say that
in the universe there are three Joves, one of whom has Aether for his
father; another, Coelus; the third, Saturn, born and
buried<sup>[74](footnote/fn75.htm#P7553_2376945)</sup> in the island of
Crete. *They speak of* five Suns and vie Mercuries,-of whom, as they
relate, the first Sun is called the son of Jupiter, and is regarded as
grandson of Aether; the second *is* also Jupiter's son, and the mother
who bore him Hyperiona;<sup>[75](footnote/fn75.htm#P7554_2377247)</sup>
the third the son of Vulcan, not *Vulcan* of Lemnos, but the son of the
Nile; the fourth, whom Acantho bore at Rhodes in the heroic age, *was*
the father of Ialysus; *while* the fifth is regarded as the son of a
Scythian king and subtle Circe. Again, the first Mercury, who is said to
have lusted after
Proserpina,<sup>[76](footnote/fn75.htm#P7555_2378514)</sup> is son of
Coelus, *who* is above all. Under the earth is the second, who boasts
that he is Trophonius. The third *was* born of Maia, his mother, and the
third Jove;<sup>[77](footnote/fn75.htm#P7556_2378687)</sup> the fourth
is the offspring of the Nile, whose name the people of Egypt dread and
fear to utter. The fifth is the slayer of Argus, a fugitive and exile.
and the inventor of letters in Egypt. But there are five Minervas also,
they say, just as *there are five* Suns and Mercuries; the first of whom
is no virgin but the mother of Apollo by Vulcan; the second, the
offspring of the Nile, who is asserted to be the Egyptian Sais; the
third is descended from Saturn, and is the one who devised the use of
arms; the fourth is sprung from Jove, and the Messenians name her
Coryphasia; and the fifth is she who slew her
lustful<sup>[78](footnote/fn75.htm#P7557_2379346)</sup> father, Pallas.

15\. And lest it should seem tedious and prolix to wish to consider each
person singly, the same theologians say that there are four Vulcans and
three Dianas, as many Aesculapii and five Dionysi, six Hercules and four
Venuses, threesets of Castors and the same number of Muses, three winged
Cupids, and four named
Apollo;<sup>[79](footnote/fn75.htm#P7559_2379717)</sup> whose fathers
they mention in like manner, in like manner their mothers, *and* the
places where they were born, and point out the origin andfamily of each.
But if it is true and certain, and is told in earnest as a *well*-known
matter, either they are not all gods, inasmuch as there cannot be
several under the same name, as we have been taught; or if there is one
of them, he will not be known and recognised, because he is obscured by
the confusion of very similar names. And thus it results from your own
action, however unwilling you may be that it should be so, that religion
is brought into difficulty and confusion, and has no fixed end to which
it can turn itself, without being made the sport of equivocal illusions.

16\. For suppose that it had occurred to us, moved either by suitable
influence or violent fear of
you,<sup>[80](footnote/fn75.htm#P7561_2380658)</sup> to worship Minerva,
for example, with the rights you deem sacred, and the usual ceremony:
if, when we prepare sacrifices, and approach to make *the offerings*
appointed for her on the flaming altars, all the Minervas shall fly
thither, and striving for the right to that name, each demand that the
offerings prepared be given to herself; what drawn-out animal shall we
place among them, or to whom shall we direct the sacred offices which
are our duty?<sup>[81](footnote/fn75.htm#P7562_2381284)</sup> For the
first one of whom we spoke will perhaps say: "The name Minerva is mine,
mine<sup>[82](footnote/fn75.htm#P7563_2381443)</sup> the divine majesty,
who bore Apollo and Diana, and by the fruit of my womb enriched heaven
with deities, and multiplied the number of the gods." "Nay, Minerva,"
the fifth will say, "are you
speaking,<sup>[83](footnote/fn75.htm#P7564_2381844)</sup> who, being a
wife, and so often a mother, have lost the sanctity of spotless purity?
Do you not see that in all
temples<sup>[84](footnote/fn75.htm#P7565_2382036)</sup> the images of
Minervas are those of virgins, and that all artists refrain from giving
to them the figures of
matrons?<sup>[85](footnote/fn75.htm#P7566_2382391)</sup> Cease,
therefore, to appropriate to yourself a name not
rightfully<sup>[86](footnote/fn75.htm#P7567_2382632)</sup> yours. For
that I am Minerva, begotten of father Pallas, the whole band of poets
bear witness, who call me Pallas, the surname being derived from my
father." The second will cry on hearing this: "What say you? Do you,
then, bear the name of Minerva, an impudent parricide, and one defiled
by the pollution of lewd lust, who, decking yourself with rouge and a
harlot's arts, roused upon yourself even your father's passions, full of
maddening desires? Go further, then, seek for yourself another name for
this belongs to me, whom the Nile, greatest of rivers, begot from among
his flowing waters, and brought to a maiden's estate from the condensing
of moisture.<sup>[87](footnote/fn75.htm#P7568_2383330)</sup> But if you
inquire into the credibility of the matter, I too will bring as
witnesses the Egyptians, in whose language I am called Neith, as Plato's
*Timaeus*<sup>[88](footnote/fn75.htm#P7569_2383622)</sup> attests."
What, then, do we suppose will be the result? Will she indeed cease to
say that she is Minerva, who is named Coryphasia, either to mark her
mother, or because she sprung forth from the top of Jove's head, bearing
a shield, and girt with the terror of arms? *Or are we to suppose* that
she who is third will quietly surrender the name? and not
argue<sup>[89](footnote/fn75.htm#P7570_2384219)</sup> and resist the
assumption of the first *two* with such words as these: "Do you thus
dare to assume the honour of my name, O
Sais,<sup>[90](footnote/fn75.htm#P7571_2384385)</sup> sprung from the
mud and eddies of a stream, and formed in miry places? Or do you
usurp<sup>[91](footnote/fn75.htm#P7572_2384534)</sup> another's rank,
who falsely say that you were born a goddess from the head of Jupiter,
and persuade very silly men that you are reason? Does he conceive and
bring forth children from ms head? That the arms you bear might be
forged and formed, was there even in the hollow of his head a smith's
workshop? *were there anvils*, hammers, furnaces, bellows, coals, and
pincers? Or if, as you maintain, it is true that you are reason, cease
to claim for yourself the name which is mine; for reason, of which you
speak, is not a certain form of deity, but the understanding of
difficult questions." If, then, as we have said, five Minervas should
meet us when we essay to
sacrifice,<sup>[92](footnote/fn75.htm#P7573_2385257)</sup> and
contending as to whose this name is, each demand that either fumigations
of incense be offered to her, or sacrificial wines poured out from
golden cups; by what arbiter, by what judge, shall we dispose of so
great a dispute? or what examiner will there be, what umpire of so great
boldness as to attempt, with such personages, either to give a just
decision, or to declare their causes not founded on right? Will he not
rather go home, and, keeping himself apart from such matters, think it
safer to have nothing to do with them, test he should either make
enemies of the rest, by giving to one what belongs to all, or be charged
with folly for yielding<sup>[93](footnote/fn75.htm#P7574_2385964)</sup>
to all what should be the property of one?

17\. We may say the very same things of the Mercuries, the Suns,-indeed
of all the others whose numbers you increase and multiply. But it is
sufficient to know from one case that the same principle applies to the
rest; and, lest our prolixity should chance to weary our audience, we
shall cease to deal with individuals, lest, while we accuse you of
excess, we also should ourselves be exposed to the charge of excessive
loquacity. What do you say, you who, by *the fear of* bodily tortures,
urge us to worship the gods, and constrain us to undertake the service
of your deities? We can be easily won, if only something befitting the
conception of so great a race be shown to us. Show us Mercury, but
*only*, one; give us Bacchus, but *only* one; one Venus, and in like
manner one Diana. For you will never make us believe that there are four
Apollos, or three Jupiters, not even if you were to call Jove himself as
witness, or make the Pythian *god* your authority.

18\. But some one on the opposite side says, How do we know whether the
theologians have written what is certain and well known, or set forth a
wanton fiction,<sup>[94](footnote/fn75.htm#P7577_2387194)</sup> as they
thought and judged? That has nothing to do with the matter; nor does the
reasonableness of your argument depend upon this,-whether the facts are
as the writings of the theologians state, or are otherwise and markedly
different. For to us it is enough to speak of things which come before
the public; and *we need* not inquire what is true, but *only* confute
and disprove that which lies open to all, and which *men's* thoughts
have generally received. But if they are liars, declare yourselves what
is the truth, and disclose the unassailable mystery. And how can it be
done when the services of men of letters are set aside? For what is
there which can be said about. the immortal gods that has not reached
men's thoughts from what has been written by men on these
subjects?<sup>[95](footnote/fn75.htm#P7578_2388110)</sup> Or can you
relate anything yourselves about their rights and ceremonies, which has
not been recorded in books, and made known by what authors have written?
Or if you think these of no importance, let all the books be destroyed
which have been composed about the gods for you by theologians,
pontiffs, *and* even some devoted to the study of philosophy; nay, let
us rather suppose that from the foundation of the world no man ever
wrote<sup>[96](footnote/fn75.htm#P7579_2388676)</sup> anything about the
gods: we wish to find out, and desire to know, whether you can mutter or
murmur in mentioning the
gods,<sup>[97](footnote/fn75.htm#P7580_2388932)</sup> or conceive those
in thought to whom no
idea<sup>[98](footnote/fn75.htm#P7581_2389012)</sup> from any book gave
shape in your minds. But when it is clear that you have been informed of
their names and powers by the suggestions of
books,<sup>[99](footnote/fn75.htm#P7582_2389192)</sup> it is unjust to
deny the reliableness of these books by whose testimony and authority
you establish what you say.

19\. But perhaps these things will turn out to be false, and what you
say to be true. By what proof, by what evidence, *will it be shown*? For
since both parties are men, both those who have said the one thing and
those who have said the other, and on both sides the discussion was of
doubtful matters, it is arrogant to say that that is true which seems so
to you, but that that which offends your feelings manifests wantonness
and falsehood. By the laws of the human race, and the associations of
mortality itself, when you read and hear, That god was born of this
*father* and of that mother, do you not feel in your
mind<sup>[100](footnote/fn75.htm#P7584_2389986)</sup> that something is
said which belongs to man, and relates to the meanness of our earthly
race? Or, while you think that it is
so,<sup>[101](footnote/fn75.htm#P7585_2390174)</sup> do you conceive no
anxiety lest you should in something offend the gods themselves, whoever
they are, because you believe that it is owing to filthy intercourse
...<sup>[102](footnote/fn75.htm#P7586_2390389)</sup> that they have
reached the light they knew not of, thanks to lewdness? For we, lest any
one should chance to think that we are ignorant of, do not know, what
befits the majesty of that name,
assuredly<sup>[103](footnote/fn75.htm#P7587_2390665)</sup> think that
the gods should not know birth; or if they are born at all, we hold and
esteem that the Lord and Prince of the universe, by ways which He knew
Himself, sent them forth spotless, most pure, undefiled, ignorant of
sexual pollution,<sup>[104](footnote/fn75.htm#P7588_2391034)</sup> and
brought to the full perfection of their natures as soon as they were
begotten?<sup>[105](footnote/fn75.htm#P7589_2391155)</sup>

20\. But you, on the contrary, forgetting how
great<sup>[106](footnote/fn75.htm#P7591_2391286)</sup> their dignity and
grandeur are, associate with them a
birth,<sup>[107](footnote/fn75.htm#P7592_2391409)</sup> and impute *to
them* a descent,<sup>[108](footnote/fn75.htm#P7593_2391459)</sup> which
men of at all refined feelings regard as at once execrable and terrible.
From Ops, you say, his mother, and from his father Saturn, Diespiter was
born with his brothers. Do the gods, then, have wives; and, the matches
having been previously planned, do they become subject to the bonds of
marriage? Do they take upon
themselves<sup>[109](footnote/fn75.htm#P7594_2391813)</sup> the
engagements of the bridal couch by prescription, by the cake of spelt,
and by a pretended
sale?<sup>[110](footnote/fn75.htm#P7595_2392029)</sup> Have they their
mistresses,<sup>[111](footnote/fn75.htm#P7596_2392094)</sup> their
promised wives, their betrothed brides, on settled conditions? And what
do we say about their marriages, too, when indeed you say that some
celebrated their nuptials, and entertained joyous throngs, and that the
goddesses sported at these; and that *some* threw all things into utter
confusion with dissensions because they had no share in *singing* the
Fescennine verses, and occasioned danger and
destruction<sup>[112](footnote/fn75.htm#P7597_2392618)</sup> to the next
generation of men?<sup>[113](footnote/fn75.htm#P7598_2392689)</sup>

21\. But perhaps this foul pollution may be less apparent in the rest.
Did, then, the ruler of the heavens, the father of gods and men, who, by
the motion of his eyebrow, and by his nod, shakes the whole heavens and
makes them tremble,-did he find his origin in man and woman? And unless
both sexes abandoned *themselves* to degrading pleasures in sensual
embraces,<sup>[114](footnote/fn76)</sup> would there be no Jupiter,
greatest of all; and even to this time would the divinities have no
king, and heaven stand without its lord? And why do we marvel that you
say Jove sprang from a woman's womb, seeing that your authors relate
that he both had a nurse, and in the next place maintained the life
given to him by nourishment *drawn from* a
foreign<sup>[115](footnote/fn76.htm#P7601_2393598)</sup> breast? What
say you, O men? Did, then, shall I repeat, *the god* who makes the
thunder crash, lightens and hurls the thunderbolt, and draws together
terrible clouds, drink in the streams of the breast, wail as an infant,
creep about, and, that he might *be persuaded to cease* his crying most
foolishly protracted, was he made silent by the noise of
rattles,<sup>[116](footnote/fn76.htm#P7602_2394018)</sup> and put to
sleep lying in a very soft cradle, and lulled with broken words? O
devout assertion *of the existence* of gods, pointing out and declaring
the venerable majesty of their awful grandeur! Is it thus in your
opinion, ask, that the exalted
powers<sup>[117](footnote/fn76.htm#P7603_2394300)</sup> of heaven are
produced? do your gods come forth to the light by modes of birth such as
these, by which asses, pigs. dogs, by which the whole of this unclean
herd<sup>[118](footnote/fn76.htm#P7604_2394505)</sup> of earthly beasts
is conceived and begotten?

22\. And, not content to have ascribed these carnal unions to the
venerable Saturn,<sup>[119](footnote/fn76.htm#P7606_2394659)</sup> you
affirm that the king of the world himself begot children even more
shamefully than he was himself born and begotten. Of
Hyperiona,<sup>[120](footnote/fn76.htm#P7607_2394828)</sup> as his
mother, you say, and Jupiter, who wields the thunderbolt, was born the
golden and blazing Sun; of Latona and the same, the Delian archer, and
Diana,<sup>[121](footnote/fn76.htm#P7608_2395018)</sup> who rouses the
woods; of Leda and the
same,<sup>[122](footnote/fn76.htm#P7609_2395296)</sup> those named in
Greek Dioscori; of Aclmena and the same, the Theban Hercules, whom his
club and hide defended; of him and Semele, Liber, who is named Bromius,
and was born a second time from his father's thigh; of him, again, and
Main, Mercury, eloquent in speech, and bearer of the harmless snakes.
Can any greater insult be put upon your Jupiter, or is there anything
else which will destroy and ruin the reputation of the chief of the
gods, further than that you believe him to have been at times overcome
by vicious pleasures, and to have glowed with the passion of a heart
roused to lust after women? And what had the Saturnian king to do with
strange nuptials? Did Juno not suffice him; and could he not stay the
force of his desires on the queen of the deities, although so great
excellence graced her, *such* beauty, majesty of countenance, and snowy
and marble whiteness of arms? Or did he, not content with one wife,
taking pleasure in concubines, mistresses, and courtezans, a lustful
god, show<sup>[123](footnote/fn76.htm#P7610_2396794)</sup> his
incontinence in all directions, as is the custom with
dissolute<sup>[124](footnote/fn76.htm#P7611_2396886)</sup> youths; and
in old age, after intercourse with numberless persons, did he renew his
eagerness for pleasures *now* losing their zest? What say you, profane
ones; or what vile thoughts do you fashion about your love? Do you not,
then, observe do you not see with what disgrace you brand him? of what
wrong-doing you make him the author? or what stains of vice, how great
infamy you heap upon him?

23\. Men, though prone to lust, and inclined, through weakness of
character, to *yield to* the allurements of sensual pleasures, still
punish adultery by the laws, and visit with the penalty of death those
whom they find to have possessed themselves of others rights by forcing
the marriage-bed. The greatest of kings, *however, you tell us*, did not
know how vile, how infamous the person of the seducer and adulterer was;
and he who, as is said, examines our merits and demerits, did not, owing
to the reasonings of his abandoned heart, see what was the fitting
course *for him* to resolve on. But this misconduct might perhaps be
endured, if you were to conjoin him with persons at least his equals,
and *if* he were made by you the paramour of the immortal goddesses. But
what beauty, what grace was there, I ask you, in human bodies, which
could move, which could turn to
it<sup>[125](footnote/fn76.htm#P7613_2398254)</sup> the eyes of Jupiter?
Skin, entrails, phlegm, and all that filthy mass placed under the
coverings of the intestines, which not Lynceus only with his searching
gaze can shudder at, but any other also can *be made to* turn from even
by merely thinking.

24\. If you will open your minds' eyes, and see the
real<sup>[126](footnote/fn76.htm#P7615_2398657)</sup> truth without
gratifying any private end, you will find that the causes of all the
miseries by which, as you say, the human race has long been afflicted,
flow from such beliefs which you held in former times about your gods;
and which you have refused to amend, although the truth was placed
before your eyes. For what about them, pray, have we indeed ever either
imagined which was unbecoming, or put forth in shameful writings that
the troubles which assail men and the loss of the blessings of
life<sup>[127](footnote/fn76.htm#P7616_2399289)</sup> should be used to
excite a prejudice against us? Do we say that certain gods were produced
from eggs,<sup>[128](footnote/fn76.htm#P7617_2399452)</sup> like storks
and pigeons? *Do we say* that the radiant Cytherean Venus grew up,
having taken form from the sea's foam and the severed genitals of
Coelus? that Saturn was thrown into chains for parricide, and relieved
from their weight only on his own
days?<sup>[129](footnote/fn76.htm#P7618_2399851)</sup> that Jupiter was
saved from death<sup>[130](footnote/fn76.htm#P7619_2400135)</sup> by the
services of the Curetes? that he drove his father from the seat of
power, and by force and fraud possessed a sovereignty not his own? Do we
say that his aged sire, when driven out, concealed himself in the
territories of the Itali, and gave his name as a gift to
Latium,<sup>[131](footnote/fn76.htm#P7620_2400469)</sup> because he had
been *there* protected from his son? Do we say that Jupiter himself
incestuously married his sister? or, instead of pork, breakfasted in
ignorance upon the son of Lycaon, when invited to his table? that
Vulcan, limping on one foot, wrought as a smith in the island of Lemnos?
that Aeculapius was transfixed by a thunderbolt because of his greed and
avarice, as the Boeotian
Pindar<sup>[132](footnote/fn76.htm#P7621_2400947)</sup> sings? that
Apollo, having become rich, by his ambiguous responses, deceived the
very kings by whose treasures and gifts he had been enriched? Did we
declare that Mercury was a thief? that Laverna is so also, and along
with him presides over secret frauds? Is the writer Myrtilus one of us,
who declares that the Muses were the handmaids of
Megalcon,<sup>[133](footnote/fn76.htm#P7622_2401325)</sup> daughter of
Macarus?<sup>[134](footnote/fn76.htm#P7623_2401365)</sup>

25\. Did we say<sup>[135](footnote/fn76.htm#P7625_2401572)</sup> that
Venus was a courtezan, deified by a Cyprian king named Cinyras? Who
reported that the palladium was formed from the remains of Pelops? Was
it not you? Who that Mars was Spartanus? was it not your writer
Epicharmus? Who that he was born within the confines of Thrace? was it
not Sophocles the Athenian, with the assent of all his spectators? Who
*that he was born* in Arcadia? was it not you? Who that he was kept a
prisoner for thirteen
months?<sup>[136](footnote/fn76.htm#P7626_2402344)</sup> was it not the
son of the river Meles? Who *said* that dogs were sacrificed to him by
the Carians, asses by the Scythians? was it not Apollodorus especially,
along with the rest? Who that in wronging another's marriage couch, he
was caught entangled in snares? was it not your writings, your
tragedies? Did we ever write that the gods for hire endured slavery, as
Hercules at Sardis<sup>[137](footnote/fn76.htm#P7627_2403339)</sup> for
lust and wantonness; as the Delian Apollo, *who served* Admetus, as
Jove's brother, *who served* the Trojan Laomedon, whom the Pythian *also
served*, but with his uncle; as Minerva, who gives light, and trims the
lamps to secret lovers? Is not he one of your poets, who re resented
Mars and Venus as wounded by men's hands? Is not Panyassis one of you,
who relates that father Dis and queenly Juno were wounded by Hercules?
Do not the writings of your Polemo say that
Pallas<sup>[138](footnote/fn76.htm#P7628_2403974)</sup> was
slain,<sup>[139](footnote/fn76.htm#P7629_2404019)</sup> covered with her
own blood, overwhelmed by Ornytus? Does not Sosibius declare that
Hercules himself was afflicted by the wound and pain he suffered at the
hands of Hipocoon's children? Is it related at our instance that Jupiter
was committed to the grave in the island of Crete? Do we say that the
brothers,<sup>[140](footnote/fn76.htm#P7630_2404449)</sup> who were
united in their cradle, were buried in the territories of Sparta and
Lacedaemon? Is the author of our number, who is termed Patrocles the
Thurian in the titles of his writings, who relates that the tomb and
remains of Saturn are
found<sup>[141](footnote/fn76.htm#P7631_2404719)</sup> in Sicily? Is
Plutarch of Chaeronea<sup>[142](footnote/fn76.htm#P7632_2404781)</sup>
esteemed one of us, who said that Hercules was reduced to ashes on the
top of Mount Oeta, after his loss of strength through epilepsy?

26\. But what shall I say of the desires with which it is written in
your books, and contained in your writers, that the holy immortals
lusted after women? For is it by us that the king of the sea is asserted
in the heat of maddened passion to have robbed of their virgin purity
Amphitrite,<sup>[143](footnote/fn76.htm#P7634_2405323)</sup> Hippothoe,
Amymone, Menalippe,
Alope?<sup>[144](footnote/fn76.htm#P7635_2405419)</sup> that the
spotless Apollo, Latona's son, most chaste and pure, with the passions
of a breast not governed by reason, desired Arsinoe, Aethusa, Hypsipyle,
Marpessa, Zeuxippe, and Prothoe, Daphne, and
Sterope?<sup>[145](footnote/fn76.htm#P7636_2405708)</sup> Is it shown in
our poems that the aged Saturn, already long covered with grey hair, and
now cooled by weight of years, being taken by his wife in adultery, put
on the form of one of the lower animals, and neighing *loudly*, escaped
in the shape of a beast? Do you not accuse Jupiter himself of having
assumed countless forms, and concealed by mean deceptions the ardour of
his wanton lust? Have we ever written that he obtained his desires by
deceit, at one time changing into gold, at another into a sportive
satyr; into a serpent, a bird, a bull; and, to pass beyond all limits of
disgrace, into a little ant, that he might, forsooth, make Clitor's
daughter the mother of Myrmidon, in Thessaly? Who represented him as
having watched over Alcmena for nine nights without ceasing? was it not
you?-that he indolently abandoned himself to his lusts, forsaking his
post in heaven? was it not you? And, indeed, you
ascribe<sup>[146](footnote/fn76.htm#P7637_2406683)</sup> *to him* no
mean favours; since, in your opinion, the god Hercules was born to
exceed and surpass in such matters his father's powers. He in nine
nights begot<sup>[147](footnote/fn76.htm#P7638_2406864)</sup> with
difficulty one son; but Hercules, a holy god, in one night taught the
fifty daughters of Thestius at once to lay aside their virginal title,
and to bear a mother's burden. Moreover, not content to have ascribed to
the gods love of women, do you also say that they lusted after men? Some
one loves Hylas; another is engaged with Hyacinthus; that one burns with
desire for Pelops; this one sighs more ardently for Chrysippus;
Catamitus is carried off to be a favourite and cup-bearer; and Fabius,
that he may be called Jove's darling, is branded on the soft parts, and
marked in the hinder.

27\. But among you, is it only the males who lust; and has the female
sex preserved its
purity?<sup>[148](footnote/fn76.htm#P7640_2407648)</sup> Is it not
proved in your books that Tithonus was loved by Aurora; that Luna lusted
after Endymion; the Nereid after Aeacus; Thetis after Achilles' father;
Proserpina after Adonis; her mother, Ceres, after some rustic Jasion,
and afterwards Vulcan,
Phaeton,<sup>[149](footnote/fn76.htm#P7641_2407962)</sup> Mars; Venus
herself, the mother of Aeneas, and founder of the Roman power, to marry
Anchises? While, therefore, you accuse, without making *any* exception,
not one only by name, but the whole of the gods alike, in whose
existence you believe, of such acts of extraordinary shamefulness and
baseness, do you dare, without violation of modesty, to say either that
we are impious, or that you are pious, although they receive from you
much greater occasion for offence on account of all the shameful acts
which you heap up to their reproach, than in connection with the service
and duties required by their majesty, honour, and worship? For either
all these things are false which you bring forward about them
individually, lessening their credit and reputation; and it is *in that
case* a matter quite deserving, that the gods should utterly destroy the
race of men; or if they are true and certain, and perceived without any
reasons for doubt, it comes to this issue, that, however unwilling you
may be, we believe them to be not of heavenly, but of earthly birth.

28\. For where there are weddings, marriages, births, nurses,
arts,<sup>[150](footnote/fn76.htm#P7643_2409227)</sup> and weaknesses;
where there are liberty and slavery; where there are wounds, slaughter,
and *shedding* of blood; where there are lusts, desires, sensual
pleasures; where there is every mental passion arising from disgusting
emotions,-there must of necessity be nothing godlike there; nor can that
cleave to a superior nature which belongs to a fleeting race, and to the
frailty of earth. For who, if only he recognises and perceives what the
nature of that power is, can believe either that a deity had the
generative members, and was deprived of them by a very base operation;
or that he at one time cut off the children sprung from himself, and was
punished by suffering imprisonment; or that he, in a way, made civil war
upon his father, and deprived him of the right of governing; or that he,
filled with fear of one younger when overcome, turned to flight, and hid
in remote solitudes, like a fugitive and exile? Who, I say, can believe
that the deity reclined at men's tables, was troubled on account of his
avarice, deceived his suppliants by an ambiguous reply, excelled in the
tricks of thieves, committed adultery, acted as a slave, was wounded,
and in love, and submitted to the seduction of impure desires in all the
forms of lust? But yet you declare all these things both were, and are,
in your gods; and you pass by no form of vice, wickedness, error,
without bringing it forward, in the wantonness of your fancies, to the
reproach of the gods. You must, therefore, either seek out other gods,
to whom all these *reproaches* shall not apply, for they are a human and
earthly race to whom they apply; or if there are only these whose names
and character you have declared, by your beliefs you do away with them:
for all the things of which you speak relate to men.

29\. And here, indeed, we can show that all those whom you represent to
us as and call gods, were *but* men, by quoting either Euhemerus of
Acragas,<sup>[151](footnote/fn76.htm#P7645_2411374)</sup> whose books
were translated by Ennius into Latin that all might be thoroughly
acquainted *with them*; or
Nicanor<sup>[152](footnote/fn76.htm#P7646_2411524)</sup> the Cyprian; or
the Pellaean Leon; or Theodorus of Cyrene; or Hippo and Diagoras of
Melos; or a thousand other writers, who have minutely, industriously,
and carefully<sup>[153](footnote/fn76.htm#P7647_2411785)</sup> brought
secret things to light with noble candour. We may, I repeat, at
pleasure, declare both the acts of Jupiter, and the wars of Minerva and
the virgin<sup>[154](footnote/fn76.htm#P7648_2411994)</sup> Diana; by
what stratagems Liber strove to make himself master of the Indian
empire; what was the condition, the duty, the
gain<sup>[155](footnote/fn76.htm#P7649_2412217)</sup> of Venus; to whom
the great mother was bound in marriage; what hope, what joy was aroused
in her by the comely Attis; whence *came* the Egyptian Serapis and Isis,
or for what reasons their very
names<sup>[156](footnote/fn76.htm#P7650_2412460)</sup> were formed.

30\. But in the discussion which we at present maintain, we do not
undertake this trouble or service, to show and declare who all these
were. *But* this is what we proposed to ourselves, that as you call us
impious and irreligious, *and*, on the other hand, maintain that you are
pious and serve the gods, we should prove and make manifest that by no
men are they treated with less respect than by you. But if it is proved
by the very insults that it is so, it must, as a consequence, be
understood that it is yon who rouse the gods to fierce and terrible
rage, because you either listen to or believe, or yourselves invent
about them, stories so degrading. For it is not he who is anxiously
thinking of religious
rites,<sup>[157](footnote/fn76.htm#P7652_2413240)</sup> and slays
spotless victims, who gives piles of incense to be burned with fire, not
he must be thought to worship the deities, or alone discharge the duties
of religion. True worship is in the heart, and a belief worthy of the
gods; nor does it at all avail to bring blood and gore, if you believe
about them things which are not only far remote from and unlike their
nature, but even to some extent stain and disgrace both their dignity
and virtue.

31\. We wish, then, to question you, and invite you to answer a short
question, Whether you think it a greater offence to sacrifice to them
being neither wishes nor desires these; or, with foul beliefs, to hold
opinions about them so degrading, that they might rouse any one's spirit
to a mad desire for revenge? If the relative importance of the matters
be weighed, you will find no judge so prejudiced as not to believe it a
greater crime to defame by manifest insults any one's reputation, than
to treat it with silent neglect. For this, perhaps, may be held and
believed from deference to reason; *but* the other course manifests an
impious spirit, and a blindness despaired of in fiction. If in your
ceremonies and rites neglected sacrifices and expiatory offerings may be
demanded, guilt is said to have been contracted; if by a momentary
forgetfulness<sup>[158](footnote/fn76.htm#P7654_2414731)</sup> any one
has erred either in speaking or in pouring
wine;<sup>[159](footnote/fn76.htm#P7655_2414829)</sup> or
again,<sup>[160](footnote/fn76.htm#P7656_2414881)</sup> if at the solemn
games and sacred races the dancer has halted, or the musician suddenly
become silent,-you all cry out immediately that something has been done
contrary to the sacredness of the ceremonies; or if the boy termed
patrimus let go the thong in
ignorance,<sup>[161](footnote/fn76.htm#P7657_2415262)</sup> or could not
hold to the earth:<sup>[162](footnote/fn76.htm#P7658_2415502)</sup> and
*yet* do you dare to deny that the gods are ever being wronged by you in
sins so grievous, while you confess yourselves that, in less matters,
they are often angry, to the national ruin?

32\. But all these things, they say, are the fictions of poets, and
games arranged for pleasure. It is not credible, indeed, that men by no
means thoughtless, who sought to trace out the character of the remotest
antiquity, either did
not<sup>[163](footnote/fn76.htm#P7660_2416380)</sup> insert in their
poems the fables which survived in men's
minds<sup>[164](footnote/fn76.htm#P7661_2416480)</sup> and common
conversation;<sup>[165](footnote/fn76.htm#P7662_2416529)</sup> or that
they would have assumed to themselves so great licence as to foolishly
feign what was almost sheer madness, and might give them reason to be
afraid of the gods, and bring them into danger with men. But let us
grant that the poets are, as yon say, the inventors and authors of tales
so disgraceful; you are not, however, even thus free from the guilt of
dishonouring the gods, who either are remiss in punishing such offences,
or have not, by passing laws, and by severity of punishments, opposed
such indiscretion, and
determined<sup>[166](footnote/fn76.htm#P7663_2417105)</sup> that no man
should henceforth say that which tended to the
dishonour,<sup>[167](footnote/fn76.htm#P7664_2417289)</sup> or was
unworthy of the glory of the
gods.<sup>[168](footnote/fn76.htm#P7665_2417379)</sup> For whoever
allows the wrongdoer to sin, strengthens his audacity; and it is more
insulting to brand and mark any one with false accusations, than to
bring forward and upbraid their real offences. For to be called what you
are, and what you feel yourself to be, is less offensive, because *your
resentment* is checked by the evidence supplied against you on privately
reviewing your life;<sup>[169](footnote/fn76.htm#P7666_2417858)</sup>
but that wounds very keenly which brands the innocent, and defames a
man's honourable name and reputation.

33\. Your gods, it is recorded, dine on celestial couches, and in golden
chambers, drink, and are at last soothed by the music of the lyre, and
singing. You fit them with ears not easily
wearied;<sup>[170](footnote/fn76.htm#P7668_2418257)</sup> and do not
think it unseemly to assign to the gods the pleasures by which earthly
bodies are supported, and which are sought after by ears enervated by
the frivolity of an unmanly spirit. Some of them are brought forward in
the character of lovers, destroyers of purity, to commit shameful and
degrading deeds not only with women, but with men also. You take no care
as to what is said about matters of so much importance, nor do you
check, by any fear of chastisement at least, the recklessness of your
wanton literature; others, through madness and frenzy, bereave
themselves, and by the slaughter of their own relatives cover themselves
with blood, just as though it were that of an enemy. You wonder at these
loftily expressed impieties; and that which it was fitting should be
subjected to all punishments, you extol with praise that spurs them on,
so as to rouse their recklessness to greater vehemence. They mourn over
the wounds of their bereavement, and with unseemly wailings accuse the
cruel fates; you are astonished at the force of their eloquence,
carefully study *and* commit to memory that which should have been
wholly put away from human
society,<sup>[171](footnote/fn76.htm#P7669_2419450)</sup> and are
solicitous that it should not perish through any forgetfulness. They are
spoken of as being wounded, maltreated, making war upon each other with
hot and furious contests; you enjoy the description; and, to enable you
to defend so great daring in the writers, pretend that these things are
allegories, and contain the principles of natural science.

34\. But why do I complain that you have disregarded the
insults<sup>[172](footnote/fn76.htm#P7671_2420073)</sup> offered to the
other deities? That very Jupiter, whose name you should not have spoken
without fear and trembling over your whole body, is described as
confessing his faults when overcome by
lust<sup>[173](footnote/fn76.htm#P7672_2420337)</sup> of his wife, and,
hardened in shamelessness, making known, as if he were mad and
ignorant,<sup>[174](footnote/fn76.htm#P7673_2420483)</sup> the
mistresses he preferred to his spouse, the concubines he preferred to
his wife; you say that those who have uttered so marvellous things are
chiefs and kings among poets endowed with godlike genius, that they are
persons most holy; and so utterly have you lost sight of your duty in
the matters of religion which you bring forward, that words are of more
importance, in your opinion, than the profaned majesty of the immortals.
So then, if only you felt any fear of the gods, or believed with
confident and unhesitating assurance that they existed at all, should
you not, by bills, by popular votes, by fear of the senate's decrees,
have hindered, prevented, *and* forbidden any one to speak at random of
the gods otherwise than in a pious
manner?<sup>[175](footnote/fn76.htm#P7674_2421258)</sup> Nor have they
obtained this honour even at your hands, that you should repel insults
offered to them by the same laws by which you ward them off from
yourselves. They are accused of treason among you who have whispered any
evil about your kings. To degrade a magistrate, or use insulting
language to a senator, you have made by decree *a crime*, followed by
the severest punishment. To write a satirical poem, by which a slur is
cast upon the reputation and character of another, you determined, by
the decrees of the decemvirs, should not go unpunished; and that no one
might assail your ears with too wanton abuse, you established
formulae<sup>[176](footnote/fn76.htm#P7675_2421953)</sup> for severe
affronts. With you only the gods are unhonoured, contemptible, vile;
against whom you allow any one liberty to say what he will, to accuse
them of the deeds of baseness which his lust has invented and devised.
And *yet* you do not blush to raise against us the charge of want of
regard for deities so infamous, although it is much better to disbelieve
the existence of the gods than to think they are such, and of such
repute.

35\. But is it only poets whom you have thought
proper<sup>[177](footnote/fn76.htm#P7677_2422508)</sup> to allow to
invent unseemly tales about the gods, and to turn them shamefully into
sport? What do your pantomimists, the actors, that crowd of mimics and
adulterers?<sup>[178](footnote/fn76.htm#P7678_2422702)</sup> Do
they<sup>[179](footnote/fn76.htm#P7679_2422800)</sup> not abuse your
gods to make to themselves gain, and *do not the
others*<sup>[180](footnote/fn76.htm#P7680_2422901)</sup> find enticing
pleasures in<sup>[181](footnote/fn76.htm#P7681_2422986)</sup> the wrongs
and insults offered to the gods? At the public games, too, the colleges
of all the priests and magistrates take their places, the chief
Pontiffs, and the chief priests of the curiae; the Quindecemviri take
their places, *crowned* with wreaths of laurel, and the flamines diales
with their mitres; the augurs take their places, who disclose the divine
mind and will; and the chaste maidens also, who cherish and guard the
ever-burning fire; the whole people and the senate take their places;
the fathers who have done service as consuls, princes next to the gods,
and most worthy of reverence; and, shameful to say, Venus, the mother of
the race of Mars, and parent of the imperial people, is represented by
gestures as in love,<sup>[182](footnote/fn76.htm#P7682_2423774)</sup>
and is delineated with shameless mimicry as raving like a Bacchanal,
with all the passions of a vile
harlot.<sup>[183](footnote/fn76.htm#P7683_2423938)</sup> The Great
Mother, too, adorned with her sacred fillets, is represented by dancing;
and that Pessinuntic
Dindymene<sup>[184](footnote/fn76.htm#P7684_2424093)</sup> is, to the
dishonour of her age, represented as with shameful desire using
passionate gestures in the embrace of a herdsman; and also in the
Trachiniae of
Sophocles,<sup>[185](footnote/fn76.htm#P7685_2424412)</sup> that son of
Jupiter, Hercules, entangled in the toils of a death-fraught garment, is
exhibited uttering piteous cries, overcome by his violent suffering, and
at last wasting away and being consumed, as his intestines soften and
are dissolved.<sup>[186](footnote/fn76.htm#P7686_2424725)</sup> But in
*these* tales even the Supreme Ruler of the heavens Himself is brought
forward, without any reverence for His name and majesty, as acting the
part of an adulterer, and changing His countenance for purposes of
seduction, in order that He might by guile rob of their chastity
matrons, who were the wives of others, and putting on the appearance of
their husbands, by assuming the form of another.

36\. But this crime is not enough: the persons of the most sacred gods
are mixed up with farces also, and scurrilous plays. And that the idle
onlookers may be excited to laughter and jollity, the deities are hit at
in jocular quips, the spectators shout and rise up, the whole pit
resounds with the clapping of hands and applause. And to the debauched
scoffers<sup>[187](footnote/fn76.htm#P7688_2425591)</sup> at the gods
gifts and presents are ordained, ease, freedom from public burdens,
exemption and relief, together with triumphal garlands,-a crime for
which no amends can be made by any apologies. And after this do you dare
to wonder whence these ills come with which the human race is deluged
and overwhelmed without any interval, while you daily both repeat and
learn by heart all these things, with which are mixed up libels upon the
gods and slanderous sayings; and
when<sup>[188](footnote/fn76.htm#P7689_2426102)</sup> you wish your
inactive minds to be occupied with useless dreamings, demand that days
be given to you, and exhibition made without any interval? But if you
felt any real indignation on behalf of your religious beliefs, you
should rather long ago have burned these writings, destroyed those books
of yours, and overthrown these theatres, in which evil reports of your
deities are daily made public in shameful tales. For why, indeed, have
our writings deserved to be given to the flames? our meetings to be
cruelly broken up,<sup>[189](footnote/fn76.htm#P7690_2426703)</sup> in
which prayer is made to the Supreme God, peace and pardon are asked for
all in authority, for soldiers, kings, friends, enemies, for those still
in life, and those freed from the bondage of the
flesh;<sup>[190](footnote/fn76.htm#P7691_2427039)</sup> in which all
that is said is such as to make *men*
humane,<sup>[191](footnote/fn76.htm#P7692_2428002)</sup> gentle, modest,
virtuous, chaste, generous in dealing with their substance, and
inseparably united to all embraced in our
brotherhood?<sup>[192](footnote/fn76.htm#P7693_2428373)</sup>

37\. But this is the state of the case, that as you are exceedingly
strong in war and in military power, you think you excel in knowledge of
the truth also, and are pious before the
gods,<sup>[193](footnote/fn76.htm#P7695_2428787)</sup> whose might you
have been the first to besmirch with foul imaginings. Here, if your
fierceness allows. and madness suffers, we ask you to answer us this:
Whether you think that anger finds a place in the divine nature, or that
the divine blessedness is far removed from such passions? For if they
are subject to passions so
furious,<sup>[194](footnote/fn76.htm#P7696_2429163)</sup> and are
excited by feelings of rage as your imaginings suggest.-for you say that
they have often shaken the earth with their
roaring,<sup>[195](footnote/fn76.htm#P7697_2429336)</sup> and bringing
woful misery on men, corrupted with pestilential contagion the character
of the times,<sup>[196](footnote/fn76.htm#P7698_2429494)</sup> both
because their games had been celebrated with too little care, and
because their priests were not received with favour, and because some
small spaces were desecrated, and because their rites were not duly
performed,-it must consequently be understood that they feel no little
wrath on account of the opinions which have been mentioned. But if, as
follows of necessity, it is admitted that all these miseries with which
men have long been overwhelmed flow from such fictions, if the anger of
the deities is excited by these causes, you are the occasion of so
terrible misfortunes, because you never cease to jar upon the feelings
of the gods, and excite them to a fierce desire for vengeance. But if,
on the other hand, the gods are not subject to such passions, and do not
know at all what it is to be enraged, then indeed there is no ground for
saying that they who know not what anger is are angry with us, \* and
they are free from its
presence,<sup>[197](footnote/fn76.htm#P7699_2430623)</sup> and the
disorder<sup>[198](footnote/fn77.htm#P7700_2430727)</sup> *it causes*.
For it cannot be, in the nature of things, that what is one should
become two; and that unity, which is naturally uncompounded, should
divide and go apart into separate
things.<sup>[199](footnote/fn77.htm#P7701_2430939)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V.](0060138)
