[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060057)  [Next](0060059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Fragments of the Books on Arithmetic.<sup>[1](footnote/fn26)</sup>

------------

What is mathematics?

Aristotle thinks that all philosophy consisted of theory and
practice,<sup>[2](footnote/fn26.htm#P2655_722539)</sup> and divides the
practical into ethical and political, and the theoretic again into the
theological, the physical, and the mathematical. And thus very clearly
and skilfully he shows that mathematics is (a branch of) philosophy.

The Chaldaeans were the originators of astronomy, and the Egyptians of
geometry and arithmetic....

And whence did mathematics derive its name? Those of the Peripatetic
school affirmed that in rhetoric and poetry, and in the popular music,
any one may be an adept though he has gone through no process of study;
but that in those pursuits properly called
studies,<sup>[3](footnote/fn26.htm#P2658_723152)</sup> none can have any
real knowledge unless he has first become a student of them. Hence they
supposed that the theory of these things was called *Mathematics*, from
ma/qhma, study, science. And the followers of Pythagoras are said to
have given this more distinctive name of mathematics to geometry, and
arithmetic alone. For of old these had each its own separate name; and
they had up till then no name common to both. And he (Archytas) gave
them this name, because he found
science<sup>[4](footnote/fn26.htm#P2659_723646)</sup> in them, and that
in a manner suitable to man's
study.<sup>[5](footnote/fn26.htm#P2660_723719)</sup> For they (the
Pythagoreans) perceived that these studies dealt with things eternal and
immutable and perfect,<sup>[6](footnote/fn26.htm#P2661_723842)</sup> in
which things alone they considered that science consisted. But the more
recent philosophers have given a more extensive application to this
name, so that, in their opinion, the mathematician deals not only with
substances<sup>[7](footnote/fn26.htm#P2662_724093)</sup> incorporeal,
and falling simply within the province of the
understanding,<sup>[8](footnote/fn26.htm#P2663_724177)</sup> but also
with that which touches upon corporeal and sensible matter. For he ought
to be cognisant of<sup>[9](footnote/fn26.htm#P2664_724290)</sup> the
course of the stars, and their velocity, and their magnitudes, and
forms, and distances. And, besides, he ought to investigate their
dispositions to vision, examining into the causes, why they are not seen
as of the same form and of the same size from every distance, retaining,
indeed, as we know them to do, their dispositions relative to each
other,<sup>[10](footnote/fn26.htm#P2665_724664)</sup> but producing, at
the same time, deceptive appearances, both in respect of order and
position. And these are so, either as determined by the state of the
heavens and the air, or as seen in reflecting and all polished surfaces
and in transparent bodies, and in all similar kinds. In addition to
this, they thought that the man ought to be versed in mechanics and
geometry and dialectics. And still further, that he should engage
himself with the causes of the harmonious combination of sounds, and
with the composition of music; which things are
bodies,<sup>[11](footnote/fn26.htm#P2666_725251)</sup> or at least are
to be ultimately referred to sensible matter.

What is mathematics?

Mathematics is a theoretic
science<sup>[12](footnote/fn26.htm#P2669_725393)</sup> of things
apprehensible by perception and sensation for communication to
others.<sup>[13](footnote/fn26.htm#P2670_725502)</sup> And before this a
certain person indulging in a joke, while hitting his mark, said that
mathematics is that science to which Homer's description of Discord may
be applied.-

For it begins with a point and a
line,<sup>[15](footnote/fn26.htm#P2676_725940)</sup> and forthwith it
takes heaven itself and all things within its compass.

How many divisions are there of mathematics?

Of the more notable and the earliest mathematics there are two principal
divisions, viz., arithmetic and geometry. And of the mathematics which
deals with things sensible there are six divisions, viz, computation
(practical arithmetic), geodesy, optics, theoretical music, mechanics,
and astronomy. But that neither the so-called tactics nor
architecture,<sup>[16](footnote/fn26.htm#P2679_726440)</sup> nor the
popular music, nor physics, nor the art which is called equivocally the
mechanical, constitutes, as some think, a branch of mathematics, we
shall prove, as the discourse proceeds, clearly and systematically.

As to the circle having eight solids and six superficies and four
angles.... What branches of arithmetic have closest affinity with each
other? Computation and theoretical music have a closer affinity than
others with arithmetic; for this department, being one also of quantity
and ratio, approaches it in number and
proportion.<sup>[17](footnote/fn26.htm#P2681_727010)</sup> Optics and
geodesy, again, are more in affinity with geometry. And mechanics and
astrology are in general affinity with both.

As to mathematics having its
principles<sup>[18](footnote/fn26.htm#P2683_727192)</sup> in hypothesis
and about hypothesis. Now, the term hypothesis is used in three ways, or
indeed in many ways. For according to one usage of the term we have the
dramatic revolution;<sup>[19](footnote/fn26.htm#P2684_727398)</sup> and
in this sense there are said to be hypotheses in the dramas of
Euripides. According to a second meaning, we have the investigation of
matters in the special in rhetoric; and in this sense the Sophists say
that a hypothesis must be proposed. And, according to a third
signification, the beginning of a proof is called a hypothesis, as being
the begging of certain matters with a view to the establishment of
another in question. Thus it is said that
Democritus<sup>[20](footnote/fn26.htm#P2685_727944)</sup> used a
hypothesis, namely, that of atoms and a vacuum; and
Asclepiades<sup>[21](footnote/fn26.htm#P2686_728311)</sup> that of
atoms<sup>[22](footnote/fn26.htm#P2687_728675)</sup> and pores. Now,
when applied to mathematics, the term hypothesis is to be taken in the
third sense.

That Pythagoras was not the only one who duly honoured arithmetic, but
that his best known disciples did so too, being wont to say that "all
things fit number."<sup>[23](footnote/fn26.htm#P2689_728949)</sup>

That arithmetic has as its immediate end chiefly the theory of
science,<sup>[24](footnote/fn26.htm#P2691_729074)</sup> than which there
is no end either greater or nobler. And its second end is to bring
together in one all that is found in determinate
substance.<sup>[25](footnote/fn26.htm#P2692_729253)</sup>

Who among the mathematicians has made any discovery?

Eudemus<sup>[26](footnote/fn26.htm#P2695_729384)</sup> relates in his
*Astrologies* that
Oenopides<sup>[27](footnote/fn26.htm#P2696_729501)</sup> found out the
circle of the zodiac and the
cycle<sup>[28](footnote/fn26.htm#P2697_729703)</sup> of the great year.
And Thales<sup>[29](footnote/fn26.htm#P2698_729762)</sup> discovered the
eclipse of the sun and its period in the tropics in its constant
inequality. And
Anaximander<sup>[30](footnote/fn26.htm#P2699_729938)</sup> discovered
that the earth is poised in
space,<sup>[31](footnote/fn27.htm#P2700_730085)</sup> and moves round
the axis of the universe. And
Anaximenes<sup>[32](footnote/fn27.htm#P2701_730158)</sup> discovered
that the moon has her light from the sun, and found out also the way in
which she suffers eclipse. And the rest of the mathematicians have also
made additions to these discoveries. We may instance the facts-that the
fixed stars move round the axis passing through the poles, while the
planets remove from each
other<sup>[33](footnote/fn27.htm#P2702_730549)</sup> round the
perpendicular axis of the zodiac; and that the axis of the fixed stars
and the planets is the side of a pentedecagon with four-and-twenty
parts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alexander of Cappadocia.](0060059)
