[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0060027)  [Next](0060029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  On All the Saints.<sup>[1](footnote/fn13.htm#P1300_353755)</sup>

------------

Grant thy blessing, Lord.

It was my desire to be silent, and not to make a
public<sup>[2](footnote/fn13.htm#P1304_353944)</sup> display of the
rustic rudeness of my tongue. For silence is a matter of great
consequence when one's speech is
mean.<sup>[3](footnote/fn13.htm#P1305_354128)</sup> And to refrain from
utterance is indeed an admirable thing, where there is lack of training;
and verily he is the highest philosopher who knows how to cover his
ignorance by abstinence from public address. Knowing, therefore, the
feebleness of tongue proper to me, I should have preferred such a
course. Nevertheless the spectacle of the onlookers impels me to speak.
Since, then, this solemnity is a glorious one among our festivals, and
the spectators form a crowded gathering, and our assembly is one of
elevated fervour in the faith, I shall face the task of commencing an
address with confidence.<sup>[4](footnote/fn13.htm#P1306_354802)</sup>
And this I may attempt all the more boldly, since the
Father<sup>[5](footnote/fn13.htm#P1307_354907)</sup> requests me, and
the Church is with me, and the sainted martyrs with this object
strengthen what is weak in me. For these have inspired aged men to
accomplish with much love a long course, and constrained them to support
their failing steps by the staff of the
word;<sup>[6](footnote/fn13.htm#P1308_355425)</sup> and they have
stimulated women to finish their course like the young men, and have
brought to this, too, those of tender years, yea, even creeping
children. In this wise have the martyrs shown their power, leaping with
joy in the presence of death, laughing at the sword, making sport of the
wrath of princes, grasping at death as the producer of deathlessness,
making victory their own by their fall, through the body taking their
leap to heaven, suffering their members to be scattered abroad in order
that they might hold<sup>[7](footnote/fn13.htm#P1309_355967)</sup> their
souls, and, bursting the bars of life, that they might open the.
gates<sup>[8](footnote/fn13.htm#P1310_356058)</sup> of heaven. And if
any one believes not that death is abolished, that Hades is trodden
under foot, that the chains thereof are broken, that the tyrant is
bound, let him look on the martyrs disporting
themselves<sup>[9](footnote/fn13.htm#P1311_356281)</sup> in the presence
of death, and taking up the jubilant strain of the victory of Christ. O
the marvel! Since the hour when Christ despoiled Hades, men have danced
in triumph over death. "O death, where is thy sting! O grave, where is
thy victory? "<sup>[10](footnote/fn13.htm#P1312_356545)</sup> Hades and
the devil have been despoiled, and stripped of their ancient armour, and
cast out of their peculiar power. And even as Goliath had his head cut
off with his own sword, so also is the devil, who has been the father of
death, put to rout through death; and he finds that the selfsame thing
which he was wont to use as the ready weapon of his deceit, has become
the mighty instrument of his own destruction. Yea, if we may so speak,
casting his hook at the Godhead, and seizing the wonted enjoyment of the
baited pleasure, he is himself manifestly caught while he deems himself
the captor, and discovers that in place of the man he has touched the
God. By reason thereof do the martyrs leap upon the head of the dragon,
and despise every species of torment. For since the second Adam has
brought up the first Adam out of the deeps of Hades, as Jonah was
delivered out of the whale, and has set forth him who was deceived as a
citizen of heaven to the shame of the deceiver, the gates of Hades have
been shut, and the gates of heaven have been opened, so as to offer an
unimpeded entrance to those who rise thither in faith. In olden time
Jacob beheld a ladder erected reaching to heaven, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon it. But now, having been made man for
man's sake, He who is the Friend of man has crushed with the foot of His
divinity him who is the enemy of man, and has borne up the man with the
hand of His Christhood,<sup>[11](footnote/fn13.htm#P1313_358019)</sup>
and has made the trackless ether to be trodden by the feet of man. Then
the angels were ascending and descending; but now the Angel of the great
counsel neither ascendeth nor descendeth: for whence or where shall He
change His position, who is present everywhere, and filleth all things,
and holds in His hand the ends. of the world? Once, indeed, He
descended, and once He ascended,-not, however, through any
change<sup>[12](footnote/fn13.htm#P1314_358551)</sup> of nature, but
only in the condescension<sup>[13](footnote/fn13.htm#P1315_358609)</sup>
of His philanthropic
Christhood;<sup>[14](footnote/fn13.htm#P1316_358662)</sup> and He is
seated as the Word with the Father, and as the Word He dwells in the
womb, and as the Word He is found everywhere, and is never separated
from the God of the universe. Aforetime did the devil deride the nature
of man with great laughter, and he has had his joy over the times of our
calamity as his festal-days. But the laughter is only a three days'
pleasure, while the wailing is eternal; and his great laughter has
prepared for him a greater wailing and ceaseless tears, and inconsolable
weeping, and a sword in his heart. This sword did our Leader forge
against the enemy with fire in the virgin furnace, in such wise and
after such fashion as He willed, and gave it its point by the energy of
His invincible divinity, and dipped it in the water of an undefiled
baptism, and sharpened it by sufferings without passion in them, and
made it bright by the mystical resurrection; and herewith by Himself He
put to death the vengeful adversary, together with his whole host. What
manner of word, therefore, will express our joy or his misery? For he
who was once an archangel is now a devil; he who once lived in heaven is
now seen crawling like a serpent upon earth; he who once was jubilant
with the cherubim, is now shut up in pain in the guard-house of swine;
and him, too, in fine, shall we put to rout if we mind those things
which are contrary to his choice, by the grace and kindness of our Lord
Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory and the power unto the ages of the
ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidations.](0060029)
