[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fons06)  [Next](fons08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Fountain of Life (Fons Vitae)* (excerpt), by Solomon Ibn Gabirol,
tr. by Harry E. Wedeck \[1962\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Part VI

*Master:* I shall now demonstrate the existence of the simple substances
according to the impression of the substances upon each other by the
analytical method, although by the synthetic method it is quite evident.
I ask you first for the two principles that you require in order to
understand this.

*Pupil:* What are they?

*Master:* Do you grant that the body in itself is at rest and inactive?

*Pupil:* I would not say otherwise if I did not see simple bodies, such
as fire, air, and water, each of which moves in place.

*Master:* Since the motion of each of them does not come from the fact
that they are bodies, but from the fact that they are qualities by the
qualities with which they are endowed, you must know that their motions
do not in any way prevent the body from being in itself at rest and
inactive.

*Pupil:* What proof is there that the motions of the elements do not
come from the fact that the elements are bodies?

*Master:* If the motions of the elements came from the fact that the
elements are bodies, they would not be different.

*Pupil:* Why so?

*Master:* If they came from the essence of the body, their motion would
be one because the body is one.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

*Pupil:* Why does not the body, which is one, move with different
motions?

*Master:* Because the different motions come from different essences.

*Pupil:* Why?

*Master:* Because a single motion depends on a single essence and must
not be separated from it except by its destruction. Similarly, a second
motion must not come without the first motion being moved aside.

*Pupil:* Your words make me realize that the motions of the elements do
not come from the fact that the elements are bodies, and to me it is an
established fact that the body in itself is at rest and inactive. That
is one of the principles you ask for. But what is the other?

*Master:* I ask again whether the action assumes an agent or not?

*Pupil:* Since the action is an accident that does not exist by itself,
it is necessary to say that it has an agent to make it subsist and be.

*Master:* It is then necessary to grant that the actions that are in the
body have an agent other than the body.

*Pupil:* It cannot be otherwise.

*Master:* The body is a continuous compound of parts. It is therefore
necessary to assert that it has an agent that continues and composes its
parts.

*Pupil:* That is so.

*Master:* Composition and cohesion come from the motion of the parts of
the compound and from their mutual attraction, and also from the fact
that each of them is kept in the place where the motion and the
attraction have brought it.

*Pupil:* That is the case.

*Master:* It is therefore necessary that there should

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

be an essence other than the body, whose property is solely to attract
and keep the parts of the body.

*Pupil:* That is necessary. But show me, by clear proof, that the body
is composed of parts.

*Master:* We learn that the body is composed of parts from the fact that
it resolves itself in them ideally, that it divides in seven directions,
that it divides in substance, measure and figure and that it has depth
in the direction contrary to its natural motion.

*Pupil:* Add an explanation although this is sufficient.

*Master:* Between the body dispersed and subtle, and the body contracted
and dense there is almost the same relation as between the substance of
the intelligence and the sensible substance: and the density of the body
comes from the union and the contraction of numerous parts. There is the
proof that your question asked for.

*Pupil:* I understand and I see that there is a substance that composes
and unites the parts of the simple body.

*Master:* What follows then?

*Pupil:* It follows that this substance composes and keeps the parts of
the different bodies, as the elements are composed and kept in minerals,
vegetables, and animals.

*Master:* Observe vegetables and animals again and you will find in them
a stronger and more evident action of this substance.

*Pupil:* Show me this in greater detail.

*Master:* Do you not see that each of the vegetables and animals
requires a matter to supply it with the equivalent of that which it has
lost? Hence it requires a faculty to attract the parts of this matter
and unite them to the parts of the body. Furthermore, it requires

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

a faculty to retain the parts when they unite with the body. Similarly,
it requires a faculty to convert the parts of the matter and assimilate
them to the parts in which they assemble. Finally, it requires a faculty
to drive out the superfluous matter. It is therefore necessary that
there should be in vegetables and animals a substance that effects these
operations by means of these faculties.

*Pupil:* Yes. But what necessity forces me to say that these operations
proceed from a single substance and not from different substances, from
several faculties and not from one?

*Master:* If these operations proceeded from many substances, it would
be impossible that one of these substances should be higher and more
perfect than another, since its operations would not be so. Understand
therefore from this that the substance that effectuates is. one.
Moreover, these operations are of the same genus, for the operation of
attraction is of the same genus as the expulsive and digestive
operations. As for retention, it is suspension of motion.

*Pupil:* It is established that these operations come from a single
substance. But show me that they come from different faculties.

*Master:* If this substance had one faculty only, it would have one
operation only.

*Pupil:* Why so?

*Master:* Because the existence of the action depends on the existence
of the faculty: furthermore, because there is a connection of succession
between these operations.

*Pupil:* Now I know that there is one single substance to compose the
parts of vegetables and animals and that the operations that appeared in
them come from the faculties by which this substance accomplishes its
natural operations. But what would you

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

reply to one who said these operations come from the four elements?

*Master:* We have already said that the body in itself is at rest and
inactive.

*Pupil:* It is the same with the bodies of the elements. But is it then
the same with the qualities?

*Master:* Since the qualities require a mover, understand then that they
do not act by themselves.

*Pupil:* Now I know that there is a substance that composes and retains
the parts of the simple body and the compound body and it is established
that the substance that acts in two bodies is one, since these two
operations belong to a single genus. It is also established that the
faculties of this substance differ on account of the diversity of the
operations.

*Master:* Your understanding has been correct. But what follows then?

*Pupil:* It follows that there exists a universal substance that
composes and retains the parts of the universal body.

*Master:* Whence the necessity?

*Pupil:* From the necessity by virtue of which the universal body must
be similar to the particular single body and to the particular body
composed of the elements, on the basis of composition and cohesion. It
is therefore necessary to conceive their agent as one.

*Master:* That is good. But still what follows that statement?

*Pupil:* The consequence of this is that the universal substance acting
on the universal body assigns its essence and its virtue to the
particular substance acting on the particular body. Therefore the
particular substance corresponds to the universal substance and the
particular operation corresponds to the universal operation.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

*Master:* Thus when we see in the particular bodies the presence of some
particular action due to a particular substance, will it not be
necessary, according to our previous observation, to find also in the
universal body the presence of a universal action due to a universal
substance?

*Pupil:* It seems to me that you are referring to the universal
substances that you previously called the three souls and the
intelligence, substances designated by the particular substances that
are in vegetables and animals.

*Master:* That is just what I wanted to do. But is this a necessary
thing or not?

*Pupil:* When 1 observe that the particular body requires the universal
body and that the particular nature similarly requires the universal
nature, since it receives from it being and existence, I see in this
respect the particular souls must require the universal souls and the
universal intelligence, because they receive from it their being and
their existence.

*Master:* You will find something else by observing that among these
substances a higher substance gives to a lower substance.

*Pupil:* How is that?

*Master:* The inferior substances envelop the light coming from the
higher substance, and the whole envelops the light of the First Author,
sublime and holy, as we have already shown when we spoke of the
emanation of the substance from others.

*Pupil:* Acquaint me with the impression of the superior substances on
the inferior substances and show me the designs and the figures that
they receive from others, by the analytical method, as you promised.

*Master:* Do you not see in vegetables the motion

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

of growth, of nutrition, and of generation, in which you find the
evidence of the substance that causes these motions, that is, the
vegetative soul, as the composition and the cohesion of the parts of the
body have given you the evidence of the substance that is in the cause,
that is, nature?

*Pupil:* It is clearly so.

*Master:* Consider likewise the motion of variation in the sense of the
motion of thought, that of knowledge and that of reasoning, and you will
find therein the evidence of the substances that cause these motions,
that is, the animal soul, the rational and intellective soul.

*Pupil:* By virtue of which is not the substance that causes these
actions one, and why do the substances that are in man differ from each
other?

*Master:* Because these substances are separate from each other, for if
they were a single substance, vegetables would not be constituted
separately with growth, animals with sensation and mobility and men with
thought and understanding.

*Pupil:* Now I know by the procedure that you have just mentioned that
these substances differ from each other. But show me how they give to
each other and how the operations of these substances belong to the same
genus and are similar to each other.

*Master:* The knowledge of the impression of these substances on each
other has two aspects: one is the knowledge of the action and the
passivity and the other is the knowledge of the cause of the action and
of the passivity. Which one do you want to investigate?

*Pupil:* Since my intention for the moment is to understand the
existence of these substances and to know how they must come from each
other, I require

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

at this time only the knowledge of the passivity. I see that the
doctrine of the cause of passivity is higher and more noble than the
present discussion.

*Master:* Yes, that is so. Prepare then to understand what you ask, with
the aid of the following postulates.

*Pupil:* I am ready. But what are these postulates?

*Master:* One of the postulates will teach you that if two things are
similar in one relationship and unite in it, although the concept that
is common to them is otherwise in one than in the other, it is necessary
nevertheless that this concept should be one. Let us consider for
example the heat that is in fire and in the part of the air that is near
fire. Must the heat that is in the fire be that which is in the air,
although differently?

*Pupil:* It cannot be otherwise.

*Master:* Then it is not absurd to say that the heat that is in the air
comes from the heat that is in the fire, but we must say that it is
impressed by it.

*Pupil:* It is just as you say.

*Master:* If you realize that substances and their operations differ in
a particular way and agree in another way, you must know that the idea
in which they agree is one.

*Pupil:* That is so.

*Master:* If one of these operations is more perfect than another, must
not the more perfect one be the cause of the other?

*Pupil:* It must be so.

*Master:* If then you realize that the natural operations belong to the
same genus as the operations of the vegetative soul and are similar to
them, and that the natural operations are inferior to those of the
vegetative soul, must you not grant that the vegetative soul is the
cause of nature?

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

*Pupil:* It must be so, not only for the vegetative soul and nature, but
also for all substances.

*Master:* Listen then now. I am going to tell you how the operations of
these substances belong to the same genus and are similar to each other,
so that you will thus understand that they arise from each other.

*Pupil:* I am listening. I am quite impatient, for I have not met with
this doctrine in any philosopher and I think that nothing is more useful
and more effective if one wants to attain perfect knowledge of the
question that confronts us.

*Master:* How do you know this?

*Pupil:* If I find that the actions of these substances belong to the
same genus and are similar to each other and that as I pass I rise from
the inferior to the superior, thanks to the similarity that exists among
the substances, I am presented with the possibility of proceeding to the
superior extremity of being and I then discover the principle of motion.

*Master:* That is true. And you know also the cause of which we have
spoken, or the cause of the action and the passivity: you then observe
the degrees of the operations: you see that all things obey the divine
command and that the good moves all of them.

*Pupil:* Dear professor, finish then the proof that you promised me of
this profound problem, and may the Dispenser of the Good grant it to
you.

*Master:* What is the action whose origin is attributed to nature?

*Pupil:* The action of attraction and retention, transformation and
expulsion.

*Master:* What is the action that proceeds from the vegetative soul?

*Pupil:* The action of growth and generation.

*Master:* What is growth and what is generation?

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

*Pupil:* Generation is procreation from the self of a thing similar to
itself. Growth is motion of the vegetative parts from the centre toward
the extremities.

*Master:* Now attraction and repulsion are motion in place of the parts
of the nutriment by an opposite motion. These actions must therefore
belong to the same genus as the motion of the vegetative parts from the
centre toward the extremities.

*Pupil:* That must be so.

*Master:* Alteration or nourishing is the change of the body of the
nourishment from its form and its assimilation to the form of that which
is nourished. It is therefore also necessary that this action should
belong to the same genus as generation.

*Pupil:* That must also be so.

*Master:* Since this is so, it is necessary that one of the substances
that produce these actions should impress on the other, one of its
faculties, by which it produces its particular effect.

*Pupil:* It must necessarily be so.

*Master:* Now what is more perfect acts on the less perfect and marks it
with its impression.

*Pupil:* Yes.

*Master:* The action of nature is less perfect than that of the
vegetative soul.

*Pupil:* What proof is there?

*Master:* The proof is that the vegetative soul moves the body in all
its extremities, and nature does not do this. Further, the only object
of the action of nature is not so perfect as the object of the action of
the vegetative soul.

*Pupil:* You have given me to understand that these actions belong to
the same genus. But what do you understand by the retentive faculty in
the vegetative soul?

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

*Master:* Retention is the resting and weakening of motion.

*Pupil:* What is the proof of this?

*Master:* The proof is that motion is stronger than rest. Wherever
therefore there is motion, there is power, and where there is rest,
there is weakening.

*Pupil:* What do we gain by this reasoning?

*Master:* We gain by this, that we understand that the vegetative soul
acts on nature because it is more perfect and stronger than it.

*Pupil:* You have shown me the action of the vegetative soul on nature,
and I understand how the actions of these substances belong to the same
genus. Show me also the action of the sensitive soul on the vegetative
soul and explain how the actions of these substances belong to the same
genus.

*Master:* What is the action of the sensitive soul on the vegetative
soul?

*Pupil:* The action of moving the vegetative parts toward the
extremities.

*Master:* What is the action of the sensitive soul in the animal?

*Pupil:* Sensation and locomotion.

*Master:* Is it not necessary that these two motions should belong to
the same genus, since the characteristic of each of them is to move the
body in place?

*Pupil:* It is.

*Master:* Since the action of the animal soul consists in moving the
body in its entirety and in making it pass in its entirety from one
place to another, and since the action of the vegetative soul consists
in moving the parts of the body without displacement of the whole from
one place to another is it not necessary that the action of the animal
soul should be stronger than that of the vegetative soul?

*Pupil:* It must be so.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

*Master:* Moreover, the animal soul surpasses the vegetative soul in
this respect, that it is united with the forms of bodies that agree with
it in subtlety, whether more common or more eminent and draws them out
of their corporeal forms, while the vegetative soul unites with the
essence of the bodies, because it agrees with them in density and it
does so at close quarters only and without an intermediary.

*Pupil:* That is so.

*Master:* It is therefore necessary that the animal soul should act on
the vegetative soul since it is more perfect and stronger than it.

*Pupil:* It must be so.

*Master:* Using the method that I showed you for these three substances,
we must similarly discuss the rational soul and the intelligence. And in
order not to protract this dialogue, but to bring it into public notice,
I shall here condense my talk.

*Pupil:* Condense it then and give me a general conspectus of it, as you
usually do.

*Master:* The action of the animal soul consists in perceiving the forms
of the dense bodies in time, in moving in place, in uttering its voice
and in regulating it without the order that indicates understanding. The
action of the rational soul is to perceive the subtle forms of the
intelligibles, to move in the intelligibles beyond time and space, and
to utter its voice, and regulate it in proper order and in a sequence
that indicates understanding. Finally, the action of the intelligence is
the perception of all the intelligible forms beyond time and space,
without inquiry, without effort and without any other reason except its
essence, for it is completely perfect.

*Pupil:* What proof is there that the substance of the intelligence
differs from the rational soul?

*Master:* You must first examine that which proves

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

that the intelligence is a substance. But that is not relevant to the
purpose of our investigation. As for the proof that the substance of the
intelligence differs from the substance of the rational soul, it is the
very proof by virtue of which the rational soul differs from the animal
soul and from the vegetative soul. Furthermore, the proof of this is
that the rational soul perceives the exterior while the intelligence
perceives the essence. Now the essence is more simple than the exterior.
Therefore the form of the intelligence is more simple than the form of
the soul.

You see then, if you have understood, the action of the intelligence on
the rational soul and the action of the rational soul on the animal
soul, and you know how the actions of these substances belong to the
same genus and are similar.

*Pupil:* I think you have made me understand. But I am going to show you
what I mean.

*Master:* Say then what it is.

*Pupil:* I find that the substance of the intelligence is the most
subtle and the most perfect of the intelligible substances: that it
possesses every form: that it unites with everything, that it perceives
and knows everything. I find that the rational soul is inferior to it in
that it has some forms only, that it does not unite with everything and
does not know everything. Similarly, I find that the sensitive soul is
inferior in that respect to the rational soul. And as the actions of
each of these substances belong to the same genus and are similar, I
know that among them a substance more perfect and stronger is an active
cause for a weaker and more imperfect substance, as has been said
previously of the other substances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VII](fons08.md)
