[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fons04)  [Next](fons06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Fountain of Life (Fons Vitae)* (excerpt), by Solomon Ibn Gabirol,
tr. by Harry E. Wedeck \[1962\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Part IV

All that has more than a single figure to contain it can receive all the
figures. And whenever a thing receives all the figures, every form is in
its essence. Now the simple substance receives all the figures.
Therefore every form is in the essence of the simple substance.

All that receives numerous forms has not in itself one form that is
peculiar to it. Now the simple substance, like the soul, the
intelligence, nature, and matter, receives numerous forms. Therefore
none of them has in it a form that is peculiar to it.

The spiritual simple substance is more apt to combine in itself numerous
forms than the corporeal compound substance. Now the corporeal substance
and the corporeal figure unite numerous forms and figures.

All that is perceived in action in a thing was in

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

potentiality before passing into act. Now the forms that are in the
compound substance are in it in act. Therefore they were in potentiality
before passing into act.

The universal soul that unites the faculties of the soul is more apt to
have numerous forms than one of its faculties. Now the visual faculty
among the faculties of the soul has numerous forms. Therefore the
universal soul is more apt to have numerous forms than the visual
faculty.

If sense is a faculty that embraces the sensible forms, it is necessary
that the soul should be a substance that embraces the aggregate of the
forms. Now the sensitive faculty embraces the sensible forms. Therefore
the substance of the soul embraces the aggregate of the forms.

The more simple and subtle the substance is, the more it embraces forms:
thus the soul, the intelligence, and the primal matter. Now the
substance of the soul is more simple and more subtle than the compound
substance. Therefore the substance of the soul embraces more forms than
the compound substance.

Whenever a substance seizes the aggregate of the forms, all the forms
are in its essence absolutely. Thus matter, intelligence and soul seize
all the forms that are borne by the compound substance. Therefore all
the forms are in the essence of the soul.

If the intelligence perceives the spirituality of things, this
perception occurs through resemblance. Therefore the intelligence is
similar to the power of everything. And if it is similar to the power of
everything, the form of everything is in it. Similarly with the soul.

The intelligence and the soul know all things. Now knowledge is the
subsistence in the soul and

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

in the intelligence of the form of the thing known. Therefore the forms
of all things subsist in the soul and in the intelligence. Now the forms
subsist in them by union. Therefore all the forms are united with the
intelligence and the soul. Now the union takes place through
resemblance. Therefore all the forms are similar to the intelligence and
the soul.

The intelligence and the soul conceive knowledge from the forms of
things. Now all that conceives something conceives it through its form.
Therefore the intelligence and the soul conceive the forms of things by
their form, and their knowledge of the forms of things is due to the
union of their form with the forms of things. Therefore the intelligence
and the soul unite their form with the forms of things. Now all things
that unite are similar. Therefore the forms of the intelligence and the
soul are similar to the forms of things.

Sensible things are in the soul simply, for their forms are in it
without their matter. Similarly the forms of things are in the
intelligence more simply and in a more general fashion. Therefore the
inferior forms must be in all the superior forms, degree by degree,
until the universal form is reached in which exists the aggregate of all
the forms. But the superior forms are not in place, while the inferior
forms are in place; the first participate in the union of the spiritual
substance, while the second participate in the dispersal of the
corporeal substance.

The sensitive soul perceives the sensible forms without perception of
the matter that is their subject: and this is the case because the
matter is outside the essence of the soul and the forms are in the
essence of the soul. Hence I shall propose and say: If the soul does not
perceive the matter that has the forms

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

because the matter is outside its essence, it is necessary that the
object of its perception should be the forms that are in its essence.
Now the soul does not perceive the matter because it is outside its
essence. Therefore it perceives the forms because they are in its
essence.

If the sensible forms were not similar to the soul, the soul would not
receive them and these forms would not subsist in it. But the soul
receives these forms and they subsist in it. Therefore they are similar
to it.

The sensible forms that are in the compound substance are in the soul
simply, for the forms are in it divested of their matter. They are
similarly in the intelligence, but more absolutely. Now the substance of
the soul is superior to the substance that has the sensible forms. It is
therefore necessary that the inferior forms should be in the superior
substances.

The forms that are in the compound substance are sensible in act for the
soul. Now all that is in act was previously in potentiality. Therefore
the forms that are in the compound substance in act were previously in
potentiality in the substance of the soul. Now all that is in
potentiality is spiritual with regard to that which is in act. Therefore
the forms that are in potentiality in the substance of the soul are
spiritual with regard to the forms that are in act. Now the forms that
are borne by the compound substance are in act. Therefore the forms that
are in potentiality in the substance of the soul are spiritual with
respect to the forms that are borne by the compound substance.

If the substance of the intelligence and that of the soul detach the
forms that are borne by the compound substance and carry them in
themselves divested of

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

the substance that carries them, it is necessary that these forms should
be in the essence of each of them. Now the soul and the intelligence
detach the forms that are carried by the compound substance. Therefore
these forms are in the essence of each of them.

If the particular form borne by the particular matter subsists in the
substance of the particular soul divested of the matter that it bears,
it is also necessary that the universal form borne by the universal
matter, that is, the form borne by the compound substance, should be
borne by the substance of the universal soul divested of the universal
matter, that is, of the compound substance that bears it. The same
assertion must be made of the forms of the universal soul borne by the
substance that is superior to it, until the primal substance is reached
that bears all things: for the case of the universal form is the same as
the particular form.

If everything has a spiritual matter and a spiritual form, it is
necessary that they should exist in everything: and if they exist in
everything, it is necessary that there should be in each corporeal
substance a spiritual matter and in each corporeal form a spiritual
form. It is therefore necessary that in the corporeal color and in the
corporeal figure there should be a spiritual color and,a spiritual
figure and it is necessary that the spiritual color and the spiritual
figure should subsist in the spiritual substance.

The corporeal forms emanate from the spiritual forms. Now all that
emanates from something is the image of the thing from which it
emanates. Therefore the corporeal forms are the image of the spiritual
forms.

All that emanates from some origin is united with the origin and
dispersed far from the origin. Now

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the sensible forms are united with the spiritual substances and
dispersed in the corporeal substances. Therefore the sensible forms
derive from the spiritual substances and are nearer their origin in the
spiritual substances than in the corporeal substances.

The forms dispersed in the corporeal substances are united with the
spiritual substances. Now all that is dispersed in something is united
with its origin. Therefore the spiritual substances are the origin of
the forms that are dispersed in the corporeal substances.

The spiritual substances unite the sensible forms. Now every origin
unites that of which it is the origin. Therefore the spiritual
substances are the origin of the sensible forms.

All that derives from some origin is united with its origin. Now the
sensible forms are united in the spiritual substances. Therefore the
sensible forms derive from the spiritual substances.

The sensible forms unite. Now all that derives from an origin unites.
Therefore the sensible forms derive from an origin. Now all that derives
from an origin unites with the origin. Therefore the sensible forms
unite with their origin. Now the sensible forms unite with the spiritual
substances. Therefore the spiritual substances are the origin of the
sensible forms.

Whenever a thing is an origin for another thing, the latter unites with
it essentially. Now the sensible forms unite essentially with the
spiritual substances. Therefore the spiritual substances are the origin
of the sensible forms.

The sensible forms unite essentially with the spiritual substances. Now
all that with which things unite essentially constitutes the origin of
these things.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

Therefore the spiritual substances are the origin of the sensible forms.

The simple substance, like the soul and the intelligence, perceives the
essences of the sensible forms by itself. Now whenever a thing perceives
the essence of another thing by itself, the essence of the first thing
unites with the essence of the second thing. Therefore the essence of
the simple substances unites with the essence of the sensible forms.
Then I take this proposition as a premise: The essences of the simple
substances and of the sensible forms are united: and whenever two
essences are united, they form one. Therefore the essence of the simple
substances and the essence of the sensible forms are one. Then I shall
propose and say: the essence of the simple substance and of the sensible
forms is one. Now whenever a thing emanates from another thing, its
essence and that of the thing from which it emanates are one essence.
Therefore the sensible forms emanate from the essence of the simple
substance.

The union of the forms of things is much greater in the form of the
intelligence than in the other forms. Now all that derives from an
origin is more united with its origin than different from it. Therefore
the form of the intelligence is the origin of the aggregate of the
forms.

Every form that springs from the soul in matter was previously in the
soul spiritually and it is to these spiritual forms that the corporeal
forms owe their existence. Now the soul creates the forms and the
corporeal figures that are borne by matter. Therefore these forms and
these figures are in the soul spiritually.

The Master proceeds: We have just adduced as far as possible the proofs
that demonstrate (A) that the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

forms borne by the compound substance are impressed therein by the
simple substance, which is superior to the compound substance: and they
have all established (B) that these forms exist in the essence of the
simple substance that impresses them and that they emanate and originate
from this substance. We have demonstrated this synthetically. Now we
shall also present the analytical proof, resolving the impressions that
are in the compound substance and noting for each of them the simple
substance whose characteristic is to produce it: for when we have done
this, we shall know how many simple substances there are united with the
compound substance, that impress in it its designs and figures.

*Pupil:* By the cumulative proofs that you have just presented, you
maintained (B) that the sensible forms that are borne by the compound
substance exist in the essence of the simple substance that impresses
them: (C) you affirmed also that these forms are united in the essence
of the soul and in that of the intelligence and that they emanate from
these substances, and you postulated as a proof of this the faculty of
the soul and of the intelligence to perceive all these forms. Show me
then how it is possible that the sensible forms, like continuous
quantity, figure, color, and the first qualities are united in the
essence of the simple substance and how the faculty of the simple
substance to perceive all these forms is proof that they are united and
that they subsist in it, for to me nothing is more inadmissible than to
say that the forms of this sensible world, however great and numerous
they may be, exist in the substance of the soul and that of the
intelligence. Show me this then, to the best of your ability.

*Master:* Do you consider it certain, after the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

proofs that we have established, that the sensible forms are impressed
by the simple substance?

*Pupil:* I consider it quite certain.

*Master:* Since the simple substance impresses these forms, it is
necessary that it should impress either that which is in its essence
only, or that which is in its essence and in the essence of the compound
substance, or that which is not in its essence. But it does not impress
that which is not in its essence. If indeed it impressed that which is
not in its essence, it would be false to say it impresses, for that
which impresses gives to the object impressed what it has in its
essence. Or again: If the simple substance impressed that which is not
in its essence, its action could not be an impression and this substance
would create from nothing. But the First Author, sublime and holy, alone
creates from nothing.

*Pupil:* Then assume that the simple substance impresses that which is
in the compound substance.

*Master:* The essence of the compound substance has no form and that is
why it receives the impression of the simple substance. For if it has a
form, it receives it or not. Now if it receives it and if it is
impossible for it to receive it by itself, it is necessary that it
should receive it from something else. And if it does not receive it,
the form and the essence of the substance are one thing: the form would
be therefore the substance itself and the substance the form itself:
which is inadmissible. In short, the substance is subject and
receptivity, and before the existence of the form in it, it had only the
possibility of receiving it from something else.

And in this way the proposition is also refuted according to which the
simple substance impresses that which is in its essence and in the
essence of the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

compound substance. And since the proposition according to which the
simple substance impresses that which is not in its essence is negated,
just like the proposition according to which the simple substance
impresses that which is in its essence and in the essence of the
compound substance, the proof compels you to say that the simple
substance impresses that which is in its essence only.

*Pupil:* If the proof compels me to say that the sensible forms exist in
the essence of the simple substance, be careful that it does not
constrain me to maintain that they are in the essence of the simple
substance as they are in the compound substance.

*Master:* It is impossible that the form of the quantity, that figure,
color, and the four qualities should be in the simple substance as they
are in the compound substance, for it would follow that the simple
substance would be similar in its form to the compound substance. But
these forms are in the simple substance in a much more subtle and some
simple manner. They are in it in so far as forms separated from their
matter, perceived by the soul and divested of their substance. These
forms are in fact more subtle and more simple than the forms borne by
their matter, since they are borne by the essence of the soul divested
of the corporeal matter. And since these simple forms have energies
emanating necessarily, as has been proved, when these energies spread on
the substance that is opposed to them, and when they unite with it, from
their emanation on it and from their union with it arise the sensible
forms borne by the compound substance. And the cause of the existence of
these sensible forms is their union with the corporeal substance. That
is why they differ from the simple forms borne by the simple substance.
And

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

just as from the union of the simple bodies with the simple substances a
form arises that is different from the different forms, so from the
union of the simple substances with the compound substances there arises
a form different from the different forms which is similar to the union
of the light of the sun with bodies whose substance and colors differ,
since from their union come lights that differ from the light of the sun
and from each other.

*Pupil:* How can I imagine that this sensible form, so great and
extended, that the corporeal substance has, can exist in the simple
substance?

*Master:* Do not be surprised at this. For if the particular simple
substance, that is, the particular soul, comprehends the universal
compound substance and all the forms, and if it makes it stay in its
essence, all the more so must the universal simple substance, that is,
the universal soul, comprehend the compound substance and all its forms.
Now I see that all the forms of the compound substance, so great and
extended, are like an indivisible point to the form of the simple
substance. If then this great form is plunged into the indivisible part
of the universal simple substance, that is, into the particular soul,
there is no reason for being surprised at its presence in the universal
simple substance, that is, in the universal soul. For just as the forms
of sensible things are in the substance of the universal soul simply,
that is, divested of their matter, so there is no reason to be surprised
that these forms are plunged into the universal simple substance
superior to this substance, or the substance of the intelligence: for
the forms of all things are in the substance of the intelligence in a
more universal and more simple manner. The forms that are in a superior
substance are more united and

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

do not occupy place. Inversely, those that are in the inferior substance
are more dispersed and occupy place: the cause of this is the unity of
the essence of the corporeal substance: and this occurs only through the
union of the essences of the simple substances and the diffusion of the
essence of the corporeal substance. And in general the inferior forms
are enveloped by the superior forms, to the point where all the forms
are reduced to the universal primal form that unites in it all the forms
and in which all the forms are enveloped. Thus the universal form of the
intelligence has all the forms and all the forms subsist in it, as I
shall show you in what follows, when we examine what the form of the
intelligence is and how it perceives all the forms.

*Pupil:* What you say makes me understand that the sensible forms are in
the intelligible forms. But I entertain the following doubt: If all the
corporeal forms are in the spiritual forms, more simply than in the
corporeal substance, and if the inferior is the image of the superior
and is in it, how can the ten corporeal genera be in the spiritual
substance?

*Master:* Consider the inferior extremity of being, that is, each of the
genera that are at the inferior extremity and consider likewise its
superior extremity: and you will find for every genus of those things
that are in the inferior extremity what is contrary to it in the
superior extremity. You will find the universal matter corresponding to
the substance. You will find the quantity corresponding to the form of
the intelligence, as it results from that which precedes. You will find
it corresponding also to the units that are borne by the forms of the
substance. You will likewise find the seven simple species of quantity
corresponding to the number seven of the simple substances, namely,

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

matter, form, intelligence, the soul and nature, and to the number of
faculties of each of these substances. You will find the quality
corresponding to the differences and to the forms of these substances.
You will find the relation corresponding to the fact that they are
causes and effects. You will find time corresponding to eternity. You
will find space corresponding to the order of these substances that
precede and follow each other. You will find location corresponding to
subsistence. You will find the action corresponding in these substances
to the faculty of impressing, communicating, and creating. You will find
the object of the action corresponding in them to the impression from
these substances. You will find possession corresponding to the
existence of the universal form in the universal matter, to the
existence of each of the forms of the simple substance in the matter
that possesses it and to the existence, in each of these substances, of
the faculties that are peculiar to it. Do you not see that the
correlations that I point out to you or the opposition that there is
between the forms of the compound substance and the forms of the simple
substance prove that the forms of the compound substance emanate from
the forms of the simple substance?

*Pupil:* Yes: that is the proof of what you said. Thanks to you I
understand better the existence of the corporeal forms in the simple
substance. You have in fact told me that these forms do not become
corporeal and do not become so except by uniting with the corporeal
substance. For they are similar to a white cloth, thin and transparent,
that, applied on a black or reddish body, assumes its color and changes
in respect of sensation, but not all in itself.

But show me how the perception that the intelligence

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and the soul have of the sensible forms constitutes the proof that these
forms exist in their essence and that they emanate and come from them.

*Master:* Did you grant or not that the substance of the soul and of the
intelligence is a simple substance and that it perceives all the forms?

*Pupil:* That is necessarily so.

*Master:* Does the simple substance that perceives all the forms either
perceive them by itself or not perceive them by itself?

*Pupil:* It must be so.

*Master:* If one said that the simple substance does not perceive by
itself the aggregate of the forms, it would be necessary in consequence
that it should not perceive them throughout all time.

*Pupil:* We assert that the soul does not perceive the sensible things
throughout all time and however it may be, but that at times it
perceives them and at other times it does not, and that it does not do
so in every way.

*Master:* The soul is not prevented sometimes from perceiving the forms
by itself. It would be if it perceived them by anything else but that
whereby it does perceive them. The proof of this is that if the soul
were prevented sometimes from perceiving the forms by itself, it would
be impossible for it to perceive them sometimes by itself. And it would
be necessary for it to perceive them by itself and at the same time not
to perceive them by itself: which is impossible. Now this is the method
of reasoning. It is impossible that at the same time the soul should
perceive the forms by itself and should not perceive them by itself. Now
the soul perceives the forms by itself. Therefore it is impossible that
it should not perceive them by itself. And to this conclusion I add the
following

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

proposition: It is said of the soul that it is prevented from perceiving
the forms. The conclusion is therefore: The soul is not prevented from
perceiving the forms by itself. Therefore it is necessary that it should
perceive the forms by itself. It is therefore evident that the soul
perceives the forms by itself.

*Pupil:* If the soul perceives the forms by itself, it is necessary that
in it they should always be in act. But the forms in the soul are not
always in act. Therefore it does not perceive them by itself.

*Master:* If the forms in the soul were in act, they would always be
sensible. And the perception by itself that the soul has of the forms
does not make it necessary that these forms should be in act in it, for
it is not impossible that they are there in potentiality and that the
soul then perceives them by itself when they pass into act.

*Pupil:* How is it possible for the forms to be in the essence of the
soul in potentiality and then to be in its essence in act?

*Master:* Why should that not be possible, since it is a matter of two
different times?

*Pupil:* If the forms are in the essence of the soul in potentiality,
how is it possible for the soul to act on them and fail to impress them?

*Master:* The forms that are in the essence of the soul are not those on
which it acts: on the contrary, the forms that are in the bodies act on
the essence of the soul and this action is possible because these forms
differ from the essence of the soul.

*Pupil:* Then if the forms are in the essence of the soul, why does it
not perceive them without an organ, as the intelligence perceives things
without an organ?

*Master:* The forms that are in the essence of the soul are not the
forms borne by the bodies, for these

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

forms are corporeal in act, and that is why the soul requires an organ
to perceive them. The intelligence too does not perceive all things
without an organ, since it requires the organ to perceive the sensible
forms.

*Pupil:* You have forced me to grant that the substance of the soul
perceives the forms by itself. But what do you say of the substance of
the intelligence?

*Master:* If the substance of the soul perceives the forms by itself on
account of its simplicity and its spirituality, all the more so is it
necessary that the substance of the intelligence should perceive the
forms by itself, since the substance of the intelligence is of far
greater simplicity and spirituality than that of the soul, and that is
why it knows all things by itself.

*Pupil:* All that you have just said makes me understand that the simple
substance perceives all the forms by itself. But what follows?

*Master:* It follows that the forms exist in its essence.

*Pupil:* What is now the method of reasoning?

*Master:* The method of reasoning is as follows: The simple substance
perceives all the forms by itself. Now whenever a substance perceives
things by itself, between it and that which it perceives there is no
intermediary. Therefore between the simple substance and the forms that
it perceives there is no intermediary. Then I assert: The forms that the
simple substance perceives by itself without an intermediary either
subsist in its essence or are next to its essence. But it is not
possible that they should be next to its essence, for they require a
support that bears them and there is no other support except the essence
of the substance of the soul. Therefore the forms subsist in the essence
of the soul.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

This becomes still more evident if it is observed that the simple
substance is similar to the forms in this respect that the forms are in
themselves simple and spiritual and that they become corporeal only
through the corporeal matter that they bear. Now the concept of similar
things implies that they join and unite together. It is therefore
necessary that the forms should unite with the simple substance. Now if
the forms unite with the simple substance, they are then with the
essence of this substance a single thing. And if the essence of the
forms and the essence of the simple substance are a single thing, it is
necessary that the forms should be in the essence of the simple
substance.

The following arguments can make this proposition still more evident.
All that has an interior and an exterior is a compound substance, and
every compound substance has an interior and an exterior. And if we add
to one of these propositions the following one; The simple substance is
not a compound, it follows; Therefore the simple substance has neither
an interior nor an exterior. Therefore there is not something in the
interior or in the exterior of its essence. Therefore there is nothing
in the interior or the exterior of its essence. And to this conclusion I
add this proposition: All the forms are in the simple substance.
Therefore the forms that are in the simple substance are not in the
interior or in the exterior of its essence. To the preceding conclusion
I add this proposition: Whenever a thing is not in the interior or in
the exterior of another thing and it is yet in it, the essence of this
latter thing and the essence of that which is in it are one essence.
Therefore the forms that are in the simple substance and the essence of
this substance are one thing.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

The following arguments clarify this proposition still more. The simple
substance perceives the form through union. Now the union of the
substance with the form occurs through motion. Therefore the simple
substance perceives the forms through motion. Now all motion is in time.
Therefore the simple substance perceives the forms in time. Now all that
perceives something in time perceives many dispersed things in more time
than a single thing. Therefore the simple substance perceives numerous
forms dispersed in more time than it takes to perceive only one form.
Now all that perceives numerous forms dispersed in more time than it
takes to perceive only one form cannot perceive at the same time
numerous forms dispersed. Therefore it is impossible that the simple
substance should perceive at the same time numerous forms dispersed.

To this conclusion I add this proposition: The simple substance
perceives by itself numerous forms at the same time. Therefore the
numerous forms that the simple substance perceives at the same time are
not these forms dispersed. To this conclusion I add the following
proposition: The sensible forms in the corporeal substances are
dispersed. Therefore the forms that the simple substance perceives at
the same time are not in the forms that are in the corporeal substances.

Similarly in another way. The numerous forms that the simple substance
perceives at the same time are not dispersed. Now the forms that are not
dispersed are in the essence of the simple substance. Therefore the
numerous forms that the simple substance perceives at the same time are
in the essence of the simple substance.

Similarly in another way. The forms that the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

simple substance perceives at the same time must necessarily be united.
Now the united forms are in the simple substance. Therefore it follows
necessarily that the forms with which the simple substance unites are in
the simple substance.

The same proposition can be clarified still more by the following method
of reasoning. The numerous forms that the simple substance perceives
unite spiritually with its essence. Now the essence of the simple
substance is united spiritually. Therefore the forms that the simple
substance perceives are united spiritually. Now all things united
spiritually exist in a thing united spiritually. Therefore the numerous
forms that the simple substance perceives exist in a single thing,
united spiritually. Now the simple substance is a single thing, united
spiritually. Therefore the numerous forms that the simple substance
perceives exist in the simple substance.

The same proposition is again proved by the following reasoning. The
simple substance perceives all the forms by itself. Now the form of
everything is the thing itself. Therefore the simple substance perceives
all the forms by its form. Then I assert: The simple substance perceives
all the forms by its form. Now it perceives all the forms by its form
when its form unites with these forms. Therefore the form of the simple
substance unites with all the forms. Similarly I assert: the form of the
simple substance unites with all the forms. Now whenever the form of a
thing unites with all the forms, this form comprehends all the forms
with which it is united. Therefore the form of the simple substance
comprehends all the forms with which it unites. To this conclusion I add
the following proposition: The form of the simple substance comprehends
all the forms with which it

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

unites. Now whenever a thing comprehends many forms, these numerous
things that it comprehends exist in it. Therefore all the forms that the
simple substance comprehends exist in it. Then I take this conclusion
and I assert: All the forms are in the form of the simple substance. Now
the form of the simple substance is its essence. Therefore all the forms
are in the essence of the simple substance.

The same proposition is clarified again by the following reasoning: The
sensible forms are effects of the form of the simple substance. Now
every effect is in its cause. Therefore the sensible forms are in the
form of the simple substance. Now the form of the simple substance is
its essence. Therefore the sensible forms are in the essence of the
simple substance.

*Pupil:* All the arguments that you have just advanced make me
understand that the sensible forms are in the essence of the simple
substance from the fact that the simple substance perceives all the
forms by itself. But another doubt assails me. Did you mean that the
simple substance perceives all the forms by itself although these forms
are in their support and not in it, and that thus, when the simple
substance wants to imagine them by itself and it takes up a position by
itself confronting them, it perceives what these forms are although they
are not in it?

*Master:* Is it possible that the essence of the substance perceives the
form while the essence of one does not unite with the essence of the
other to become a single thing?

*Pupil:* It can be very well said that the essence of the substance
perceives the form although it is different from it: thus, when it
perceives the sensible forms divested of their matter, although these
forms are very different from it, it imagines them nevertheless

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

necessarily, perceives and represents them to itself as if they were
present in it.

*Master:* When a form is perceived, it signifies that the essence of the
substance is impressed by the form. Now the impression results from the
conjunction of the impresser and the impressed. Therefore when a form is
perceived by the substance, it is the result of their conjunction and
union with each other.

*Pupil:* If the form unites with the essence of the simple substance, it
is necessary that the form that unites should be the form borne by the
matter of another form. If this form is that which is borne by the
matter, it cannot unite with the essence of the substance except by
separation from the matter. But it does not separate from the matter.
Therefore it does not unite with the essence of the substance. If on the
contrary the form that unites with the essence of the substance is not
the form borne by the matter, then it is false to assert that the form
borne by the matter is the form that is in the essence of the simple
substance.

*Master:* The union of the form borne by the matter with the essence of
the substance is not a corporeal union like its union with the matter,
so that the form cannot unite with the essence of the simple substance
except by separation from the matter. But this union is a spiritual
union. For the form of this form unites with the essence of the form
that is in potentiality in the essence of the simple substance, by means
of which this form in potentiality passes into act.

*Pupil:* I understand that it is impossible that the simple substance
should perceive the forms without their being in it. But I am worried
about the concept of a single thing that assimilates with all things,
that

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

is all things, that bears and contains all things without contracting or
thickening. And I should like you to show me how many things exist in
one simple thing, so that I can grasp this doctrine and increase my
enjoyment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part V](fons06.md)
