[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gem01)  [Next](gem03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406795151/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Histories of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffry of Monmouth*, tr. by
Sebastian Evans, \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### Geoffrey of Monmouth's

### Histories

###### OF THE

### Kings of Britain

# BOOK I

### CHAPTER I

###### EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO ROBERT, EARL OF GLOUCESTER

<span class="margnote">Geoffrey's Prologue</span><span
class="smallcaps">Oftentimes</span> in turning over in mine own mind the
many themes that might be subject-matter of a book, my thoughts would
fall upon the plan of writing a history of the Kings of Britain, and in
my musings thereupon meseemed it a marvel that, beyond such mention as
Gildas and Bede have made of them in their luminous tractate, nought
could I find as concerning the kings that had dwelt in Britain before
the Incarnation of Christ, nor nought even as concerning Arthur and the
many others that did succeed him after the Incarnation, albeit that
their deeds be worthy of praise everlasting and be as pleasantly
rehearsed from memory by word of mouth in the traditions of many peoples
as

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="margnote">To Robert of Glouchester</span>though they had
been written down. Now, whilst, I was thinking upon such matters,
Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, a man learned not only in the art of
eloquence, but in the histories of foreign lands, offered me a certain
most ancient book in the British language that did set forth the doings
of them all in due succession and order from Brute, the first King of
the Britons, onward to Cadwallader, the son of Cadwallo, all told in
stories of exceeding beauty. At his request, therefore, albeit that
never have I gathered gay flowers of speech in other men's little
gardens, and am content with mine own rustic manner of speech and mine
own writing-reeds, have I been at the pains to translate this volume
into the Latin tongue. For had I besprinkled my page with high-flown
phrases, I should only have engendered a weariness in my readers by
compelling them to spend more time over the meaning of the words than
upon understanding the drift of my story.

Unto this my little work, therefore, do thou, Robert, Duke of
Gloucester, show favour in such wise that it may be so corrected by thy
guidance and counsel as that it may be held to have sprung, not from the
poor little fountain of Geoffrey of Monmouth, but rather from thine own
deep sea of knowledge, and to savour of thy salt. Let it be held to be
thine own offspring, as thou thyself art offspring of the illustrious
Henry, King of the English. Let it be thine, as one that hath been
nurtured in the liberal arts by philosophy, and called unto the command
of our armies by thine own inborn

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

<span class="margnote">Praises of Britain</span>prowess of knighthood;
thine, whom in these our days haileth with heart-felt affection Britain
as though in thee she had been vouchsafed a second Henry.

### CHAPTER II

<span class="smallcaps">Britain</span>, best of islands, lieth in the
Western Ocean betwixt Gaul and Ireland, and containeth eight hundred
miles in length and two hundred in breadth. Whatsoever is fitting for
the use of mortal men the island doth afford in unfailing plenty. For
she aboundeth in metals of every kind; fields hath she, stretching far
and wide, and hillsides meet for tillage of the best, whereon, by reason
of the fruitfulness of the soil, the divers crops in their season do
yield their harvests. Forests also hath she filled with every manner of
wild deer, in the glades whereof groweth grass that the cattle may find
therein meet change of pasture, and flowers of many colours that do
proffer their honey unto the bees that flit ever busily about them.
Meadows hath she, set in pleasant places, green at the foot of misty
mountains, wherein be sparkling well-springs clear and bright, flowing
forth with a gentle whispering ripple in shining streams that sing sweet
lullaby unto them that lie upon their banks. Watered is she, moreover,
by lakes and rivers wherein is much fish, and, besides the narrow sea of
the Southern coast whereby men make voyage unto Gaul, by three noble
rivers, Thames, to wit, Severn and Humber, the which

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<span class="margnote">Of Duke Æneas</span>she stretcheth forth as it
were three arms whereby she taketh in the traffic from oversea brought
hither from every land in her fleets. By twice ten cities, moreover, and
twice four, was she graced in days of old, whereof some with shattered
walls in desolate places be now fallen into decay, whilst some, still
whole, do contain churches of the saints with towers builded wondrous
fair on high, wherein companies of religious, both men and women, do
their service unto God after the traditions of the Christian faith.
Lastly, it is inhabited of five peoples, Romans, to wit, Britons,
Saxons, Picts and Scots. Of these the Britons did first settle them
therein from sea to sea before the others, until, by reason of their
pride, divine vengeance did overtake them, and they yielded them unto
the Picts and Saxons. Remaineth now for me to tell from whence they came
and in what wise they did land upon our shores, as by way of foretaste
of that which shall hereafter be related more at large.

### CHAPTER III

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> the Trojan War, Æneas, fleeing from
the desolation of the city, came with Ascanius by ship unto Italy.
There, for that Æneas was worshipfully received by King Latinus, Turnus,
King of the Rutulians, did wax envious and made war against him. When
they met in battle, Æneas had the upper hand, and after that Turnus was
slain, obtained the kingdom

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

<span class="margnote">The birth of Brute.</span>of Italy and Lavinia
the daughter of Latinus. Later, when his own last day had come,
Ascanius, now King in his stead, founded Alba on Tiber, and begat a son
whose name was Silvius. Silvius, unknown to his father, had fallen in
love with and privily taken to wife a certain niece of Lavinia, who was
now about to become a mother. When this came to the knowledge of his
father Ascanius, he commanded his wizards to discover whether the damsel
should be brought to bed of a boy or a girl. When they had made sure of
the matter by art magic, they told him that the child would be a boy
that should slay his father and his mother, and after much travel in
many lands, should, albeit an exile, be exalted unto the highest
honours. Nor were the wizards out in their forecast, for when the day
came that she should be delivered of a child, the mother bare a son, but
herself died in his birth. Howbeit, the child was given in charge unto a
nurse, and was named Brute. At last, after thrice five years had gone
by, the lad, bearing his father company out a-hunting, slew him by
striking him unwittingly with an arrow. For when the verderers drave the
deer in front of them, Brute, thinking to take aim at them, smote his
own father under the breast. Upon the death of his father he was driven
out of Italy, his kinsfolk being wroth with him for having wrought a
deed so dreadful. He went therefore as an exile into Greece, and there
fell in with the descendants of Helenus, the son of Priam, who at that
time were held in bondage under the

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span class="margnote">Brute's youthful prowess</span>power of
Pandrasus, King of the Greeks. For Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, after
the overthrow of Troy, had led away with him in fetters the foresaid
Helenus and a great number of others besides, whom he commanded to be
held in bondage by way of revenging upon them his father's death. And
when Brute understood that they were of the lineage of his former
fellow-citizens, he sojourned amongst them. Howbeit, in such wise did he
achieve renown for his knighthood and prowess, that he was beloved by
kings and dukes above all the other youths of the country. For among the
wise he was as wise as he was valiant among warriors, and whatsoever
gold or silver or ornaments he won, he gave it all in largess to his
comrades in battle. His fame was thus spread abroad among all nations,
and the Trojans flocked unto him from all parts, beseeching him that he
should be their King and deliver them front the slavery of the Greeks;
the which they declared might easily be done, seeing that they had now
so multiplied in the land as that without making count of little ones
and women they were already reckoned to be seven thousand. There was,
moreover, a certain youth of high nobility in Greece, by name Assaracus,
who was no less favourable to their cause. For he was born of a Trojan
mother, and he had in them the fullest affiance that by their help he
would be able to resist the harassing persecution of the Greeks. For his
brother laid claim against him in respect of three castles which his
father when dying had conferred upon him, but

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="margnote">Brute to Pandrasus</span>which the brother was
now trying to take away from him because Assaracus had been born of a
concubine. The brother himself was Greek both by father and mother, and
had rallied the King and the rest of the Greeks to the support of his
cause. When, therefore, Brute saw how great was the multitude of
fighting men, and also how strong were the castles of Assaracus which
were open unto him, he granted their request without misgiving.

### CHAPTER IV

<span class="smallcaps">When</span>, therefore, he was thus chosen their
Duke, he summons together the Trojans from every quarter and garrisons
the strongholds of Assaracus. Howbeit, Assaracus himself, with all the
host of men and women that were upon their side, occupied the forests
and hills. Then Brute sent his letter addressed unto the King in these
words: 'To Pandrasus, King of the Greeks, Brute, Duke of them that are
left of Troy, greeting: Whereas a nation sprung from the illustrious
race of Dardanus deigned not to be treated in thy kingdom otherwise than
as the purity of their nobility did demand, they have betaken them into
the depths of the forests. For they held it better to live a life after
the manner of wild beasts, to wit on flesh and herbs, with liberty, than
to be cockered with dainties of every kind and remain any longer under
the yoke of bondage unto thee. If this offendeth the loftiness of thy
power, they are rather to be

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="margnote">Brute's first victory</span>pardoned than held to
blame, for of all that are in captivity it is the common aim and desire
to recover their former dignity. Be thou, therefore, moved to mercy
towards them, and deign to bestow upon them their lost liberty, allowing
them to inhabit the forest glades that they have occupied to the end
that thus they might flee beyond the reach of slavery. But if this thou
wilt not, grant them at least that they may depart unto other nations of
the world with thy good will.'

### CHAPTER V

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> Pandrasus, therefore, had learnt the
drift of this letter, he was beyond measure amazed that they whom he had
held in bondage should so abound in hardihood as to address any mandates
of the kind unto him. He therefore summoned a council of his nobles, and
decreed that an army should be levied in order to hunt them down. But
whilst that he was searching the wildernesses wherein he supposed them
to be, and the stronghold of Sparatinum, Brute issued forth with three
thousand men, and suddenly attacked him when he was expecting nothing of
the kind. For, hearing of his arrival, he had thrown himself into the
said stronghold the night before, in order that he might make an
unlooked-for onslaught upon them when they were unarmed and marching
without order. The Trojans accordingly charged down upon them and
attacked them stoutly, doing their

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="margnote">The Greeks defeated </span>best to overwhelm them
with slaughter. The Greeks, moreover, suddenly taken aback, are
scattered in all directions, and scamper off, the King at their head, to
get across the river Akalon that runneth anigh. But in fording the
stream they suffer sore jeopardy from the whirling currents of the
flood. Whilst they are thus fleeing abroad,. Brute overtaketh them, and
smiteth down them that he overtaketh partly in the waters of the river
and partly on the banks, and, hurrying hither and thither amongst them,
rejoiceth greatly to inflict upon them a double death. Which when
Antigonus the brother of Pandrasus beheld, he was beyond measure
afflicted, and as soon as he could recall his straggling comrades to the
ranks, returned and charged swiftly upon the raging Trojans. For he was
minded rather to die fighting than to make a craven flight only to be
drowned in the muddy whirlpits of the river. Marching, therefore, in a
solid battalion, he exhorted his comrades to resist like men, and hurl
back the deadly weapons with all their might. Yet did it avail him
little or nothing. For the Trojans were accoutred with arms, while the
others were unarmed. Pressing forward, therefore, all the more boldly on
this account, they inflicted a grievous slaughter upon them, nor did
they cease to harry them in such fashion until they had slaughtered
well-nigh the whole of them, and had taken captive Antigonus and his
comrade Anacletus.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="margnote">Pandrasus besiegeth Brute</span><span
class="smallcaps">Now</span>, when Brute had achieved the victory, he
garrisoned the stronghold with six hundred men, and then sought out the
recesses of the forest wherein the Trojan folk were expecting his
protection. But Pandrasus, in sore tribulation over his own flight and
the capture of his brother, spent the night in getting his scattered
forces together again, and when the morrow morning dawned marched with
his reassembled people to besiege the stronghold. For he thought that
Brute had again set himself therein together with Antigonus and the
other prisoners. When, therefore, he came anigh the walls, he examined
the situation of the castle, and distributed his army in companies, and
disposed them in divers places around it, telling off sonic to forbid
all egress to them that were enclosed within, some to divert the course
of the rivers, and others, again with store of battering-rams and other
engines to shatter the fabric of the walls. They all obeyed his orders
to the best of their endeavour, devising in what manner most cruelly
they might annoy the besieged. When the night came on, moreover, they
chose the boldest of their number to keep guard over the camp and tents
against any stealthy attack of the enemy, while the rest, worn out with
fatigue-labour, refreshed them with undisturbed sleep.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### CHAPTER VII

<span class="margnote">Brute's cunning device</span><span
class="smallcaps">The</span> besieged, on the other hand, standing on
the top of the walls, endeavour with all their strength to beat back the
machinations of the device enemy by counter-devices, with one mind
busying themselves in their own defence, now flinging down missiles, now
lighted brimstone torches among them. When the wall was undermined by
sappers working under shelter of 'a tortoise,' they compelled the enemy
to retreat by Greek fire and a shower of boiling water. Suffering,
howbeit, from scarcity of victual and the daily travail, they sent a
messenger unto Brute, beseeching him to hasten to their assistance, for
sore were they afeared lest they should he reduced by weakness to desert
the fortress. Brute, therefore, anxious to come to their succour, is
sore tormented inwardly for that he hath not enough men to adventure on
delivering battle in the field. Howbeit, taking crafty counsel, he
maketh resolve to attack the enemy's camp by night, and by deceiving the
sentinels, to slay I them sleeping. But, for that he knew this could
only be done with the assistance and assent of one of the Greeks, he
called unto him Anacletus, the comrade of Antigonus, and, unsheathing
his sword, spake unto him on this wise:—

'Most noble youth, thine own life and that of Antigonus are already at
an end, save thou faithfully agree to execute that which I shall command
thee according unto my will. For it is my purpose on this night
following to attack the

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

<span class="margnote">A perilous stratagem</span>camp of the Greeks in
such sort that I may inflict upon them an unexpected slaughter. But I
fear me lest their sentinels should discover my secret intent, and that
thus the enterprise be brought to nought. Wherefore, seeing that it
behoveth us first of all to turn our arms against the watch, I am
desirous of deceiving them by means of you, so that I may have safer
passage for attacking the others. Do thou, therefore, acting warily as
befitteth a matter of such weight, go to the guard at the second hour of
the night, and allaying the suspicions of any by words of feigning, say
that thou hast carried off Antigonus out of my dungeons unto a combe in
the forest, and that he there lieth hidden among the under-wood, being
unable to get any further on account of the fetters wherewith thou will
feign that he is shackled. Then thou shalt guide them to the issue of
the forest as if for the purpose of setting him free, and there will I
be with a company of armed men ready to slay them.'

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="smallcaps">Anacletus</span>, therefore, scared all the time
by the sight of the sword, which during the time these words were spoken
had been raised ready to slay hint, made promise by oath that he would
execute this command on condition that longer life were granted unto
Antigonus as well as himself. The covenant was at last confirmed, and at
the second hour of the night, which was then just at hand, Anacletus
started on his way towards the

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="margnote">But a successful</span>guard as he had been
commanded. And when at last he arrived anigh the camp, the sentinels on
every side who keep eye upon all the hidden corners of the places run up
and ask him the cause of his coming, and whether he hath come in order
to betray the army? Unto whom he, feigning the greatest joy, made
answer: 'Of a truth I come not here as a traitor to mine own folk, but
as one that hath escaped from the prison of the Trojans do I thus flee
unto you, beseeching you that ye come with me to our Antigonus, whom I
have rescued from the chains of Brute. Him, indeed, hindered by the
weight of his shackles, have I but just now enjoined to lie hidden in
the underwood by the issue of the forest until I could find some whom I
can lead thither to set him free.' Whilst that they were still doubting
whether he told truth, came up one who had known him aforetime, and
after saluting him, told his comrades who he was. They thereupon,
hesitating no longer, summoned the rest who were at a distance to come
as swiftly as might be, and followed him as far as the wood, wherein, as
he had told them before, Antigonus was hiding. While they, accordingly,
were making their way through the brushwood, Brute, with his armed
companies, cometh forth, and charging upon them soon inflicted a most
terrible slaughter on the panic-stricken guard. Then he marched on to
the leaguer, dividing his comrades into three companies, and commanding
that each should approach the camp at a different point, prudently and
without noise, but that after they had

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

<span class="margnote">A deadly signal</span>effected an entrance into
the camp, they should refrain from slaughtering any until such time as
he, with his own special company, had taken possession of the King's
pavilion, when he would blow his own horn as a signal for them.

### CHAPTER IX

<span class="smallcaps">He</span> further instructed them in what manner
they were to do everything that was to be done. Forthwith they lightly
make their way into the camp, and after fulfilling all that they have
been commanded, await the promised signal, which Brute tarried not long
to give as soon as he set foot without the pavilion of Pandrasus, which
above all others he was burning to attack. When the signal was heard,
they unsheath their swords as swiftly as may be, rush into the
sleeping-tents of the drowsy enemy, redouble their death-dealing blows,
and march in this wise, all pitiless, throughout the camp. The rest
waken up at the groans of the dying, and are stricken helpless with
dismay at the sight of the butchers, like sheep seized of a sudden by
the wolves. For nought of protection did they think to find, seeing that
they had not even time enow either to lay hands on their arms or to take
to flight. They could but run without arms to and fro amidst armed men
as sudden impulse might lead. But all the time they are being cut to
pieces by the onslaught of their enemies. He that escaped half-alive,
hurrying forth in his eagerness for flight was dashed to the ground

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

<span class="margnote">The King's life spared</span>among the rocks and
trees and brambles; and yielded up his unhappy soul together with his
red blood. He that was furnished with a shield only, or other covering,
dropped down through fear of death among the same rocks, or swiftly
fleeing through the darkness of the night, fell, and in falling brake a
leg or an arm. He to whom neither of these mischances befel, not knowing
whither to fly, was drowned in the rushing of the neighbouring rivers.
Scarce one departed unharmed without peril of any mishap. They within
the fortress, moreover, when they knew of the arrival of their fellows
in arms, issued forth and redoubled the slaughter that was wrought.

### CHAPTER X

<span class="smallcaps">Now</span> Brute, when he had obtained
possession of the royal tent, was careful to bind the King and to keep
him safe. For he knew that he could attain the object at which he aimed
more readily by the King's life than by his death. But the company that
were with him ceased not from the slaughter they made, which in the part
of the camp they held had wrought a clearance that was nought less than
extermination. When the night had thus been spent and the light of dawn
revealed how mighty a loss had been inflicted on the people, Brute, in a
very tempest of delight, now that the carnage was over, gave permission
to his comrades to deal as they pleased with the spoils of the slain.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="margnote">Mempricius speaketh</span>Then he entereth the
fortress with the King, and there awaiteth until he should have
distributed the treasure. When this was all allotted, he again
garrisoned the castle and gave orders for the burial of the dead. He
then again collected his troops and returned rejoicing in his victory to
the forest. The tidings filled the hearts of his men with no less joy,
and the doughty Duke, after summoning the elders, made inquiry of them
what they thought ought to be demanded of Pandrasus, for, now that he
was placed in their power, he would grant any petition they might make
to the utmost, provided he were allowed to go free. Some of them at once
proposed one thing, and some another, according to their inclinations.
Part exhorted him to ask for a portion of the kingdom for them to dwell
therein; part for leave to go their way elsewhere and for whatever might
be of use to them upon the journey. And seeing that after a long while
they still hesitated, one amongst them, Mempricius by name, rose up and
besought silence, when he spake thus in the hearing of the rest:—

'Wherefore, fathers, do ye hesitate about that which, in my opinion, is
most expedient for your own welfare? There is but one thing to be asked
for, to wit, leave to depart, if ye desire that yourselves and your
children should have lasting peace. For if it be that ye grant Pandrasus
his life on condition that ye obtain a part of Greece, and so be minded
to sojourn in the midst of the Danai, never will ye enjoy an enduring
peace so long as the brethren and

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="margnote">His counsel taken</span>sons and grandsons of
them upon whom ye inflicted the slaughter of yesterday remain
intermingled amongst ye or are your next neighbours without. For so long
as they remember the slaying of their kinsfolk they will hold ye always
in eternal hatred, and taking offence at every the merest trifle, will
do their best to wreak vengeance upon ye. Nor will ye, seeing that your
host is the smaller, have strength to resist the aggressions of so many
indwellers of the land. For if any strife for the mastery should arise,
their numbers will wax daily while your own will wane. Mine opinion,
therefore, is that ye ask of him his eldest daughter, whom they call
Ignoge, as a wife for our Duke, and along with her gold and silver,
ships and corn, and whatsoever else may be needful for our voyage. And
if so be that he will grant her, we will then with his leave go on our
way to. seek out other lands.'

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> he had made an end of this speech,
with more to the like effect, the whole assembly signified their assent,
and counselled that Pandrasus be brought into their midst, and, save he
should be favourable towards this their petition, should be condemned to
a death as cruel as might be. No tarrying was there. He is brought
thither and set in a chair on high, where he is instructed, moreover,
what tortures he will have to suffer in case he refuse to do

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

<span class="margnote">Pandrasus yieldeth</span>according as he is
commanded. Whereupon he made answer on this wise:—

'Forasmuch as the gods are against me, and have delivered me and my
brother Anacletus into your hands, needs must I grant your petition,
lest in case ye should meet with a denial we lose the life which ye have
the power to give or to take away as ye may choose. For nought hold I
better nor dearer than life, nor is it marvel that I should be willing
to ransom it at the price of any outward goods and possessions.
Wherefore, albeit against my will, I will obey your orders. Some
comfort, nevertheless, seem I to have in this, that I shall give my
daughter unto a youth of such prowess, whom the nobility that doth now
burgeon within him no less than his renown which hath been made known to
us, do declare to be a scion of the house of Priam and Anchises. For who
but he could have delivered the exiles of Troy, the bondsmen of so many
and such mighty princes, from their chains? Who but he could have urged
them to successful resistance against the nation of the Greeks? Who but
he with so few would have challenged to battle so mighty a host of armed
warriors and at the first onset have led away their King in fetters? But
sith that a youth so noble and of so mighty prowess hath been able to
withstand me, I give him my daughter Ignoge. I give him, moreover, gold
and silver, ships, corn, wine and oil, and whatsoever ye shall deem
needful for your journey. And if it be that ye turn aside from your
present purpose, and be minded to abide

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="margnote">Brute weddeth Ignoge</span>with the Greeks, I
yield ye the third part of my kingdom wherein to dwell. But if
otherwise, I will fulfil my first promises in deeds, and that ye may
have the fuller assurance, with you will I remain as hostage until I
shall have done all things whereunto I have pledged me.'

The agreement thus confirmed, envoys are directed to gather ships
together from all the shores of Greece. These, when they were assembled
to the number of three hundred and twenty-four, are duly presented and
laden with provision of all sorts. The daughter is married to Brute, and
each man, according as his rank demanded, was presented with gold and
silver. All his promises exactly fulfilled, the King is set free from
prison; and at the same time the Trojans depart from his dominions with
a prosperous wind. But Ignoge, standing on the lofty poop of the ship,
falleth swooning again and again into the arms of Brute, and with
sobbing and shedding of tears lamenteth to forsake her kinsfolk and her
country; nor turneth she her eyes away from the shore, so long as the
shore itself is in sight. Brute, the while, soothing her with gentle
words, at one time foldeth her in a sweet embrace, or at another kisseth
her as sweetly, nor doth he slacken his endeavour to comfort her until,
weary with weeping, she falleth at last on sleep.

In the meanwhile, what with these and other matters, they ran on
together for two days and a night with a fair current of wind, and drew
to land at a certain island called Leogecia, which had been uninhabited
ever since it was laid waste

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="margnote">A deserted city</span>by pirates in the days of
old. Howbeit, Brute sent three hundred men inland to discover by whom it
might be inhabited. Who, finding not a soul, slew such venison of divers
kinds as they found in the glades and the forests. They came, moreover,
to a certain deserted city, wherein they found a temple of Diana. Now in
this temple was an image of the goddess, that gave responses, if haply
it were asked of any votary that there did worship. At last they
returned to their ships, laden with the venison they had found, and
report to their comrades the lie of the land and the situation of the
city, bearing the Duke on hand that he make repair unto the temple, and
after making offerings of propitiation, inquire of the deity of the
place what land she would grant them as a fixed abiding place. By the
common consent of all, therefore, Brute took with him Gerion the augur,
and twelve of the elders, and sought out the temple, bringing with them
everything necessary for making sacrifice. When they arrived they
surrounded their brows with garlands, and set up three altars according
to immemorial wont, before the holy place, to the three Gods, Jove, to
wit, and Mercury as well as to Diana, and made unto each his own special
libation. Brute himself, holding in his right hand a vessel full of
sacrificial wine and the blood of a white hind before the altar of the
goddess, with face upturned towards her image, broke silence in these
words:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Goddess and forest Queen, the wild boar's terror,  
 Thou who the maze of heaven or nether mansions  
 Walkest at will, vouchsafe thy rede to earthward! <span id="page_23">p.
23</span>  
 Tell me what lands thy will it is we dwell in?<span
class="margnote">The response of Diana</span>  
 What sure abode? Lo, there to Thee for ever  
 Temples I vow, and chant of holy maidens!'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> After he had nine
times repeated this, he walked four times round the altar, poured forth
the wine he held upon the hearth of offering, laid him down upon the
fell of a hind that he had stretched in front of the altar, and after
invoking slumber fell on sleep. For as at that time it was the third
hour of the night, wherein are mortals visited by the sweetest sleep.
Then it seemed him the goddess stood there before him, and spake unto
him on this wise:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Brute,—past the realms of Gaul, beneath the
sunset  
 Lieth an Island, girt about by ocean,  
 Guarded by ocean—erst the haunt of giants,  
 Desert of late, and meet for this thy people.  
 Seek it! For there is thine abode for ever.  
 There by thy sons again shall Troy be builded  
 There of thy blood shall Kings be born, hereafter  
 Sovran in every land the wide world over.'</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> On awakening from
such a vision, the Duke remained in doubt whether it were a dream that
he had seen, or whether it were the living goddess herself who had thus
foretold the land whereunto he should go. At last he called his
companions and related unto them from first to last all that had
befallen him in his sleep. They thereupon were filled with exceeding
great joy, and advise that they should at once turn back to their ships,
and while the wind is still blowing fair, should get under way as
quickly as possible full sail for the West in search of that land which
the goddess had promised. Nor did

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="margnote">A voyage of adventure</span>they tarry. They
rejoin their comrades and launch out into the deep, and after ploughing
the waves for a run of thirty days, made the coast of Africa, still not
knowing in which direction to steer their ships. Then came they to the
Altars of the Phileni, and the place of the Salt-pans, steering from
thence betwixt Ruscicada and the mountains Azarae, where they
encountered sore peril from an attack by pirates. Natheless, they won
the victory, and went on their way enriched by the spoil and plunder
they had taken.

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="smallcaps">From</span> thence, passing the mouth of the
river Malva, they arrived in Mauritania, where lack of food and drink
compelled them to disembark, and dividing themselves into companies,
they harried the whole region from end to end. When they had
revictualled their ships, they made sail for the Columns of Hercules,
where they saw many of the monsters of the deep called Sirens, which
surrounded the ships and well-nigh overwhelmed them. Howbeit, they made
shift to escape, and came to the Tyrrhene sea, where they found nigh the
shore four generations born of the exiles from Troy, who had borne
Antenor company in his flight. Their Duke was called Corineus, a
sober-minded man and excellent in counsel, mighty in body, valiance and
hardiness, insomuch as that if it were he had to deal with a giant in
single combat he would straightway

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="margnote">Corineus goeth a-hunting</span>overthrow him as
though he were wrestling with a lad. Accordingly, when they knew the
ancient stock whereof he was born, they took him into their company, as
well as the people whereof he was chieftain, that in after-days were
called Cornishmen after the name of their Duke. He it was that in all
encounters was of more help to Brute than were any of the others.

Then came they to Aquitaine, and entering into the mouth of the Loire,
cast anchor there. Here they abode seven days and explored the lie of
the land. Goffarius Pictus then ruled in Aquitaine, and was King of the
country, who, hearing the rumour of a foreign folk that had come with a
great fleet and had landed within the frontier of his dominions, sent
envoys to make inquiry whether their demanded peace or war? While the
legates were on their way to the fleet, they met Corineus who had just
landed with two hundred men to hunt for venison in the forest. Thereupon
they accost him, and ask him by whose leave he hath thus trespassed into
the King's forest to slay his deer? And when Corineus made them answer,
that in such a matter no leave nor license whatever could be held as
needful, one of their number, Imbert by name, rushed forward, and
drawing his bow, aimed an arrow at him. Corineus avoided the arrow, and
ran in upon Imbert as fast as he might, and with the bow that he carried
all-to-brake his head in pieces. Thereupon the rest fled, just making
shift to escape his hands, and reported the death of their fellow to
Goffarius. The Duke of the Poitevins, taking the matter

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="margnote">Corineus: his prowess</span>sorely to heart,
forthwith assembled a mighty host to take vengeance upon them for the
death of his messenger. Brute, hearing tidings of his coming, set guards
over his ships, bidding the women and children remain on board, while he
himself along with the whole flower of his army marcheth forth to meet
the enemy. When the engagement at last began, the fighting is fierce on
both sides, and after they had spent a great part of the day in
battling, Corineus thought it shame that the Aquitanians should hold
their ground so stoutly, and the Trojans not be able to press forward to
the victory. So taking heart afresh, he called his own men apart to the
right of the battle, and forming them in rank made a rapid charge upon
the enemy, and when, with his men in close order, he had broken the
front ranks, he never stinted striking down the enemy till he had cut
his way right through the battalion and forced them all to flee. Good
luck had supplied the place of a sword he lost with a battle-axe,
wherewith he cleft in twain any that came next him from the crown of the
head right down to the girdlestead. Brute marvels; his comrades and even
the enemy marvel at the hardihood and valour of the man, who,
brandishing his battle-axe among the flying host, added not a little to
their terror by shouting, 'Whither fly ye, cowards? Whither fly ye,
cravens? Turn back, I tell ye, turn, and do battle with Corineus! Shame
upon ye! So many thousands as are ye, do ye flee before my single arm?
Flee then! and take with ye at least this comfort in your flight, that
it is I who am after ye,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Goffarius vanquished</span>I who ere now have so oft
been wont to drive the Tyrrhene giants in flight before me, and to hurl
them to hell by threes and fours at a time!'

### CHAPTER XIII

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> these words of his a certain earl
named Subardus with three hundred men turned back and charged down upon
him. But Corineus, in raising his shield to ward the blow, forgat not
the battle-axe he held in his hand. Lifting it overhead, he smote him a
buffet upon the top of his helmet that cleft him right through into two
halves. After this, he straightway rusheth in amongst the rest, whirling
his axe, and a passing furious slaughter he maketh. Hurrying hither and
thither, he avoideth receiving a single stroke, but never resteth a
moment from smiting down his enemies. Of one he loppeth off hand and
arm, of another he cleaveth the shoulders from the body, of another he
striketh off the head at a single blow, of another he severeth the legs
from the thigh. All dash headlong upon him only; he dasheth headlong in
upon them all. Brute, who beholdeth all this, glowing with love of the
man, hurrieth forward with a company to succour him. Then ariseth a
mighty shouting betwixt the two peoples—the strokes are redoubled, and
passing bloody is the slaughter on the one side and the other. But it
endureth not long. The Trojans win the day, and drive King Goffarius and
his

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">A battle nigh Tours</span>Poitevins in flight before
them. Goffarius, escaping by the skin of his teeth, betook him into the
parts of Gaul to have succour of his kinsfolk and acquaintance. At that
time twelve kings there were in Gaul, each of equal rank, under whose
dominion the whole country was ruled. They all received him kindly, and
with one accord did pledge them to drive out from the frontiers of
Aquitaine this foreign folk that had arrived there.

### CHAPTER XIV

<span class="smallcaps">Brute</span>, overjoyed at the said victory,
enriched his comrades with the spoils of the slain, ant after again
forming the ranks in companies. he leadeth his host inland with the
intention of sacking the whole country and loading his ship, with the
countless treasure. Accordingly, he burneth the cities in all
directions, fire after fire, and ransacketh their hidden hoards; even
the fields are laid waste, and citizen and countryman alike are
subjected to a piteous slaughter, his aim being to exterminate the
unhappy race to the last man. But after that he had thus visited with
bloodshed well-nigh the whole of Aquitaine, he came unto the place where
now standeth the city of Tours, which, as Homer beareth witness, he
afterwards himself builded. Finding after diligent survey that the place
was convenient as a refuge, he there decided to pitch his camp, so that
if need were he could betake him thereinto. For sore misgiving had he by
reason of the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span class="margnote">Goffarius boasteth</span>arrival of Goffarius,
who had marched into the neighbourhood along with the Kings and Princes
of Gaul and a mighty host of armed warriors to do battle against him.
When his camp was fully finished, he awaited Goffarius for two days
therein, confident alike in his own prudence and in the hardihood of the
young men whereof he was the chieftain.

### CHAPTER XV

<span class="smallcaps">Now</span>, when Goffarius heard of the Trojans
being there, he advanced by forced marches day and night until he came
well within sight of Brute's camp. Gazing grimly thereon, yet somewhat
smiling withal, he burst forth into these words: 'Alas! what grievous
destiny is here? Have these ignoble exiles pitched their camp within
dominions of mine? To arms, ye warriors to arms! and charge through
their serried ranks! Right soon may we take captive this herd of
half-men like sheep and hold them in bondage throughout our realm!'
Forthwith, all they that he had brought with him leapt to arms, and
marched upon their enemies ranked in twelve battalions. But not after
any woman wise did Brute range his men and march to meet them. Prudently
instructing his troops as to what they were to do, how to advance, and
in what order to hold their ground, he gives the word to charge. At the
first onset, the Trojans for a time had the upper hand, and fearful was
the slaughter they made of the enemy, for nigh

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="margnote">Corineus: his stratagem</span>two thousand of
them fell, and the rest were so daunted at the sight that they all but
turned to flee. But where the numbers of men are the greater, there the
more often doth victory abide. In this case, therefore, the Gauls,
albeit that at first they were beaten back, yet being thrice so many as
their enemies, made shift to form themselves again in rank and charged
in again on every side against the Trojans, whom they compelled after
much bloodshed to take refuge in the camp. Having thus obtained the
victory, they beleaguered them within the camp, never thinking but that
before they departed thence the besieged would either offer their necks
to the fetters, or suffer a cruel and lingering death from the pangs of
hunger. In the meanwhile, on the night following, Corineus entered into
counsel with Brute, and agreed with him that he would issue forth of the
camp that same night by certain secret byways, and would lie hidden in
the neighbouring forest until daybreak. And when Brute, issuing forth
just before dawn, should be engaged in battle with the enemy, he himself
with his company should attack them in the rear, and charging in upon
them put them to the sword. Brute applauded this device of Corineus,
who, cautiously issuing forth as he had proposed with three thousand
men, betook him to the depths of the forest. Accordingly, when the
morrow morning began to break, Brute ordained his men in companies, and
opening the gates of the camp, marched forth to battle. The Gauls
straightway set themselves to oppose him, and disposing their troops in
battle array

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span class="margnote">How Tours city was named</span>came to close
quarters with him. Many thousands of men are at once cut down on both
sides, and many are the wounds given and received, for not a man spareth
his adversary. It chanced that a certain Trojan was there present named
Turonus, a nephew of Brute's, than whom was none more valiant and hardy
save only Corineus himself. He with his single sword slew no less than
six hundred men. Unhappily he was slain before his time by a sudden
onslaught of the Gauls; and the foresaid city of Tours acquired the name
thereof by reason of his being there buried. And while the troops on
both sides were in the very thickest of the battle, Corineus came upon
them of a sudden and charged the enemy at the double in the rear.
Straightway the others, pressing forward from the front, renew the
attack more hotly and strain them to the utmost to complete the
slaughter. The Gauls were aghast with dismay even at the very shout of
the Cornishmen as they charged in on the rear, and thinking that they
were more in number than they were, fled, hot foot, from the field. The
Trojans are on their heels, hewing them down in pursuit, nor cease they
to follow them up until the victory is their own. Brute, nevertheless,
albeit he were right glad at heart to have achieved so signal a triumph,
was sore grieved by anxiety on one account, for he saw that, whilst his
own numbers were minished daily, those of the Gauls were daily
multiplied. Wherefore, seeing it was doubtful whether he could any
longer hold out against them, he chose rather to retire to his

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="margnote">Brute landeth at Totnes</span>ships while the
greater part of his army was still whole and the glory of the victory
still fresh, and to set sail in quest of the island which the divine
monition had prophesied should be his own. Nor was there any tarriance.
With the assent of his men, he returned to his fleet, and after loading
his ships with all the treasures and luxuries he had acquired, he
re-embarked, and with a prosperous wind sought out the promised island,
where he landed at last in safety at Totnes.

### CHAPTER XVI

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> that time the name of the island was
Albion, and of none was it inhabited save only of a few giants.
Natheless the pleasant aspect of the land, with the abundance of fish in
the rivers and deer in the choice forests thereof did fill Brute and his
companions with no small desire that they should dwell therein.
Wherefore, after exploring certain districts of the land, they drove the
giants they found to take refuge in the caverns of the mountains, and
divided the country among them by lot according as the Duke made grant
thereof. They begin to till the fields, and to build them houses in such
sort that after a brief space ye might have thought it had been
inhabited from time immemorial. Then, at last, Brute calleth the island
Britain, and his companions Britons, after his own name, for he was
minded that his memory should be perpetuated in the derivation of the
name. Whence afterward the country

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

<span class="margnote">The giant Goemagot</span>speech, which was
aforetime called Trojan or crooked Greek, was called British. But
Corineus called that share of the kingdom which had fallen unto him by
lot Cornwall, after the manner of his own name, and the people
Cornishmen, therein following the Duke's example. For albeit that he
might have had the choice of a province before all the others that had
come thither, yet was he minded rather to have that share of the land
which is now called Cornwall, whether from being, as it is, the *cornu*
or horn of Britain, or from a corruption of the said name Corineus. For
nought gave him greater pleasure than to wrestle with the giants, of
whom was greater plenty there than in any of the provinces that had been
shared amongst his comrades. Among others was a certain hateful one by
name Goemagot, twelve cubits in height, who was of such lustihood, that
when he had once uprooted it, he would wield an oak tree as lightly as
it were a wand of hazel. On a certain day when Brute was holding high
festival to the gods in the port whereat he had first landed, this one,
along with a score other giants, fell upon him and did passing cruel
slaughter on the British. Howbeit, at the last, the Britons collecting
together from all quarters prevailed against them and slew them all,
save Goemagot only. Him Brute had commanded to be kept alive, as he was
minded to see a wrestling bout betwixt him and Corineus, who was beyond
measure keen to match himself against such monsters. So Corineus,
overjoyed at the prospect, girt

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

<span class="margnote">New Troy founded</span>himself for the encounter,
and flinging away his arms, challenged him to a bout at wrestling. At
the start, on the one side stands Corineus, on the other the giant, each
hugging the other tight in the shackles of their arms, both making the
very air quake with their breathless gasping. It was not long before
Goemagot, grasping Corineus with all his force, brake him three of his
ribs, two on the right side and one on the left. Roused thereby to fury,
Corineus gathered up all his strength, heaved him up on his shoulders
and ran with his burden as fast as he could for the weight to the
seashore nighest at hand. Mounting up to the top of a high cliff, and
disengaging himself, he hurled the deadly monster he had carried on his
shoulder into the sea, where, falling on the sharp rocks, he was mangled
all to pieces and dyed the waves with his blood, so that ever thereafter
that place from the flinging down of the giant hath been known as
Lamgoemagot, to wit, 'Goemagot's Leap,' and is called by that name unto
this present day.

### CHAPTER XVII

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> that he had seen his kingdom, Brute
was minded to build him a chief city, and following out his intention,
he went round the whole circuit of the land in search of a fitting site.
When he came to the river Thames, he walked along the banks till he
found the very spot best suited to his purpose. He therefore founded his
city there and called it New Troy,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="margnote">London and King Lud</span>and by this name was it
known for many ages thereafter, until at last, by corruption of the
word, it came to be called Trinovantum. But afterward, Lud, the brother
of Cassibelaunus, who fought-with Julius Cæsar, possessed him of the
helm of the kingdom, and surrounded the city with right noble walls, as
well as with towers builded with marvellous art, commanding that it
should be called Kaerlud, that is, the City of Lud, after his own name.
Whence afterward a contention arose betwixt him and his brother Nennius,
who took it ill that he should be minded to do away the name of Troy in
his own country. But since Gildas, the historian, hath treated of this
contention at sufficient length, I have chosen the rather to pass it
over, lest that which so great a writer hath already set forth in so
eloquent a style, I should only seem to besmirch in mine own homelier
manner of speech.

### CHAPTER XVIII

<span class="smallcaps">Accordingly</span>, when the aforesaid Duke
founded the said city, he granted it as of right unto the citizens that
should dwell therein, and gave them a law under which they should be
peacefully entreated. At that time Eli the priest reigned in Judæa, and
the Ark of the Covenant was taken by the Philistines. The sons of Hector
reigned in Troy, having driven out the descendants of Antenor. In Italy
reigned Sylvius Æneas, the son of Æneas and uncle of Brute, he being the
third of the Latin kings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](gem03)
