[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gem02)  [Next](gem04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406795151/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Histories of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffry of Monmouth*, tr. by
Sebastian Evans, \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

# BOOK II

### CHAPTER I

<span class="margnote">Locrine and Ignoge</span><span
class="smallcaps">Now</span> Ignoge, the wife of Brute, bare unto him
three sons of high renown, whose names were Locrine, Albanact and
Camber. When their father departed this life in the twenty-fourth year
after his arrival, they buried him within the city that he had builded,
and divided the realm of Britain amongst themselves, each succeeding him
in his share therein. Locrine, that was eldest born, had the midland
part of the island, which in later days was called Loegria, after his
name. Next, Camber had that part which lieth beyond the river Severn,
and is now called Wales, which afterward was for a long time called
Cambria, after his name; whence unto this day do the folk of the country
call them Cymry in the British tongue. But Albanact, the youngest, had
the country which in these days in our tongue is called Scotland, and
gave it the name or Albany, after his own. And after that these had of a
long time reigned in peace and concord, Humber, the King of the Huns,
landed in Albany, and engaging in battle with Albanact, slew him, and
compelled the country folk to flee unto Locrine.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### CHAPTER II

<span class="margnote">Locrine and Estrildis</span><span
class="smallcaps">Locrine</span>, accordingly, when he heard the rumour,
besought his brother Camber to accompany him, called out the whole youth
of the country, and went to meet the King of the Huns in the
neighbourhood of the river Humber. When the armies met, he compelled
Humber to flee, but when he had fled as far as the river, it chanced
that he was drowned therein, and thus left his name to the stream.
Locrine, therefore, after he had won the victory, distributed the spoil
among his comrades, keeping nothing for himself save the gold and silver
that he found in the enemy's ships. He also kept for himself three
damsels of marvellous beauty, whereof one was the daughter of a certain
King of Germany, whom the foresaid Humber had seized along with the two
other damsels when he laid waste her father's country. Her name was
Estrildis, and so fair was she that scarce might any be found to compare
with her for beauty, for no polished ivory, nor newly-fallen snow, nor
no lilies could surpass the whiteness of her flesh. Taken with love of
her, Locrine would fain that she should share his bed, and that the
marriage-torch should be lighted to celebrate their wedding. But when
Corineus found out what he was minded to do he was wroth beyond measure,
for that Locrine had pledged himself to marry Corineus’ own daughter.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

### CHAPTER III

<span class="margnote">Locrine weddeth Gwendolen</span><span
class="smallcaps">He</span> came accordingly unto the King, and
brandishing his battle-axe in his right hand, spake unto him on this
wise: 'Be these the wages, Locrine, that thou wouldst pay me for the
wounds I have suffered in thy father's service when he was warring
against unknown peoples, that you disdain my daughter and stoop to yoke
you with a barbarian woman? If this indeed be so, thou dost it on peril
of my vengeance, so long as any strength is left in this right hand,
which hath quenched the delight of life in so many giants on the
Tyrrhene shores.' Shouting these words aloud again and yet again, he
brandished the axe as if about to strike him, when the friends of both
flung themselves betwixt. And after that Corineus were somewhat
appeased, they compelled Locrine to perform that which he had pledged
him to do.

### CHAPTER IV

<span class="smallcaps">Locrine</span> accordingly married Corineus’
daughter, Gwendolen by name; yet, natheless did he not forget the love
he bare unto Estrildis. Wherefore, in the city of Trinovant, did he make
fashion a chamber underground wherein he enclosed her, and caused her be
right honourably served of the attendants of his household, for that he
was minded to keep his love of her secret. For he was sore troubled by
reason of his dread of Corineus, so that he durst not hold

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span class="margnote">Gwendolen's revenge</span>her openly, but, as
hath been said already, kept her in hiding, and seven whole years did
haunt her in secret, so that none knew thereof save only they that were
the closest of his familiars. For, so often as he was minded to go unto
her, he would feign that he made hidden sacrifice unto his gods, whereby
he did lightly move others to believe the same, albeit in truth it were
no such thing. In the meantime, Estrildis did become great with child,
and brought forth a daughter of marvellous beauty, whom she called
Sabrina. Gwendolen also became pregnant and haiê a son, unto whom was
given the name of Maddan. This son was delivered into the charge of his
grandfather Corineus, and had of him his teachings and nurture.

### CHAPTER V

<span class="smallcaps">Years</span> later, after Corineus was dead,
Locrine deserted Gwendolen and raised Estrildis to be Queen. Gwendolen
thereupon, being beyond measure indignant, went into Cornwall, and
gathering together all the youth of that kingdom, began to harass
Locrine by leading forays into his land. At last, after both had
mustered their armies, a battle was fought on the river Stour, and
Locrine, smitten by an arrow, lost his life and all the joys thereof.
Whereupon Gwendolen laid hold on the helm of state, maddened by the same
revengeful fury as her father, insomuch as that she bade Estrildis and
Sabrina her daughter be flung into the river that

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

<span class="margnote">Maddan and his is sons</span>now called Severn,
issuing an edict throughout all Britain that the river should be called
by the damsel's name. For she was minded that it should bear her name
for ever, for that it was her own husband that begat her; whereby it
cometh to pass that even unto this day the river in the British tongue
is called Sabren, which by corruption in other speech is called Severn.

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="smallcaps">Gwendolen</span> reigned fifteen years after the
slaying of Locrine, who had reigned ten years. And when she saw that her
son Maddan had grown to man's estate, she conferred upon him the sceptre
of the realm, contenting herself with the province of Cornwall, wherein
she passed the rest of her life. At that time Samuel the prophet reigned
in Judæa, and Sylvius Æneas was still living. And Homer was held to be a
famous teller of histories and poet. Whilst Maddan held the sceptre, his
wife bare unto him two sons, Mempricius and Malim. And he maintained his
kingdom in peace diligently for forty years. But after his death arose
discord betwixt the two brethren as concerning the 'kingdom, for that
each of them was eager to possess the whole island. Mempricius
accordingly, desirous of achieving his own ends, entered into conference
with Malim as if for the purpose of establishing concord betwixt them.
But kindled, as it were, by the fire-brand of treason, he slew him in
the presence of them that had

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span class="margnote">Mempricius and Ebraucus</span>come to take
counsel in the matter, and having thus obtained the government of the
whole island, exercised so sore a tyranny over the people that he
destroyed well-nigh all the more noble men of the land. Moreover, hating
all of his own family, either by violence or treachery he made away with
every single one that he feared might be able to succeed him in the
kingdom. He further left his own wife that had borne him the famous
youth Ebraucus, and abandoned himself wholly to unclean living. At last,
in the twentieth year of his reign, while he was out hunting, he rode
apart from his companions into a certain combe, wherein he was
surrounded by a herd of raging wolves and miserably devoured. At that
time Saul reigned in Judæa and Eurystheus in Lacedæmon.

### CHAPTER VII

<span class="smallcaps">After</span> the death of Mempricius, his son
Ebraucus, a man tall of stature and of marvellous strength, undertook
the government of Britain, which he held for forty years. He was the
first after Brute to take a fleet along the coasts of Gaul, and carrying
war into the country to harass the provinces by the slaughter of men and
the sacking of the cities; returning thence with victory and enriched
with boundless plenty of gold and silver. He afterwards founded a city
beyond the Humber, which, after his own name, he called Kaerebrauc, that
is to say, the City of Ebrauc. At that time

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Ebrauc's children</span>King David reigned in Judæa and
Sylvius Latinus in Italy. Gad, Nathan and Asaph prophesied in Israel.
Ebrauc founded also the city of Alclud towards Albany, and the fortress
of Mount Agned, which now is called the Castle of Damsels and the
Dolorous Mountain.

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="smallcaps">He</span> begat, moreover, twenty sons by twenty
wives that he had, besides thirty daughters, and for forty years did he
maintain the kingdom of Britain right stoutly. The names of his sons
were these: Brute Greenshield, Margadud, Sisilius, Regin, Morivid,
Bladud, Lagon, Bodloan, Kincar, Spaden, Gaul, Darden, Eldad, Ivor,
Gangu, Hector, Kerin, Rud, Assaracus, Buel. The names of the daughters
were: Gloygni, Ignogen, Oudas, Guenliam, Gaurdid, Angarad, Guendoloe,
Tangustel, Gorgon, Median, Methabel, Ourar, Mailiure, Kambreda, Ragan,
Gael, Ecub, Nest, Cheun, Stadud, Gladud, Ebren, Blagan, Ahallac, Angaes,
Galaes, the fairest of all at that time living in Britain or Gaul, Edra,
Anaor, Stadial and Egron. These all did their father cause to be
convoyed into Italy unto Sylvius Alba, who reigned after Sylvius
Latinus. There were they married with the more noble Trojans with whom
the Latin and Sabine women did refuse to match them. The sons, moreover,
with Assaracus their brother for chieftain, took a fleet into Germany,
where, with the help of

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Brute Greenshield</span>Sylvius Alba, they subdued the
people and possessed themselves of the kingdom.

### CHAPTER IX

<span class="smallcaps">Howbeit</span>, Brute, surnamed Greenshield,
remained with his father, and obtaining the government of the kingdom
after his father's death, reigned for twelve years. Him succeeded his
son Leil, a lover of peace and justice, who, taking advantage of a
prosperous reign, builded a city in the north parts of Britain called
after s name Kaerleil. At this time did Solomon begin to build the
Temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, and the Queen of Sheba came thither to
hearken unto his wisdom. At the same time Sylvius Epitus succeeded his
father Alba in the kingdom of the Latins. Leil lived five-and-twenty
years after that he had come into the kingdom, albeit toward the end he
maintained his royalty but feebly. Owing to his sluggard slackness a
civil war suddenly arose in the realm. After him reigned his son
Hudibras nine-and-thirty years, who, after the civil dissensions, did
restore concord among the people and founded Kaerlem, that is,
Canterbury. He also founded Kaerguen, which is Winchester, and the
fortress of Mount Paladur, which is now called Shaftesbury. There, while
the wall was a-building, an eagle spake, the sayings whereof, had I
believed them to be true, I would not have shrunk from committing to
written memory along with the rest. At that time reigned Capys, the son
of Epitus, and Haggai, Amos, Joel and Azarias did prophesy.

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### CHAPTER X

<span class="margnote">Bladud foundeth Bath </span><span
class="smallcaps">Next</span> succeeded Bladud his son, in whose hands
the kingdom remained for twenty years. He builded the city of Kaerbadon,
that is now called Bath, and fashioned hot baths therein, meet for the
needs of men, the which he placed under the guardianship of the deity
Minerva, in whose temple he set fires that could not be quenched, that
never turned into ashes, but as they began to fail became as it were
round balls of stone. At that time did Elijah pray that it might not
rain upon the earth, and it rained not for the space of three years and
six months. Bladud was a right cunning craftsman, and did teach
nigromancy throughout the realm of Britain, nor did he stint of his
subtle sleights until he had fashioned him wings and tried to go upon
the top of the air, when he fell upon the temple of Apollo in the city
of Trinovantum, and was dashed into many pieces.

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> Bladud was thus given over to the
destinies, his son Lear was next raised to the kingdom, and ruled the
country after manly fashion for three-score years. He it was that
builded the city on the river Soar, that in the British is called
Kaerleir, but in the Saxon, Leicester. Male issue was denied unto him,
his only children being three daughters named

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">King Lear and his daughters</span>Goneril, Regan and
Cordelia, whom all he did love with marvellous affection, but most of
all the youngest borne to wit, Cordelia. And when that he began to be
upon the verge of eld, he thought to divide his kingdom amongst them,
and to marry them unto such husbands as were worthy to have them along
with their share of the kingdom. But that he might know which of them
was most worthy of the largest share, he went unto them to make inquiry
of each as to which of them did most love himself. When, accordingly, he
asked of Goneril how much she loved him, she first called all the gods
of heaven to witness that her father was dearer to her heart than the
very soul that dwelt within her body. Unto whom saith her father: 'For
this, that thou hast set mine old age before thine own life, thee, my
dearest daughter, will I marry unto whatsoever youth shall be thy
choice, together with the third part of Britain.' Next, Regan, that was
second, fain to take ensample of her sister and to wheedle her father
into doing her an equal kindness, made answer with a solemn oath that
she could no otherwise express her thought than by saying that she loved
him better than all the world beside. The credulous father thereupon
promised to marry her with the same dignity as her elder sister, with
another third part of the kingdom for her share. But the last, Cordelia,
when she saw how her father had been cajoled by the flatteries of her
sisters who had already spoken, and desiring to make trial of him
otherwise, went on to make answer unto him thus: 'Father mine, is there
a

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span class="margnote">Lear wroth with Cordelia</span>daughter anywhere
that presumeth to love her father more than a father? None such, I trow,
there is that durst confess as much, save she were trying to hide the
truth in words of jest. For myself, I have ever loved thee as a father,
nor never from that love will I be turned aside. Albeit that thou art
bent on wringing more from me, yet hearken to the true measure of my
love. Ask of me no more, but let this be mine answer: So much as thou
hast, so much art thou worth, and so much do I love thee.' Thereupon
forthwith, her father, thinking that she had thus spoken out of the
abundance of her heart, waxed mightily indignant, nor did he tarry to
make known what his answer would be. 'For that thou hast so despised thy
father's old age that thou hast disdained to love me even as well as
these thy sisters love me, I also will disdain thee, nor never in my
realm shalt thou have share with thy sisters. Howbeit, sith that thou
art my daughter, say not but that I will marry thee upon terms of some
kind unto some stranger that is of other land than mine, if so be that
fortune shall offer such an one; only be sure of this, that never will I
trouble me to marry thee with such honour as thy sisters, inasmuch as,
whereas up to this time I have loved thee better than the others, it now
seemeth that thou lovest me less than they.'

Straightway thereupon, by counsel of the nobles of the realm, he giveth
the twain sisters unto two Dukes, of Cornwall, to wit, and Albany,
together with one moiety only of the island so long as he should live,
but after his

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span class="margnote">Cordelia married into France</span>death he
willed that they should have the whole of the kingdom of Britain. Now it
so fell out about this time that Aganippus, King of the Franks, hearing
report of Cordelia's beauty, forthwith despatched his envoys to the
King, beseeching him that Cordelia might be entrusted to their charge as
his bride whom he would marry with due rite of the wedding-torch. But
her father, still persisting in his wrath, made answer that right
willingly would he give her, but that needs must it be without land or
fee, seeing that he had shared his kingdom along with all his gold and
silver betwixt Cordelia's sisters Goneril and Regan, When this word was
brought unto Aganippus, for that he was on fire with love of the damsel,
he sent again unto King Lear saying that enow had he of gold and silver
and other possessions, for that one-third part of Gaul was his, and that
he was fain to marry the damsel only that he might have sons by her to
inherit his land. So at last the bargain was struck, and Cordelia was
sent to Gaul to be married unto Aganippus.

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="smallcaps">Some</span> long time after, when Lear began to
wax more sluggish by reason of age, the foresaid Dukes, with whom and
his two daughters he had divided Britain, rebelled against him and took
away from him the realm and the kingly power which up to that time he
had held right manfully and gloriously. Howbeit, concord was,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="margnote">Lear's piteous plight</span>restored, and one of
his sons-in-law, Maglaunus, Duke of Albany, agreed to maintain him with
threescore knights, so that he should not be without some semblance of
state. But after that he had sojourned with his son-in-law two years,
his daughter Goneril began to wax indignant at the number of his
knights, who flung gibes at her servants for that their rations were not
more plentiful. Whereupon, after speaking to her husband, she ordered
her father to be content with a service of thirty knights and to dismiss
the other thirty that he had. The King, taking this in dudgeon, left
Maglaunus, and betook him to Henvin, Duke of Cornwall, unto whom he had
married his other daughter. Here, at first, he was received with honour,
but a year had not passed before discord again arose betwixt those of
the King's household and those of the Duke's, insomuch as that Regan,
waxing indignant, ordered her father to dismiss all his company save
five knights only to do him service. Her father, beyond measure
aggrieved thereat, returned once more to his eldest daughter, thinking
to move her to pity and to persuade her to maintain himself and his
retinue. Howbeit, she had never renounced her first indignation, but
swore by all the gods of Heaven that never should he take up his abode
with her save he contented himself with the service of a single knight
and were quit of all the rest. Moreover, she upbraided the old man for
that, having nothing of his own to give away, he should be minded to go
about with such a retinue; so that finding she would not give way to his
wishes one single tittle, he at

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

<span class="margnote">Lear seeketh Cordelia</span>last obeyed and
remained content with one knight only, leaving the rest to go their way.
But when the remembrance of his former dignity came back unto him,
bearing witness to the misery of the estate to which he was now reduced,
he began to bethink him of going to his youngest daughter oversea.
Howbeit, he sore misdoubted that she would do nought for him, seeing
that he had held her, as I have said, in such scanty honour in the
matter of her marriage. Natheless, disdaining any longer to endure so
mean a life, he betook him across the Channel to Gaul. But when he found
that two other princes were making the passage at the same time, and
that he himself had been assigned but the third place, he brake forth
into tears and sobbing, and cried aloud: 'Ye destinies that do pursue
your wonted way marked out by irrevocable decree, wherefore was it your
will ever to uplift me to happiness so fleeting? For a keener grief it
is to call to mind that lost happiness than to suffer the presence of
the unhappiness that cometh after. For the memory of the days when in
the midst of hundreds of thousands of warriors I went to batter down the
walls of cities and to lay waste the provinces of mine enemies is more
grievous unto me than the calamity that hath overtaken me in the
meanness of mine estate, which hath incited them that but now were
grovelling under my feet to desert my feebleness. O angry fortune! will
the day ever come wherein I may requite the evil turn that hath thus
driven forth the length of my days and my poverty? O Cordelia, my
daughter,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="margnote">Cordelia's compassion</span>how true were the
words wherein thou didst make answer unto me, when I did ask of thee how
much thou didst love me! For thou saidst, So much as thou hast so much
art thou worth, and so much do I love thee. So long, therefore, as I had
that which was mine own to give, so long seemed I of worth unto them
that were the lovers, not of myself but of my gifts. They loved me at
times, but better loved they the presents I made unto them. Now that the
presents are no longer forthcoming, they too have gone their ways. But
with what face, O thou dearest of my children, shall I dare appear
before thee? I who, wroth with thee for these thy words, was minded to
marry thee less honourably than thy sisters, who, after all the
kindnesses I have conferred upon them have allowed me to become an
outcast and a beggar?'

Landing at last, his mind filled with these reflections and others of a
like kind, he came to Karitia, where his daughter lived, and waiting
without the city, sent a messenger to tell her into what indigence he
had fallen, and to beseech his daughter's compassion inasmuch as he had
neither food nor clothing. On hearing the tidings, Cordelia was much
moved and wept bitterly. When she made inquiry how many armed men he had
with him, the messenger told her that he had none save a single knight,
who was waiting with him without the city. Then took she as much gold
and silver as was needful and gave it unto the messenger, bidding him
take her father to another city, where he should bathe

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

<span class="margnote">Lear's honourable reception</span>him, clothe him
and nurse him, feigning that he was a sick man. She commanded also that
he should have a retinue of forty knights well appointed and armed, and
that then he should duly announce his arrival to Aganippus and herself.
The messenger accordingly forthwith attended King Lear into another
city, and hid him there in secret until that he had fully accomplished
all that Cordelia had borne him on hand to do.

### CHAPTER XIII

<span class="smallcaps">As</span> soon, therefore, as he was meetly
arrayed in kingly apparel and invested with the ensigns of royalty and a
train of retainers, he sent word unto Aganippus and his daughter that he
had been driven out of the realm of Britain by his sons-in-law, and had
come unto them in order that by their assistance he might be able to
recover his kingdom. They accordingly, with the great counsellors and
nobles, came forth to receive him with all honour, and placed in his
hands the power over the whole of Gaul until such time as they had
restored him unto his former dignity.

### CHAPTER XIV

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the meanwhile, Aganippus sent envoys
throughout the whole of Gaul to summon every knight bearing arms therein
to spare no pains in coming to help him to recover the kingdom of
Britain

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

<span class="margnote">Lear recovereth his kingdom</span>for his
father-in-law, King Lear. When they had all made them ready, Lear led
the assembled host together with Aganippus and his daughter into
Britain, fought a battle with his sons-in-law, and won the victory,
again bringing them all under his own dominion. In the third year
thereafter he died, and Aganippus died also, and Cordelia, now mistress
of the helm of state in Britain, buried her father in a certain
underground chamber which she had bidden be made under the river Soar at
Leicester. This underground chamber was founded in honour of the
two-faced Janus, and there, when the yearly celebration of the day came
round, did all the workmen of the city set hand unto such work as they
were about to be busied upon throughout the year.

### CHAPTER XV

<span class="smallcaps">Now</span>, when Cordelia had governed the
kingdom in peace for five years, two sons of her sisters began to harass
her, Margan, to wit, and Cunedag, that had been born unto the Dukes
Maglaunus and Henvin, both of them youths of notable likelihood and
prowess, Margan being son of Maglaunus and Cunedag of Henvin. These,
after the deaths of their fathers, had succeeded them in their dukedoms,
and now took it in high dudgeon that Britain should be subject to the
rule of a woman. They therefore assembled their hosts and rebelled
against the Queen, nor were they minded to put an end to their outraged

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="margnote">Margan and Cunedag</span>until after laying waste
a number of provinces, they had defeated her in several battles, and had
at last taken her and put her in prison, wherein, overwhelmed with grief
for the loss of her kingdom, she slew herself. Forthwith the youths
divided the island between them, whereof that part which stretcheth from
the Humber towards Caithness fell to Margan's share, and the other, on
the other side of the river, that vergeth toward the West, was allotted
to Cunedag. After the space of two years, certain of them that rejoiced
in making disturbance in the realm, joined them with Margan and began to
tempt him to walk in crooked paths, saying that foul shame it was he,
the eldest born, should not have dominion over the whole island; so
that, what with this and other grievances, they at last egged him on to
march with an army into Cunedag's [territories](errata.htm#0.md), and thus
began to heap fuel on the fire they had kindled. On the war breaking
out, Cunedag with all his host marched out to meet him, and in the
battle that was fought inflicted no small slaughter, driving Margan in
flight before him, and afterwards following his flight from province to
province, until at last he overtook and slew him in a village of Wales,
which after that Margan was slain there hath been called by his name,
Margan to wit, ever since by the country folk even unto this day.
Cunedag, accordingly, having won the victory, possessed himself of the
monarchy of the whole island and governed the same gloriously for
three-and-thirty years. At that time Isaiah and Hosea prophesied, and
Rome was founded the eleventh

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="margnote">Ferrex and Porrex </span>of the Kalends of May by
the twin-brethren, Romulus and Remus.

### CHAPTER XVI

<span class="smallcaps">Afterwards</span>, upon the death of Cunedag,
his son Rivallo succeeded him, a peaceful youth and fortunate, who
governed the realm with diligence. In his time there fell a rain of
blood three days, and a great swarming of flies was there, whereof men
died. After him succeeded Gurgustius, his son, unto whom Sisillius, and
after him Lago the nephew of Gurgustius, unto whom succeeded Kinmarch
the son of Sisillius, and after him Gorbodug. Unto him were two sons
born, whereof the one was called Ferrex and the other Porrex. But when
their father began to verge upon eld, a contention arose betwixt the
twain as to which should succeed him in the kingdom. Howbeit, Porrex,
spurred on thereunto by a more grasping covetise, layeth snares for his
brother with design of slaying him, whereupon Ferrex, when the matter
was discovered unto him, betook him across the Channel into Gaul, and,
having obtained the help of Suard, King of the Franks, returned and
fought against his brother. In this battle betwixt them, Ferrex was
slain together with the entire host that accompanied him. Thereupon
their mother, who was named Widen, when she learnt the certainty of her
son's death, was beyond measure troubled, and conceived a bitter hatred
of the other, for she loved the one that was slain the better of the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<span class="margnote">Dunwallo Molmutius</span>twain, and so hotly did
her wrath blaze up by reason of his death, that she was minded to
revenge it upon his brother. She accordingly took possession of the tent
wherein he was lying fast asleep, and setting upon him with her
waiting-women hacked him all into little pieces. Thenceforward the
people was sore afflicted by civil war for a long space, and the kingdom
was governed by five kings who harried the one another with mutual
forays wherein was much blood spilt.

### CHAPTER XVII

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> last, in after days, arose a certain
youth renowned above all others for his singular prowess, by name
Dunwallo Molmutius, the son of Cloten, King of Cornwall. Excelling all
the Kings of Britain in comeliness and courage, he no sooner undertook
the government of the country upon his father's death than he invaded
the lands of Ymner, King of Loegria, whom after a battle he defeated and
slew. Thereupon Rudauc, the King of Kambria, and Stater, King of Albany,
took counsel together, and after that they had contracted an alliance,
led their armies into Dunwallo's territory to lay waste town and country
and destroy his people. Dunwallo marched to meet them with thirty
thousand men and gave battle, but after great part of the day had been
spent in fighting and neither party could claim the victory, he called
apart six hundred of his bravest youths and bade them all take and don
the arms

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="margnote">The Molmutine laws</span>of the enemies they had
slain. He himself also flung aside the arms he was wearing and did the
like. He then led them into the press of the enemy's ranks, going in
among them as though he were of their own party, and when he had reached
the place where Rudauc and Stater were leading on their men, gave the
word unto his comrades to charge down upon them. They accordingly dashed
forward, and the two Kings were slain in the onset and a number of
others along with them. But Dunwallo Molmutius, fearing lest he should
be himself slain of his own men, turned back with his comrades and
disarmed him. Then, donning again the arms that he had flung aside, he
cheereth on his comrades to another charge which he himself led
foremost. Scarce a moment later the day was won and the enemy put to
flight and scattered. It was then only left for him to march through the
lands of the slain, overthrow their cities and fortresses, and subject
their people to his dominion. And after that he had thus utterly
subjugated the whole island, he fashioned for himself a crown of gold
and restored the realm unto the former estate thereof.

This King it was that did establish amongst the Britons the laws that
were called the Molmutine laws, the which even unto this day are
celebrated amongst the English. For among other things which, long time
after, the Blessed Gildas did write of him, he ordained that the temples
of the gods and the cities should enjoy such privilege, as that in case
any runaway or guilty man should take refuge therein, he should depart
thence forgiven of his adversary. He

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="margnote">Dunwallo buried</span>ordained, moreover, that
the ways which led unto the foresaid temples and cities, no less than
the ploughs of the husbandmen, should by the same law be held
inviolable. In his days, therefore, the knife of the cut-throat was
blunted and the cruelties of the robber ceased in the land, for nowhere
was any that durst do violence unto other. At last, after that forty
years were fulfilled sithence that he had taken the crown, he departed
and was buried in the city of Trinovantum anigh the Temple of Concord,
which he ad builded to the confirmation of his law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](gem04.md)
