[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gem07)  [Next](gem09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406795151/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Histories of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffry of Monmouth*, tr. by
Sebastian Evans, \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

# BOOK VII

### CHAPTER I

#### OF THE PROPHECIES OF MERLIN

<span class="margnote">Geoffrey's address</span><span
class="smallcaps">I had</span> not come so far as this place of my
history, when by reason of the much talk that was made about Merlin my
contemporaries did on every side press me to make public an edition of
his prophecies, and more especially Alexander, Bishop of Lincoln, a man
of the highest piety and wisdom. Nor was there none other, whether he
were cleric or layman, that did retain so many knights or nobles in his
household, whom his gentle holiness of life and bountiful kindliness did
allure into his service. Wherefore, for that he it was whom I did most
earnestly desire to please above all other, I did translate the
prophecies and did send them unto him along with a letter unto this
effect.

### CHAPTER II

'<span class="smallcaps">The</span> affection I bear unto thy nobility,
Alexander, Prelate of Lincoln, hath compelled me to translate the
*Prophecies of Merlin* out of the British into Latin before I had made
an end of the *History* I had begun as concerning the acts of the
British Kings; for my purpose was to have finished that

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="margnote">to Bishop Alexander</span>first, and afterward to
have published this present work, for fear lest, both labours hanging on
my hands at once, my wit should scarce be sufficient for either.
Howbeit, sithence that I am well assured aforehand of pardon being
granted unto me according to the discretion of thine own subtile wit, I
have set my rustic reed to the writing of these little books, and have
interpreted for thee this unknown language. Greatly, natheless, do I
marvel that thou hast deigned to commit this task unto my poor pen,
seeing that the wand of thy power might have commanded the services of
so many more learned and more wealthy than am I to charm the ears of thy
Minerva with the delight of a sublimer song. And, to say nothing of all
the philosophers of the whole island of Britain, this I blush not to
confess, that thou art the one man who hast it in thee to chant more
excellently than they all unto this adventurous lyre. Howbeit, sith it
so pleaseth thee that Geoffrey of Monmouth should sound his pipe in
these vaticinations, eschew thou not to show favour unto his
minstrelsies, and if so be that he carol out of time or tune do thou
with the ferule of thine own muses chastise him back into keeping true
harmony and measure.'

### CHAPTER III

<span class="smallcaps">Accordingly</span>, while Vortigern, King of the
Britons, was yet seated upon the bank of the pool that had been drained,
forth issued the two dragons, whereof the one was white and the other

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>red. And when the one
had drawn anigh unto the other, they grappled together in baleful combat
and breathed forth fire as they panted. But presently the white dragon
did prevail, and drave the red dragon unto the verge of the lake. But
he, grieving to be thus driven forth, fell fiercely again upon the white
one, and forced him to draw back. And whilst that they were fighting on
this wise, the King bade Ambrosius Merlin declare what this battle of
the dragons did portend. Thereupon he straightway burst into tears, and
drawing in the breath of prophecy, spake, saying;

‘Woe unto the Red Dragon, for his extermination draweth nigh; and his
caverns shall be occupied of the White Dragon that betokeneth the Saxons
whom thou hast invited hither. But the Red signifieth the race of
Britain that shall be oppressed of the White. Therefore shall the
mountains and the valleys thereof be made level plain and the streams of
the valleys shall flow with blood. The rites of religion shall be done
away and the ruin of the churches be made manifest. At the last, she
that is oppressed shall prevail and resist the cruelty of them that come
from without. For the Boar of Cornwall shall bring succour and shall
trample their necks beneath his feet. The islands of the Ocean shall be
subdued unto his power, and the forests of Gaul shall he possess. The
house of Romulus shall dread the fierceness of his prowess and doubtful
shall be his end. Renowned shall he be in the mouth of the peoples, and
his deeds shall be as meat unto them that tell thereof. Six of

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>his descendants shall
follow his sceptre, but after them shall rise up the German Worm. The
Wolf of the sea shall exalt him, unto whom the woods of Africa shall
bear company. Again shall religion be done away, and the Sees of the
Primates shall be transmuted. The dignity of London shall adorn
Dorobernia and men shall resort unto the seventh shepherd of York in the
realm of Armorica. Menevia shall be robed in the pall of the City of
Legions and a preacher of Ireland shall be stricken dumb on account of
an infant in the womb. It shall rain a shower of blood, and a baleful
famine shall prey upon mortal men. When these things befall, then shall
the Red one grieve, yet when he hath undergone his travail shall he wax
strong. Then shall the calamity of the White be hastened and that which
is builded in his little gardens shall be overthrown. Seven
sceptre-bearers shall be slain, and one thereof shall be canonised a
saint. Children shall perish in the wombs of their mothers, and dread
shall be the torments of men that thereby may they that were born in the
land be restored unto their own. He that shall do these things shall
clothe him in the brazen man, and throughout many ages shall keep guard
over the gates of London sitting upon a brazen horse. Thereafter shall
the Red Dragon turn him back into his own ways, and labour to wreak is
wrath upon himself. Wherefore the vengeance of the Thunderer shall
overtake him, for that every field shall fail the tiller of the soil.
Death shall snatch away the people and all nations shall be made void.
The remnant that are left shall forsake their native soil and sow seed
in plantations

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>of foreign lands. The
Blessed King shall fit forth a navy and shall be reckoned twelfth in the
court amongst the saints. A grievous desolation of the land shall there
be, and the threshing-floors of harvests shall return unto the forests
fruitful in mast and acorn. Then again shall the White Dragon arise and
invite hither the daughter of Germany. Again shall our little gardens be
filled of foreign seed, the Red one shall pine away at the furthest end
of the pool. Thereafter shall the German Worm be crowned and the Brazen
Prince be buried. A term hath been assigned unto him that he shall not
be able to overpass. A hundred and fifty years shall he remain in
disquiet and subjection, but three hundred shall he be seated therein.
Then shall the North wind rise against him and snatch from him the
flowers that the West wind had brought forth. There shall be gilding in
the temples and the edge of the sword shall not cease. Scarce shall the
German Worm find refuge in his caves for the vengeance of his treason
that shall overtake him. Yet at the last for a little while shall he wax
strong albeit that the decimation of Neustria shall do him a hurt. For a
people in wood and jerkins of iron shall come upon him and take
vengeance upon him for his wickedness. He shall restore their
dwelling-places unto them that did inhabit them aforetime, and the ruin
of the foreigner shall be made manifest. The seed of the White Dragon
shall be rooted out of our little gardens and the remnant of his
generation shall be decimated. The yoke of bondage shall they bear and
their mother shall they wound with spades

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>and ploughs. Two
dragons shall succeed, whereof the one shall be slain by the arrow of
envy, but he other shall return under the shadow of a name. The Lion of
Justice shall succeed, at whose warning the towers of Gaul and the
dragons of the island shall tremble. In those days shall gold be wrung
forth from the lily and the nettle, and silver shall flow from the
hooves of them that low. They that go crisped and curled shall be clad
in fleeces of many colours, and the garment without shall betoken that
which is within. The feet of them that bark shall be cropped short. The
wild deer shall have peace, but humanity shall suffer dole. The shape of
commerce shall be cloven in twain; the half shall be round. The ravening
of kites shall perish and the teeth of wolves be blunted. The Lion's
whelps shall be transformed into fishes of the sea, and his Eagle build
her nest upon Mount Aravius. Venedotia shall be red with mother's blood
and six brethren shall the house of Corineus slay. The island shall be
drenched in nightly tears, whence all men shall be provoked unto all
things. Woe unto thee, Neustria, for the brain of the Lion shall be
poured forth upon thee; and with mangled limbs shall he be thrust forth
of his native soil. They that come after shall strive to outsoar the
highest, but the favour of the newcomers shall be exalted. Piety shall
do hurt unto him that doth possess through impiety until he shall have
clad him in his father. Wherefore, girdled about with the teeth of
wolves, shall he climb over the heights of the mountains and the shadow
of him that weareth a helmet. Albany shall be moved

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>unto wrath, and calling
unto them that are at her side shall busy her only in the shedding of
blood. A bridle-bit shall be set in her jaws that shall be forged in the
Bay of Armorica. This shall the Eagle of the broken covenant gild over,
and the Eagle shall rejoice in her third nesting. The roaring whelps
shall keep vigil, and forsaking the forests shall follow the chase
within the walls of cities. No small slaughter shall they make of them
that withstand them, and the tongues of bulls shall they cut out. They
shall load with chains the necks of them that roar, and the days of
their grandsire shall they renew. Thenceforward from the first unto the
fourth, from the fourth unto the third, from the third unto the second
the thumb shall be rolled in oil. The sixth shall overthrow the walls of
Hibernia and change the forests into a plain. He shall unite the divers
shares into one, and with the head of the Lion shall he be crowned. His
beginning shall be subject unto roving affection, but his end shall soar
up to those above. For the seats of the blessed shall he renew
throughout the lands, and shepherds shall he set in places befitting.
Two cities shall he robe in two palls, and virgin bounties shall he
bestow upon virgins. Thereby shall he merit the favour of the Thunderer,
and his place shall be amongst the blessed. Of him shall issue forth the
Lynx that seeth through all things, and shall keep watch to bring about
the downfall of his own race, for through him shall Neustria lose both
islands and be despoiled of her ancient dignity. Then shall the men of
the country be turned back into the island for that strife shall be
kindled amongst the

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>foreigners. An old man,
moreover, snowy white, hat sitteth upon a snow-white horse, shall turn
side the river of Pereiron and with a white wand hall measure out a mill
thereon. Cadwallader shall call unto Conan, and shall receive Albany to
his fellowship. Then shall there be slaughter of the foreigners: then
shall the rivers run blood: then shall gush forth the fountains of
Armorica and shall be crowned with the diadem of Brutus. Cambria shall
be filled with gladness and the oaks of Cornwall shall wax green. The
island shall be called by the name of Brutus and the name given by
foreigners shall be done away. From Conan shall issue forth the warlike
Boar that shall try the sharpness of his tushes within the forests of
Gaul. For the greater oaks shall he stub short each one, but unto the
smaller shall he grant protection. The Arab and the African shall be
adread of him, for even into furthest Spain shall sweep the swiftness of
his career. The He-goat of the Castle of Venus shall succeed, having
horns of gold and a beard of silver, and a cloud shall he breathe forth
of his nostrils so dark as that the face of the island shall be wholly
overshadowed. There shall be peace in his time, and the harvests shall
be multiplied by the bounty of the soil. Women shall become serpents in
their gait, and all their steps be full of pride. The castles of Venus
shall be builded new, nor shall Cupid's arrows cease to wound. Every
fountain shall be turned into blood, and two Kings shall encounter in
nigh combat for the Lioness of the ford of the staff. Every soil shall
riot in luxury, neither shall mankind cease to follow after lust. All

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>these things shall
three ages see, until the buried Kings be brought to light in the city
of London. Again shall famine return; again mortality return; and the
citizens shall mourn over the desolation of their cities. Then shall the
Boar of commerce arrive in the land, who shall recall the scattered
flocks unto the pastures they have lost. His breast shall be meat unto
the hungry and his tongue as drink unto them that thirst. From his mouth
shall issue forth rivers that shall slake the parching gullets of men.
Thereafter shall a tree rise up above the Tower of London, that
thrusting forth three branches only shall overshadow all the face of the
whole island with the spreading breadth of the leaves thereof. Against
it shall come the Northwind as an adversary, and an evil blast thereof
shall tear away the third branch, but the two that shall remain shall
occupy his place until the one shall bring to nought the other by the
multitude of his leaves. But when this shall be, then shall he himself
hold the places of the twain, and offer sustenance unto birds from the
lands that are without. And it shall be accounted hurtful unto native
fowl, for they shall lose the freedom of their flight by reason of their
dread of the shadow thereof. The Ass of wickedness shall succeed, swift
to fall upon the workers of gold but slow against the ravening of
wolves. In those days the oaks of the forest shall burn, and acorns
shall grow upon the boughs of the linden tree. The Severn sea shall flow
forth by seven mouths, and the river of Usk shall seethe for seven
months. The fishes thereof shall die for the heat, and of the fishes
shall serpents be engendered. The

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>baths of the city of
Bath shall wax cold, and the wholesome waters thereof shall breed death.
London shall mourn the slaughter of twenty thousand, and the Thames
river shall be turned into blood. They that wear the cowl shall be
provoked unto marriage, and their outcry shall be heard in the mountains
of the Alps.

### CHAPTER IV

‘<span class="smallcaps">Three</span> fountains shall well forth in the
city of Winchester, whereof the streams shall dispart the island into
three portions. Whosoever shall drink of the one shall rejoice in the
length of his days, neither shall he be overtaken nor afflicted of any
malady. He that shall drink of the second shall perish of hunger
unappeasable, and wanness and dread shall sit manifest in his face. He
that shall drink of the third shall be slain by hazard of sudden death,
neither shall his body be a corpse that men may bury. They that would
fain escape so deadly a swallow-pit will strive to hide it with divers
coverings. But whatsoever bulk be cast thereon shall take the shape of
other substance. For if stones be heaped thereupon, the stones shall be
turned into wood, wood into ashes, ashes into water. Moreover, a damsel
shall be sent forth of the City of Canute's Forest to work healing by
leechcraft, and when she shall have put forth all her arts, by her
breath only shall she dry up the hurtful fountains. Thereafter, when she
shall have refreshed her with the wholesome water, in her right hand
shall she carry the forest of Caledon

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>and in her left the
bulwarks of the walls of London. Whithersoever she shall walk, her
footsteps shall smoke of brimstone that shall burn with a twofold flame,
and the smoke thereof shall arouse the Ruteni, and make meat for them
that be under the sea. She herself shall overflow with tears of
compassion, and shall fill the island with the shrieks of her lamenting.
He that shall slay her shall be a Stag of ten branches, whereof four
shall wear crowns of gold, but the remaining six shall be turned into
horns of wild oxen that shall arouse the three islands of Britain with
their accursed bellowing. The Daneian forest shall waken, and bursting
forth into human speech shall cry aloud:

‘"Hither, thou Cambria, and bringing Cornwall with thee at thy side, say
unto Winchester: 'The earth shall swallow thee: transfer the see of the
shepherd thither where ships do come to haven, and let the rest of the
members follow the head.' For the day is at hand wherein thy citizens
shall perish for their crimes of perjury. The whiteness of wools hath
done thee hurt, and the diversity of the dyes thereof. Woe unto the
perjured race, for by reason of them shall the renowned city fall into
ruin." The ships shall be glad at the greatness of increase, and out of
two shall one be made. The Hedgehog that is loaden with apples shall
rebuild her, and unto the smell of the apples the fowls of many forests
shall fly together. He shall add thereunto a mighty palace, and wall it
around with six hundred towers. London shall behold it with envy and
trebly increase her walls. The Thames river shall compass her round on
every

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>side, and the report of
that work shall pass beyond the Alps. Within her shall the Hedgehog hide
his apples and shall devise ways under ground. In that day shall stones
speak, and the sea whereby men sail into Gaul shall be narrowed into a
straiter channel. Upon each bank thereof shall one man be heard of
another, and the soil of the island shall be made broad. The hidden
things of them that are beneath the sea shall be revealed, and Gaul
shall tremble for dread. Thereafter shall a Heron issue forth of the
forest Calaterium, and shall fly around the island for a space of two
years. By her cries at night shall she call the fowls of the air
together and all winged things shall she assemble in her company. They
shall fall upon the tillage of mortal men and every grain of the
harvests shall they devour. A famine shall follow the people, and a
baleful mortality the famine. And when this sore calamity hath come to
an end, then shall the accursed fowl go unto the Valley Galabes, and
uplift it so that it shall be a high mountain. Upon the top thereof,
moreover, shall she plant an oak and build her nest in the branches
thereof. Three eggs shall be laid in the nest, wherefrom shall issue
forth a fox, a wolf and a bear. The Fox shall devour her mother, and an
ass's head shall she wear. In this guise shall she affright her brethren
and make them flee into Neustria. But they shall awaken the tusky Boar,
and borne back together in a boat, shall do battle with the Fox. And
when the fight hath begun, she shall feign her dead and move the Boar to
pity her. Presently he shall go unto her corpse, and standing over

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>her shall breathe upon
her eyes and her face. But she, not forgetful of her ancient cunning,
shall bite his left foot and rend it away utterly from his body.
Leaping, moreover, upon him, she shall snatch away from him his right
ear and his tail, and slink away into the caverns of the mountains. Thus
befooled, the Boar shall demand of the Wolf and the Bear that they
restore unto him the members he hath lost. The twain accordingly, when
they shall have entered into his cause, shall promise him two feet of
the Fox, both her ears and her tail, the which they will compound into
hog's flesh wherewith to make him whole. Hereunto shall the Boar agree,
and shall await his promised restoration. In the meantime shall the Fox
come down from the mountains and change herself into a Wolf, and making
believe that she is fain to speak with the Boar, shall come unto him and
craftily eat all of him up. Thereafter shall she turn herself into the
Boar, and feigning that she hath lost the missing members shall abide
the coming of her twain brethren. But after that they shall come unto
her, them also with sudden-snapping tooth shall she slay, and shall be
crowned with the head of a lion.

‘In her days shall be born a serpent that shall be bent wholly upon the
destruction of mankind. He shall encompass London with his length, and
all them that pass by shall he devour. The Mountain Ox shall take upon
him the head of a wolf and shall whiten his teeth in the workshop of the
Severn. He shall gather unto his company the flocks of them of Albany
and Cambria that shall drink dry the river Thames. The Ass shall

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>unto the Goat of the
long beard and shall change shapes with him. Thereupon shall the
Mountain Ox wax wroth, and calling unto him the Wolf, shall become a
horned Bull against them. And when he shall let loose his cruelty upon
them, flesh and bones shall he devour them, yet shall he burned upon the
top of Urian. The ashes of his funeral pyre shall be turned into swans
that shall swim upon the dry as it had been a river. They shall devour
fishes in fishes, and men in men shall they swallow up. But when they
shall be stricken with eld, they shall become wolves of the sea, and
within the depths of the sea shall they devise their treacheries. They
shall swamp out the dockyards, and no little silver shall they gather
together thereby. Again the Thames shall flow, and calling his streams
together shall overpass the limits of his bed. The neighbouring cities
shall he hide out of his sight and overwhelm the mountains that seek to
oppose him. Fulfilled of guile and wickedness, he shall make recourse
unto the fountain of Galabes, and from thence shall seditions arise that
shall provoke the Venedotians to battle. The oaks of the forest shall
come together and engage in conflict with the rocks of the Gewissi. The
raven shall be there with the kite and shall devour the carcases of the
slain. The owl shall build her nest upon the walls of Gloucester, and in
the nest thereof shall an ass be brought forth. The serpent of Malvern
shall nurture him, and many deceits shall he urge him to contrive. When
he hath taken the crown, he shall transcend the highest and shall
affright the folk of the land with the hoarseness of his bray. In his
days shall the

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>mountains of Panchaia
totter, and the provinces shall [be](errata.htm#1) despoiled of their
forests. For a Worm the breath whereof is fire shall come upon then and
burn up the trees with the vapour he shall breathe forth. Out of him
shall issue forth seven lions disfigured by heads of goats. With the
stench of their nostrils shall they corrupt women, and their own wives
shall they cause to be as harlots. The father shall not know his own
son, for that they shall live in common, even as brute beasts. But a
Giant of iniquity shall arise that shall daunt all by the keenness of
his eyes. Against him shall rise up the Dragon of Worcester, and shall
strive to bring him unto nought. And in the battle shall he prevail
against the Dragon, who shall suffer oppression under the wickedness of
the conqueror. For he shall mount upon the Dragon, and putting off his
garment shall sit upon him naked. The Dragon shall bear him aloft, and
swingeing his tail shall beat him upon his naked body. Then shall the
Giant, again renewing his strength, pierce his gullet with his sword,
and at last shall the Dragon die poisoned, entangled within the coils of
his tail. After him shall succeed the Boar of Totnes, and with baleful
tyranny shall he oppress the people. Gloucester shall send forth a Lion
that in divers battles shall harass him even as he rageth. He shall
trample him under his feet, and affright him with his yawning jaws. At
last the Lion shall wrangle with the realm, and climb above the backs of
the nobles. A Bull shall appear in the midst of the conflict, and shall
smite the Lion with his right foot. He shall drive him forth through all
the taverns of the kingdom, but his horns shall he

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>break against the walls
of Oxford. The Fox of Kaerdubali shall wreak revenge upon the Lion, and
shall wholly devour him with her teeth. But the Adder of Lincoln shall
coil about her, and betoken his presence unto many dragons by his
dreadful hissing. Then shall the dragons encounter, and one shall tear
other into pieces. He that hath wings shall oppress him that hath none,
and fix his poisonous claws in his cheeks. Others shall gather together
to the battle and one shall slay other therein. A fifth shall succeed
unto them that are slain, and by various devices shall break the residue
in pieces. Upon the back of one shall he climb with a sword and sever
his head from his body. Then, putting off his garment, shall he climb
upon another and grasp his tail in his right hand and his left, for
naked shall he vanquish him against whom when clad he might nought
prevail. The rest shall he torment and drive them all the kingdom round.
Thereafter shall a roaring Lion come forth and dread shall be the cruel
fellness thereof. Thrice five portions shall he bring into one, and he
only shall possess the people. A Giant shall glitter in white array and
spread him abroad over the white people as a tree. Luxury shall waste
the strength of princes and of a sudden shall they be turned into
beasts. Amongst them shall arise a Lion, swollen with the blood of men.
Under him shall be set a reaper with a sickle in the standing corn, and
even as he toileth at his reaping shall he be oppressed of him. The
charioteer of York shall appease them, and thrusting forth his lord,
shall mount the chariot

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>he driveth. With his
drawn sword shall he threaten the East, and the rut of his chariot
wheels shall he fill with blood. Then shall he become a fish of the sea
that shall mate with a serpent that shall allure him by her hissing.
Thence shall be born three thundering bulls, who, when they have eaten
up their pastures, shall be turned into trees. The first shall carry a
scourge of vipers, and shall turn his back upon the next-born, who shall
strive to snatch away the scourge, but by the last shall it be seized
and carried off. They shall turn away their faces the one from other
until they shall have cast away the poisoned cup. Unto him shall succeed
the Husbandman of Albany, at whose back shall a serpent overhang. He
shall busy him in turning of the soil so that the land may be white unto
harvest. The serpent shall weary him in spilling of his venom, that the
green blade may never ripen to the full ear. The people shall be wasted
by deadly slaughter, and the walls of cities shall be made desolate.
Then shall the city of Claudius be given for healing, and she shall
interpose the foster-daughter of the Scourger. For she shall hold the
balance whereby the medicine of healing is meted out, and in a brief
space shall the island be renewed. Then shall two follow the sceptre,
unto whom shall the horned Dragon minister. The one shall come in iron,
and upon a flying serpent shall he ride. With his body naked shall he
sit upon his back, and with his right hand shall he lay hold upon his
tail. The seas shall be troubled at the noise of his crying, and fear
shall fall upon the other because of him. Therefore

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>shall the second take
the Lion into his company, but a strife shall arise betwixt them, and
they shall fight together. With mutual wounds shall the one be stricken
of the other, but the fellness of the beast shall prevail. Then shall
one come with harp and tabor, and shall appease the fierceness of the
Lion. Wherefore the nations of the realm shall be at peace, and shall
call upon the Lion to be holder of the balance. In the seat assigned him
he shall pay heed unto the weights, but his palms shall he stretch forth
into Albany. They of the Northern province shall thereby be aggrieved
and shall throw open the gates of the temples. The Wolf that beareth the
ensign shall be captain of the companies, and Cornwall shall he
encompass round about with his tail. A knight in a chariot shall
withstand him, and that people shall he change into a boar. Wherefore
the Boar shall lay waste the provinces, but his head shall he hide in
the depths of the Severn sea. A man shall hug a lion in gold, and the
dazzling of the gold shall blind the eyes of them that look thereon.
Silver shall wax white in the circuit thereof, and shall be a vexation
unto the wine-presses. Mortals shall be drunken with the wine that is
set before them, and turning their back upon heaven, shall fix their
eyes upon the earth. The stars shall turn their face away from them, and
their wonted course shall be confounded. In the wrath of the stars shall
the standing corn be withered and the dews of heaven shall be forbidden
to fall. Root and branch shall change places, and the newness of the
thing shall be as a miracle. The shining of the sun shall be

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span class="margnote">Merlin's prophecies</span>dimmed by the amber of
Mercury, and shall be a dread unto them that behold it. Stilbon of
Arcady shall change his shield, and the helmet of Mars shall call unto
Venus. The helmet of Mars shall cast a shadow, and the rage of Mercury
shall overpass all bounds. Iron Orion shall bare his sword. Phœbus of
the ocean shall torment his clouds. Jupiter shall trespass beyond his
appointed bounds, and Venus forsake the way that hath been ordained unto
her. The malignity of Saturn the star shall fall upon earth with the
rain of heaven, and shall slay mankind as it were with a crooked sickle.
The twice six houses of the stars shall mourn over the wayward wandering
of their guests. The Twins shall surcease from their wonted embrace, and
shall call the Urn unto the fountains. The scales of the Balance shall
hang awry until the Ram shall set his crooked horns beneath them. The
tail of the Scorpion shall breed lightnings, and the Crab fall at strife
with the Sun. The Virgin shall forget her maiden shame, and climb up on
the back of the Sagittary. The chariot of the Moon shall disturb the
Zodiac, and the Pleiades shall burst into tears and lamentation. None
hereafter shall return unto his wonted duty, but Ariadne shall lie
hidden within the closed gateways of her sea-beaten headland. In the
twinkling of an eye shall the seas lift them up, and the dust of them of
old again begin to live. With a baleful blast shall the winds do battle
together, and the sound thereof shall be heard amongst the stars.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII](gem09)
