[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](gem09)  [Next](gem11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406795151/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Histories of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffry of Monmouth*, tr. by
Sebastian Evans, \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

# BOOK IX

### CHAPTER I

<span class="margnote">Dubricius crowneth Arthur</span><span
class="smallcaps">After</span> the death of Uther Pendragon, the barons
of Britain did come together from the divers provinces unto the city of
Silchester, and did bear on hand Dubricius, Archbishop of the City of
Legions, that he should crown as king Arthur, the late King's son. For
sore was need upon them, seeing that when the Saxons heard of Uther's
death they had invited their fellow-countrymen from Germany, and under
their Duke Colgrin were bent upon exterminating the Britons. They had,
moreover, entirely subdued all that part of the island which stretcheth
from the river Humber as far as the sea of Caithness. Dubricius
therefore, sorrowing over the calamities of the country, assembled the
other prelates, and did invest Arthur with the crown of the realm. At
that time Arthur was a youth of fifteen years, of a courage and
generosity beyond compare, whereunto his inborn goodness did lend such
grace as that he was beloved of well-nigh all the peoples in the land.
After he had been invested with the ensigns of royalty, he abided by his
ancient wont, and was so prodigal of his bounties as that he began to
run short of wherewithal to distribute amongst the huge multitude of
knights

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="margnote">Arthur's first battles</span>that made repair
unto him. But he that hath within him a bountiful nature along with
prowess, albeit that he be lacking for a time, natheless in no wise
shall poverty be his bane for ever. Wherefore did Arthur, for that in
him did valour keep company with largesse, make resolve to harry the
Saxons, to the end that with their treasure he might make rich the
retainers that were of his own household. And herein was he monished of
his own lawful right, seeing that of right ought he to hold the
sovereignty of the whole island in virtue of his claim hereditary.
Assembling, therefore, all the youth that were of his allegiance, he
made first for York. And when Colgrin was ware of this, he got together
his Saxons, Scots and Picts, and came with a mighty multitude to meet
him nigh the river Douglas, where, by the time the battle came to an
end, the more part of both armies had been put to the sword. Natheless,
Arthur won the day, and after pursuing Colgrin's flight as far as York,
did beleaguer him within that city. Thereupon, Baldulf, hearing of his
brother's flight, made for the besieged city with six thousand men to
relieve him. For, at the time his brother had fought the battle, he
himself was upon the seacoast awaiting the arrival of Duke Cheldric, who
was just coming from Germany to their assistance. And when he had come
within ten mile of the city, he was resolved to make a night march and
fall upon them by surprise. Howbeit, Arthur was ware of his purpose, and
bade Cador, Duke of Cornwall, go meet him that same night with six
hundred horse and three thousand foot. He,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="margnote">Baldulf: his craft</span>choosing a position on
the road whereby the enemy were bound to march, surprised them by an
assault on the sudden, and cutting up and slaying the Saxons, drave
Baldulf off in flight. Baldulf, distressed beyond measure that he could
convey no succour to his brother, took counsel with himself in what wise
he might have speech of him, for he weened that so he might get at him,
they might together devise some shift for the safety of them both.
Failing all other means of access unto him, he shaved off his hair and
his beard, and did upon him the habit of a jongleur with a ghittern, and
walking to and fro within the camp, made show as had he been a minstrel
singing unto the tunes that he thrummed the while upon his ghittern.
And, for that none suspected him, by little and little he drew nigh unto
the walls of the city, ever keeping up the disguise he had taken upon
him. At last he was found out by some of the besieged, who thereupon
drew him up with cords over the wall into the city and brought him unto
his brother, who, overjoyed at the sight of him, greeted him with kisses
and embraces. At last, after talking over every kind of shift, when they
had fallen utterly into despair of ever issuing forth, the messengers
they had sent into Germany returned, bringing with them unto Albany six
hundred ships full of stout warriors under Duke Cheldric; and when
Arthur's counsellors heard tell of their coming, they advised him to
hold the leaguer no longer, for that sore hazard would it be to do
battle with so mighty a multitude of enemies as had now arrived.

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

### CHAPTER II

<span class="margnote">Battle of Lincoln</span><span
class="smallcaps">Arthur</span>, therefore, in obedience to the counsel
of his retainers, retired him into the city of London. Hither he
summoned all the clergy and chief men of his allegiance and bade them
declare their counsel as to what were best and safest for him to do
against this inroad of the Paynim. At last, by common consent of them
all, messengers are sent unto King Hoel in Armorica with tidings of the
calamitous estate of Britain. For Hoel was sister's son unto Arthur,
born unto Dubric, King of the Armorican Britons. Wherefore, so soon as
he heard of the invasion wherewith his uncle was threatened, he bade fit
out his fleet, and mustering fifteen thousand men-at-arms, made for
Hamo's port with the first fair wind. Arthur received him with all
honour due, and the twain embraced the one the other over and over
again.

### CHAPTER III

<span class="smallcaps">A Few</span> days later they set forth for the
city of Kaerlindcoit, then besieged by the Paynim already mentioned, the
which city lieth upon a hill betwixt two rivers in the province of
Lindesey, and is otherwise called Lincoln. Accordingly, when they had
come thither with their whole host, they did battle with the Saxons and
routed them with no common slaughter, for upon that day fell six
thousand of them, some part drowned in the rivers and some part smitten
of deadly weapons.

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Saxons ever treacherous</span>The residue, in dismay,
forsook the siege and fled, but Arthur stinted not in pursuit until they
had reached the forest of Caledon, wherein they assembled again after
the fight and did their best to make a stand against him. When the
battle began, they wrought sore havoc amongst the Britons, defending
themselves like men, and avoiding the arrows of the Britons in the
shelter afforded by the trees. When Arthur espied this he bade the trees
about that part of the forest be felled, and the trunks set in a compass
around them in such wise as that all ways of issuing forth were shut
against them, for he was minded to beleaguer them therein until they
should be starven to death of hunger. This done, he bade his companies
patrol the forest, and abode in that same place three days. Whereupon
the Saxons, lacking all victual and famishing to death, besought leave
to issue forth upon covenant that they would leave all their gold and
silver behind them so they might return unto Germany with nought but
their ships only. They promised further to give them tribute from
Germany and to leave hostages for the payment thereof. Arthur, taking
counsel thereupon, agreed unto their petition, retaining all their
treasure and the hostages for payment of the tribute, and granting only
unto them bare permission to depart. Natheless, whilst that they were
ploughing the seas as they returned homeward, it repented them of the
covenant they had made, and tacking about, they returned into Britain,
making the shore at Totnes. Taking possession of the country, they
devastated the land as far as the Severn sea, slaying the husbandmen

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="margnote">The siege of Bath</span>with deadly wounds.
Marching forth from thence they made for the country about Bath and
besieged that city. When word of this was brought unto the King,
[astonished](errata.htm#2.md) beyond measure at their wicked daring, he
bade judgment be done upon their hostages and hanged them out of hand,
and, abandoning the expedition whereby he intended to repress the Picts
and Scots, hurried away to disperse the leaguer. Howbeit, that which did
most sorely grieve him in this strait was that he was compelled to leave
his nephew Hoel behind him lying sick in the city of Alclud. When at
last he arrived in the province of Somerset, and beheld the leaguer nigh
at hand, he spake in these words; 'For that these Saxons, of most
impious and hateful name, have disdained to keep faith with me, I,
keeping my faith unto my God, will endeavour me this day to revenge upon
them the blood of my countrymen. To arms, therefore, ye warriors, to
arms, and fall upon yonder traitors like men, for, of a certainty, by
Christ's succour, we cannot fail of victory!'

### CHAPTER IV

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> he had thus spoken, the holy Dubric,
Archbishop of the City of Legions, went up on to the top of a certain
mount and cried out with a loud voice:

'Ye men that be known from these others by your Christian profession,
take heed ye bear in mind the piety ye owe unto your country and unto
your fellow-countrymen, whose slaughter by the

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

<span class="margnote">Arthur's armour</span>treachery of the Paynim
shall be unto ye a disgrace everlasting save ye press hardily forward to
defend them. Fight ye therefore for your country, and if it be that
death overtake ye, suffer it willingly for your country's sake, for
death itself is victory and a healing unto the soul, inasmuch as he that
shall have died for his brethren doth offer himself a living sacrifice
unto God, nor is it doubtful that herein he doth follow in the footsteps
of Christ who disdained not to lay down His own soul for His brethren.
Whosoever, therefore, amongst ye shall be slain in this battle, unto him
shall that death be as full penance and absolution of all his sins, if
so be he receive it willingly on this wise.'

Forthwith, thus cheered by the benison of the blessed man, each one
hastened to arm him to do his bidding, and Arthur himself doing upon him
a habergeon worthy of a king so noble, did set upon his head a helm of
gold graven with the semblance of a dragon. Upon his shoulders,
moreover, did he bear the shield that was named Priwen, wherein, upon
the inner side, was painted the image of holy Mary, Mother of God, that
many a time and oft did call her back unto his memory. Girt was he also
with Caliburn, best of swords, that was forged within the Isle of
Avalon; and the lance that did grace his right hand was called by the
name Ron, a tall lance and a stout, full meet to do slaughter withal.
Then, stationing his companies, he made hardy assault upon the Saxons
that after their wont were ranked wedge-wise in battalions. Natheless,
all day long did they stand their ground manfully maugre the Britons
that did

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="margnote">Victory at Bath</span>deliver assault upon
assault against them. At last, just verging upon sundown, the Saxons
occupied a hill close by that might serve them for a camp, for, secure
in their numbers, the hill alone seemed all the camp they needed. But
when the morrow's sun brought back the day, Arthur with his army clomb
up to the top of the hill, albeit that in the ascent he lost many of his
men. For the Saxons, dashing down from the height, had the better
advantage in dealing their wounds, whilst they could also run far more
swiftly down the hill than he could struggle up. Howbeit, putting forth
their utmost strength, the Britons did at last reach the top, and
forthwith close with the enemy hand to hand. The Saxons, fronting them
with their broad chests, strive with all their endeavour to stand their
ground. And when much of the day had been spent on this wise, Arthur
waxed wroth at the subbornness of their resistance, and the slowness of
his own advance, and drawing forth Caliburn, his sword, crieth aloud the
name of Holy Mary, and thrusteth him forward with a swift onset into the
thickest press of the enemy's ranks. Whomsoever he touched, calling upon
God, he slew at a single blow, nor did he once slacken in his onslaught
until that he had slain four hundred and seventy men single-handed with
his sword Caliburn. This when the Britons beheld, they followed him up
in close rank dealing slaughter on every side. Colgrin and Baldulf his
brother fell amongst the first, and many thousands fell besides.
Howbeit, as soon as Cheldric saw the jeopardy of his fellows, he turned
to flee away.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

### CHAPTER V

<span class="margnote">Arthur at Alclud</span><span
class="smallcaps">The</span> King having won the victory, bade Cador,
Duke of Cornwall, pursue the enemy, while he himself hastened his march
into Albany, for word had thence been brought him that the Scots and
Picts were besieging Hoel in the city of Alclud, wherein, as I have
said, he was lying afflicted of grievous sickness, and sore need it was
he should come swiftly to his succour lest he should be taken by the
barbarians along with the city. The Duke of Cornwall, accordingly,
accompanied by ten thousand men, started from Bath, but was not minded,
in the first place, to pursue the fleeing Saxons, deeming it better to
make all speed to get hold of their ships and thus forbid their
embarking therein. As soon as he had taken possession of the ships, he
manned them with his best soldiers, who could be trusted to take heed
that no Paynim came aboard, in case they should flee unto them to
escape. Then he made best haste to obey Arthur's orders by following up
the enemy and slaying all he overtook without mercy. Whereupon they, who
but just now had fallen upon the Britons with the fury of a double
thunderbolt, straightway sneak off, faint of heart, some into the depths
of the forest, others into the mountains and caves, anywhither so only
they may live yet a little longer. At last, when they found all shelter
failing, they march their shattered companies into the Isle of Thanet.
Thither the Duke of Cornwall follows hard upon their heels, smiting them
down without

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="margnote">Cador slayeth Cheldric</span>mercy as was his
wont; nor did he stay his hand until after Cheldric had been slain. He
compelled them to give hostages for the surrender of the whole residue.

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="smallcaps">Having</span> thus established peace, he marched
towards Alclud, which Arthur had already delivered from the oppression
of the barbarians. He next led his army into Moray, where the Scots and
Picts were beleaguered, for after they had thrice been defeated in
battle by Arthur and his nephew they had fled into that province. When
they had reached Loch Lomond, they occupied the islands that be therein,
thinking to find safe refuge; for this lake doth contain sixty islands
and receiveth sixty rivers, albeit that but a single stream doth flow
from thence unto the sea. Upon these islands are sixty rocks plain to be
seen, whereof each one doth bear an eyrie of eagles that there
congregating year by year do notify any prodigy that is to come to pass
in the kingdom by uttering a shrill scream all together in concert. Unto
these islands accordingly the enemy had fled in order to avail them of
the protection of the lake. But small profit reaped they thereby, for
Arthur collected a fleet and went round about the inlets of the rivers
for fifteen days together, and did so beleaguer them as that they were
famished to death of hunger by thousands. And whilst that he was serving
them out on this wise arrived Guillamur, King of Ireland,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="margnote">Arthur pardoneth the Scots</span>with a mighty
host of barbarians in a fleet, to bring succor unto the wretched
islanders. Whereupon Arthur left off the leaguer and began to turn his
arms against the Irish, whom he forced to return unto their own country,
cut to pieces without mercy. When he had won the victory, he again gave
all his thoughts to doing away utterly the race of the Scots and Picts,
and yielded him to treating them with a cruelty beyond compare. Not a
single one that he could lay hands on did he spare, insomuch as that at
last all the bishops of the miserable country assembled together with
all the clergy of their obedience, and came unto him barefoot, bearing
relics of the saints and the sacraments of the church, imploring the
King's mercy for the safety of their people. As soon as they came into
his presence, they prayed him on their bended knees to have pity on the
down-trodden folk, for that he had visited them with pains and penalties
enow, nor was any need to cut off the scanty few that still survived to
the last man. Some petty portion of the country he might allot unto them
whereon they might be allowed to bear the yoke of perpetual bondage, for
this were they willing to do. And when they had besought the King on
this wise, he was moved unto tears for very pity, and, agreeing unto the
petition of the holy men, granted them his pardon.

### CHAPTER VII

<span class="smallcaps">These</span> matters ended, Hoel did explore the
site of the foresaid lake, and marvelled greatly to

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="margnote">Marvels of Britain</span>behold how so many
rivers, so many islands, so many rocks and so many eyries of eagles did
all so exactly agree in number. And while he thus marvelled, holding the
same for a miracle, Arthur came unto him and told him there was another
lake in the same province even yet more marvellous. 'It lieth,' saith
he, 'not far hence, and it hath twenty foot in breadth and the same
measure in length, with but five foot of depth. Howbeit, within this
square, whether it be by artifice of man or by ordinance of nature, do
breed four manner fishes in the four corners thereof; nor never is a
fish of one quarter found in any of the others. Moreover,' saith he,
'another lake is there in the parts of Wales nigh the Severn, which the
men of that country do call Linligwan, whereinto when the sea floweth it
is received as into a whirlpit or swallow, in suchwise as that the lake
is never the fuller for the waters it doth ingulf so as to cover the
margent of the banks thereof. Natheless, when the sea ebbeth again, it
doth spout forth the waters it hath sucked in as it were a mountain, and
overplasheth and covereth the banks. At such a time, were the folk of
all that country to stand anigh with their faces toward the lake and
should be sprinkled of the spray of the waves upon their garments, they
should scarce escape, if indeed they did at all escape, being swallowed
up of the lake. Natheless, should they turn their back to the lake, they
need have no fear of being sprinkled, even though they should stand upon
the very brink.'

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="margnote">Lot, Urian and Angusel</span><span
class="smallcaps">Pardon</span> granted unto the Scottish people, the
King made for York, there to celebrate the forthcoming Christmas
festival. And when he was entered into the city and beheld the
desolation of the holy churches, he was sore grieved and moved unto
compassion. For Samson the Archbishop had been driven forth along with
all the other holy men of religion, and the half-burnt churches had
ceased from the offices of God, so fiercely had the fury of the Paynim
prevailed. Forthwith he summoned a convocation of the clergy and people,
and appointed Pyramus his chaplain unto the Metropolitan See; restored
the churches that were cast down even to the ground, and did grace them
with convents of religious both men and women. The barons also that had
been driven out by the incursions of the Saxons did he restore unto
their former honours.

### CHAPTER IX

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> that city were three brethren born of
blood royal, Lot, to wit, and Urian and Angusel, that had held the
principality of those parts before the Saxons had prevailed. Being
minded, therefore, to grant unto them as unto the others their
hereditary rights, he restored unto Angusel the kingly power of the
Scots, and conferred the sceptre of the people of Moray upon Urian.
Howbeit, Lot, who in the days of Aurelius

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Arthur weddeth Guenevere</span>Ambrosius had married
Arthur's own sister, who had borne unto him Gawain and Mordred, he did
reinstate in the Dukedom of Lothian and of the other provinces thereby
that had appertained unto him aforetime. At last, when he had
re-established the state of the whole country in its ancient dignity, he
took unto him a wife born of a noble Roman family, Guenevere, who,
brought up and nurtured in the household of Duke Cador, did surpass in
beauty all the other dames of the island.

### CHAPTER X

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> the next summer came on he fitted
out his fleet and sailed unto the island of Hibernia, that he desired to
subdue unto himself. No sooner had he landed than Guillamur,
before-mentioned, came to meet him with a host past numbering, purposing
to do battle with him. But as soon as the fight began, his folk, naked
and unarmed, fled whithersoever they might find a place of refuge.
Guillamur was forthwith taken prisoner and compelled to surrender, and
the rest of the princes of the country, smitten with dismay, likewise
surrendered them after their King's ensample. All parts of Ireland thus
subdued, he made with his fleet for Iceland, and there also defeated the
people and subjugated the island. Next, for far and wide amongst the
other islands it was rumoured that no country could stand against him,
Doldavy, King of Gothland, and Gunfast, King of the Orkneys, came of

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="margnote">Of Arthur's Court</span>their own accord, and
promising a tribute, did homage unto him. At the end of winter he
returned into Britain, and re-establishing his peace firmly throughout
the realm, did abide therein for the next twelve years.

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="smallcaps">At</span> the end of this time he invited unto
him all soever of most prowess from far-off kingdoms and began to
multiply his household retinue, and to hold such courtly fashion in his
household as begat rivalry amongst peoples at a distance, insomuch as
the noblest in the land, fain to vie with him, would hold himself as
nought, save in the cut of his clothes and the manner of his arms he
followed the pattern of Arthur's knights. At last the fame of his bounty
and his prowess was upon every man's tongue, even unto the uttermost
ends of the earth, and a fear fell upon the Kings of realms oversea lest
he might fall upon them in arms and they might lose the nations under
their dominion. Grievously tormented of these devouring cares, they set
them to repairing their cities and the towers of their cities, and
builded them strongholds in places meet for defence, to the end that in
case Arthur should lead an expedition against them they might find
refuge therein should need be. And when this was notified unto Arthur,
his heart was uplifted for that he was a terror unto them all, and he
set his desire upon subduing the whole of Europe unto himself. Fitting
forth his fleets accordingly, he made first

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span class="margnote">Lot, King of Norway</span>of all for Norway,
being minded to set the crown thereof upon the head of Lot, his sister's
son. For Lot was grandson of Sichelm, King of Norway, who at that time
had died leaving the kingdom unto him. But the Norwegians disinclined to
receive him, and had raised one Riculf to the kingly power, deeming
that, so they garrisoned their cities, he would be able to withstand
Arthur himself. At that time Gawain, the son of Lot, was a youth of
twelve years, and had been sent by his uncle to be brought up as a page
in the service of Pope Sulpicius, from whom he had received arms.
Accordingly, when Arthur, as I had begun to tell, landed upon the coast
of Norway, King Riculf met him with the whole people of the kingdom and
did battle; but after much blood had been shed upon both sides, the
Britons at last prevailed, and making an onset, slew Riculf with a
number of his men. When they had won this victory they overran and set
fire to the cities, scattering the country folk, nor did they cease to
give full loose to their cruelty until they had submitted the whole of
Norway as well as Denmark unto the dominion of Arthur. These countries
thus conquered, as soon as Arthur had raised Lot to be King of Norway
Arthur sailed for Gaul, and dividing his force into companies began
everywhere to lay the country waste. The province of Gaul at that time
had been committed to the charge of Flollo, Tribune of Rome, who ruled
it under the Emperor Leo. He, when he was ware of Arthur's arrival,
summoned every soldier in arms that owned his allegiance and fought
against Arthur, but in no wise might he

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="margnote">Flollo challenges Arthur</span>stand against him.
For the youth of all the islands he had conquered were in Arthur's
company, whence it was of common report that his army was so great that
scarce of any the greatest might he be overcome. In his retinue,
moreover, was the better part of the knighthood of Gaul, whom by his
much largesse he had bound unto himself. Flollo, therefore, when he saw
that he had been worsted in the battle, forthwith forsaking the field,
fled with a few of his men unto Paris. There, reassembling his
straggling army, he put the city in estate of defence and again was fain
to do battle with Arthur. But whilst he was thinking of strengthening
his army by auxiliaries from the neighbouring countries, Arthur came
upon him at unawares and besieged him in the city. At the end of a
month, Flollo, taking it grievously to heart that his people should be
famished to death, sent unto Arthur challenging him to single combat on
condition that whichsoever of the twain should be conqueror should have
the kingdom of the other. For he was of great stature, hardihood and
valour, and of his overweening confidence herein had sent this challenge
hoping that it might open unto him a door of safety. When the message
was brought unto Arthur, mightily was he rejoiced at Flollo's proposal,
and sent back word that he was ready and willing to abide by the
conditions thereof. Thereupon each did duly enter into covenant with the
other, and the twain met in an island that is without the city, all the
folk watching to see what might be the issue. Both were armed full
seemly, and each bestrode a destrier of marvellous swiftness; nor was it
easy

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

<span class="margnote">Duel with Flollo</span>to forecast which of the
twain were most like to win the day. Taking their stand opposite each
other, and couching lance in rest, they forthwith set spur to their
steeds and smote together with a right mighty shock. But Arthur, who
bare his spear the more heedfully, thrusted the same into the top of
Flollo's breast, and shielding off the other's blow with all the force
he might, bare him to the ground. Then, unsheathing his sword, he was
hastening to smite him, when Flollo, on his legs again in an instant,
ran upon him with his spear levelled, and with a deadly thrust into his
destrier's chest brought both horse and rider to the ground. When the
Britons saw their King lying his length on the field, they thought he
was slain and could scarce be withholden from breaking the covenant and
setting on the Gauls with one accord. But before they had resolved to
transgress the bounds of peace Arthur was quickly on his legs again,
and, covering him with his shield, was hastily stepping up to meet
Flollo, who was bearing down upon him. And now, standing up to each
other man to man, they redouble buffet on buffet, each bent upon
fighting it out to the death. At last Flollo found an opening and smote
Arthur on the forehead, and, had not the crash of the stroke on the
helmet blunted the edge of his sword, the wound might well have been
Arthur's death. But when the blood welled forth, and Arthur saw his
habergeon and shield all red therewithal, his wrath waxed yet more
burning hot, and raising Caliburn aloft, with all his force he brought
it down through the helmet on to the head of Flollo and clove it sheer
in

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

<span class="margnote">Bedevere and Kay</span>twain. With this stroke
Flollo fell, and beating the ground with his heels, gave up his ghost to
the winds.

When the tidings was known throughout the army, the citizens all ran
together and, opening the gates, delivered themselves up unto Arthur.
He, after thus achieving the victory, divided his army into two
commands, giving one into commission unto Duke Hoel, and bidding him go
conquer Guitard, Duke of the Poitevins, whilst he himself with the other
command busied him with subduing the other provinces. Thereupon Hoel
marched into Aquitaine, invaded the cities of the country, and after
harassing Guitard in a number of battles, compelled him to surrender. He
next laid waste Gascony with fire and sword, and subjugated the princes
thereof. After a space of nine years, when he had subdued all the parts
of Gaul unto his dominion, Arthur again came unto Paris and there held
his court. He there also summoned a convocation of the clergy and
people, and did confirm the stablishment of the realm in peace and law.
At that time, moreover, he made grant of Neustria, which is now called
Normandy, unto Bedevere his butler, and the province of Anjou unto Kay
his seneschal. Many other provinces also did he grant unto the noblemen
that did him service in his household. At last, when all the states and
peoples were stablished in his peace, he returned into Britain at the
beginning of spring.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="margnote">Arthur at Caerleon</span><span
class="smallcaps">When</span> the high festival of Whitsuntide began to
draw nigh, Arthur, filled with exceeding great joy at having achieved so
great success, was fain to hold high court, and to set the crown of the
kingdom upon his head, to convene the Kings and Dukes that were his
vassals to the festival so that he might the more worshipfully celebrate
the same, and renew his peace more firmly amongst his barons. Howbeit,
when he made known his desire unto his familiars, he, by their counsel,
made choice of the City of Legions wherein to fulfil his design. For,
situate in a passing pleasant position on the river Usk in Glamorgan,
not far from the Severn sea, and abounding in wealth above all other
cities, it was the place most meet for so high a solemnity. For on the
one side thereof flowed the noble river aforesaid whereby the Kings and
Princes that should come from oversea might be borne thither in their
ships; and on the other side, girdled about with meadows and woods,
passing fair was the magnificence of the kingly palaces thereof with the
gilded verges of the roofs that imitated Rome. Howbeit, the chiefest
glories thereof were the two churches, one raised in honour of the
Martyr Julius, that was right fair graced by a convent of virgins that
had dedicated them unto God, and the second, founded in the name of the
blessed Aaron, his companion, the main pillars whereof were a
brotherhood of canons regular, and this was the cathedral church of the
third Metropolitan See of

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">The glories of Caerleon</span>Britain. It had,
moreover, a school of two hundred philosophers learned in astronomy and
in the other arts, that did diligently observe the courses of the stars,
and did by true inferences foretell the prodigies which at that time
were about to befall unto King Arthur. Such was the city, famed for such
abundance of things delightsome, that was now busking her for the
festival that had been proclaimed. Messengers were sent forth into the
divers kingdoms, and all that owed allegiance throughout the Gauls and
the neighbour islands were invited unto the court. Came accordingly
Angusel, King of Albany, that is now called Scotland; Urian, King of
them of Moray; Cadwallo Lewirh, King of the Venedotians, that now be
called the North Welsh; Sater, King of the Demeti, that is, of the South
Welsh; Cador, King of Cornwall, the Archbishops of the three
Metropolitan Sees, to wit, of London and York, and Dubric of the City of
Legions. He, Primate of Britain and Legate of the Apostolic See, was of
so meritorious a piety that he could make whole by his prayers any that
lay oppressed of any malady. Came also the Earls of noble cities;
Morvid, Earl of Gloucester; Mauron of Winchester; Anaraut of Salisbury;
Arthgal of Carguet, that is also called Warguit; Jugein from Leicester;
Cursal from Caistor; Kimmare, Duke of Dorobernia; Galluc of Salisbury;
Urgen from Bath; Jonathal of Dorchester; Boso of Ridoc, that is Oxford.
Besides the earls came champions of lesser dignity, Danant map Papo;
Cheneus map Coil; Peredur map Elidur; Guisul map Nogoit; Regin map
Claut;

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Guests at Court</span>Eddelein map Cledauc; Kincar map
Bagan; Kimmare; Gorbonian map Goit; Clofaut; Rupmaneton; Kimbelim map
Trunat; Chatleus map Catel; Kinlich map Neton, and many another beside,
the names whereof be too long to tell. From the neighbour islands came
likewise Guillamur, King of Ireland; Malvasius, King of Iceland;
Doldavy, King of Gothland: Gunvasius, King of the Orkneys; Lot, King of
Norway; Aschil, King of the Danes. From the parts oversea came also
Holdin, King of the Ruteni; Leodegar, Earl of Boulogne; Bedevere the
Butler, Duke of Normandy; Borel of Maine; Kay the Seneschal, Duke of
Anjou; Guitard of Poitou; the Twelve Peers of the Gauls whom Guerin of
Chartres brought with him; Hoel, Duke of the Armorican Britons, with the
barons of his allegiance, who marched along with such magnificence of
equipment in trappings and mules and horses as may not easily be told.
Besides all these, not a single Prince of any price on this side Spain
remained at home and came not upon the proclamation. And no marvel, for
Arthur's bounty was of common report throughout the whole wide world,
and all men for his sake were fain to come.

### CHAPTER XIII

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> all at last were assembled in the
city on the high day of the festival, the archbishops were conducted
unto the palace to crown the King with the royal diadem. Dubric,
therefore,

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

<span class="margnote">Arthur's coronation</span>upon whom the charge
fell, for that the court was held within his diocese, was ready to
celebrate the service. As soon as the King had been invested with the
ensigns of kingship, he was led in right comely wise to the church of
the Metropolitan See, two archbishops supporting him, the one upon his
right hand side the other upon his left. Four Kings, moreover, to wit,
those of Albany, Cornwall, and North and South Wales, went before him,
bearing before him, as was their right, four golden swords. A company of
clerics in holy orders of every degree went chanting music marvellous
sweet in front. Of the other party, the archbishops and pontiffs led the
Queen, crowned with laurel and wearing her own ensigns, unto the church
of the virgins dedicatee, The four Queens, moreover, of the four Kings
already mentioned, did bear before her according to wont and custom four
white doves, and the ladies that were present did follow after her
rejoicing greatly. At last, when the procession was over, so manifold
was the music of the organs and so many were the hymns that were chanted
in both churches, that the knights who were there scarce knew which
church they should enter first for the exceeding sweetness of the
harmonies in both. First into the one and then into the other they
flocked in crowds, nor, had the whole day been given up to the
celebration, would any have felt a moment's weariness thereof. And when
the divine services had been celebrated in both churches, the King and
Queen put off their crowns, and doing on lighter robes of state, went to
meat, he to his palace

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="margnote">A State banquet</span>with the men, she to
another palace with the women. For the Britons did observe the ancient
custom of the Trojans, and were wont to celebrate their high festival
days, the men with the men and the women with the women severally. And
when all were set at table according as the rank of each did demand, Kay
the Seneschal, in a doublet furred of ermines, and a thousand youths of
full high degree in his company, all likewise clad in ermines, did serve
the meats along with him. Of the other part, as many in doublets furred
of vair did follow Bedevere the Butler, and along with him did serve the
drinks from the divers ewers into the manifold-fashioned cups. In the
palace of the Queen no less did numberless pages, clad in divers brave
liveries, offer their service each after his office, the which were I to
go about to describe I might draw out my history into an endless
prolixity. For at that time was Britain exalted unto so high a pitch of
dignity as that it did surpass all other kingdoms in plenty of riches,
in luxury of adornment, and in the courteous wit of them that dwelt
therein. Whatsoever knight in the land was of renown for his prowess did
wear his clothes and his arms all of one same colour. And the dames, no
less witty, would apparel them in like manner in a single colour, nor
would they deign have the love of none save he had thrice approved him
in the wars. Wherefore at that time did dames wax chaste and knights the
nobler for their love.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

<span class="margnote">Tourneys and games </span><span
class="smallcaps">Refreshed</span> by their banqueting, they go forth
into the fields without the city, and sundry among them fall to playing
at sundry manner games. Presently the knights engage in a game on
horseback, making show of fighting a battle whilst the dames and damsels
looking on from the top of the walls, for whose sake the courtly knights
make believe to be fighting, do cheer them on for the sake of seeing the
better sport. Others elsewhere spend the rest of the day in shooting
arrows, some in tilting with spears, some in flinging heavy stones, some
in putting the weight; others again in playing at the dice or in a
diversity of other games, but all without wrangling; and whosoever had
done best in his own game was presented by Arthur with a boon of price.
And after the first three days had been spent on this wise, upon the
fourth day all they that had done service in virtue of the office they
held were summoned, and unto each was made grant of the honour of the
office he held, in possession, earldom, to wit, of city or castle,
archbishopric, bishopric, abbacy, or whatsoever else it might be.

### CHAPTER XV

<span class="smallcaps">Now</span> the blessed Dubric, piously yearning
after the life of a hermit, did depose himself from the archiepiscopal
See, and David, the King's uncle,

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="margnote">Lucius Hiberius: his letter</span>was consecrated
in his place, whose life was an ensample of all goodness unto them whom
he had instructed in his doctrine. In the place, moreover, of the holy
Samson, Archbishop of Dol, was appointed Chelian, an illustrious priest
of Landaff, with the consent of Hoel, King of the Armorican Britons,
unto whom the good life and conditions of the man had commended him. The
Bishopric of Silchester also was assigned to Mangan, and that of Winton
unto Diwan, and the pontifical mitre of Alclud unto Eledan. And whilst
Arthur was allotting these benefices amongst them, behold, twelve men of
ripe age and worshipful aspect, bearing branches of olive in their right
hands in token of embassy, approach anigh the King with quiet step and
words as quiet, and after saluting him, present unto him a letter on
behalf of Lucius Hiberius conceived in these words:

‘Lucius, Procurator of the Republic, unto Arthur, King of Britain,
wisheth that which he hath deserved.

‘With much marvel do I marvel at the insolence of thy tyranny. I do
marvel, I say, thereat, and at the injury that thou hast done unto Rome.
When I recall it to remembrance, I am moved unto wrath for that thou art
so far beside thyself as not to acknowledge it, and art in no hurry to
perceive what it is to have offended the Senate by thy wrongful deeds,
albeit none better knoweth than thou that the whole world oweth
vassalage thereunto. For the tribute of Britain that the Senate hath
commanded thee to pay, and that hath been paid these many ages unto
Caius Julius, and unto his successors in the dignity of Rome,

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="margnote">Cador jesteth</span>thou hast presumed to hold
back in contempt of an empire of so lofty rank. Thou hast, moreover,
seized from them Gaul, seized from them the province of the Allobroges,
seized from them all the islands of the Ocean sea, the Kings whereof
have paid tribute unto our forefathers from the time that the Roman
power did in those parts prevail. Now, therefore, seeing that the Senate
hath decreed to demand lawful redress of thee for heaping so huge a pile
of injuries upon them, I do command thee that thou appear in Rome, and
do appoint the middle day of August in the year next coming as the term
of thine appearance, there to make satisfaction unto thy lords, and to
abide by such sentence as their justice shall decree. Wherein if thou
dost make default, I myself will enter into thy dominions and will take
heed by means of the sword to restore unto the Republic all those lands
whereof thy mad presumption hath plundered her.’

When this letter was read in presence of the King and his earls, Arthur
went apart with them into the Giants’ Tower, that is at the entrance of
the palace, to treat with them as to what ordinance they ought to make
as against a mandate of the kind. But, just as they had begun to mount
the stair, Cador, Duke of Cornwall, that was ever a merry man, burst out
on laughing before the King, and spake unto him on this wise:

'Until now it hath been my fear that the easy life the Britons have led
this long time they have been at peace might make them wax craven, and
utterly do away in them their renown in knighthood wherein they have
ever been held to excel

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

all other nations. For where use of arms is none, Arthur's and nought is
there to do but to toy with women speech and play at the dice and such
like follies, none need doubt but that cowardice will tarnish all they
once had of valour and honour and hardihood and renown. For nigh upon
five year is it since we took to junketings of the kind for lack of the
sports of Mars. Wherefore, methinks, God Himself hath put the Romans
upon this hankering, that so He may deliver us from our cowardize and
restore us to our prowess as it wont to be in the old days.'

And whilst he was saying this and more to the same purpose, they were
come to their seats, and when they were all set, Arthur spake unto them
thus:

### CHAPTER XVI

'<span class="smallcaps">Comrades</span>,' saith he, 'alike in adversity
and in prosperity, whose prowess I have made proof of in giving of
counsel no less than in deeds of arms, now earnestly bethink ye all in
common, and make ye wise provision as to what ye deem best for us to do
in face of such mandate as is this, for that which is diligently
provided for by a wise man aforehand is the more easily borne withal
when it cometh to the act. The more easily therefore shall we be able to
withstand the attack of Lucius, if we shall first with one accord have
applied us to weighing heedfully the means whereby we may best enfeeble
the effect thereof. Which, verily, I deem not greatly to be dreaded of
us, seeing that he doth with so unreasonable cause demand

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

<span class="margnote">Let Rome pay tribute to us</span>the tribute that
he desireth to have from Britain. For he saith that we ought of right to
give it unto him, for that it was paid unto Julius Cæsar and the other
his successors, who, invited by the discords of the ancient Britons, did
of old invade Britain by force of arms, and did thus by violence subdue
unto their power the country tottering as it then was with civil
dissensions. But, forasmuch as it was on this wise that they possessed
them of the country, it hath been only by an injustice that they have
taken tribute thereof. For nought that is taken by force and violence
can be justly possessed by him that did the violence. Wherefore a cause
without reason is this that he pretendeth whereby he assumeth that we
are of right his tributaries. Howbeit, sith that he thus presumeth to
demand of us that which is unjust, let us also, by like reasoning, ask
tribute of Rome from him, and let him that is the better man of the
twain carry off that which he hath demanded to have. For, if it be that
because Julius Cæsar and the rest of the Roman Kings did conquer Britain
in old days, he doth therefore decree that tribute ought now to be paid
unto him therefrom, in like manner do I now decree that Rome ought of
right to pay tribute unto me, forasmuch as mine ancestors did of yore
obtain possession of Rome. For Belinus, that most high and mighty King,
did, with the assistance of his brother, Brennius, to wit, Duke of the
Allobroges, take the city, and in the midmost of the market-place
thereof did hang a score of the most noble Romans; and moreover, after
they had taken it, did for many a year possess the same, Constantine,
also, the son of

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">not we to Rome</span>Helena, no less than Maximian,
both of them nigh of kindred unto myself, and both of whom, the one
after the other, wore the crown of Britain, did also obtain the throne
of the Roman empire. Bethink ye, therefore, whether we should ask
tribute of Rome? But as to Gaul or the neighbour islands of the Ocean,
no need is there of answer, inasmuch as he shrank from defending them at
the time we took them out of his dominion.'

And when he had thus spoken with more to the same effect, Hoel, King of
the Armorican Britons, rising up in precedence of all the rest, made
answer unto him on this wise:

### CHAPTER XVII

'<span class="smallcaps">Were</span> each one of up to take thought
within himself, and were he able to turn over in his mind all the
arguments upon every point in question, I deem that no better counsel
could he find than this which the wise discretion of thy policy hath
thus proposed unto our acceptance. For so exactly hath thy provident
forethought anticipated our desire, and with such Tullian dew of
eloquence hast thou besprinkled it withal, that we ought all of us to
praise without ceasing the affection of a man so constant, the power of
a mind so wise, the profit of counsel so exceeding apt to the occasion.
For if, in accordance with thine argument, thou art minded to go to
Rome, I doubt not that the victory shall be ours, seeing that what we do
justly demand of our enemies they did first begin to demand of us. For
whosoever

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

<span class="margnote">Hoel's speech</span>doth seek to snatch away from
another those things that be his own doth deserve to lose his own
through him whom he seeketh to wrong. Wherefore, sith that the Romans do
desire to take from us that which is our own, beyond all doubt we shall
take their own from them, so only we be allowed to meet them in the
field. Behold, this is the battle most to be desired by all Britons.
Behold the prophecies of the Sibyl that are witnessed by tokens true,
that for the third time shall one of British race be born that shall
obtain the empire of Rome. Already are the oracles fulfilled as to the
two, sith that manifestly, as thou hast said, the two illustrious
princes, Belinus and Constantine, have worn the imperial crown of the
Roman empire. And now in thee have we the third unto whom is promised
that highest height of honour. Hasten thou, therefore, to receive that
which God tarrieth not to grant. Hasten to subjugate that which doth
desire to be subjugated! Hasten to exalt us all, who, in order that thou
thyself mayst be exalted, will shrink not from receiving wounds, nay,
nor from losing our very lives. And that thou mayst carry this matter
through I will accompany thy presence with ten thousand men-at-arms.'

### CHAPTER XVIII

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> Hoel had made an end of his speech,
Angusel also, King of Albany, went on to declare what was his mind in
the matter on this wise:

'From the moment that I understood my lord

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span class="margnote">Angusel's speech</span>to be so minded as he hath
said, such gladness hath entered into my heart that I know not how to
utter it at this present. For in all our past campaigns that we have
fought against kings so many and so mighty, all that we have done
meseemeth as nought so long as the Romans and the Germans remain
unharmed, and we revenge not like men the slaughter they have formerly
inflicted upon our fellow-countrymen. But now that leave is granted us
to meet them in battle, I rejoice with exceeding great joy, and do yearn
with desire for the day to come when we shall meet. I am athirst for
their blood, even as for a well-spring when I had for three days been
forbidden to drink. O, may I see that morrow! How sweet will be the
wounds whether I give them or receive! when the right hand dealeth with
right hand. Yea, death itself will be sweet, so I may suffer it in
revenging our fathers, in safeguarding our freedom, in exalting our
King! Let us fall upon these half men, and falling upon them, tread them
under foot, so that when we have conquered them we may spoil them of
their honours and enjoy the victory we have won. I will add two thousand
horsemen to our army besides those on foot.'

### CHAPTER XIX

<span class="smallcaps">Thereafter</span> the rest said what there was
left to say. Each promised the knight's service that was due from him,
so that besides those that the Duke of Armorica had promised, sixty
thousand were reckoned from the island of Britain alone

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="margnote">Numbers of the host</span>of armed men with all
arms. But the Kings of the other islands, inasmuch as they had not yet
taken up with the custom of having knights, promised foot soldiers as
many as were due from them, so that out of the six islands, to wit,
Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, the Orkneys, Norway and Denmark, were
numbered six score thousand. From the duchies of the Gauls, the Ruteni,
Portunians, Estrusians, Maine, Anjou and Poitou, eighty thousand; from
the twelve earldoms of those who came along with Guerin of Chartres,
twelve hundred. Altogether they made eighty-three thousand two hundred
besides those on foot, who were not so easy to reckon.

### CHAPTER XX

<span class="smallcaps">King Arthur</span>, seeing that all those of his
allegiance were ready with one accord, bade them return quickly unto
their own countries and call out the armies they had promised; so that
in the Kalends of August they might hasten unto the haven of Barfleur,
and from thence advance with him to the frontiers of the Allobroges to
meet the Romans. Howbeit, he sent word unto the Emperors through their
ambassadors that in no wise would he pay the tribute, nor would go to
Rome for the sake of obeying their decree, but rather for the sake of
demanding from them what they had by judicial sentence decreed to demand
from him. Thereupon the ambassadors depart, the Kings depart, the barons
depart, nor are they slow to perform what they had been bidden to do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book X](gem11.md)
