[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](gem11)  [Next](gem13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406795151/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Histories of the Kings of Britain, by Geoffry of Monmouth*, tr. by
Sebastian Evans, \[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

# BOOK XI

### CHAPTER I

<span class="margnote">Arthur hasteneth to Britain</span><span
class="smallcaps">Hereof</span>, verily, most noble Earl, will Geoffrey
of Monmouth say nought. Natheless, according as he hath found it in the
British discourse aforementioned, and hath heard from Walter of Oxford,
a man of passing deep lore in many histories, in his own mean style will
he briefly treat of the battles which that renowned King upon his return
to Britain after this victory did fight with his nephew. So soon
therefore as the infamy of the aforesaid crime did reach his ears, he
forthwith deferred the expedition he had emprised against Leo, the King
of the Romans, and sending Hoel, Duke of the Armoricans, with the
Gaulish army to restore peace in those parts, he straightway hastened
back to Britain with none save the island Kings and their armies. Now,
that most detestable traitor Mordred had despatched Cheldric, the Duke
of the Saxons, into Germany, there to enlist any soever that would join
him, and hurry back again with them, such as they might be, the quickest
sail he could make. He pledged himself, moreover, by covenant to give
him that part of the island which stretcheth from the river Humber as
far as Scotland, and whatsoever Horsus and Hengist had possessed in Kent
in the time of Vortigern. Cheldric, accordingly, obeying his

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

<span class="margnote">Gawain slain at Richborough</span>injunctions,
had landed with eight hundred ships full of armed Paynims, and doing
homage unto this traitor did acknowledge him as his liege lord and king.
He had likewise gathered into his company the Scots, Picts and Irish,
and whomsoever else he knew bare hatred unto his uncle. All told, they
numbered some eight hundred thousand Paynims and Christians, and in
their company and relying on their assistance he came to meet Arthur on
his arrival at Richborough haven, and in the battle that ensued did
inflict sore slaughter on his men when they were landed. For upon that
day fell Angusel, King of Albany, and Gawain, the King's nephew, along
with numberless other. Eventus, son of Urian his brother, succeeded
Angusel in the kingdom, and did afterward win great renown for his
prowesses in those wars. At last, when with sore travail they had gained
possession of the coast, they revenged them on Mordred for this
slaughter, and drove him fleeing before them. For inured to arms as they
had been in so many battles, they disposed their companies right
skilfully, distributing horse and foot in parties, in such wise that in
the fight itself, when the infantry were engaged in the attack or
defence, the horse charging slantwise at full speed would strain every
endeavour to break the enemies’ ranks and compel them to take to flight.
Howbeit, the Perjurer again collected his men together from all parts,
and on the night following marched into Winchester. When this was
reported unto Queen Guenevere, she was forthwith smitten with despair
and fled from York unto Caerleon, where

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

<span class="margnote">Mordred fleeth to Cornwall,</span>she purposed
thenceforth to lead a chaste life amongst the nuns, and did take the
veil of their order in the church of Julius the Martyr.

### CHAPTER II

<span class="smallcaps">But</span> Arthur, burning with yet hotter wrath
for the loss of so many hundred comrades-in-arms, after first giving
Christian burial to the slain, upon the third day marched upon that city
and beleaguered the miscreant that had ensconced him therein. Natheless,
he was not minded to renounce his design, but encouraging his adherents
by all the devices he could, marched forth with his troops -and arrayed
them to meet his uncle. At the first onset was exceeding great slaughter
on either side, the which at last waxed heavier upon his side and
compelled him to quit the field with shame. Then, little caring what
burial were given unto his slain, 'borne by the swift-oared ferryman of
flight,' he started in all haste on his march toward Cornwall. Arthur,
torn by inward anxiety for that he had so often escaped him, pursued him
into that country as far as the river Camel, where Mordred was awaiting
his arrival. For Mordred, being, as he was, of all men the boldest and
ever the swiftest to begin the attack, straightway marshalled his men in
companies, preferring rather to conquer or to die than to be any longer
continually on the flight in this wise. There still remained unto him
out of the number of allies I have mentioned sixty thousand men, and
these he divided into three battalions, in each of which

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

<span class="margnote">whither Arthur followeth</span>were six thousand
six hundred and sixty-six men-at-arms. Besides these, he made out of the
rest that were over a single battalion, and appointing captains to each
of the others, took command of this himself. When these were all posted
in position, he spake words of encouragement unto each in turn,
promising them the lands and goods of their adversaries in case they
fought out the battle to a victory. Arthur also marshalled his army over
against them, which he divided into nine battalions of infantry formed
in square with a right and left wing, and having appointed captains to
each, exhorted them to make an end utterly of these perjurers and
thieves, who, brought from foreign lands into the island at the bidding
of a traitor, were minded to reave them of their holdings and their
honours. He told them, moreover, that these motley barbarians from
divers kingdoms were a pack of raw recruits that knew nought of the
usages of war, and were in no wise able to make stand against valiant
men like themselves, seasoned in so many battles, if they fell upon them
hardily and fought like men. And whilst the twain were still exhorting
their men on the one side and the other, the battalions made a sudden
rush each at other and began the battle, struggling as if to try which
should deal their blows the quicker. Straight, such havoc is wrought
upon both sides, such groaning is there of the dying, such fury in the
onset, as it would be grievous and burdensome to describe. Everywhere
are wounders and wounded, slayers and slain. And after much of the day
had been spent on this wise, Arthur at last, with one battalion

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

<span class="margnote">Arthur mortally wounded</span>wherein were six
thousand six hundred and sixty-six men, made a charge upon the company
wherein he knew Mordred to be, and hewing a path with their swords, cut
clean through it and inflicted a most grievous slaughter. For therein
fell that accursed traitor and many thousands along with him. Natheless
not for the loss of him did his troops take to flight, but rallying
together from all parts of the field, struggle to stand their ground
with the best hardihood they might. Right passing deadly is the strife
betwixt the foes, for well-nigh all the captains that were in command on
both sides rushed into the press with their companies and fell. On
Mordred's side fell Cheldric, Elaf, Egbricht, Bunignus, that were
Saxons, Gillapatric, Gillamor, Gislafel, Gillar, Irish. The Scots and
Picts, with well-nigh all that they commanded, were cut off to a man. On
Arthur's side, Olbricht, King of Norway, Aschil, King of Denmark, Cador,
Limenic, Cassibelaunus, with many thousands of his lieges as well
Britons as others that he had brought with him. Even the renowned King
Arthur himself was wounded deadly, and was borne thence unto the island
of Avalon for the healing of his wounds, where he gave up the crown of
Britain unto his kinsman Constantine, son of Cador, Duke of Cornwall, in
the year of the Incarnation of Our Lord five hundred and forty-two.

### CHAPTER III

<span class="smallcaps">When</span> Constantine was crowned King, the
Saxons and the two sons of Mordred raised an insurrection

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

<span class="margnote">Constantine succeedeth him</span>against him; but
could nought prevail, and after fighting many battles, the one fled to
London and the other to Winchester, and did enter and take possession of
those cities. At that time died the holy Daniel, that most devout
prelate of the church of Bangor, and Thomas, Bishop of Gloucester, was
elected unto the archbishopric of London. At that time also died David,
that most holy Archbishop of Caerleon, in the city of Menevia, within
his own abbey, which he loved above all the other monasteries of his
diocese, for that it was founded by the blessed Patrick who had foretold
his nativity. For whilst he was there sojourning for a while with his
fellow-brethren he was smitten of a sudden lethargy and died there,
being buried in the same church by command of Malgo, King of Venedotia.
In his place, Kinoc, priest of the church of Lambadarn, was appointed to
the Metropolitan See, and was thus promoted unto the higher dignity.

### CHAPTER IV

<span class="smallcaps">But</span> Constantine pursued the Saxons and
subdued them unto his allegiance; and took the two sons of Mordred. The
one youth, who had fled into the church of St. Amphibalus at Winchester,
he slew before the altar; but the other, who was in hiding in the
monastery of certain brethren in London, he did there find beside the
altar and slew by a cruel death. In the third year thereafter he was
himself slain by Conan, smitten by God's judgment, and was buried by the
side of

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="margnote">Succession of Kings</span>Uther Pendragon within the
structure of stones set together with marvellous art not far from
Salisbury which in the English tongue is called Stonehenge.

### CHAPTER V

<span class="smallcaps">Unto</span> him succeeded Aurelius Conan, a
youth of wondrous prowess, his nephew, who, as he held the monarchy of
the whole island, so might he have been worthy the crown thereof had he
not been a lover of civil war. For he raised disturbance against his
uncle, who of right ought to have reigned after Constantine, and thrust
him into prison, and after slaying both his sons, did himself obtain the
kingdom, and died in the second year of his reign.

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="smallcaps">Unto</span> Conan succeeded Vortipore, against
whom the Saxons raised an insurrection, bringing over their
fellow-countrymen from Germany in a passing mighty fleet. But he did
battle with them and overcame them, and after that he had obtained the
monarchy of the whole kingdom did govern the people thereof for four
years in diligence and in peace.

### CHAPTER VII

<span class="smallcaps">Unto</span> him succeeded Malgo, one of the
comeliest men in the whole of Britain, the driver-out of many tyrants,
redoubted in arms, more bountiful

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

<span class="margnote">Careticus hated of all</span>than others and
renowned for prowess beyond compare, yet hateful in the sight of God for
his secret vices. He obtained the sovereignty of the whole island, and
after many exceeding deadly battles did add unto his dominions the six
neighbour islands of the Ocean, to wit, Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, the
Orkneys, Norway and Denmark.

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="smallcaps">Unto</span> Malgo succeeded Careticus, a lover
of civil wars, hateful unto God and unto the Britons. The Saxons, having
had experience of his shiftiness, went unto Gormund, King of the
Africans, in Ireland, wherein, adventuring thither with a, vast fleet,
he had conquered the folk of the country. Thereupon, by the treachery of
the Saxons, he sailed across with a hundred and sixty-six thousand
Africans into Britain, which in one province the Saxons by perjuring
their oath of fealty, and in another the Britons by continually carrying
on civil wars amongst themselves, were utterly laying waste. Entering
into covenant, therefore, with the Saxons, Gormund made war upon
Careticus, and after many battles betwixt them, drove him fleeing from
city unto city until he forced him into Cirencester and did there
beleaguer him. Here Isembard, nephew of Lewis, King of the Franks, came
unto him and entered into a league of friendship with him and forsook
his Christianity for his sake upon condition that he would grant him his
assistance in seizing the kingdom of Gaul away from his

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

<span class="margnote">Geoffrey: his sermon</span>uncle, by whom, as he
said, he had been driven forth by violence and wrong. When Gormund at
last had taken and burnt the said city, he did battle with Careticus and
drove him fleeing beyond the Severn into Wales. Then he desolated the
fields, set fire to all the neighbouring cities, nor did he stint his
fury until he had burnt up well-nigh the whole face of the country from
sea to sea; in such sort that all the colonies were battered to the
ground by rams, and all they that dwelt therein along with the priests
of the churches delivered up to the flashing of their swords or the
crackling of the flames. The residue of them that were slaughtered in
these dreadful visitations had no choice but to flee unto whatsoever
shelter might seem to promise safety.

### CHAPTER IX

<span class="smallcaps">Wherefore</span>, O thou neglectful nation,
borne down by the weight of thine outrageous iniquities, wherefore, ever
thirsting after civil wars, hast thou thus enfeebled thee by these
discords within thine own household? Thou that of old didst subdue the
kingdoms that lie afar off unto thy might, thou that wast planted a
noble vine, wholly a right seed, how art thou now turned into the
degenerate plant of a bitter vine, that thus thou canst no longer
protect thine own country, thine own wives and children from thine
enemies. Yea, onward! On with thine inward discords, little
understanding that word of the Gospel, every kingdom divided against
itself shall

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

<span class="margnote">Loegria occupied by Saxons</span>be made desolate
and the house shall fall upon the house! For that thy kingdom hath been
divided against itself, for that the rage of civil war and the smoke of
envy have darkened thy mind, for that thy pride hath forbidden thee to
pay thine allegiance unto one only King, therefore now dost thou behold
thy country made desolate by these most sacrilegious heathen and the
houses thereof falling upon the houses, that thy children yet unborn
shall mourn. For they shall see the whelps of the barbarian lioness
lords over their strong places and their cities and over all else that
is now their own. Forth of all these shall they be driven, and scarce
again if ever shall they recover the glories of their ancient estate!

### CHAPTER X

<span class="smallcaps">Howbeit</span>, after that the tyrant of evil
omen had laid waste, as hath been said, well-nigh the whole island with
his countless thousands of Africans, the more part thereof which was
called Loegria did he make over unto the Saxons through whose treachery
he had come into the land. The remnant of the Britons did therefore
withdraw them into the western parts of the kingdom, Cornwall, to wit,
and Wales, from whence they ceased not to harry their enemies with
frequent and deadly forays. The three archbishops, to wit, he of
Caerleon, Theon of London, and Thadioceus of York, when they beheld all
the churches within their obedience destroyed even to the ground, fled
away with all the clergy that had

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

<span class="margnote">Civil wars</span>survived so dreadful a calamity
unto the shelter of the forests of Wales, bearing with them the relics
of the saints, fearing lest so many holy bones of such pious men of old
might be scattered and lost in the invasion of the barbarians were they
to stay and offer themselves to instant martyrdom, thus leaving the
relics in such imminent peril. Many of them betook them in a mighty
fleet unto Armorican Britain, so that the whole church of the two
provinces, Loegria, to wit, and Northumbria, was left desolate of all
the convents of religious therein. But of this will I tell the story
elsewhere, when I come to translate the Book of their Exile.

### CHAPTER XI

<span class="smallcaps">Thereafter</span> for many ages did the Britons
lose the crown of the kingdom and the sovereignty of the island, nor
made they any endeavour to recover their former dignity. On the
contrary, they did many a time and oft lay waste that part of the
country which did still remain unto them, subject now not unto one king
only, but unto three tyrants. But neither did the Saxons as yet obtain
the crown of the island, for they also were subject unto three kings,
and did at one time send forth their forays against themselves, and at
another against the Britons.

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="margnote">Pope Gregory and Augustine</span><span
class="smallcaps">In</span> the meantime was Augustine sent by the
blessed Pope Gregory into Britain to preach the Word of God unto the
English, who, blinded by heathen superstition, had wholly done away with
Christianity in that part of the island which they held. Howbeit, in the
part belonging to the Britons the Christianity still flourished which
had been held there from the days of Pope Eleutherius and had never
failed amongst them. But after Augustine came, he found in their
province seven bishoprics and an archbishopric provided with most godly
prelates besides a number of abbacies wherein the Lord's flock held
right order. Amongst others there was in the city of Bangor a certain
most noble church wherein was said to be such a number of monks that
when the monastery was divided into seven portions with a prior set over
each, not one of them had less than three hundred monks, who did all
live by the labour of their own hands. Their abbot was called Dinoot,
and was in marvellous wise learned in the liberal arts. He, when
Augustine did demand subjection from the British bishops, in order that
they might undertake in common the task of preaching the Gospel unto the
English people, made answer with divers arguings, that they owed no
subjection unto him as of right, nor were they minded to bestow their
preaching upon their enemies, seeing that they had an archbishop of
their own, and that the nations of the Saxons did persist in withholding
their own

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

<span class="margnote">Abbot Dinoot</span>country from them; whence they
did ever hold them in the deepest abhorrence, and reeked nought of their
faith and religion, and in nought had more in common with the Saxons
than with dogs.

### CHAPTER XIII

<span class="smallcaps">Ethelbert</span>, therefore, King of the men of
Kent, when he saw that the Britons did disdain to make subjection unto
Augustine, and did despise his preaching, took the same in grievous
dudgeon and stirred up Ethelfrid, King of the Northumbrians, and the
other Saxon knights to collect a mighty army and go unto the city of
Bangor to make away utterly with the Abbot Dinoot and the rest of the
clerics that did hold them in scorn. Agreeably therefore unto his
counsel, they mustered a marvellous great army, and upon their way unto
the province of the Britons came unto Leicester, where Brocmail, Earl of
that city, was expecting their arrival. There had come also unto the
same city out of the divers provinces of Britain a numberless company of
monks and hermits, and more especially from the city of Bangor, to pray
for the safety of their people. Thereupon, assembling all his armies
from every quarter, Ethelfrid, King of the Northumbrians, gave battle
unto Brocmail, who, making such stand as he could against him with a
lesser number of soldiers, quitted the city and fled, but not before he
had inflicted exceeding great slaughter upon the enemy. But Ethelfrid,
after he had taken the city, understanding the

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

<span class="margnote">Ethelfrid defeated</span>reason wherefore the
said monks had come unto the city, bade his men first turn their arms
against them, and thus upon that very day one thousand two hundred of
then, adorned with the palm of martyrdom, did obtain a seat in the
kingdom of Heaven. These, when the said tyrant of the Saxons went
forward on his march towards the city of Bangor, hearing of his mad
outrage, the Dukes of the Britons, to wit, Blederic, Duke of Cornwall,
Margadud, King of the South Welsh, and Cadran, King of the North, came
from all parts to meet him, and joining battle with him, drove him
fleeing wounded before them, but so passing great was the number of his
army slain, that it was reckoned not less than about ten thousand and
sixty-six had fallen. On the side of the Britons likewise fell Blederic,
Duke of Cornwall, who was their commander in those battles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XII](gem13)
