[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](morg12)  [Next](morg14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9II90/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Illustrations of Masonry*, by William Morgan, \[1827\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION FIRST OF THE MASTER MASON LECTURE.

"Are you a Master Mason"

Ans. "I am—try me, prove me—disprove me if yon can."

"Where were you prepared to be made a Master Mason?"

Ans. "In a room adjacent to the body of a just and lawfully constituted
lodge of such, duly assembled in a room representing the sanctum
sanctorum, or holy of holies, of King Solomon's Temple."

"How were you prepared?"

Ans. "By being divested of all metals; neither naked nor clothed;
barefoot nor shod; with a cable-tow three times about my naked body; in
which posture I was conducted to the door of the lodge, where I gave
three distinct knocks."

"What did those three distinct knocks allude to?"

Ans. "To the third degree of Masonry; it being that on

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

which I was about to enter."

"What was said to you from within?"

Ans. "Who comes there? Who comes there? Who comes there?"

"Your answer?'

Ans. "A worthy brother who has been regularly initiated as an Entered
Apprentice Mason, passed to the degree of a Fellow Craft, and now wishes
for further light in Masonry, by being raised to the sublime degree of a
Master Mason."

"What further was said to you from within?"

Ans. "I was asked if it was of my own free will and accord I made that
request; if I was duly and truly prepared; worthy and well qualified,
and had made suitable proficiency in the preceding degrees; all of which
being answered in the affirmative, I was asked by what further rights I
expected to obtain that benefit."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "By the benefit of a pass-word."

"What is that pass-word?"

Ans. "*Tubal Cain*."

"What next was said to you?"

Ans. "I was bid to wait till the Worshipful Master in the east was made
acquainted with my request and his answer returned."

"What followed after his answer was returned?"

Ans. "I was caused to enter the lodge on the two extreme points of the
compass, pressing my naked right and left breasts, in the name of the
Lord."

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted three times regularly round the lodge, and halted
at the Junior Warden in the south, where the same questions were asked
and answers returned as at the door."

"How did the Junior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Senior Warden in the west,
where the same questions were asked and answers returned as before."

"How did the Senior Warden dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted to the Worshipful Master in the
east, where by him the same questions were asked, and answers returned
as before, who likewise demanded

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of me from whence I came, and whither I was traveling."

"Your answer?"

Ans. "From the east and traveling to the west"

"Why do you leave the east, and travel to the west?"

Ans. "In search of light."

"How did the Worshipful Master then dispose of you?"

Ans. "He ordered me to be conducted back to the west, from whence I
came, and put in care of the Senior Warden, who taught me how to
approach the east, by advancing upon three upright, regular steps to the
third step, my feet forming a square and my body erect at the altar
before the Worshipful Master."

"What did the Worshipful Master do with you?"

Ans. "He made an obligated Master Mason of me."

"How?"

Ans. "In due form."

"What was that due form?"

Ans. "Both my knees bare bent, they forming a square; both hands on the
Holy Bible, Square and Compass; in which posture I took upon me the
solemn oath or obligation of a Master Mason."

"After your obligation, what was said to you?"

Ans. "What do you most desire?"

"Your answer?"

Ans. "More light."

\[The bandage round the head is now dropped over the eyes.\]

"Did you receive light?"

Ans. "I did."

"On being brought to light on this degree, what did you first discover?"

Ans. "Three great lights in Masonry, by the assistance of three lesser,
and both points of the compass elevated above the square, which denoted
to me that I had received, or was about to receive all the light that
could be conferred on me in a Master's Lodge."

"What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master approaching me from the east, under the sign
and due-guard of a Master Mason, who presented me with his right hand in
token of brotherly love

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

and confidence, and proceeded to give me the pass-grip and word of a
Master Mason, \[the word is the name of the pass-grip\] and bid me arise
and salute the Junior and Senior Wardens and convince them that I was an
obligated Master Mason, and had the sign, pass-grip and word. \[Tubal
Cain.\] "What did you next discover?"

Ans. "The Worshipful Master approaching me the second time from the
east, who presented me with a lamb-skin or white apron, which he said he
hoped I would continue to wear, with honor to myself, and satisfaction
and advantage to the brethren."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "The working tools of a Master Mason."

"What are they?"

Ans. "All the implements of Masonry indiscriminately, but more
especially the trowel."

"How explained?"

Ans. "The trowel is an instrument made use of by operative masons to
spread the cement which unites a building into one common mass, but we,
as Free and Accepted Masons, are taught to make use of it for the more
noble and glorious purpose of spreading the cement of brotherly love and
affection, that cement which unites us into one sacred band or society
of brothers, among whom no contention should ever exist, but that noble
emulation of who can best work or best agree."

"What were you next presented with?"

Ans. "Three precious jewels."

"What are they?"

Ans. "Humanity, friendship and brotherly love."

"How were you then disposed of?"

Ans. "I was conducted out of the lodge and invested with what I had been
divested, and returned again in due season."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Section of the Master Mason Lecture.](morg14.md)
