[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](morg14)  [Next](morg16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002E9II90/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Illustrations of Masonry*, by William Morgan, \[1827\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SECTION SECOND OF THE MASTER MASON LECTURE.

"What does a Master's lodge represent?"

Ans. "The Sanctum Sanctorum, or holy of holies of King Solomon's
Temple."

"How long was the temple building?"

Ans. Seven years, during which it rained not in the day-time, that the
workmen might not be obstructed in their labor."

"What supported the temple."

Ans. "Fourteen hundred and fifty-three columns and two thousand nine
hundred and six pilasters, all hewn from the finest Parian marble."

"What further supported it?"

Ans. "Three grand columns, or pillars."

"What were they called?"

Ans. "Wisdom, strength and beauty."

"What did they represent?"

Ans. "The pillar of wisdom represented Solomon, King of Israel, whose
wisdom contrived the mighty fabric; the pillar of strength, Hiram, King
of Tyre, who strengthened Solomon in his glorious undertaking; the
pillar of beauty, Hiram Abiff, the widow's son, whose cunning craft and
curious

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

workmanship beautified and adorned the temple."

"How many were there employed in the building of King Solomon's Temple?"

Ans. "Three Grand Masters, three thousand three hundred Masters, or
overseers of the work, eighty thousand Fellow Crafts, and seventy
thousand Entered Apprentices; all those were classed and arranged in
such a manner by the wisdom of Solomon that neither envy, discord nor
confusion were suffered to interrupt that universal peace and
tranquillity that pervaded the work at that important period."

"How many constitutes an Entered Apprentice lodge?"

Ans. "Seven; one Master and six Entered Apprentices."

"Where did they usually meet?"

Ans. "On the ground floor of King Solomon's Temple."

"How many constitute a Fellow Craft's lodge?"

Ans. "Five; two Masters and three Fellow Crafts."

"Where did they usually meet?"

Ans. "In the middle chamber of King Solomon's Temple."

"How many constitute a Master's lodge?"

Ans. "Three Master Masons."

"Where did they usually meet?"

Ans. "In the Sanctum Sanctorum, or holy of holies of King Solomon's
Temple."

"Have you any emblems on this degree?"

Ans. "We have several, which are divided into two classes."

"What are the first class?"

Ans. "The pot of incense, the bee-hive, the book of constitutions,
guarded by the Tyler's sword, the sword pointing to a naked heart, the
all-seeing eye, the anchor and ark, the forty-seventh problem of Euclid,
the hour-glass, the scythe, and the three steps usually delineated on
the Master's carpet, which are thus explained: The pot of incense is an
emblem of a pure heart, which is always an acceptable sacrifice to the
Deity and, as this glows with fervent heat, so should our hearts
continually glow with gratitude to the great and beneficent Author of
our existence for the manifold blessings and comforts we enjoy. The
bee-hive is an emblem of industry, and recommends the practice of that
virtue to all created beings, from the highest seraph in heaven to the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

lowest reptile of the dust. It teaches us that, as we came into the
world rational and intelligent beings, so we should ever be industrious
ones, never sitting down contented while our fellow-creatures around us
are in want, when it is in our power to relieve them without
inconvenience to ourselves. When we take a survey of nature, we behold
man, in his infancy, more helpless and indigent than the brute creation;
he lies languishing for days, weeks, months and years, totally incapable
of providing sustenance for himself; of guarding against the attacks of
the wild beasts of the field, or sheltering himself from the
inclemencies of the weather. It might have pleased the great Creator of
heaven and earth to have made man independent of all other beings, but,
as dependence is one of the strongest bonds of society, mankind were
made dependent on each other for protection and security, as they
thereby enjoy better opportunities of fulfilling the duties of
reciprocal love and friendship. Thus was man formed for social and
active life, the noblest part of the work of God, and he that will so
demean himself, as not to be endeavoring to add to the common stock of
knowledge and understanding, may be deemed a drone in the hive of
nature, a useless member of society, and unworthy of our protection as
Masons.

The book of constitutions, guarded by the Tyler's sword, reminds us that
we should be ever watchful and guarded in our thoughts, words, and
actions, particularly when before the enemies of Masonry, ever bearing
in remembrance those truly Masonic virtues, silence and circumspection.
The sword pointing to a naked heart, demonstrates that justice will
sooner or later overtake us; and although our thoughts, words and
actions may be hidden from the eye of man yet that all-seeing eye, whom
the sun, moon and stars obey, and under whose watchful care even comets
perform their stupendous revolutions, pervades the inmost recesses of
the human heart, and will reward us according to our merits. The anchor
and ark, are emblems of a well grounded hope and a well spent life. They
are emblematical of that Divine ark which safely wafts us over this
tempestuous sea of troubles, and that anchor which shall safely moor us
in a peaceful harbor, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the
weary shall find rest.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

The forty-seventh problem of Euclid: This was an invention of our
ancient friend and brother, the great Pythagoras, who, in his travels
through Asia, Africa and Europe, was initiated into several orders of
priesthood, and raised to the sublime degree of a Master Mason. This
wise philosopher enriched his mind abundantly in a general knowledge of
things, and more especially in Geometry, or Masonry, on this subject he
drew out many problems and theorems; and among the most distinguished he
erected this, which, in the joy of his heart, he called Eureka, in the
Grecian language signifying, I have found it; and upon the discovery of
which he is said to have sacrificed a hecatomb. It teaches Masons to be
general lovers of the arts and sciences. The hour glass is an emblem of
human life. Behold! how swiftly the sands run, and how rapidly our lives
are drawing to a close. We cannot without astonishment behold the little
particles which are contained in this machine; how they pass away,
almost imperceptibly, and yet to our surprise in a short space of an
hour they are all exhausted. Thus wastes man! To-day, he puts forth the
tender leaves of hope; to-morrow, blossoms, and bears his blushing
honors thick upon him; the next day comes a frost, which nips the root,
and when he thinks his greatness is still ripening, he falls like autumn
leaves, to enrich our mother earth. The scythe is an emblem of time,
which cuts the brittle thread of life, and launches us into eternity.
Behold! what havoc the scythe of time makes among the human race; if by
chance we should escape the numerous evils, incident to childhood and
youth, and with health and vigor come to the years of manhood, yet
withal we must soon be cut down by the all-devouring scythe of time, and
be gathered into the land where our fathers have gone before us. The
three steps usually delineated upon the Masters carpet, are emblematical
of the three principal stages of human life, viz.: youth, manhood and
age. In youth, as Entered Apprentices, we ought industriously to occupy
our minds in the attainment of useful knowledge; in manhood, as Fellow
Craft, we should apply our knowledge to the discharge of our respective
duties to God, our neighbors, and ourselves, that so in age, as Master
Mason, we may enjoy the happy reflections consequent on a well spent
life, and die in the hope of a glorious immortality.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

"What are the second class of emblems?"

Ans. "The spade, coffin, death-head, marrow-bones, and sprig of cassia,
which are thus explained: The spade opens the vault to receive our
bodies where our active limbs will soon moulder to dust. The coffin,
death-head, and marrowbones, are emblematical of the death and burial,
of our Grand Master, Hiram Abiff, and are worthy of our serious
attention. The sprig of cassia is emblematical of that important part of
man which never dies—and when the cold winter of death shall have
passed, and the bright summer's morn of the resurrection appears, the
Son of Righteousness shall descend, and send forth his angels to collect
our ransomed dust; then, if we are found worthy, by his pass word, we
shall enter into the celestial lodge above, where the Supreme Architect
of the Universe presides, where we. shall see the King in the beauty of
holiness and with him enter into an endless eternity. Here ends the
three first degrees of Masonry, which constitute a Master Mason's Lodge.
A Master Mason's Lodge and a chapter of Royal Arch Masons, are two
distinct bodies, wholly independent of each other. The members of a
Chapter are privileged to visit all Master Mason's Lodges when they
please, and may be, and often are members of both at the same time; and
all the members of a Master Mason's Lodge, who are Royal Arch Masons,
though not members of any Chapter, may visit any Chapter. I wish the
reader to understand that neither all Royal Arch Masons nor Master
Masons are members of either Lodge or Chapter; there are tens of
thousands who are not members and scarcely ever attend, although
privileged to do so. A very small proportion of Masons, comparatively
speaking, ever advance any further than the third degree, and
consequently never get the great word which was lost by Hiram's untimely
death. Solomon, king of Israel; Hiram, king of Tyre, and Hiram Abiff;
the widow's son having sworn that they nor neither of them would ever
give the word except they three were present; \[and it is generally
believed that there was not another person in the world at that time
that had it\], consequently the word was lost, and supposed to be
forever; but the sequel will show it was found after the lapse of four
hundred and seventy years; notwithstanding the word Mah-hah-bone,

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

which was substituted, by Solomon, still continues to be used by Master
Masons, arid no doubt will be as long as Masonry attracts the attention
of men; and the word which was lost is used in the Royal Arch degree.

What was the word of the Royal Arch degree before they found the
Master's word which was lost at the death of Hiram Abiff, and was not
found for four hundred and seventy years? Were there any Royal Arch
Masons before the Master's word was found? I wish some Masonic gentleman
would solve these two questions. The ceremonies, history, and the
lecture, in the preceding degree, are so similar, that perhaps, some one
of the three might have been dispensed with, and the subject well
understood by most readers, notwithstanding, there is a small difference
between the work and history, and between the history and the lecture. I
shall now proceed with the Mark Master's degree, which is the first
degree in the Chapter. The Mark Master's degree, the Past Master's, and
the Most Excellent Master's are called lodges of Mark Master Masons,
Past Masters, and Most Excellent Masters; yet, although called lodges,
they are a component part of the Chapter. Ask a Mark Master Mason if he
belongs to the Chapter, he will tell you he does, but that he has only
been marked. It is not an uncommon thing, by any means, for a Chapter to
confer all four of the degrees in one night, viz.: The Mark Master, Past
Master, Most Excellent Matter, and Royal Arch degree.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Entered Apprentice Degree](morg16.md)
