[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac06)  [Next](ybac08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

### SEC. III. CAPTIVITY OF GERONIMO DE AGUILAR. EXPEDITION OF HERNANDEZ DE CORDOBA AND GRIJALVA TO YUCATAN.

It is said that the first Spaniards to come to Yucatan were Gerónimo de
Aguilar, a native of Ecija, and his companions. These, in 1511, upon the
break-up at Darien resulting from the dissensions between Diego de
Nicueza and Vasco Núñez de Balboa, followed Valdivia on his voyage in a
caravel to San Domingo, to give account to the admiral and the governor,
and to bring 20,000 ducats of the king's. On the way to Jamaica the
caravel grounded on the shoals known as the Viboras, where it was lost
with all but twenty men. These went with Valdivia in a boat without
sails, and only some poor oars and no provisions, and were at sea for
thirteen days. After nearly half of them had died of hunger, the rest
reached the coast of Yucatan at a province called that of the Maya,
whence the language of Yucatan is known as **Mayat’an**, meaning the
'Maya speech.'

These poor fellows fell into the hands of a bad cacique, who sacrificed
Valdivia and four others to their idols, and served them in a feast to
the people. Aguilar and Guerrero and five or six others lie saved to
fatten. These broke their prison and came to another chief who was an
enemy of the first, and more merciful; he made them his slaves, and his
successor treated them with much kindness. However, all died of grief,
save only Gerónimo de Aguilar and Gonzalo Guerrero. Of these Aguilar was
a good Christian and had a breviary, by which he kept count of the feast
days and finally escaped on the arrival of the Marquis Hernando Cortés,
in 1519.

Guerrero learned the language and went to Chectemal (Chetumal), which is
Salamanca de Yucatan. Here he was received by a chief named **Nachan
Can**, who placed in his charge his military affairs; in these he did
well and conquered his master's enemies many times. He taught the
Indians to fight, showing them how to make barricades and bastions. In
this way, and by living as an Indian, he gained a great reputation and
married a woman of high quality, by whom he had children, and he made no
attempt to escape with Aguilar. He decorated his body, let his hair
grow, pierced his ears to wear rings like the Indians, and is believed
to have become an idolater like them.

During Lent of 1517 Francisco Hernández de Córdoba sailed from Cuba with
three ships to procure slaves for the mines, as the population of Cuba

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

was diminishing. <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4) Others say he sailed
to discover new lands. Taking Alaminos as a pilot he landed on Isla do
las Mugeres, to which he gave this name because of the idols he found
there, of the goddesses of the country, **Aixchel**, **Ixchebeliax**,
**Ixhunié**, **Ixhunieta**, vestured from the girdle down, and having
the breasts covered after the manner of the Indians. The building was of
stone, such as to astonish them; and they found certain objects of gold,
which they took. Arriving at Cape Cotoch they directed their course to
the Bay of Campeche, where they disembarked on Lazarus Sunday, whence
they called the place Lazaro. They were well received by the chief and
the Indians marveled at seeing the Spaniards, touching their beards and
persons.

At Campeche they found a building in the sea near to the land, all
square and in steps, on the top of which was an idol with two fierce
animals devouring his flanks; also a great thick serpent swallowing a
lion; the animals were covered with the blood of sacrifices. At Campeche
they learned of a large town nearby, which was Champotón; landing there
they found a chief named **Moch-Covoh**, a warlike man who called his
people together against the Spaniards. Francisco Hernández was much
disturbed seeing in this what must happen; but not to show a less spirit
he put his men in order and had the artillery fired from the ships. The
Indians however, notwithstanding the strange sound, smoke and fire of
the guns, attacked with great cries; the Spaniards resisted, inflicting
severe wounds and killing many. Nevertheless the chief so inspired his
people that they forced the Spaniards to retire, killing twenty,
wounding fifty, and taking alive two whom they afterwards sacrificed.
Francisco Hernández came off with thirty-three wounds, and thus returned
downcast to Cuba, where he reported that the land was good and rich,
because of the gold he found on the Isla de las Mugeres.

These stories moved Diego Velásquez, governor of Cuba, as well as many
others, so that he sent his nephew Juan de Grijalva with four ships and
200 men. With him went Francisco de Montejo, to whom one ship belonged,
the expedition sailing on the 1st of May, 1518.

They took with them the sane Alaminos as pilot, and landed on the island
of Cozumel, from which the pilot descried the coast of Yucatan which
with Francisco Hernández he had previously coasted along, on the right
hand going south. Desiring to see whether it was an island, they turned
left and followed by the bay they called Ascension, because of entering
it on that day. Then turning back they followed the whole coast until
they reached Champotón for the second time; landing here for water, one
man was killed and fifty wounded, among them Grijalva, who received two
arrows and lost a tooth and a half. In this [manner](errata.htm#2) they
departed and named the harbor the Puerto de Mala Pelea. On this voyage
they discovered New Spain, Pánuco and Tabasco, where they stayed for
five months, and also tried to make a landing

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

at Champotón. This the Indians resisted with such spirit as to come out
close to the ships in their canoes, in order to shoot their arrows. So
they made sail and departed.

When Grijalva returned from his voyage of discovery and trade in Tabasco
and Ulúa, the great captain Hernando Cortés was in Cuba; and he on the
news of such a country and such riches, conceived the desire of seeing
it, and even of acquiring it for God, for his king, for himself, and for
his friends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:\*](ybac07.htm#fr_4) <span id="page_26">p.
26</span> The ghastly chapter of the fate of the peaceful population of
Cuba has been elsewhere told, and we have here one of its early
evidences. But the Cubans were fortunate—it was as least quick total
extermination. The Mayas were to live through 400 years of seizures for
sale abroad, resettlements and forced removals from their towns, to
receive their conquerors’ religion, or to add to his wealth and ease.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Expedition of Cortés to Cozumel. Letter to Aguilar and His
Friends](ybac08)
