[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac63)  [Next](ybac65) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

### Yucatan in 1549 and 1579

*The Tax List of 1549 and the Relaciones*.

In 1517 Hernández de Cordova coasted from Ascension Bay around to
Campeche; in 1518 Grijalva landed on Cozumel island and then sailed to
Campeche, attempting occupation, but was driven off at Champotón. On
March 4, 1519, Cortés made a peaceful stop at Cozumel, received Gerónimo
de Aguilar, and continued on to Tabasco and Veracruz, for the conquest
of Mexico, Montejo being one of his captains.

Montejo received from the king the capitulation authorizing his conquest
of Yucatan on Dec. 8th, 1526, after his successful defense of Cortés
against the pretensions of Governor Velazquez of Cuba, and then made his
own landing at Cozumel in September, 1927. After his attempted
settlement at Chichén Itzá, and the great battle at Aké, he was driven
off from the northeast; then after abortive efforts in the west this
first attempt was abandoned in 1533, save for the retention of a base in
Tabasco. He was then made governor of Honduras, was forced to surrender
this to the control of Alvarado, the conqueror of Guatemala, and was
allowed the governorship of Chiapas.

From this point he organized a second effort against Yucatan, placing in
charge his natural son Francisco (previously legitimated by royal
decree), himself being then at the age of 62. From this effort came the
formal establishment of Spanish rule at Tiho, renamed Mérida, on Jan. 6,
1542; and this was then only made possible by the voluntarily offered
alliance of Tutul Xiu of Maní, just as the Cakchiquels had aided
Alvarado in Guatemala to subdue the Quichés, to the final loss of their
own independence.

Long before the Xius, themselves incomers from Mexico, had founded
(perhaps re-founded) Uxmal, and later had become part of the League of
Mayapán, founded by Kukulcan in the eleventh century, which governed
Yucatan united under the headship of the Cocoms, an eastern family
deriving from the ancient Itzá stock, for over 300 years. Then under Xiu
leadership the League was broken up, Mayapán destroyed in 1420, leaving
inherited rancors as bitter as those that are preparing the fall of
Europe today, when 500 years after their expulsion from Spain, Moors are
brought back in, by Spanish Christians to kill other Spanish Christians.
To strengthen themselves against the eastern faction, the Xius gave
allegiance to Montejo and Spain, surrendering their own independence. To
this association was soon added the Canuls, themselves earlier incomers
from Mexico, later than the Xius; also others of the western families or
chiefdoms. It was Jan. 23, 1542, when the Lord Tutul Xiu came to Tiho.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

Montejo at once in 1542 began the allotment of the towns as 'encomienda'
grants to his 80 soldiers, 'conquistadores.' But the news of the entry
of the Spaniards and the action of Tutul Xiu had quickly spread through
the peninsula, and under the leadership of Nachi Cocom, descendant of
the only member of his family left after the sack of Mayapán by the
Xius, an army said to have numbered 40,000, or even 60,000 men, from all
the regions shown on the eastern half of our accompanying map, with
those of Sotuta, attacked the Spaniards and their Yucatecan allies at
Tiho, on June 11, 1542. Actually a combination of civil war and a drive
for conquest from without, the superior arms and discipline of the
compact 'foreign legion,' prevailed.

With this success behind him Montejo set out in 1543 to subdue all the
eastern territory, from which he had been driven by superior valor
sixteen years before. In 1544 Valladolid was established as the second
city, on the site of the ancient Saci, with forty resident encomendero
distributees of the population and towns; and next Salamanca at
Bakhalal, with twenty, as the third capital center. Then in 1546 a great
uprising took place in all the east, which after four months mercilessly
exterminating warfare, and with the aid of the Xius and their neighbors,
the Canuls, those of Hocabá and probably the Peches, was suppressed.

Montejo had brought with him a single priest of the regular clergy, not
a friar, one Francisco Hernández, who soon returned to serve at
Campeche, leaving padre Martin de Alarcon as cura at Mérida. No friars
came to Yucatan until 1545, when four Franciscans came from Guatemala to
Campeche under Luis de Villalpando, and four others from Mexico.
Villalpando was one of the most active, as later to be noted, and seems
to be the pioneer in the conversions, around Valladolid and further in
Cochuah; but this was not until 1548, over a year after the uprising of
1546 was suppressed. In this same year Kukum Xiu and others of his party
were baptised, and the beginnings of the later great monastery at Sisal,
the suburb of Valladolid, were made. The foregoing thus brings us to the
year 1549, when Landa arrived, and when the Tax-List was drawn up, as
seen below.

Landa became provincial of the Franciscan order for Yucatan in 1561, was
censured by Bishop Toral on his arrival in 1562; he then went to Spain
to defend himself before the Council of the Indies in 1563, wrote his
great work in 1566, certainly as a move to increase his own standing,
while his friends back in Yucatan were carrying on the campaign for his
return, and to establish their own authority over that of Bishop Toral.
The latter finally went away to Mexico, where he died in 1571; Landa,
appointed in 1572 to succeed him, returned as Bishop to Yucatan in 1573,
and died in 1579, the same year as the Relaciones were drawn up, from
which we gather our final data for the preceding thirty years in
Yucatan.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

We are told that the peninsula of Yucatan at the coming of Cortés and
Montejo was divided into nineteen independent Chiefdoms. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_50) It is with the purpose of giving what
picture we can of it as a native Maya realm when the List was issued and
Landa arrived, and then when the Reports were made, and Landa died,
leaving it a Spanish colony, that the data herein are summarized. The
Tax List has been known, but never yet published, to our knowledge. The
*Relaciones* were published in 1898-1900, and often referred to, but are
still a mine of uncoordinated material, especially for English readers.

 

Our knowledge of Yucatan, before and after the Conquest, rests (apart
from the results of field archaeological work and our still inchoate
study of the hieroglyphic Dresden and Madrid codices) on the native
chronicles in the Maya language, Landa, the Xiu Papers, and these 1549
and 1579-81 documents. The Tax List we give in complete digested form;
the Relations when studied and compared throw strong light on points of
history, and on Landa's own story and position, far too wide to compass
here, but which will be brought out later in a much fuller work on the
whole Maya area and times. We are using them here for the single purpose
of shown,; the immediate results of the invasion and conquest on the
population of the country. That story is best told by a sort of
commentary on the Map, as it was and is; about as we might read racial
movements, animosities, wars, and history, around Dantzig and the Polish
corridor, Memel, and what is left of Armenia. We shall thus seek to give
a 'population picture,' of each native chiefdom <span
id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_50) in turn, as it was when Villalpando,
Landa and then the Auditor Tomás López came, and then left it, pacified
in the west, unpacified in the east, but 'reduced' in all senses of that
word, in the east, north, west and south.

The Tax List in 1549 fixed the levy, to be paid by each of 175 towns in
Yucatan, and 10 in Tabasco, to its encomendero, or in certain towns for
the Crown. Starting in the northwestern corner, the order of listing
proceeded quite closely in geographical order, a fact helping much in
the many cases where the towns in time disappeared from the map, or
history. The listing followed a formula of which we give a sample below,
of which the rest are

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

merely duplicates save in their figures. In many cases the population as
such is noted in the margin, but this always corresponds to the number
of mantles, *mantas*, to be paid in the year, each *manta* being made up
of three breadths, one to be woven and delivered each four months. The
proportions of the other items were fairly regular, but not sharp.
Certain amounts of salt and/or fish were to be paid by towns with access
to the sea, and in Tabasco (with which we are not here concerned)
cacao-and chile were also called for. The document thus runs as follows:

 

*The Royal Audiencia in the City of Santiago de Guatemala*.

In the City of Santiago, in the Province of Guatemala, on the second day
of February, in the year 1549 of our Lord, by the President and Justices
of the Royal Audiencia and Chancery of His Majesty the King, seated in
the said city.

The town and people of Zamailco (Samahil, in Zipatán), which is in the
encomienda of Rodrigo Alvarez, a citizen of the city of Mérida, are
taxed as follows. The people of the said town are ordered to plant each
year six fanegas (bushels) of maize and one-half fanega of beans,
fencing, cultivating and reaping in the said town. They will also pay
annually 400 mantles of the usual kind, and of the value of two tomins
(pieces of eight, or *reales*) each; 22 arrobas (quarter 100-weights) of
beeswax; 2 arrobas of honey; 400 fowls, of either the native or Spanish
variety, as they prefer; 4 fanegas of salt and 3 arrobas of fish.

The above tribute they shall deliver to their encomendero in the city of
Mérida, at the rate of one-third every four months, and with pack
animals or carts which their said encomendero will supply to them they
shall transport the said tribute to him in the said City of Mérida. They
will also give him four Indian workmen for his service. During the
period of their service the said encomendero is required to feed the
Indian workmen and have them taught the doctrines of Christianity. They
do not have to give any other thing, neither may the said Indians be
levied upon in any manner whatever, nor may they substitute any other
thing for any part of the tribute, under pain of the penalties in the
law and ordinances laid down by his Majesty for the good government of
the Indies.

(signed) LICENCIADO CERRATO. LICENCIADO ROGEL.

Under this order there was then levied a total of 53,285 mantles per
year, with the other above items, upon the 175 towns named as granted in
the peninsula. Many of these towns have disappeared, 30 indeed in the
chiefdom of the Cupuls in the ensuing thirty years; but thanks to the
arrangement of the list and the fact that many of the grantees had
several towns is assigned, we can separate them into their chiefdoms
with little uncertainty.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

A comparison of the list and the map will make clear that as an actual
population index the figures must fall very short of the facts, partly
because of what is to be told about the eastern half of the map, and
partly because of the absence in the list of so many known towns, for
reasons we do not know, in the western half. Further, to the Spanish
administration, population meant only so many tax-payers, heads of
households; and since the house (as well as the larger unit, the town)
was itself a 'community' organization only releasing its sons when they
had so far advanced in status as new 'family heads,' we should at least
multiply the taxable population by five or more, to reach what we
understand as population.

Now, in comparing 1549 with 1579, we have a certain amount of definite
reduction figures in the east; and in the west few of the grantees
reporting through Mérida (or else Gaspar Antonio Chi, who helped most of
them in their reports) seemed to consider actual figures worth
mentioning, and a very large proportion said nothing even of losses,
even in a vague way. But one way or another, we have continued positive
evidence, confirmed by similar testimony at various places, that the
reduction in the intervening thirty years ran from one-half as the
smallest loss (and that in few cases only) down to a very common
reduction to one-third, and frequently to one-fifth, then even to
one-tenth; and over most of the eastern region, to nothing.

The ’49 Tax List is then our one *definite* base from which to visualize
what happened in Yucatan in the thirty years we are considering; and it
only gives the number of 'man taxpayers' reachable *and* assigned as
tribute-payers to Montejo's captains and soldiery. Since we are also
trying to remake for ourselves a native Maya map and its political and
governmental set up when the Spaniards arrived, the following table
should aid readers interested enough in the work of friar Landa. The
figures stand for heads of households.

|           |               |
|-----------|---------------|
| Cozumel   | 220           |
| Ekab      | 165           |
| Cochuah   | 300           |
| Chauac-há | 440           |
| Tazees    | 2,240         |
| Cupul     | 12,940        |
| Chel      | 4,870         |
| Cocom     | 2,740         |
| Ceh-Pech  | 9,270         |
| Hocabá    | 3,300         |
| Xiu       | 7,290         |
| Zipatán   | 3,640         |
| Canul     | 1,680         |
| Campeche  | 2,280         |
| Champotón | <u> 2,110</u> |
| Total     | 53,285        |

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

Testimony outside the Tax List indicates that the figure for Chauac-há
must have been 4000 at the very least, and double that more likely.
Similar testimony as to destroyed towns in the concentration calls for a
like increase for the Cupul chiefdom, up to at least 18,000 in the towns
we are told existed. Out of the 3365 above given for households taxed in
1549 in the first five regions in the list, 633 survived in 1579.

*The Island of Cozumel*.

At the coming of the Spaniards Cozumel was less a chiefdom than a sacred
place of pilgrimage from over the whole peninsula and even the regions
beyond, ruled by the high priest of **Ixchel**, the Isis of the Maya
pantheon; he was of the **Pat** family. Stretching almost in a line to
the west we had three, possibly four, other major sacred centers; the
greatest Itzamal, the seat of **Itzamná**, the Great Initiator, in a way
corresponding to Osiris, whither came pilgrims from all "the four
roads," to worship and be healed. The sacred well at Chichén Itzá was
another, and so also Cobá, whose greatness as a center we are only now
beginning to learn. All these belonged to the most ancient times, of the
Itzás. What place was held by Ti-ho, "at the Place of the Five," the
present Mérida, we do not know.

Cortés was received in friendship at Cozumel, which is described as
'populous'; as the grant of Juan Núñez in 1549, it was taxed as for 220
'heads of families'; by 1579 the region generally was said to have lost
two-thirds its people, and Cozumel reduced to 20. The blame for this
loss, along the whole east coast in the earliest period, lies first at
the sweeping smallpox brought in 1520 by one negro on a Spanish ship;
then from 1546 on to the merciless cruelty of the Pachecos, let loose to
'reduce' the revolt of that year.

*Ekab*.

The name is an abbreviation of **ek-cab**, 'black earth,' and the
province extended to an undefined southern boundary near Lake Bacalar.
Of its once great population, strong enough to keep the Spaniards off
until they came with Xiu backing from the west, we have little left but
names. Across the 15 mile channel lies P’ole, the mainland port of
Cozumel, through which passed all the pilgrimages; Juan Núñez held it,
with Cozumel, in 1549, with only 17 tribute payers. Halfaway down the
coast was Samal, once 'populous,' but in 1579 only taxed for 50; and
today its very location is in doubt. Its description would well fit
Tulum, were it not for an early statement that it lay by a creek, near a
place Muyil, halfway between Cozumel and Ascension Bay. This latter is
supported by the still marked trails from the interior

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (always a prime
help in such cases, since made trails persist), and Samal was a main
port on the Honduras trade. Bitanché was held in ’49 taxed for 60
married men; today its location is wholly lost. Of the original capital
of the chiefdom, Ekab, we know it was at the north, about as shown on
the map; held as a grant in ’79, its population was not reported.

And of Isla Mugeres the grantee of Ekab reported it "uninhabited" in
1579. That is all we have for Ekab chiefdom.

*Cochuah*.

Of Cochuah, which includes the largest inland lake left today in
Yucatan, Chichen-kanab, we know somewhat more, and it also has some
practically independent native population today, away from the end of
the railroad at Peto. Its ancient capital, Chikin-cenote, the 'West
Cenote.' held the remains of great ancient temples and buildings, and
was thus taken for one of the four great convents of the Franciscans in
the western half of the peninsula; the others being at Chaan-cenote, the
'Fair Cenote,' among the Tazees, and at Sisal a suburb of Valladolid,
and Tizimín, both among the Cupules.

Only one town appears in the 1549 list, Chunhubub; as part of the
concentrations to be told more fully when we come to the Cupuls, four
towns had been destroyed and the people driven in to Chunhubub by the
Franciscans, and the tax levy in ’49 for its grantee was 300 tribute
payers, reduced in ’79 to thirty. Ixumul, chief town of the province in
1579, was then taxed as for 400; it is close to, or perhaps once the
same as Tihotzuco, which joined with Cisteil in the great uprising of
1731. Of the only other town on either list, Kanpocolché, we are told by
its grantee in 1579 that to his knowledge the population had been cut in
half.

For many years the head of the '*indios rebeldes*' in back of Bacalar
has been General May; it is understood that his successor-to-be is a
Cochuah, by name.

*Chauac-há (Choaca), or 'Long Water.'*

Of this once great province we are only now able to map two towns, and
those but in approximation: the capital Chauac-há and the port Conil, or
Conitzá. The expulsion of Montejo's force in 1527 has been told in the
previous pages. The land was arable, not stony. giving two crops a year,
with plantations of copal. Offshore are the famed fresh-water springs
rising from the sea. The public buildings at Chauac-há were of stone,
the private house, of strong wood, thatched. The Spanish reports agree
in [allotting](errata.htm#7) high intelligence to these people of the
coast regions, both Chauac-há and the Tazees, and as using "very correct
language."

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

We are told that in 1529 Chauac-há had 3000 houses, and in 1543 when
Montejo attempted to found the new town of Valladolid near the Indian
city, there were only 1000 houses. After the revolt of '46 the incoming
friars burned the native town to drive the inhabitants inland to the
vicinity of the coming convents at Chaan-cenote and Tizimín, and the
official Valladolid Relation says there were only *twenty houses left*
in the ancient town in 1579. Urrutia received it in grant, and reports
his tribute payers as thirteen, due "to the removals and the sumptuous
stone convents the Indians were impressed to build"; this was in ’79,
his earlier tribute having been 200. Another writer speaks of a time
previous, with 250 houses, and 600 to 700 population.

The port town of Conil is said by one writer to have had 5000 houses; in
’79 Díaz Alpuche, then 75 years old, says he witnessed the town burnings
and that nearly all the people died of grief or destitution; that it was
all done "by the official order" of the Auditor López, in support of the
friars’ plan of removals for doctrination and church attendance. In ’79
it was still taxed for Contreras in 80 payers.

The only other town name that has come down to us is that of Samyol; in
’79 Sarmiento says that his predecessor Cieza received from 900, but he
only has from 160. Its location is lost.

*The Tazees*.

The name is most probably a corruption of Tah-Itzáes, 'among those of
the Itzá.' The chiefdom shared with Chauac-há in reputation for high
civil order and polity, free from any tyranny. Its capital was
Chaan-cenote, named for the beauty of the land at its chief cenote, with
600 on its first tax list. Surrounding it were five other towns,
including Temasa with 400; then came friar Francisco Aparicio and
without warning burned all five towns over the heads of the people,
totally destroying all five, including a good church in Temasa, and
driving all the people in around Chaan-cenote. There is no report on
these five burned towns for 1549, but when Urrutia received in the grant
he had 900 tribute payers for his support and income, which were reduced
in 1579 to 300. He further says that when Aparicio burned Temasa, with
its 170 houses, and the rest, he did not even give time to remove the
household goods; that he burned all the fruit trees, and so "within
eight days" the head men and many others died. The rest were then made
to work on a monastery fit to accommodate 100 friars, to serve actually
for *four*.

Kantunil once had 120, was taxed for 50 in ’49, and in ’79 there were
but 2 to pay and provide living for the grantee Bellido.

Dohot is a site now wholly lost. The people, numbering 600 in ’49, were
removed to near the convent at Tizimín, and less than 100 were left in
’79.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Of Sinsimché Sarmiento tells us in ’79 that it was once a place of great
population, numbering 600, and was taxed on his predecessor for 80, but
"now, because of the heavy tributes, I have only 8 left."

Two other towns, now entirely lost to the map, had paid Cieza 900 in
’49, reduced in ’79 to 150. Of all this removal Díaz Alpuche tells us it
was by the orders of Tomás López, "coming with power thereto from the
Audiencia" (corresponding to our Supreme Court in such matters) of
Guatemala. This López was one of the committee to which Landa's appeal
against Bishop Toral was referred in Spain, resulting in his absolution
of "any wrong or usurpation of power," and his return in 1573 as Bishop.

*The Cupuls*.

The region we have up to now surveyed became in later days the Territory
of Quintana Roo, covered in the Díaz-Molina days with "exploitation
grants" to some half dozen concessionaires, shown on the Espinosa map,
but who found it profitless. That map aids us chiefly in its almost
total lack of even settlements marked, but also in the different trail
complexes such as those at the probable site of Conil, Chaan-cenote,
Kantunil, Chemax, the two Muyils, Tabi and Ixmul. A thousand years ago
we know it to have been in full flower as ancient Itzá territory: Tulum
alive, Cobá with its branching system of great built up stone roads that
we have only learned about in the past few years, and the great
**sac-be**, or 'white road' of stone almost certainly from Tulum or
P’ole to Cobá; then as now known from Cobá to near Chichén, and then
Itzamal, thus linking all the great Itzá sacred places.

What happened after the incoming of the Mexicans soon after that, we
have still to learn; difficulties were certainly foreshadowed, but that
it was still populous even after the rise of the Xius and the fall of
Mayapán, and up to the coming of the Spanish invaders, the atrocities of
Pacheco constantly told of and even referred to by Landa as something
wherein the friars "were protecting the Indians," and then the torches
of Aparicio, Guevara and Villalpando, and the Ordinances of Tomás López,
is certain. But passing from this region where even the great
monasteries at Chaancenote and Chikin-cenote, among the Tazees and the
Cochuahs, were early abandoned when the drive for conquest and
conversion had died down, we next come to the regions actually 'made
Spanish,' and marked by the railway lines of today: Campeche, Muna,
Peto, Valladolid and Tizimín, outside of which impenetrability and a
practical independence under the Indian leaders was grudgingly allowed.
The civil power and administration became settled under Mérida,
Valladolid and Salamanca de Bacalar, and under that protection the
political functionaries, the grantees and their successors the
'científico' hacendados of the Díaz period, and the clergy settled down.

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

All this continued until our own great machine age, with its thousand
acre farms and tractors, began to need fuel (oil and Sisal hemp) to
threaten us with a tenant farm régime, and our own 'dust-bowl' with its
threatened depopulation, put the final pressure on the screws of
exploiting the Indian of Yucatan, and Mexico proper, for the amassing of
wealth by those in control, through the sale of things extracted for the
foreign trade. In no whit was there any difference from the protests to
Montejo in 1543 for leave to sell off their Maya slaves to Cuba, to buy
the 'luxuries' from abroad. The only difference was that this last turn
of the screws broke the screws themselves, and set the Indian on his
strength to become again a man and a producing, educated, economic
citizen of his own country.

Fortunately for our present purpose, the Tax List of 1549 followed a
geographical course from one province or chiefdom to the next, with
occasional slips at the overlappings; also most of the grantees had more
than one town, helping us in a sufficiently close location of names that
have disappeared from our map, or from the 1579 reports themselves. Many
places named in ’49 were lost, 'removed' or their people driven away or
absorbed, in ’79. In this connection the basic and destructive,
merciless evil of the 'removal' system cannot be appreciated except by
remembering the universal 'community' system of agriculture, not only
native to the Indian (and not realized by ourselves, as
'individualists'), but necessary particularly in Yucatan with its thinly
covered limestone and corn its staple.

To a town lot pertained a cropping lot outside; each town had its
*ejido* territory in common, that of Ebtun near Valladolid (for
instance) comprising no less than twenty-seven *ejidos*, each with its
own special name; all such *belonged* to that community. Every townsman
had the right to select his coming milpa site for clearing, planting and
harvesting for two, rarely three years; then the maize had exhausted the
soil nitrogen below the profit level of cultivation, and he selected
another site. On these community rights the life of the people depended,
and they *were* respected; but they also meant the possession of a
goodly town-owned region, proportioned to the population needs. The
towns had to be moderately sized, but also reasonably close set; on the
balance of these two factors the whole life of the whole country
depended.

It is obvious that when half a dozen such town centers, with a total of
perhaps 1800 households (man, wife, children and young married couples
living as by custom the first few years with the father-in-law) were
suddenly uprooted from the soil in which they not only rested the social
order but drew physical life itself, and with houses and possessions
burned, were suddenly driven to 'the city,' famine, despair and death
were inevitable. Add

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

to this the labor of tearing down their old stone buildings or pyramids
to build what were described as veritable fortresses fit to hold several
thousand soldiers instead of the few friars for whose use they were
erected, it is little wonder that first the natives died off, and then
as inevitable retribution, the monasteries themselves decayed as did the
Missions in California, from the identical causes. Excessive
concentration of every kind, whether of great cities, trade monopolies
however supported—privately or governmentally, or bureaucracies, must go
on drawing from the weaker outposts until they too must die, from lack
of more resources to 'tax.' But the medial processes are not pleasant,
even to read of; neither are they a work of civilization. In the
chiefdom of the Cupuls we see this working process, in the raw.

Allotment of *encomiendas* or town grants was made in Mérida in 1542,
and in Valladolid in 1544, at once on its removal from the unhealthy
Choaca location to the site of the ancient Saci. The 1549 List, besides
ten towns in Tabasco, taxes 175 under the jurisdiction of Mérida or
Valladolid, to some 100 grantees. Valladolid at its founding had forty
Spaniards, its citizens, each entitled to his share of the whole
population in the region covered by the eastern half of our map. Not all
these forty names appear in the Tax List, and for whatever reason the
reports of only twenty-four grantees appear in ’79. In all the eastern
region we have 69 towns listed, of which 60 are among the Cupuls; nine
towns taxed in ’49 are not reported in ’79, but we have instead five
that were apparently not taxed in ’49.

Of the 60 Cupul towns we can list one-half as 'survivals,' that are left
on the map; the other half we only know as Cupul from their being in the
Cupul section of the List. They were either burned or otherwise directly
*de*populated, or else abandoned. But from the double record in ’49 and
’79 we can reconstruct the picture. As to locations we are further
helped by tributes of salt and/or fish being called for in ’49, showing
nearness to one or another coastline. The population for every town
taxed in ’49 is fixed by the levy of one *manta* or triple breadth of
cloth per year from each head of a household; this is then to be
compared with the statements of how much less the grantee in ’79 was
getting; at times additional figures are supplied; in all this we
usually have concrete figures at both dates, but at times the statement:
"reduced to less than half," etc.

Thirteen of our surviving towns show an annual tribute of 5000 mantles
reduced to 1100 in the thirty years between Landa's arrival and his
death. Five towns not mentioned in ’49 are reported in ’79 as having
gone down from 2040 to 786; also Chocholá as gone to half. Nine towns
mentioned in ’49 as paying 2630 mantles per year, have become
'non-survivals' in ’79.

Thirteen neighboring towns were burned and the people removed to Popolá,
taxed in ’49 at 430; all these towns together went down from 2000 to
900, and finally to 300; today Popolá is *there*, but abandoned.

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

Tizimín (misnamed Peecemy in ’49) stood for 360; Cismopo and six others
had the torch applied by friar Guevara, to drive them either to Tizimín
or the nearby Temozón, and the tribute fell from 600 to 140. Nabalá with
a once great population fell to a third. Yalcón went down in twenty
years from 50 to 18. Kaua fell from 360 to half. Cacalchén from 100 to
28. Sotzil and Tecay together, 600 to 200. Xocén, taxed in ’49 at 110,
once paid 200, then 150, then 30. At Temul out of 460 one-third were
left. Of the various towns about Kikil only about half the people were
left, in ’79. The grantee Juan Cano, the son of Juan, tells us that
Tinum covered seven towns, two of which had paid 390 in ’49, to his
father, whereas in ’79 he only received 70 from all together.

Pixoy went from 300 to 100; Casalac from 180 to 35, and Tancuy from 60
to 21. Four towns around Ekbalám, an ancient Cupul capital, were
depopulated, and the tribute fell from 600 to 200. Tekanxó from 400 to
190, and two towns on the main highway to the port of Conil, now lost on
our map, in ’79 had fallen from 400 to 28. And finally, Villanueva tells
us that Sicab, close to Valladolid, had fallen from 500 to 240, "due to
the forced removals of the people, their flight away into the forests,
after the heavy labor" on the building of the great monastery at Sisal.
He also tells us that "now 26 surrounding towns come in to Valladolid,
for doctrination" and church attendance; on this see the López
Ordinances, below.

On our ’49 list we find the names of 21 towns, directly reported as
'concentrated' or else lost on our map, but probably all within the
Guevara work of centralization of the 'teaching' at Tizimín (whose
monastery was said to have been one of the most sumptuous in the whole
country) and the neighboring Temozón; these 21 towns were in ’49 listed
for 4290 mantles per year. To this total must be added other known
towns, by reports, probably concentrated at Valladolid, raising the
above figure to 5330 mantles—towns off the map in ’79. And yet other
data, assignable to 'somewhere in Copul,' raises the total of 'lost
towns' for that chiefdom, on our known and existing reports, to 36, with
tribute originally of over 8000 mantles per year.

To these bald figures we are added the following. Juan Cano, the 'old
man,' one of Montejo's original company, tells us that he had been
granted at the settlement of Valladolid Tinum and six towns near by.
That to concentrate the Indians for 'doctrina' there came Fray Hernando
de Guevara, and at once set on fire all the towns, driving everybody to
Tinum or Temozón; that he complained of this to the Alcalde Mayor, Ortiz
Delgueta, and was non-suited and charged the costs, as the acts were
done by "order of the Auditor from Guatemala, Tomás López." The same
thing happened under friar Luis de Villalpando, around Valladolid; 13
towns burned and the population moved, to build the Sisal monastery.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

Juan Rodríguez, the elder, tells us that five towns were gathered in to
Sucopo, now a sorry little hamlet a couple of leagues east of Tizimín,
when the present writer saw it in 1917. (Two leagues further into the
'unknown' I then came on an unlisted ancient site, with stone buildings
around a large plaza, still I think unknown even to archaeologists.)

And nearly every single informant in the twenty-five Valladolid
Relations of 1579, tells the same story. To which we must add the
reports, nine in number, that are known to have been called for by the
Instructions sent out from Spain in 1577, but which are missing from the
volume in the archives from which the twenty-five Relations were taken
and printed. Given then that by the 'married men' taxed we must
understand only heads of a household, and not including the newly
married youth who had to work for and with his father-in-law for several
years, we have a total in sight on our records of some 18,000 households
with anywhere from five to ten times the actual number of individuals,
in Cupul territory, after the decimation by war and flight following the
1546 revolt; and that again following losses we can only guess at from
pestilence and the earlier wars of 1527-9, when Montejo was allowed to
settle at Chichén Itzá, and then driven from the country when his
purposes became understood.

*The Chiefdom of Ahkin-Chel*.

As we now pass from the eastern to the western half of our map, we find
a distinctly marked cleavage, and therewith a great difference in both
the quantity and character of the information given us in the Relations.
This too, in spite of the fact that both Chels and Cocoms belong in the
eastern group, politically. The reader will remember that the first
Ahkin-Chel was that son-in-law of a high priest of Mayapán, who after
being deeply instructed by the elder man in their writings and wisdom,
then after the fall of the city carved for himself his own barony,
settling first at Tikoch, where many stone remains are left today. The
Cocoms also became by the destruction of the Federation the implacable
enemies of the revolting and victorious Xius, a story told in deep
colors in all the later history.

Nevertheless the line down the middle of the map divides the
jurisdictional authority of Mérida and Valladolid, as self-administering
centers under the general provincial government, which until the last
century also included the Campeche local administration. From the
*Spanish* side of things, this brought them into the western influence,
notwithstanding that we are told by the relators that the Chels were
highly respected by their neighbors, except those of Ceh-Pech on their
western border, with whom they constantly warred; and that the Cocom-Xiu
enmities overrode all other factors, on the Maya side of things.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

The 1549 Tax List, with slight exceptions, from Nos. 1-14 covers
Zipatán; 15-35 Ceh-Pech; 36-59 Chel; then Hocabá; 61-70 Cocom; 74-91
Xiu; 92-108 Campeche, Champotón and the Canuls; and then goes through
the eastern chiefdoms we have above summarized, to and with ten grants
in Tabasco. As we then go through the western group of Relations, dated
in 1580-1, and sent in to Mérida direct, we find a constant repetition
of ancient historical and native cultural data; in brief, the background
of the Xiu influence, of Kukulcán or Quetzalcóatl, the League, the
subsequent "evil conduct of the Cocoms," and their surprising
importation of *Mexican* mercenaries from Tabasco and Xicalango, these
latter finally accepted as 'good Mayas' by the Xius, and "allowed" to
settle on the west coast—the Canuls; finally joining with the Xius in
welcoming and then defending Montejo against the Cocoms. The story does
not easily make sense. But twelve of these Relations directly credit
Gaspar Antonio Chi with aid in their preparation, and five others show
his cooperation without actually naming him; in these seventeen are
included every one of the nine grantees of towns in Ahkin-Chel, and even
the two from Sotuta and Tabi, of the Cocoms. In the quite scanty reports
we get from the west coast, Zipatán, the Canuls, and Campeche, he
evidently did not aid directly, as e did for practically all the Pech,
Xiu, Chel and Cocom towns.

This, together with the constant treatment of the Indians in these
reports as lazy, worthless, stupid, ignorant in their *proper* food,
medicine, and their use of cold baths and bleeding, simply shows that
the whole western division had come to take on Hispanization in thought;
and one sees the same difference today between the atmosphere of things
in Mérida, and that of Valladolid—where uprisings (even that for Madero
against Díaz) always start, just as in Guatemala it is San Pedro Carchá
that has to be 'watched out for.'

The threads of this same story, politically, run all through Landa's
text, with the hand of Gaspar Antonio Chi again clear. For all that he
has thus told us, through the Relations and the work of our Franciscan
friar, concerning past Maya history and mythology, and especially of the
ancient customs and laws, we are deeply grateful. But the plain simple
fact is that in both these contributions we have *the Xiu side of the
story* of 'Things' in Yucatan. And we lack the Cocom side.

 In another respect, directly involving our present summary, we find the
demarcation equally marked. In neither the general Mérida Relation nor
the twenty-four other individual ones, do we find more than the
scantiest reference to the reduction in population, save as sometimes
referred to as a result of their bad habits, or their flight back into
the forests and hills to the south. About the most we can do is to add
up the total taxation as set in 1549, and do without the later figures
or data.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

Thus among the Chels in ’49 Tz’ilam paid Montejo 580 mantles and the
rest, plus fish; Tz’tz’ontún 600, and fish; Tekal 420; to the Quiros
Chalanté paid 700; two lost places, Cuxbil and Chaltundehad paid 600 and
550. Brizeño had Tikal in ’49 for 420 mantles, and still had it in ’80,
but does not tell his later income. San Martin had Euan in ’49 with 320,
and Cansahcab in ’80, but tells us nothing more. The Sanchez minors held
Tixjocapay in ’49, for 680 mantles; one son in ’80 held Tekantó and
Tepacán, where he tells us seven or eight surrounding towns had been
moved in, to be near the Tekantó monastery. As a total we can tell that
the Chel towns were at the start taxed at least for 5000 mantles, and
the only information we are given as to losses in population is where
Paredes says he received Sitilpech and Kisil from his father, and the
income had gone from 300 down to 120.

*The Cocom Chiefdom*.

Here again we find the same story to tell. In ’49 Sotuta itself paid two
grantees together 720 mantles; Chomulná paid Nieto 740; Chilultel 350 to
Sánchez, and Chachetunich 70 to one Cea; García received 270 from
Vayacus, which later with two other towns was moved to Tabi, García
telling us that his income on the three had fallen off from 400 to 150;
Tiquinabalon paid Ponce 290, and another town, probably Sahcabá, paid
Manrique 300. Finally, Alonso Julian tells that his town of Ixtual, a
league from Temax, once contributed 500, but "now only 150; the Indians
are stupid and bad."

Through these western Relations generally we are told that the chief
ailments are fevers, asthma and *lamparones* or scrofula; we find no
mention of syphilis or tuberculosis of the lungs, to both of which the
Shattuck report, confirming the testimony of the old Maya medicinal
texts, shows almost complete immunity among the Maya. They cured with
herbs, bleeding and baths, but were generally in much poorer health than
in the old days, owing to the break-up of their ancient customs, and
especially their native drink, the **balché**, with its purgative and
clearing effects, instead of which the Spanish intoxicants had been
forced on them by the prohibition of the **balché** as having been a
part of ancient ceremonial uses, and so constantly harped on by Landa,
except when now and then he forgets.

The Cocoms in the older days, we are told, traded into Honduras, Tabasco
and Mexico; we even are told of *tuchumite* stuffs imported from the
Mizteca into Cocom territories.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

*Ceh-pech*.

Twenty-two Ceh-Pech towns are listed in 1549, as follows: Motul 1450;
Ixil 280; Maxtunil 500; Mocochá 500; Tixcunchel 220; Ekmul 180; Baca
480; Sauanal 250; Quibil (probably Kini) 480; Yaxkukul 60; Nolo 120;
Tixkokob 530; Motul 600; Muxup’ip’ 300; Telchac 1030; Yobain 740;
Sinanché 320; Euan 320. All these are known towns today; to them must be
added, now off the map, Treveca 160; Texiol 200; Chaltún 130; Pacat 370;
in all a total of 9610<span id="img_15300"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/15300.jpg"><img src="tn/15300.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

mantles annually, plus the usual beans, honey, wax, and salt and fish
from towns near the coast. Of this total 2280 mantles went to Montejo
and 1920 to the Crown.

As to causes and conditions Pacheco, to whom we have before referred for
his brutalities in the east, says the population has decreased because
of pestilences, the Indians themselves being lazy and worthless; he also
refers to their having been gathered into towns by the friars "with holy
zeal." Another encomendero tells us that this concentration was "good
for their souls but bad for their bodies." At Sinanché we are told the
same—concentration and pestilences; population decreased at Chuburná,
Mocochá (but now increasing again); Buctzotz, one of largest towns, now
greatly decreased.

*Hocabá-Humún*.

This small province (if either it or Chakan, wherein lies Mérida, were
really ever independent chiefdoms) seems to have played a very minor
part in Maya affairs; so also here in this connection. Of ancient
Acanceh with its marvelous facade (now at last destroyed) we hear
nothing, even from Landa. In the uprising of 1546 at Valladolid, it
joined the Xius and Canuls in aiding Montejo against the Cupuls and
other eastern Mayas.

Monasteries were built at both Hocabá and Humún, and the first of these
was taxed in 2400 mantles, 1200 each to Pacheco and Alvarez while Cusamá
(probably the town of that name near Acanceh, if not that in Zipatán)
gave the Crown 900 mantles, besides salt.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

*The Xius of Maní*.

All of which brings us to the chiefdom of the western hegemony, yet with
a quite surprising tax situation. Corresponding well to the dense
settlement shown on the map, Molina Solis lists 57 Xiu towns, most of
which are known and inhabited today. But in the list for ’49 only 16 are
named, and of these Yaxá 460 (4 leagues to south in the sierra) is
reported as since depopulated to be sent to Oxkutzcab, although many
fled back to the forests; Ateque 140 and Cisnuache 360 are in doubt as
to location, as is also the identity of Hayan, which was taxed 390 to
one grantee and another 360 to a second. After this our list reads Maní
970 and Ticul 790, both to the Crown; then Tekit 400; Mamá 440; Muna
350; Sacalum 220; Pencuyut 250; Yotholín 160; Tekax 940; Izuná 60. Then
Xul far down in the sierra 630, and Cantemoy near Pew 310: a total of
only 7290 for the whole district. Oxkutzcab does not appear in the list,
but Pacheco tells us it had 1200 residents. <span
id="fr_52"></span>[\*](#fn_51)

Of specific information, Muñoz Zapata estimates the population (meaning
certainly the family heads) when the taxes were levied, at 50,000, "now
much reduced by the removals for *doctrina*." Bote tells us his three
towns are losing, and that the children die young. Julian again tells us
the Indians are stupid and bad, and that Tetzal had dropped from 500 to
108, and Ixtual from 400 to 90. Practically all the above reports on the
western region, down to here and also including the next, Chakán, are
substantially one in matter, with a great deal of information as to
history and 'things of the country,' manifestly coming from Gaspar
Antonio himself. Most of them also refer, for further details, to the
report of the cosmographer Francisco Dominguez, and his report prepared
in 1566—the same year in which Landa in Spain wrote his book.

*Chakán*.

For this district, which besides Mérida included both Mayapán, and also
Acanceh on the Hocabá border, with 23 other towns in the list given by
Molina Solís, we have but the one long general report, at Mérida, and
signed

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

directly by both Martín de Palomar and "Gaspar Antonio Chi." The
information is all general (this is in 1580, Mérida not having been
allotted as a grant in ’49), and as told in the other Chi documents.

The foregoing thus gives us a *listed*, known, taxation in 1549 of some
29,000 mantles for these six interior districts, between the Cupul
border and the line of west coast provinces. How to account for the
absence of so many known towns from the very definite list of ’49, in
both the east and especially the west, is difficult. The towns were
certainly there, and it is equally difficult to think of their being
ignored by Montejo's soldiers in their applications for exploitable and
helpless economic fodder. But with those still to follow in Zipatán, the
Canuls and Campeche, they reach a recorded total of well over 50,000
Mayas, for whom "the taxes began by the aid of those at Maní," in 1542,
as so frankly confessed by Juan Xiu, as above.

*Zipatán*.

This district was chiefly the home of fisherfolk and salt gatherers, and
played some part economically, and less politically. Of its past native
history and relationships it is safe to say we know nothing. Sihunchén
was a friars’ concentration point for shore people, but it fell from a
one-time tax of 80 mantles to 10.

In ’49 Samahil was taxed for 400; Ucú 250; Timucuy 160; Yabucú 130
before the people were moved to Hunucmá; Tetis 210, and Caucel, the
capital, 150. [Besides](errata.htm#8) these we have Acalaxán 250; Muca
250, Aquimihil 150; Taubain 150; Atimzizibique 200, and Alinacama
180—all lost names. Finally the first name on the ’49 List, Ayucalco,
allotted to Montejo himself, and which from its size and tax of 860 we
should probably identify as Hunucmá, this name not appearing itself
listed. A total of 3640 mantles, with salt or fish, or both, in every
case.

The region was not regarded as healthy, although now it plays a larger
part owing to the passage through of the railroad and other trade
factors due to the nearness of Mérida and its port, once at Sisal in
Zipatán, and later changed to Progreso.

*The Canuls, Campeche and Champotón*.

In our Tax List, immediately following the Xiu towns, and before those
of the Cupuls, are 25 others that clearly belong to these three
chiefdoms. Campeche being however the jurisdictional capital for this
region, we have no Relations corresponding to those returnable at Mérida
and Valladolid, leaving us only with the earlier population figures, and
no means of knowing the

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

falling off in the term of our present inquiry. They should however be
added here to complete the record of the full 1549 taxation, and are as
follows.

For the **Ah-Canul** chiefdom: Calkiní the capital 70; Maxcanú 260;
Halachó 200; Becal 100; Pomuch 130; Pocboc 250; Tuchica, probably the
place where the younger Montejo was forced to halt on his march from
Campeche to Mérida, 360; Nocacao, on the road from Becal to Maní, and
after passing lake Yibá; 100. The important modern town of Hecelchakán,
the seat of the present Federal Normal School for the whole peninsula,
is not named, but since all the rest are identifiable it may be
represented by the largest of the above towns, Tuchica with its 360
tribute payers. A total tax in ’49 of 1470 mantles, with salt in no
instance save at Pomuch.

For the towns of **Campeche**: the capital itself, taxed for the Crown
in 630 mantles, with the usual additions, and with both salt and fish;
Chulilá, 360; Quinlacao, probably for Kinlacán, 300; Sahcabchén,
southwest of Bolonchen-ticul, 350; and Ticul, probably for
Bolonchen-ticul, 480. A total of 2280.

For **Chakán-putún**, or **Champotón**: the city itself, to the Crown
for 420, with fish; and Sihó, probably the one in this province, to
Triana, a citizen of Campeche, in 400. Then in company with this Sihó
four other towns only placeable by their position: Con or Tecon, also
Triana, 480, with salt; then three towns to one Ricalde, Ixcacauché 360,
with salt; Sisia, 420; Enasir, 130. Assuming the location of these six
towns in Champotón, from the data we have as above, we have as a total,
2110.

One other name occurs, ten places earlier than this Sihó, and named
Sihot, taxed at 210, and probably the- town found in the Ah-Canul
territory.

For the remaining chiefdoms on our list of seventeen districts, namely
Tixchel, Chetumal and the country of the Guaymiles, and
[finally](errata.htm#9) the independent kingdom of the Itzás, Tah-Itzá
around Lake Petén, we have no data in either of our present sources. All
this region has been left quite severely alone by the governmental
authorities, and its Itzá-Mayas greatly feared by the border
inhabitants, with an ever-present threat of a new uprising. A status of
practical 'self-dependence,' at Xkanhá and two other centers, was even
recognized by definite convention at one time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[140:\*](ybac64.htm#fr_51) We are using the word
'Chiefdom' as most nearly descriptive here. They were essentially, after
the fall of Mayapán, like the independent city states of Italy, or the
seigneuries of France, or again like Athens and Sparta. They were
essentially also family regimes, clans, baronies or earldoms if one
will; but the use of any of these terms is tinged with European
political memories. Chieftainship is equally unavailable, as that
implies merely the headship of a tribe, frequently a moving one, and
semi-barbarous. These were civilized, settled community states,' with
established polity, code of laws, and customs; also with far-reaching
trade relationships. As a term for the *territorial* divisions so
covered and ruled, the term Chiefdom thus seems best fitting.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[154:\*](ybac64.htm#fr_52) The following
paragraphs from the elder Montejo's instructions, given to his son, in
Chiapas, in 1540, probably throw light on this:

"You shall make partition to one hundred citizens, and not less, because
the provinces are large and the Indians many, and it is necessary that
the citizens resist and subdue them; and this (Ti-ho) must be the chief
city of all. And after you have made the partitions, and what I have
taken for myself, you will leave various towns without assigning them,
for persons suiting to his Majesty's service; for so it is done with all
the grants in these new lands."

"Also, you shall make the entries duly of those towns I have taken as
for myself and in his Majesty's name, and my part which is in the
province of Tutul Xiu with all attached thereto, the town of Telchac
with all attached thereto, the town of Campeche with all attached
thereto, and the town of Champotón with all attached thereto."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ordinances of Tomás López](ybac65)
