[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac59)  [Next](ybac61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span id="img_12000"></span>

[![](tn/12000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12000.jpg)

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### The Xiu Family Papers

These form a volume of 160 pages of signed and dated documents, running
continuously from 1608 to the end of the Spanish rule, 1817. In the
middle of the volume are four items of outstanding importance for our
knowledge of the history of western Yucatan, and which should
particularly be included here in detail, in connection with the
preceding translation of Bishop Landa's work. That we may treat them
separately, they may be numbered as follows:

1: A genealogical tree showing the members of the Xiu family, from the
Tutul Xiu, born about 1380, who led the family from Uxmal to Maní after
the destruction of Mayapán in 1420, down to Juan Xiu, who became head of
the family in 1640, and died about 1690.

2: Two pages of text in Maya, dated 1557, relating the gathering of
various representatives at Maní, for the settlement of boundaries of
their lands and towns, and those of their neighbors, the Cocomes, the
Canules, those of Calotmul, Maxcanú, etc.

3: A map, here reproduced as drawn from the original, on a double-page
sheet, to go with the preceding, certified, text.

4: A single page, signed by Juan Xiu in 1685, and stating that it was
taken by him from a record in "*carácteres*." This page gives a number
of events, with attached dates from 1533 (the year after Montejo's
departure for Mexico after his first, unsuccessful, attempt at the
conquest of Yucatan) down to 1545, and set out in terms of both the Maya
and our European chronology. This page, after being for many years
known, ignored, studied, criticised and rejected as a base for a
correlation of Maya and European dates, has at last through the work and
researches of J. Eric Thompson and the late Dr. John E. Teeple, been
accepted as our one confirmed and authoritative base point; it has been
so acknowledged by, we believe, every American writer save one, and also
the leading Yucatecan scholar, Senor Juan Martinez H., of Mérida.

This volume of papers was sent to me over twenty years ago to photograph
for my own use, and as an addition to my collection of original
material, but nothing of it has heretofore been published save Item 4,
as to be noted later below. The volume thus brings before us, brought
out within the scope of their family history from 1380 to the present
time, a stretch of 450 documented years, the five chief outstanding
figures therein: the Tutul Xiu of Uxmal; that Ahpulhá Napot Xiu who led
the dramatic and ill-fated pilgrimage in 1536 to invoke divine aid for a
cessation of the drought that coincided with the end of the first
Spanish attempt; the Kukum Xiu, Lord of Maní, who voluntarily came to
join himself as feudatory to the Spanish as a result of the breach
between the East and West that began with the destruction of Mayapán and
came to its climax at Otzmal in 1536, one of its first results having
been the re-erection of the Itzá state at Tayasal on Lake Petén (lasting
as the one remaining independent native state until 1695, just ten

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

years after Juan Xiu wrote our Item 4); Naxiu Chi, a Xiu on his mother's
side, who having married the great-great-granddaughter of Tutul Xiu of
Uxmal, was baptised Gaspar Antonio, and became one of Landa's chief
informants in the Relation we have herein translated; finally the most
important later member, the Juan of 1685.

For clearer reading the names written on the several 'blossoms' are
replaced by numbers, and the names corresponding are given below, by
their generations, the better to show the kinships:

1: Tutul Xiu.

2a: Ah-tz’un Xiu; 2b: Ah-uitz Xiu.

3a: Ah-op Xiu; 3b: Ah-cetz Xiu; 3c: Ah-uitz; 3d: Ah-kauil Xiu; 3e:
Ah-cuat Xiu; 3f: Ah-uitz Xiu.

4a: Nap’ol Xiu; 4b: Ah-kukil Xiu; 4c: Ah-tzam Xiu; 4d: Ah-lol Xiu; 4e:
Ah-atira Xiu; 4f: Ah-uitz Xiu.

5a: Ah-ziyah Xiu, Yacman; 5b: don Diego Xiu, Tikit; 5c: don Juan Xiu;
5d: Ah-tz’ulub Xiu, grandfather of don Francisco Pacab, Ox-kutzcab; 5e:
Ah-uitz Xiu; 5f: Ah-mochan Xiu; 5g: Nabatun Xiu; 5h: Ah-chac Xiu,
Panabá.

6a: Melchor Xiu; 6b: Montexo Xiu, go<sup>r</sup> Maní, husband of doña
Maria Xiu; 6c: Ah-tzam Xiu; 6d: Ah-op Xiu; 6e: doña Maria Xiu; Calotmul,
wife of Montexo Xiu; 6f: Ixkaual Xiu, wife of Gaspar Antonio; 6g:
Ixkaual Xiu; 6h: Ah . . . .; 6i: Ah-pitz Xiu; 6j: Ah-tz’un Xiu; 6k:
Nacahun Xiu; 6l: Ah-ziyah Xiu; 6m: Ah-kukil Xiu; 6n: Ah-cuate Xiu; 6o:
don Alonso Xiu, Tikit; 6p: Nanachan Xiu.

7a: don Francisco Xiu, son of don Melchor; 7b: Nabtu (?) Xiu; 7e: don .
. . . Xiu.

8: Pedro Xiu, son of Francisco, gov<sup>r</sup> Oxkutzcab.

9a: don . . . . o Xiu; 9b: . . . . o;

10: don Juan Xiu, son of Alonso Xiu.

In tabular form it reads:

<span id="img_12200"></span> ![](img/12200.jpg)

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

The last five names, from Francisco to Juan, are in darker ink, and the
calix of the flowers differently drawn. The Tree was clearly made in the
time of Melchor and Montejo, probably in 1548, and then completed by
Juan, as shown by the pointing hand. While the tear in the leaf has
taken nearly all of the circle for Alonso, the entries as above are not
only clear, but are positively confirmed in the first of the coming
documents; the two names between Francisco and Juan must be those of
Pedro and Alonso; also the separate circle at the extreme left must have
sprung from Pedro, representing a brother of Alonso, not otherwise
mentioned.

No Spanish baptismal names occur before the fifth generation, of people
old at the time of the Conquest; here we find Diego of Tekit, and Juan
the father of Maria of Calotmul, the wife of (Kukum) Montejo. Probably
these four were all baptised at once, in 1548.

The only Spanish names we find in the sixth generation are those of
Maria, Montejo and Melchor, the ancestor of the whole following line to
which these Papers belong. But here we also find Ixkaual, wife to Gaspar
Antonio, and her first cousin, one **Ah-tz’un**, who is probably the
famous **Ahpulhá** who died at Otzmal in 1536.

The 1685 page by Juan Xiu, while describing the Otzmal event and those
killed there, does not name the leader as 'Napot Xiu,' as he is
elsewhere called; it only reads:

"The day 8 Cauac, the 1st of Pop, when there died the rain-bringers
(**ah-pulháob**) at Otzmal, namely Ah-tz’un Tutul Xiu and Ah-ziyah Napuc
Chi," etc.

**Ah-tz’un** simply meaning 'leader,' these probably refer to the same
person.

The direct line, arranged in order of primogeniture, then reads:

Tutul Xiu.  
Ah-tz’un.  
Napot Chuvat; probably the water-bringer, ah-pulhá, killed at Otzmal in
1536.  
Ah-ziyah Yacman; perhaps a companion of Napot.  
Kukum, baptized in 1548 at Maní, as Francisco de Montejo Xiu.  
Melchor, brother of Kukum.  
      Ixkaual, wife of Gaspar Antonio Chi, the interpreter.  
Francisco, son of Melchor; governor of Oxkutzcab in 1608.  
Alonso, son of Pedro; succeeds him at Yaxa in 1624.  
      Catalina Cimé of Pencuyut, granted exemptions in 1632.  
Juan (born about 1620), and his sister Maria and Petrona.

The births of the sixth generation must have fallen about 1500; Kukum
must have been he who surrendered to Montejo on his arrival at Tiho, was
baptised in 1548 as Francisco de Montejo Xiu, and was thereafter
governor of Maní, the **halach-vinic** at whose house took place the
gathering in 1557, to

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

be later described. In 1608 Francisco, then governor of Oxkutzcab,
signed the oldest document surviving in our volume, confirming his "son
Pedro" as cacique of Yaxa Cumché, in the Oxkutzcab district.

Alonso, "son of Pedro," succeeds him at Yaxa in 1624, and in 1632
Catalina Chili of Pencuyut is granted exemptions as "widow of Alonso";
his rights are also referred to in papers dated 1657, 1660. Then Juan,
with his sisters Maria and Petrona, are certified in 1640 as "children
of Alonso and grandchildren of Pedro"; and again so mentioned in a paper
dated at Tekax in 1641.

This is the Juan Xiu to whom we owe the famous page above mentioned,
establishing the correlation of the chronologies—our Item 4. His long
and prominent record includes:

Signed paper, in Maya, no date.  
Two others same, apparently about 1660.  
Confirmed as head of line, 1662; also right to bear arms.  
Made Captain for Oxkutzcab, 1664.  
Given command of 40 archers, 1667.  
Governor of Oxkutzcab, 1667.  
Succeeds the governor of Maxcanú, removed for misconduct, 1667.  
Certificate, 1678, as to his son Roque by his first wife Francisca
Chulim; born 1646; this Roque apparently died unmarried.  
Writes above page of chronology, 1685.  
Mentioned, 1689, as having a "very valuable book" from which names or
data had been copied by one Diego Chi, secretary of the cofradía at
Maní.  
Probably died about 1690.

The Tree thus gives us eleven names in the direct line, from the Tutul
Xiu from whose loins spring all the others, down to Juan, or about 26
years to a generation from the birth of the first to that of Juan's
successor, in 1661. To follow the lineage beyond the Tree and Juan Xiu,
we must turn to the body of documents in the volume, where we get an
overlapping of the data on the Tree (Pedro, Alonso and Juan appearing in
each), and then six successors to Juan, down to Antonio, who is shown as
the family head in the last paper, 1817, as follows:

Juan Antonio, son of Juan, by his second wife Maria Beltran, born in
1661.  
Salvador, son of Juan Antonio and Pasquala Ku; born 1697, and still
living as one of the 'elder men,' in 1759.  
Lorenzo, "the old man," heads list of Xiu names in 1764, and is still
mentioned among them in 1771.  
Pablo; heads five successive lists from 1779 to 1793.  
Pedro; heads the lists from 1801 to 1812.  
Antonio; heads the last list, of 1817.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

Here our documents cease, but nevertheless leaving us at the very bottom
of the last list the names of Andres, born in 1788, and Bentura, born in
1814, and thus again overlapping, by these two names, the oral
information gotten over a hundred years after tie papers ceased, from
very old surviving descendants, who remembered Andres and Bentura as the
grandfather and father of Bernabe, born in 1839 and dying in 1911. This
volume of family papers, after passing through the hands of all these
family heads for over 300 years, from at least 1608 down to Bernabe, was
still intact in his possession a couple of years before his death, when
(as stated in a letter from Sylvanus Morley to me in 1920) it "was
stolen, bought or received from Bernabe Xiu." <span
id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48)

The final links were then made when given to me on a visit to Oxkutzcab
in the autumn of 1917, by old Doña Felipa, daughter of Bernabe and
mother of young Nicomedes Xiu, 1896- —; and further confirmed the next
Spring by Morley in Ticul in the little three-year old Dionisio, the
last Xiu XXIII, in the direct male line, as below:

Andres, born 1788.  
Bentura, his son, born 1814.  
Bernabe, his son, 1839-1911.  
Ildefonso, his son, 1861-1911.  
Nemensio, his son, born about 1887.  
Dionisio, his son, born 1915. And further  
Felipa, daughter of Bernabe, horn 18  
Nicomedes, her son, born 1896.

The Tree itself as it stands is thus wholly such as might have been
drawn up in England about the year 1160 to show the descendants of Sir
So-and-So, who had led his troop with William of Normandy; and then with
additions made another hundred years later by the then head of the
family, to bring the line down to himself; and then supplemented by a
continued documentary register to the present day.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

We must here picture the Yucatan states as consisting of the
**halach-vinic**, or 'true man,' at the head, then the **almehenob** (a
compound meaning 'sons of a mother and father,' and exactly
corresponding to the Spanish *hidalgo*, or 'son of somebody'), and
finally the **vinicob** or common folk. As confirmed by what we find in
our Item 2 and the other documents in the volume, this patent of
nobility must have been drawn in the time of Francisco de Montejo Xiu on
the occasion of his baptism and recognition as feudatory to the Spanish
Crown, in 1548.

At the bottom we see reclining the Tutul Xiu who first established the
capital at Maní; then his descendants as seen in the table, ending with
our Juan Xiu of Item 4, with a hand pointing to his own name, as the
extreme left. In the lower left we see remaining the letters—**n .tzil
chac ume . . . ob Tutul Xiu**. **Mehenob** denoting descendants in the
male line, this makes a sort of title: "The growth of the descendants of
Tutul Xiu." And then just below this we find at the torn edge of the
paper a clearly distinguishable part of the Maya sign for the day
**Ahau**, over a black dot (the right-hand one of an original three),
and the words,—**au katun loe**. That can only stand for "this, the
katun **3 Ahau**," meaning in the usual style of the Chronicles, an
event that happened in the katun or 20-year period ending on a day **3
Ahau**, a date that only recurs once in 260 years.

Now as finally established, thanks to our Item 4, the katun **3 Ahau**
ended in 1382, which fixes the 'root of the tree,' as that ruler or
'leader of the Xius to their new capital,' as stated by Landa and
confirmed by the entries in the Maya Chronicles themselves, about 120 to
125 years before the coming of the Spaniards to Mérida.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The entire volume, outside of the four special items noted, consists of
documents in both Maya and Spanish, attesting the succession in
headship, births, and membership in the Xiu family. The first three
attest the legitimacy, recognized headship and privileges of Pedro in
1608, Alonso "son of Pedro" in 1624, Juan and his sisters "children of
Alonzo and grandchildren of Pedro" in 1640.

In these Spain followed the universal custom of conquering or expanding
empires, allowing to the local chieftains or rulers as full a measure of
their former headship and privileges as possible, subject to, and in
proportion to their degree of recognition of political suzerainty, the
right to economic exploitation and support, and as necessary incident,
the social recognition of the new masters as 'superior beings.' Thus did
in succession the Romans,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the British, the Dutch, and others, the degree and nature of the
resulting dominance over the acquired 'subjects' depending on the nature
or character, plus the real or professed purposes of the 'occupation.'

 

Ancient Rome, Holland, Britain sought the spread of empire and trade,
and leaving the essentials of life, religion and local customs, as
nearly untouched as possible; giving in return protection. The occupied
lands, in most cases the field of destructive internecine wars such as
would be the case in India today save for the handful of Indian
regiments protecting both the *raj* and the people, lost superior
suzerainty (actually non-existent in the country) in exchange for the
order of a firm administration. To the common man one far distant
Emperor is the same as another, so long as the currents of local life go
along and the customs and 'gods of our fathers' are respected—whether
the ryot, the fellahin or the masehual be in Ceylon, Egypt or Mexico.
The emperor may then be Akbar in Delhi, Edward in London, or Charles in
Spain; the only further thing asked is that he protect the defenseless
people from the wanton murders, tortures, rapings and burnings of the
foreign 'public enemies' set loose among them. If this is not done, the
work of the Diego de Landas and the Pedro de Alvarados will only breed
revolts that must end either in total annihilation as in Cuba, or in
final freedom, however late.

To these demands Spain however added that of enforced conversions to
Christianity and the "blessings of European civilization" (as professed
by others today in their thirst for conquest), all "by the divine
command" that justifies all 'necessary' means to save men from the
eternal hell ordained by God for those who cannot recognize his image of
peace and love in the autos de fé and the hangings—escapable however by
humbleness and gold.

Yet these people even in the later days, of the Sixteenth Century, were
higher in polity, science and all that really makes civilization, than
the invaders—who only had gunpowder, horses, lusts, and (heaven save the
mark) the Cross. In these words lies the whole story of the lands south
of us, where now in these last ten years *only*, is the long debt to the
Indian race beginning to be paid by seeking to make him once more a free
working citizen of his own country, educated in the things that lead to
economic prosperity for the individual, the local community, and the
State. For Mexico *is* today making the Indian again a 'man'—while we in
this country manufacture and offer him roseate white-man's plans for his
anthropological welfare instead of liberty; keep him against his
helpless will the slave of the most generations-long intrenched
bureaucracy in our whole log-rolling system, that wastes, and worse, his
property, while we decimate him by our imported immoralities, and
exploitations.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

Returning to our documents. These form an interesting and informative
picture of the course of events in Yucatan from the surrender of Kukum
Xiu, the Lord of Maní, in 1541. Through that century and the next, down
to and including Juan Xiu, the papers are in the form first above
referred to. They constituted the official investiture of the local head
of his own district and people, who thus continued to look to him as
"their immediate **halach-vinic**," with things going fairly peacefully
and thus of easier administration, save for the constant troubles caused
by Landa and his Franciscans, and army bandits like Pacheco on the east
coast. That the population of the districts decreased at a rate almost
as great as that of the Missions in California (roughly 100% each ten
years so long as yet more Indians remained in the unconverted back
country to be brought in to receive the blessings of working for the
whites for their 'welfare'), as testified to, and *complained* of by
many of the original company of Montejo's soldiers, among whom the lands
of the whole state were divided. (See the documents at the end of this
volume, for 1549, 1579 and 1581.) The causes were regularly: sickness by
change of their old ways, forcible concentration into single town
centers where church instruction was more convenient, and flight into
the back forests to escape the constant individual cases of oppression,
etc. Nevertheless the political system of recognizing as part of the
local state government the members of the old ruling caste, of 'hidalgo'
standing, persisted (as it still does in the heavily Indian highland
regions of Guatemala today) until the death of Juan Xiu about 1690,
after a practical headship of his family for over fifty years, from. the
death of his father in 1632.

At this time a very definite change in the character of the Spanish
occupation began, to pave the way for the first great uprising of the
Mayas for freedom at Cisteil in 1731, to which hidden references are
undoubtedly to be found in the veiled language of the Chumayel
manuscript. A marked surge of Hispanic activity springs up in many
lines, both literary and physical.

As one goes today through Yucatan one meets at every town of any size a
tremendous dominating 'Rhine castle' of stone, taken from the ancient
palaces and temples by Indian labor, to erect towering churches. Many of
these have dated lintels, which run from about 1690 to 1720, when
Yucatan ceased to be merely 'occupied' by the *encomendero* families
under the Montejo grants to his seventy odd soldiers, and the full
weight of the new order settled in place.

At this same time there began a definite literary change: the voluminous
histories came on to be written, by Cogolludo for Yucatan, Villagutierre
on the final conquest of the last Itzá kingdom at Lake Petén,
Torquemada's *Monarquía Indiana* for Mexico, Fuentes y Guzmán for
Guatemala. In 1710 Padre Ximénez found, copied and translated the *Popol
Vuh*, the magnificent

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Quiché story of
cosmogony, mythology and history; at the same time writing his long
history, trilingual dictionary and grammars, and his treatise on the
natural history.

The first students of the native languages, in the 16th century, set
down the native languages as they found them, and did it marvelously
well; what was done in that time and up to about 1650, is worth
everything we have of later date, even up to now in our own boasted era
of sciolistic anthropologism. In the 17th century amplified studies and
grammars were written, departing little from the spirit of the languages
as they still stood, nearly untouched save that they were no longer the
languages of an active native culture, but relegated to the submerged
class. Then in the 18th century after the passing of its first
generation, a conscious *Hispanization* began on every side, in every
way.

This affected the form of our documents of *hidalguía*, and resulted in
more or less vagueness in the details, only, of the Xiu primogeniture.
Roque Xiu passes out of our picture, and his step-brother Juan Antonio
must have succeeded to headship on Juan's death, but we have no specific
confirming document. Up to and including Juan, each new document was a
confirmation of the *rights* and position of the succeeding heir,
"legitimate son of" his predecessor; but beginning with Salvador we have
only papers confirming the leading elders and those of their family
name, as hidalgos, and entitled to the privileges of such quality: that
is, services and contributions from their own people, but probably no
part in the governmental set-up. Also, from 1727 on the papers do not
tell us who is the son of whom, and we thus have to deduce the direct
line by the prominence given to the successor, at the head of those
named as recognized Xius. That Salvador was in fact the "son of Juan
Antonio Xiu and Pasquala Ku" we only know from his baptismal
certificate, in 1697; in 1759 he was still alive, among those named;
then Lorenzo, "the old man," heads the list in 1764, and is still among
them in 1771.

At this time, as the spirit of liberty was stirring in the United States
and in France, we have still another change in the style of our papers;
most fortunately for our present purpose, as it resulted in our final
bridge to the present. This final, very condensed form, then lasted
until 1817, when colonial (but not Maya) freedom was ushered in. This
form undertakes to give a list of all living Xius, men, women, and
*boys* of any age, the actual age of the youngest being added. From 1779
to 1793 Pablo Xiu heads the list, then Pedro from 1801 to 1812, and
Antonio in 1817. And then almost all baptismal records through the State
having perished in the war of 1847, when the Mayas nearly regained the
peninsula, we are without direct evidence of the parentage of these
last. But, as told above, from the first Pedro in

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1608, and the
Tree, these are the continuous family records of the Xius of Maní and
Oxkutzcab, from the time Mayapán was destroyed and they abandoned Uxmal;
and also they did remain undisturbed in the possession of the succeeding
heads in Oxkutzcab, until about 1910.

For here comes our last piece of good fortune; since just as the first
Pedro appears both on the Tree and in the documents, so in the last
Pedro's lists we are told that Andres was a boy "1 year old" in 1788,
and again "4 years old in 1793." And then finally, in the last paper of
all, we are told that Bentura was 3 years old in 1817.

Now Bentura's son Bernabe Xiu, who loaned the papers to Consul Thompson,
died in 1911, but his younger sister Felipa still lived when the present
writer visited the town in 1917; also other elder Xius when Morley
followed in 1918, as related in his letters of that time. As told above,
these old people remembered back to Andres and Bentura, and from them
this final gap was filled, to be completed by the gathering then by
Morley and myself, separately, of the later data, and the present names
of the living: a complete record from Katun **3 Ahau** to *Century* XX.

 

Here also seems the place for the duties laid upon Juan Xiu in 1665,
incident to his appointment by Francisco de Esquivel, royal councillor
and Governor and Captain General of Yucatan, to serve for one year, as
the local governor of Oxkutzcab.

In this office, he shall exalt the royal justice in said town and its
confines, shall care for all matters pertaining to said office,
administering and doing justice in conformity with the royal ordinances,
defending the widows, common people and the poor from the powerful, or
from other persons also who may unjustly oppress them, remitting to us
all such matters as we should be advised of.

*Item:* He shall take great care to see that the Indians attend to bear
mass on Sundays and the other prescribed days, and to the preaching of
the Holy Christian Gospel (punishing those who without cause fail in
this); and that they respect its ministers as their spiritual fathers.

*Item:* That each family shall live in a separate house, even when near
relations; that they keep it clean and in good repair, with a Cross or
image of Our Lord and his Holy Mother; with rosaries, couches, mats,
hens, cocks, and the other things required by the Ordinances.

*Item:* That he take care that order and the Spanish way of government
be observed; that the streets lead properly to the church, and that the
houses and wells of the town be kept repaired.

*Item:* That inasmuch as the milpa to be cultivated for the town in
commonalty is essential and necessary, I command that he take great care
that it be properly sown, harvested and stored, and not consumed except
in accordance with the royal decrees.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

*Item:* That care is taken that the Indians of the town stay in it
without permitting them to live away on ranches, milpas or work-places;
that no Indians of other towns be allowed unless already married in
their own town; that he make a list of all returning Indians and of
these who go off into the bush, in conformity with the dispatches and
orders I have remitted, rendering account of this within four months, as
commanded by the decrees.

*Item:* That he take care that the Indians of his town shall work each
in his calling, shall care for the milpas, sowing 60 mecates of corn, as
well as beans, chile, squash, yuccas, cotton and cacao, as they have
them; that in the patios and gardens of their houses they shall plant
chayas, bananas and other fruit-trees, with such other things as the
earth produces; that each have near his house a granary for storage of
said edibles, and they go on supporting themselves therewith, and their
wives and children; failing in which they shall be punished in
proportion to the fault.

*Item:* It is commanded that he cause the Indians to work in the
spinning and weaving of articles for the tribute, together with the
maize and the chickens called for by the tax regulations; that payment
in money is prohibited except in the specified cases, in order that
laziness be avoided, and that prices do not go down in the pursuit of
money.

*Item:* The said governor shall not procure the cultivation of milpas of
maize, beans, cotton or other products, nor the distribution of money or
other payments for the things the Indians gather or make for the
Encomendero or other persons, under pain of deprivation of his office
for four years. He shall see to it that the tribute is paid punctually
to the Encomendero, in the mantles, maize and chickens prescribed.

*Item:* Inasmuch as it is prohibited the local governors of this
province to negotiate. contract or procure assignments of Indians for
different people; also prohibited the judges any aggressions on the
milpas with the consequent injury to the Indians and harm to the
province thereby; it is ordered that the said governors and judges
accept no money or other thing for making such assignments of the
Indians, and all persons are forbidden to make such collections in their
name to that end, under pain of privation of their offices, of 200
blows, and of banishment from the pueblo.

*Item:* I order that that he permit the Indians as to everything they
produce beyond the amount of the tribute, with their gatherings of wax,
honey, cochineal and fruits, a free sale by them in the town, or in the
city and villages of Campeche and Valladolid, to whomever will pay them
best, to the end that they may have money for their needs and the things
they require for apparel.

*Item:* Having been informed that at times when orders go for wet-nurses
solicited by different persons, it has been the custom to seize poor
women lately widowed or abandoned by their husbands with their three,
four or five infants, I order that none such be sent except after a half
year of widowhood or with one or two infants, who shall accompany them,
and not be left uncared for, that they may give breast to their own, and
in the house of their nearest relative; it being further required of the
judges to have them returned within a year and a half.

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

*Item:* Since it is so disposed that the governor, in order properly to
discharge his duties, does not himself cultivate his milpa, but that a
milpa of 70 mecates of the commonalty be farmed for him; and since I am
advised that many governors have enforced the cultivation for themselves
of large tracts, all which abuses and corruptions should be reformed, I
order and command that no more than the above 70 mecates be so
cultivated, and no more than this amount of produce be stored for them,
and the weekly service thereto be observed during his term of office.
The said governor shall not require any more to be done for him, even
under the pretext of paying for it, under pain of loss of office for
four years and banishment ten leagues away from the pueblo.

*Item:* Being advised that many aggravations and extortions are
practised by those trading and dealing in the towns, oppressing those
poor and miserable, taking them off as muleteers and in service, I order
that the present governor shall not during his term of office engage in
business or trade, nor molest any Indian, nor take them from their
houses for the like purposes, under the same penalties.

*I therefore command* that the alcades, regidores and other principal
Indians of the said town of **Oxkutzcab** receive as their Governor the
said don Juan Xiu, that they obey, esteem and respect him, keep and
cause to be kept all the honors, graces and exceptions, and the
prerogatives which belong to him by said office, doing nothing in
contravention thereof, under pain of the due prosecution for such
disobedience; that he present himself under this title before the town
Council and the Cabildo, making the proclamation thereof to all the
Indians of the said pueblo, for their information of what is ordained,
as in the book of communities.

DON JUAN FRANCISCO DE ESQUIVEL, (rubric)

Dated in Mérida this 12th of September, 1665.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[125:\*](ybac60.htm#fr_48) In confirmation of
this I can add the following, from my own visit of 1917. Having already,
as stated above, made a full photographic copy of the Xiu volume, and
later translating it, I spoke of this to Doña Felipa and others of the
family. At once they said: "Oh señor, cannot you get back for us these
papers? They belong to us; they are the records of our ancestors that
have been in our possession from back of the time that we can remember.
But a few years ago Don Bernabe loaned them to (as we thought) our 'good
friend' Don Eduardo Thompson, and we have never been able to get him to
return them. Cannot you get them for us?"

But, soon after the 'borrowing,' Don Eduardo had sold them in the United
States, where they still remain, in the 'keeping' of a certain
institution. One feels quite permitted to ask, what would a Mayflower or
Virginia descendant feel if his family papers, records not half as
ancient, and not even of royal caste, had been borrowed by a Xiu, and
sold as just interesting historical records—to the local Museum in
Mérida?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Map, and the Meeting at Maní](ybac61)
