[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac30)  [Next](ybac32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XXVII. KIND OF CONFESSIONS AMONG THE INDIANS. ABSTINENCES AND SUPERSTITIONS. DIVERSITY AND ABUNDANCE OF IDOLS. DUTIES OF THE PRIESTS.

The Yucatecans naturally knew when they had done wrong, and they
believed that death, disease and torments would come on them because of
evildoing and sin, and thus they had the custom of confessing to their
priests when such was the case. In this way, when for sickness or other
cause they found themselves in danger of death, they made confession of
their sin; if they neglected it, their near relatives or friends
reminded them of it; thus they publicly confessed their sins to the
priest if he was at hand; or if not, then to their parents, women to
their husbands, and the men to their wives.

The sins of which they commonly accused themselves were theft, homicide,
of the flesh, and false testimony; in this way they considered
themselves in

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

safety. Many times, after they had recovered, there were difficulties
over the disgrace they had caused, between the husband and wife, or with
others who had been the cause thereof.

The men confessed their weaknesses, except those committed with their
female slaves, since they held it a man's right to do with his own
property as he wished. Sins of intention they did not confess, yet
considered them as evil, and in their counsels and sermons advised
against them.

Those widowed did not marry for a year thereafter, nor know one of the
other sex for this tire.; those who infringed this rule were deemed
intemperate, and they believed some ill would come on them.

In some of the fasts observed for their fiestas they neither ate meat
nor knew their wives. They always fasted when receiving duties in
connection with their festivals, and likewise on undertaking duties of
the State, which at times lasted as long as three years; those who
violated their abstinence were great sinners.

So given were they to their idolatrous practices that in times of
necessity even the women and youths and maidens understood it as
incumbent on them to burn incense and pray to God that he free them from
evil and overcome the demon who was the cause of it.

Even travelers on the roads carried incense with them, and a little
plate on which to burn it; and then wherever they arrived at night they
erected three small stones, putting a little incense on each, and three
flat stones in front of these, on which they burned incense, praying to
the god they called **Ekchuah** <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_27)
that he bring them safely back home; this ceremony they performed every
night until their return, unless there were some other who could do
this, or even more, on their account. <span id="img_04600"></span>

|                                                    |
|----------------------------------------------------|
| ![Ekchuah&lt;br&gt; ON HIS TRAVELS](img/04600.jpg) |

The Yucatecans had a great number of temples, sumptuous in their style;
besides these temples in common the chiefs, priests and principal men
also had their oratories and idols in their houses for their private
offerings and prayers. They held Cozumel and the well at Chichén Itzá in
as great veneration as we have in our pilgrimages to Jerusalem and Rome;
they visited them to offer gifts, especially at Cozumel, as we do at our
holy places; and when they did

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

not visit they sent offerings. When traveling also, and passing an
abandoned temple, it was their custom to enter for prayers and burn
incense.

So many idols did they have that their gods did not suffice them, there
being no animal or reptile of which they did not make images, and these
in the form of their gods and goddesses. They had idols of stone (though
few in number), others more numerous of wood, but the greatest number of
terra cotta. The idols of wood were especially esteemed and reckoned
among their inheritances as objects of great value. They had no metal
statues, there being no metals in the country. As regards the images,
they knew perfectly that they were made by human hands, perishable, and
not divine; but they honored them because of what they represented and
the ceremonies that had been performed during their fabrication,
especially the wooden ones.

The most idolatrous of them were the priests, the **chilánes**, the
sorcerers, the physicians, the **chacs** and the **nacónes**. It was the
office of the priests to discourse and teach their sciences, to indicate
calamities and the means of remedying them, preaching during the
festivals, celebrating the sacrifices and administering their
sacraments. The **chilánes** were charged with giving to all those in
the locality the oracles of the demon, and the respect given them was so
great that they did not ordinarily leave their houses except borne upon
litters carried on the shoulders. The sorcerers and physicians cured by
means of bleeding at the part afflicted, casting lots for divination in
their work, and other matters. The **chacs** were four old men,
specially elected on occasion to aid the priest in the proper and full
celebration of the festivals. There were two of the **nacónes**; the
position of one was permanent and carried little honor, since it was his
office to open the breasts of those who were sacrificed; the other was
chosen as a general for the wars, who held office for three years, and
was held in great honor; he also presided at certain festivals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[46:\*](ybac31.htm#fr_27) The figure in the
text, from the Madrid codex, shows the North Star god (so called) in the
usual habiliments of **Ekchuah**, the headbands, corded hamper and
pouch, on his travels, also bearing a flint-tipped spear. **Ekchuah** is
the recognized god of the merchants, the<span id="img_04601"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/04601.jpg) |

**beyom** or 'traveling man.' He is in nearly every case shown with his
body painted black, as well as his glyph here in the margin. As such he
occurs seventeen times in the Madrid codex, devoted to daily or mundane
affairs, and only once in the Dresden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVIII. Sacrifices and Self-Mortifications, Both Cruel and
Obscene, Among the Yucatecans. Human Victims Slain By Arrows, and
Others](ybac32)
