[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac55)  [Next](ybac57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### SEC. LII. CRITICISM AND CORRECTION OF CERTAIN STATEMENTS.

The historian of the Indies, to whom much is due for his labor and the
light he gave, in speaking of the things of Yucatan, says that they used
slings in war, and spears hardened by fire; I have told in chapter 101
of the things they used in war, and I am not surprised that Francisco
Hernández de Cordova and Juan de Grijalva thought that the stones thrown
at them by the Indians at Champotón were discharged from slings, since
they retreated. But they neither throw from a sling nor knew them,
though they throw a stone very sure and hard, aiming when they throw
with the left arm and index finger as they do it.

He also says that the Indians are circumcised, and how this is will be
found in chapter 49. He says that there are hares, and about that you
will find in the fifteenth paragraph of the last chapter. He says that
there are partridges, and of what kinds, and about that you will find in
the thirteenth paragraph of the last chapter.

Our historian further says that at Cape Cotoch they found crosses among
the dead and the idols, and he does not believe it, because if they were
spoil taken from the Spaniards who perished, they would perforce have
been found elsewhere first, in many places. This reasoning does not
convince me, because no other places are known where it could have
happened, where they could have come before they did to Yucatan, whether
they did arrive or not, nor as in these parts of Yucatan. Why I do not
believe it, is because when Francisco Hernández and Grijalva arrived at
Cotoch, they did not go about digging up dead people, but hunting gold
among the living. I also believe so much in the virtue of the cross and
the malice of the evil one, that he could not endure seeing a cross
amongst the idols, because of the fear that some day miraculously its
virtue would break them, and confound him as the ark of the covenant did
with Dagon, although not sanctified by the blood of the son of God and
dignified by his divine members, as was the holy cross.

Besides all this, I will say what was told me by a lord among the
Indians, a man of fine understanding and much reputation among them.
Talking with him on this matter one day, and having asked of him whether
he had at any time heard reports of Christ our Lord, or of the Cross, he
answered that he had never heard from his ancestors anything about
either Christ or the Cross, except that once while tearing down a small
building on a certain part of the coast, they had found in some graves,
on the bodies and bones of the dead, some small metal crosses. That they
had not seen anything of the cross until today when they became
Christians and saw it venerated and worshipped; they believed it must
have been those dead men that had been buried there. If that was so, it
is possible that some small party had come from Spain and quickly
disappeared, with no memory left.

 

 

 

FINIS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter in Maya to the King](ybac57)
