[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac52)  [Next](ybac54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XLIX. OF THE BIRDS.

This country possesses an immense number of birds, of so great variety
that He who gave them as a blessing is greatly to be praised. They have
domestic fowls which they raise at their homes, and cocks in great
number, although they are troublesome to raise. They have taken to
raising Spanish fowls, in great numbers, so that all the year they have
chickens from them. They raise tame pigeons like ours, which multiply
much. They breed a certain kind of large white ducks for their plumage,
coming I think from Peru; thus they pluck their breasts often, and are
fond of using their feathers for embroidering their garments.

There are many kinds of buds, and many very handsome ones, among these
two kinds of fine turtle doves, one being quite small and tame about the
houses. There is a little bird like the nightingale, and sweet singing,
which they call **ixyalchamil**, which stays on the walls of houses that
have gardens, or in their trees. There is another large and very
beautiful bird, of very dark green plumage, and with only two long
feathers in the tail, and no others, but with down on them at the ends;
it lives in the buildings and does not go out except in the mornings.

There are other birds like the magpies both in their bodies and conduct,
always crying at the passers-by, and not letting them pass quietly.
There are many martins or swallows, though I think they are martins
since they do not -breed in dwellings as do the swallows.

There is another large one, of many colors and much beauty, with a large
strong beak; it always goes about the dry trees, holding to the bark by
its claws and hammering so loud with the beak that it can be heard a
good distance off, extracting from the decayed wood the worms they live
on. These birds carry on this boring to such an extent that trees
harboring the worms are riddled from top to bottom.

There are many field birds of excellent eating, among them three kinds
of handsome little pigeons. There are birds like Spanish partridges in
every

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

way except that their legs are long, although red; they are very poor
eating, but very tame if raised by the house.

There are many fine quail, somewhat larger than ours, and fine for
eating; they fly but little, and the Indians catch them climbing in the
trees, with dogs, and by lassos they throw over the breasts, in quite
delightful hunting.

There are many grayish brown pheasants, and also spotted, of a fair
size, but not so good to eat as those of Italy. There is one very large
bird as big as the turkey-hens, which they call the **kambul**, very
beautiful and very courageous, and good to eat. Another they call
**cox**, equally large, with a furious way of walking and stirring
about; the males are all black as jet, with a handsome crest of little
curled feathers, and yellow eyelids, fine to look at.

There are many turkeys, which while not of as fine plumage as those here
in Spain, are still very gallant and handsome; they are as large as the
Indian cocks, and as good eating. There are many other birds that I have
seen, but do not remember. All the large ones are hunted in the trees
with arrows by the Indians; they steal their eggs and take away the
hens, which they raise quite domesticated. There are three or four kinds
of large and small parrots, in such crowds that they do much harm to the
plantations.

There are other nocturnal birds like the owls, the red owl or
*mochuelo*, and blind fowl because of which it is diverting to travel at
night with great stretches of the road filled with them flying in front.
They irritate the Indians greatly, for they take them as birds of omen,
the same as with certain others.

There are carnivorous birds that the Spaniards call *auras*, and the
Indians **kuch**; these are black, with head and breast like the native
hens, and a long hooked beak. They are very filthy, since they always go
among the stables and privies eating and hunting dead meats. It is a
known fact that so far it is unknown where they nest or how they breed;
thus some say they live two hundred years or more, and others believe
them to be in fact crows. The dead meat smells so that when the Indians
have shot a deer and it gets away wounded, the one way to find it is by
climbing a tree and looking where these birds are gathering; there they
are sure to find the game. There is a great variety of birds of rapine;
there are small eagles, very handsome goshawks, large hunting birds, and
also very fine sparrowhawks, larger than the Spanish kind. There are
tanners, and falcons, and others whose names I do not remember since I
am not a hunter. On the sea the variety, diversity and multitude of
birds is infinite, as is also the beauty of each one of the species.
There are great birds as large as brown ostriches, and with larger
beaks. They move on the water hunting the fish, and when one is seen
they rise in the air and launch themselves with great force upon the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

fish; they never make a mis-stroke, and on making the dive continue
swimming and swallowing the fish without preparation of any kind.

There are certain large lean birds that fly a great deal, and fly high,
with the tail divided in two ends, and whose fat is an excellent remedy
for scars, and for numbness caused from cuts.

There are large ducks that stay under water a long time hunting fish to
eat; they are very quick, and have a hook on the beak that they use for
the fish. There are other small ducks, raised at the house and very
tame, and staying at home; these they call *maxix*.

There are many kinds of large and small herons, some white and others
brown, in the Laguna de Términos. Many are of a very bright red, like
powdered cochineal; and so many sorts of small birds, as well as large,
that their numbers and variety are causes for wonderment; and still more
is the seeing them so busy hunting their food on the shore, some
entering the incoming breakers only to break away from them, others
hunting food on the beaches or hurrying away; but most of it all is
seeing how God has provided for it all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: L. Of the Larger Animals, and of the Smaller Ones](ybac54)
