[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac20)  [Next](ybac22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. XVII. ARRIVAL OF THE SPANISH FRANCISCAN FRIARS IN YUCATAN. PROTECTION THEY GAVE TO THE NATIVES. THEIR CONTESTS WITH THE SPANISH MILITARY ELEMENT.

Friar Jacobo de Testera, a Franciscan, came to Yucatan and began to
instruct the Indian children. The Spanish soldiery, however, wanted to
use the services of the youths to such an extent that it left no time
for them to learn the catechism; they also hated the friars for rebuking
their evil conduct toward the Indians. As a result of this friar Jacobo
returned to Mexico, where he died. Afterwards friar Toribio Motolinia
sent two friars from Guatemala, and from Mexico friar Martin de
Hojacastro sent other friars, all of whom settled in Campeche and
Mérida, with the approval of the admiral and his son Don Francisco, who
built them a monastery at Mérida, as has been stated. They undertook to
learn the language, which was very difficult. The one who succeeded the
best was friar Luis de Villalpando, who commenced to learn it through
signs and small stones; he reduced it to a certain form of grammar and
wrote a Christian catechism in the language. But he suffered many
hindrances, both on the part of the Spaniards who, being absolute
masters, wanted everything directed to their own profit and

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

tributes, as well as on the part of the Indians who wanted to persist in
their idolatries and debaucheries. Especially was the labor heavy
because of the Indians being scattered through the forests. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)

The Spaniards took it ill that the friars built monasteries; they drove
the young Indians from their domains that they might not come to
catechism, and twice they burned the monastery at Valladolid, which was
built of wood and straw, so that it became necessary for the friars to
go and live among the Indians. When the Indians of that province
rebelled they wrote to the Viceroy Don Antonio that it was through their
fondness for the friars; as to this the Viceroy investigated and proved
that the friars had not yet come into the province at the time of the
uprising. They spied at night on the friars, causing great scandal with
the Indians, pried into their lives, and deprived them of the alms
given.

In the face of this danger the friars sent one of their people to a very
upright judge, Cerrato, president of Guatemala, to whom he made report
of what had happened. The latter, seeing the disorder and unchristian
conduct of the Spaniards, how they levied all the tribute they possibly
could, against the King's orders, besides requiring personal service for
every sort of labor even to the transport of burdens, established a
certain scale of taxation, which while enough was still bearable, and by
which it was specified what property should belong to the Indian after
his tribute to his master was paid, instead of everything belonging
absolutely to the Spaniards.

From this they appealed, and from fear of the tax they took from the
Indians even more than before. The friars went back to the Audiencia and
also sent to Spain, succeeding so far that the Audiencia of Guatemala
sent an Auditor, who fixed the land tax and abolished the personal
service. Some of them he forced to marry, breaking up the houses full of
women they had. This man was the licentiate Tomás López, a native of
Tendilla. All this caused a great increase of the animosity against the
friars, infamous libels were spread about them, and the men ceased to
attend the masses.

This very hatred caused the Indians to feel well toward the friars,
seeing the troubles they took disinterestedly, and securing their
freedom; so far did this go that they undertook nothing without
consulting the friars and getting their counsel. And all this aroused
further envy against the friars on the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

part of the Spaniards, who declared they did all this to get the
government of the Indies in their own hands and themselves enjoy all the
things they had deprived the Spaniards of. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[28:\*](ybac21.htm#fr_17) This grammar and
'*doctrina*' was then apparently reformed by Landa, then made the basis
of that by Coronel, as printed in 1620. The grammar, of which only one
copy has survived, in the present writer's collection, was then enlarged
in the grammar of Gabriel de San Buenaventura, as printed in 1684. There
is a persistent assertion that he also composed a large vocabulary which
was printed in Mexico City in 1571, and that one copy of this has also
survived; but the fact remains yet to be verified. It is also very
unlikely that Landa <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> would not have
mentioned it, or that Villalpando could have produced such a work in the
eight years of his conversion activities and travels, between his
arrival in 1544 and his death at some time between 1551 and 1553; as
given by Cogolludo.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[29:\*](ybac21.htm#fr_18) As to this whole
chapter see the Appendix to this volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Vices of the Indians. Studies of the Friars in the
Language of the Country. Their Teachings to the Indians. Conversions.
Punishments of Apostates](ybac22)
