[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Maya](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ybac05)  [Next](ybac07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486236226/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Yucatan Before and After the Conquest*, by Diego de Landa, tr. William
Gates, \[1937\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SEC. II. ETYMOLOGY OF THE NAME OF THIS PROVINCE. ITS SITUATION.

This province is called in the language of the Indians **Ulumil cuz
yetel ceh**, meaning 'the land of the turkey and the deer.' It is also
called **Petén**, meaning 'island,' an error arising from the gulfs and
bays we have spoken of. <span id="fr_2"></span>[†](#fn_2)

When Francisco Hernández de Córdoba came to this country and landed at
the point he called Cape Cotoch, he met certain Indian fisherfolk whom
he asked what country this was, and who answered **Cotoch**, which means
'our houses, our homeland,' for which reason he gave that name to the
cape. When he then by signs asked them how the land was theirs, they
replied **Ci uthan**, meaning 'they say it,' <span
id="fr_3"></span>[‡](#fn_3) and from that the Spaniards gave the name
Yucatan. This was learned from one of the early conquerors, Blas
Hernández, who came here with the admiral on the first occasion.

In the southern part of Yucatan are the rivers of Taiza (Tah-Itzá) and
the mountains of Lacandón, and between the south and west lies the
province of Chiapas; to pass thither one must cross four streams that
descend from the mountains and unite with others to form the San Pedro y
San Pablo river discovered by Grijalva in Tabasco. To the west lie
Xicalango and Tabasco, one and the same province.

Between this province of Tabasco and Yucatan there are two sea mouths
breaking the coast; the largest of these forms a vast lagoon, while the
other is of less extent. The sea enters these mouths with such fury as
to create a great lake abounding in fish of all kinds, and so full of
islets that the Indians put signs on the trees to mark the way going or
coming by boat from Tabasco to Yucatan. These islands with their shores
and sandy beaches have so great a variety of seafowl as to be a matter
of wonder and beauty; there is an infinite amount of game: deer, hare,
the wild pigs of that country, and

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

monkeys as well, which are not found in Yucatan. The number of iguanas
is astonishing. On one island is a town called **Tixchel**.

To the north is the island of Cuba, with Havana facing at a distance of
60 leagues; somewhat further on is a small island belonging to Cuba,
which they call Isla de Pinos. At the cast lies Honduras, between which
and Yucatan is a great arm of the sea that Grijalva called Ascension
Bay; this is filled with islets on which many boats are wrecked,
especially those in the trade between Yucatan and Honduras. Fifteen
years ago a ship laden with many people and goods foundered, and all
were drowned save one Majuelas and four others, who seized hold of a
great piece of wood from the ship, and thus went three or four days
without reaching any of the islets until their strength gave out and ail
sank except Majuelas. He came out half dead and recovered himself eating
snails and shellfish; then from the islet he reached the mainland on a
balsa or raft which he made as best he could out of branches. Having
come to land, and while hunting for food, he came upon a crab that bit
off his thumb at the first joint, and caused him intense pain. Thence he
set out through difficult bush to try to reach Salamanca, and when night
came he climbed a tree from which he saw a great tiger waylay and kill a
deer; then when morning came he ate what the tiger had left.

In front of Yucatan, somewhat below Cape Cotoch, lies **Cuzmil**
(Cozumel), across a 5-league channel where the sea runs with a strong
current between the mainland and the island. Cozumel is an island
fifteen leagues long by five wide. The Indians are few in number, and of
the same language and customs as those of Yucatan. It lies at the 20th
degree of latitude. Thirteen leagues below Point Cotoch is the Isla de
las Mugeres, 2 leagues off the coast opposite **Ekab**.

<span id="img_00300"></span> ![ISLA DE LAS MUGERES. Photo by
Maler](img/00300.jpg)  
ISLA DE LAS MUGERES. Photo by Maler

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:\*](ybac05.htm#fr_1) October 4th.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:†](ybac06.htm#fr_2) **Petén** properly means
district, region, circuit.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[2:‡](ybac06.htm#fr_3)In common use today in
Yucatan, meaning 'he speaks nicely, well.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Captivity of Gerónimo De Aguilar. Expedition of Hernandez De
Córdoba And Grijalva To Yucatan](ybac07)
