<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst03)  [Next](myst05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I. The Point of Departure

<span id="an_iii.i"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p1"></span>The <span id="an_iii.i-p1.1"></span>most
highly developed branches of the human family have in common one
peculiar characteristic. They tend to produce—sporadically it is true,
and often in the teeth of adverse external circumstances—a curious and
definite type of personality; a type which refuses to be satisfied with
that which other men call experience, and is inclined, in the words of
its enemies, to “deny the world in order that it may find reality.” We
meet these persons in the east and the west; in the ancient, mediaeval,
and modern worlds. Their one passion appears to be the prosecution of a
certain spiritual and intangible quest: the finding of a “way out” or a
“way back” to some desirable state in which alone they can satisfy their
craving for absolute truth. This quest, for them, has constituted the
whole meaning of life. They have made for it without effort sacrifices
which have appeared enormous to other men: and it is an indirect
testimony to its objective actuality, that whatever the place or period
in which they have arisen, their aims, doctrines and methods have been
substantially the same. Their experience, therefore, forms a body of
evidence, curiously self-consistent and often mutually explanatory,
which must be taken into account before we can add up the sum of the
energies and potentialities of the human spirit, or reasonably speculate
on its relations to the unknown world which lies outside the boundaries
of sense.

<span id="an_iii.i-p2"></span>All men, at one time or another, have
fallen in love with the veiled Isis whom they call Truth. With most,
this has been a passing passion: they have early seen its hopelessness
and turned to more practical things. But others remain all their lives
the devout lovers of reality: though the manner of their love, the <span
id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_4"></span> vision which
they make to themselves of the beloved object varies enormously. Some
see Truth as Dante saw Beatrice: an adorable yet intangible figure,
found in this world yet revealing the next. To others she seems rather
an evil but an irresistible enchantress: enticing, demanding payment and
betraying her lover at the last. Some have seen her in a test tube, and
some in a poet’s dream: some before the altar, others in the slime. The
extreme pragmatists have even sought her in the kitchen; declaring that
she may best be recognized by her utility. Last stage of all, the
philosophic sceptic has comforted an unsuccessful courtship by assuring
himself that his mistress is not really there.

<span id="an_iii.i-p3"></span>Under whatsoever symbols they have
objectified their quest, none of these seekers have ever been able to
assure the world that they have found, seen face to face, the Reality
behind the veil. But if we may trust the reports of the mystics—and they
are reports given with a strange accent of certainty and good faith—they
have succeeded where all these others have failed, in establishing
immediate communication between the spirit of man, entangled as they
declare amongst material things, and that “only Reality,” that
immaterial and final Being, which some philosophers call the Absolute,
and most theologians call God. This, they say—and here many who are not
mystics agree with them—is the hidden Truth which is the object of man’s
craving; the only satisfying goal of his quest. Hence, they should claim
from us the same attention that we give to other explorers of countries
in which we are not competent to adventure ourselves; for the mystics
are the pioneers of the spiritual world, and we have no right to deny
validity to their discoveries, merely because we lack the opportunity or
the courage necessary to those who would prosecute such explorations for
themselves.

<span id="an_iii.i-p4"></span>It is the object of this book to attempt a
description, and also—though this is needless for those who read that
description in good faith—a justification of these experiences and the
conclusions which have been drawn from them. So remote, however, are
these matters from our ordinary habits of thought, that their
investigation entails, in those who would attempt to understand them, a
definite preparation: a purging of the intellect. As with those who came
of old to the Mysteries, purification is here the gate of knowledge. We
must come to this encounter with minds cleared of prejudice and
convention, must deliberately break with our inveterate habit of taking
the “visible world” for granted; our lazy assumption that somehow
science is “real” and metaphysics is not. We must pull down our own card
houses—descend, as the mystics say, “into our nothingness”—and examine
for ourselves the foundations of all possible human experience, <span
id="page_5">p. 5</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_5"></span> before we are
in a position to criticize the buildings of the visionaries, the poets,
and the saints. We must not begin to talk of the unreal world of these
dreamers until we have discovered—if we can—a real world with which it
may be compared.

<span id="an_iii.i-p5"></span>Such a criticism of reality is of course
the business of philosophy. I need hardly say that this book is not
written by a philosopher, nor is it addressed to students of that
imperial science. Nevertheless, amateurs though we be, we cannot reach
our starting-point without trespassing to some extent on philosophic
ground. That ground covers the whole area of first principles: and it is
to first principles that we must go, if we would understand the true
significance of the mystic type.

<span id="an_iii.i-p6"></span>Let us then begin at the beginning: and
remind ourselves of a few of the trite and primary facts which all
practical persons agree to ignore. That beginning, for human thought, is
of course the I, the Ego, the self-conscious subject which is writing
this book, or the other self-conscious subject which is reading it; and
which declares, in the teeth of all arguments, I AM.  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) Here is a point as to which we all feel
quite sure. No metaphysician has yet shaken the ordinary individual’s
belief in his own existence. The uncertainties only begin for most of us
when we ask what else *is* .

<span id="an_iii.i-p8"></span>To this I, this conscious self “imprisoned
in the body like an oyster in his shell,”  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) come, as we know, a constant stream of
messages and experiences. Chief amongst these are the stimulation of the
tactile nerves whose result we call touch, the vibrations taken up by
the optic nerve which we call light, and those taken up by the ear and
perceived as sound.

<span id="an_iii.i-p10"></span>What do these experiences mean? The first
answer of the unsophisticated Self is, that they indicate the nature of
the external world: it is to the “evidence of her senses” that she
turns, when she is asked what the world is like. From the messages
received through those senses, which pour in on her whether she will or
no, battering upon her gateways at every instant and from every side,
she constructs that “sense-world” which is the “real and solid world” of
normal men. As the impressions come in—or rather those interpretations
of the original impressions which her nervous system supplies—she
pounces on them, much as players in the spelling game pounce on the
separate letters dealt <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_6"></span> out to them. She sorts, accepts, rejects,
combines: and then triumphantly produces from them a “concept” which
*is,* she says, the external world. With an enviable and amazing
simplicity she attributes her own sensations to the unknown universe.
The stars, she says, *are* bright; the grass *is* green. For her, as for
the philosopher Hume, “reality consists in impressions and ideas.”

<span id="an_iii.i-p11"></span>It is immediately apparent, however, that
this sense-world, this seemingly real external universe—though it may be
useful and valid in other respects—cannot be *the* external world, but
only the Self’s projected picture of it.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) It is a work of art, not a scientific fact;
and, whilst it may well possess the profound significance proper to
great works of art, is dangerous if treated as a subject of analysis.
Very slight investigation shows that it is a picture whose relation to
reality is at best symbolic and approximate, and which would have no
meaning for selves whose senses, or channels of communication, happened
to be arranged upon a different plan. The evidence of the senses, then,
cannot be accepted as evidence of the nature of ultimate reality: useful
servants, they are dangerous guides. Nor can their testimony disconcert
those seekers whose reports they appear to contradict.

<span id="an_iii.i-p13"></span>The conscious self sits, so to speak, at
the receiving end of a telegraph wire. On any other theory than that of
mysticism, it is her one channel of communication with the hypothetical
“external world.” The receiving instrument registers certain messages.
She does not know, and—so long as she remains dependent on that
instrument—never can know, the object, the reality at the other end of
the wire, by which those messages are sent; neither can the messages
truly disclose the nature of that object. But she is justified on the
whole in accepting them as evidence that something exists beyond herself
and her receiving instrument. It is obvious that the structural
peculiarities of the telegraphic instrument will have exerted a
modifying effect upon the message. That which is conveyed as dash and
dot, colour and shape, may have been received in a very different form.
Therefore this message, though it may in a partial sense be relevant to
the supposed reality at the other end, can never be adequate to it.
There will be fine vibrations which it fails to take up, others which it
confuses together. Hence a portion of the message is always lost; or, in
<span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_7"></span> other
language, there are aspects of the world which we can never know.

<span id="an_iii.i-p14"></span>The sphere of our possible intellectual
knowledge is thus strictly conditioned by the limits of our own
personality. On this basis, not the ends of the earth, but the external
termini of our own sensory nerves, are the termini of our explorations:
and to “know oneself” is really to know one’s universe. We are locked up
with our receiving instruments: we cannot get up and walk away in the
hope of seeing whither the lines lead. Eckhart’s words are still final
for us: “the soul can only approach created things by the voluntary
reception of images.” Did some mischievous Demiurge choose to tickle our
sensory apparatus in a new way, we should receive by this act a new
universe.

<span id="an_iii.i-p15"></span>William James once suggested as a useful
exercise for young idealists, a consideration of the changes which would
be worked in our ordinary world if the various branches of our receiving
instruments exchanged duties; if, for instance, we heard all colours and
saw all sounds. Such a remark throws a sudden light on the strange and
apparently insane statement of the visionary Saint-Martin, “I heard
flowers that sounded, and saw notes that shone”; and on the reports of
other mystics concerning a rare moment of consciousness in which the
senses are fused into a single and ineffable act of perception, and
colour and sound are known as aspects of one thing.  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3)

<span id="an_iii.i-p17"></span>Since music is but an interpretation of
certain vibrations undertaken by the ear, and colour an interpretation
of other vibrations performed by the eye, this is less mad than it
sounds and may yet be brought within the radius of physical science. Did
such an alteration of our senses take place the world would still send
us the same messages—that strange unknown world from which, on this
hypothesis, we are hermetically sealed—but we should interpret them
differently. Beauty would still be ours, though speaking another tongue.
The bird’s song would then strike our retina as a pageant of colour: we
should see the magical tones of the wind, hear as a great fugue the
repeated and harmonized greens of the forest, the cadences of stormy
skies. Did we realize how slight an adjustment of our organs is needed
to initiate us into such a world, we should perhaps be less contemptuous
of those mystics who tell us that they apprehended the Absolute as
“heavenly music” or “Uncreated Light”: less fanatical in our
determination to make the solid “world of common sense” the only
standard of reality. This “world of common sense” is a conceptual <span
id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_8"></span> world. It may
represent an external universe: it certainly does represent the activity
of the human mind. Within that mind it is built up: and there most of us
are content “at ease for aye to dwell,” like the soul in the Palace of
Art.

<span id="an_iii.i-p18"></span>A direct encounter with absolute truth,
then, appears to be impossible for normal non-mystical consciousness. We
cannot know the reality, or even prove the existence, of the simplest
object: though this is a limitation which few people realize acutely and
most would deny. But there persists in the race a type of personality
which does realize this limitation: and cannot be content with the sham
realities that furnish the universe of normal men. It is necessary, as
it seems, to the comfort of persons of this type to form for themselves
some image of the Something or Nothing which is at the end of their
telegraph lines: some “conception of being,” some “theory of knowledge.”
They are tormented by the Unknowable, ache for first principles, demand
some background to the shadow show of things. In so far as man possesses
this temperament, he hungers for reality, and must satisfy that hunger
as best he can: staving off starvation, though he many not be filled.

<span id="an_iii.i-p19"></span>It is doubtful whether any two selves
have offered themselves exactly the same image of the truth outside
their gates: for a living metaphysic, like a living religion, is at
bottom a strictly personal affair—a matter, as William James reminded
us, of vision rather than of argument.  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) Nevertheless such a living metaphysic
may—and if sound generally does—escape the stigma of subjectivism by
outwardly attaching itself to a traditional School; as personal religion
may and should outwardly attach itself to a traditional church. Let us
then consider shortly the results arrived at by these traditional
schools—the great classic theories concerning the nature of reality. In
them we see crystallized the best that the human intellect, left to
itself, has been able to achieve.

<span id="an_iii.i-p21"></span>I. The most obvious and generally
accepted explanation of the world is of course that of *Naturalism,* or
naive Realism: the point of view of the plain man. Naturalism states
simply that we see the real world, though we may not see it very well.
What seems to normal healthy people to be there, is approximately there.
It congratulates itself on resting in the concrete; it accepts material
things as real. In other words, our corrected and correlated sense
impressions, raised to their highest point of efficiency, form for it
the only valid material of knowledge: knowledge itself being the
classified results of exact observation.

<span id="an_iii.i-p22"></span>Such an attitude as this may be a counsel
of prudence, in view of our ignorance of all that lies beyond: but it
can never satisfy <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_9"></span> our hunger for reality. It says in effect,
“The room in which we find ourselves is fairly comfortable. Draw the
curtains, for the night is dark: and let us devote ourselves to
describing the furniture.” Unfortunately, however, even the furniture
refuses to accommodate itself to the naturalistic view of things. Once
we begin to examine it attentively, we find that it abounds in hints of
wonder and mystery: declares aloud that even chairs and tables are not
what they seem.

<span id="an_iii.i-p23"></span>We have seen that the most elementary
criticism, applied to any ordinary object of perception, tends to
invalidate the simple and comfortable creed of “common sense”; that not
merely faith but gross credulity, is needed by the mind which would
accept the apparent as the real. I say, for instance, that I “see” a
house. I can only mean by this that the part of my receiving instrument
which undertakes the duty called vision is affected in a certain way,
and arouses in my mind the idea “house.” The idea “house” is now treated
by me as a real house, and my further observations will be an unfolding,
enriching, and defining of this image. But what the external reality is
which evoked the image that I call “house,” I do not know and never can
know. It is as mysterious, as far beyond my apprehension, as the
constitution of the angelic choirs. Consciousness shrinks in terror from
contact with the mighty verb “to be.” I may of course call in one sense
to “corroborate,” as we trustfully say, the evidence of the other; may
approach the house, and touch it. Then the nerves of my hand will be
affected by a sensation which I translate as hardness and solidity; the
eye by a peculiar and wholly incomprehensible sensation called redness;
and from these purely personal changes my mind constructs and
externalizes an idea which it calls red bricks. Science herself,
however, if she be asked to verify the reality of these perceptions, at
once declares that though the material world be real, the ideas of
solidity and colour are but hallucination. They belong to the human
animal, not to the physical universe: pertain to accident not substance,
as scholastic philosophy would say.

<span id="an_iii.i-p24"></span>“The red brick,” says Science, “is a mere
convention. In reality that bit, like all other bits of the universe,
consists, so far as I know at present, of innumerable atoms whirling and
dancing one about the other. It is no more solid than a snowstorm. Were
you to eat of Alice-in-Wonderland’s mushroom and shrink to the
dimensions of the infra-world, each atom with its electrons might seem
to you a solar system and the red brick itself a universe. Moreover,
these atoms themselves elude me as I try to grasp them. They are only
manifestations of something else. Could I track matter to its lair, I
might conceivably discover that it has no extension, and become an
idealist in spite of myself. As for redness, as you <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_10"></span> call it,
that is a question of the relation between your optic nerve and the
light waves which it is unable to absorb. This evening, when the sun
slopes, your brick will probably be purple, a very little deviation from
normal vision on your part would make it green. Even the sense that the
object of perception is outside yourself may be fancy; since you as
easily attribute this external quality to images seen in dreams, and to
waking hallucinations, as you do to those objects which, as you absurdly
say, are *‘really there.’”*

<span id="an_iii.i-p25"></span>Further, there is no trustworthy standard
by which we can separate the “real” from the “unreal” aspects of
phenomena. Such standards as exist are conventional: and correspond to
convenience, not to truth. It is no argument to say that most men see
the world in much the same way, and that this “way” is the true standard
of reality: though for practical purposes we have agreed that sanity
consists in sharing the hallucinations of our neighbours. Those who are
honest with themselves know that this “sharing” is at best incomplete.
By the voluntary adoption of a new conception of the universe, the
fitting of a new alphabet to the old Morse code—a proceeding which we
call the acquirement of knowledge—we can and do change to a marked
extent our way of seeing things: building up new worlds from old sense
impressions, and transmuting objects more easily and thoroughly than any
magician. “Eyes and ears,” said Heracleitus, “are bad witnesses to those
who have barbarian souls”: and even those whose souls are civilized tend
to see and hear all things through a temperament. In one and the same
sky the poet may discover the habitation of angels, whilst the sailor
sees only a promise of dirty weather ahead. Hence, artist and surgeon,
Christian and rationalist, pessimist and optimist, do actually and truly
live in different and mutually exclusive worlds, not only of thought but
also of perception. Only the happy circumstance that our ordinary speech
is conventional, not realistic, permits us to conceal from one another
the unique and lonely world in which each lives. Now and then an artist
is born, terribly articulate, foolishly truthful, who insists on
“Speaking as he saw.” Then other men, lapped warmly in their artificial
universe, agree that he is mad: or, at the very best, an
“extraordinarily imaginative fellow.”

<span id="an_iii.i-p26"></span>Moreover, even this unique world of the
individual is not permanent. Each of us, as we grow and change, works
incessantly and involuntarily at the re-making of our sensual universe.
We behold at any specific moment not “that which is,” but “that which we
are”, and personality undergoes many readjustments in the course of its
passage from birth through maturity to death. The <span id="page_11">p.
11</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_11"></span> mind which seeks the Real,
then, in this shifting and subjective “natural” world is of necessity
thrown back on itself: on images and concepts which owe more to the
“seer” than to the “seen.” But Reality must be real for all, once they
have found it: must exist “in itself” upon a plane of being
unconditioned by the perceiving mind. Only thus can it satisfy that
mind’s most vital instinct, most sacred passion—its “instinct for the
Absolute,” its passion for truth.

<span id="an_iii.i-p27"></span>You are not asked, as a result of these
antique and elementary propositions, to wipe clean the slate of normal
human experience, and cast in your lot with intellectual nihilism. You
are only asked to acknowledge that it is but a slate, and that the white
scratches upon it which the ordinary man calls facts, and the Scientific
Realist calls knowledge, are at best relative and conventionalized
symbols of that aspect of the unknowable reality at which they hint.
This being so, whilst we must all draw a picture of some kind on our
slate and act in relation therewith, we cannot deny the validity—though
we may deny the usefulness—of the pictures which others produce, however
abnormal and impossible they may seem; since these are sketching an
aspect of reality which has not come within our sensual field, and so
does not and cannot form part of our world. Yet as the theologian claims
that the doctrine of the Trinity veils and reveals not Three but One, so
the varied aspects under which the universe appears to the perceiving
consciousness hint at a final reality, or in Kantian language, a
Transcendental Object, which shall be, not any one, yet all of its
manifestations; transcending yet including the innumerable fragmentary
worlds of individual conception. We begin, then, to ask what can be the
nature of this One; and whence comes the persistent instinct
which—receiving no encouragement from sense experience—apprehends and
desires this unknown unity, this all-inclusive Absolute, as the only
possible satisfaction of its thirst for truth.

<span id="an_iii.i-p28"></span>2. The second great conception of Being—
*Idealism—* has arrived by a process of elimination at a tentative
answer to this question. It whisks us far from the material universe,
with its interesting array of “things,” its machinery, its law, into the
pure, if thin, air of a metaphysical world. Whilst the naturalist’s
world is constructed from an observation of the evidence offered by the
senses, the Idealist’s world is constructed from an observation of the
processes of thought. There are but two things, he says in effect, about
which we are sure: the existence of a thinking subject, a conscious
Self, and of an object, an Idea, with which that subject deals. We know,
that is to say, both Mind and Thought. What we call the universe is
really a collection of such thoughts; and <span id="page_12">p.
12</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_12"></span> these, we agree, have been
more or less distorted by the subject, the individual thinker, in the
process of assimilation. Obviously, we do not think all that there is to
be thought, conceive all that there is to be conceived; neither do we
necessarily combine in right order and proportion those ideas which we
are capable of grasping. Reality, says Objective Idealism, is the
complete, undistorted Object, the big thought, of which we pick up these
fragmentary hints: the world of phenomena which we treat as real being
merely its shadow show or “manifestation in space and time.”

<span id="an_iii.i-p29"></span>According to the form of Objective
Idealism here chosen from amongst many as typical—for almost every
Idealist has his own scheme of metaphysical salvation  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) —we live in a universe which is, in popular
language, the Idea, or Dream of its Creator. We, as Tweedledum explained
to Alice in the most philosophic of all fairy tales, are “just part of
the dream.” All life, all phenomena, are the endless modifications and
expressions of the one transcendent Object, the mighty and dynamic
Thought of one Absolute Thinker, in which we are bathed. This Object, or
certain aspects of it—and the place of each individual consciousness
within the Cosmic Thought, or, as we say, our position in life, largely
determines which these aspects shall be—is interpreted by the senses and
conceived by the mind, under limitations which we are accustomed to call
matter, space and time. But we have no reason to suppose that matter,
space, and time are necessarily parts of reality; of the ultimate Idea.
Probability points rather to their being the pencil and paper with which
we sketch it. As our vision, our idea of things, tends to approximate
more and more to that of the Eternal Idea, so we get nearer and nearer
to reality: for the idealist’s reality is simply the Idea, or Thought of
God. *This,* he says, is the supreme unity at which all the illusory
appearances that make up the widely differing worlds of “common sense,”
of science, of metaphysics, and of art dimly hint. This is the sense in
which it can truly be said that only the supernatural possesses reality;
for that world of appearance which we call natural is certainly largely
made up of preconception and illusion, of the hints offered by the
eternal real world of Idea outside our gates, and the quaint concepts
which we at our receiving instrument manufacture from them.

<span id="an_iii.i-p31"></span>There is this to be said for the argument
of Idealism: that in the last resort, the destinies of mankind are
invariably guided, not by the concrete “facts” of the sense world, but
by concepts <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_13"></span> which are acknowledged by every one to
exist only on the mental plane. In the great moments of existence, when
he rises to spiritual freedom, these are the things which every man
feels to be real. It is by these and for these that he is found willing
to live, work suffer, and die. Love, patriotism, religion, altruism,
fame, all belong to the transcendental world. Hence, they partake more
of the nature of reality than any “fact” could do; and man, dimly
recognizing this, has ever bowed to them as to immortal centres of
energy. Religions as a rule are steeped in idealism: Christianity in
particular is a trumpet call to an idealistic conception of life,
Buddhism is little less. Over and over again, their Scriptures tell us
that only materialists will be damned.

<span id="an_iii.i-p32"></span>In Idealism we have perhaps the most
sublime theory of Being which has ever been constructed by the human
intellect: a theory so sublime, in fact, that it can hardly have been
produced by the exercise of “pure reason” alone, but must be looked upon
as a manifestation of that natural mysticism, that instinct for the
Absolute, which is latent in man. But, when we ask the idealist how we
are to attain communion with the reality which he describes to us as
“certainly there,” his system suddenly breaks down; and discloses itself
as a diagram of the heavens, not a ladder to the stars. This failure of
Idealism to find in practice the reality of which it thinks so much is
due, in the opinion of the mystics, to a cause which finds epigrammatic
expression in the celebrated phrase by which St. Jerome marked the
distinction between religion and philosophy. “Plato located the soul of
man in the head; Christ located it in the heart.” That is to say,
Idealism, though just in its premises, and often daring and honest in
their application, is stultified by the exclusive intellectualism of its
own methods: by its fatal trust in the squirrel-work of the industrious
brain instead of the piercing vision of the desirous heart. It interests
man, but does not involve him in its processes: does not catch him up to
the new and more real life which it describes. Hence the thing that
matters, the living thing, has somehow escaped it; and its observations
bear the same relation to reality as the art of the anatomist does to
the mystery of birth.

<span id="an_iii.i-p33"></span>3. But there is yet another Theory of
Being to be considered: that which may be loosely defined as
*Philosophic Scepticism.* This is the attitude of those who refuse to
accept either the realistic or the idealistic answer to the eternal
question: and, confronted in their turn with the riddle of reality,
reply that there is no riddle to solve. We of course assume for the
ordinary purposes of life that for every sequence a: b: present in our
consciousness there exists a mental or material A: B: in the external
universe, and that the first is a strictly relevant, though probably
wholly inadequate, <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_14"></span> expression of the second. The bundle of
visual and auditory sensations, for instance, whose sum total I am
accustomed to call Mrs. Smith, corresponds with something that exists in
the actual as well as in my phenomenal world. Behind my Mrs. Smith,
behind the very different Mrs. Smith which the X rays would exhibit,
there is, contends the Objective Idealist, a transcendental, or in the
Platonic sense an ideal Mrs. Smith, at whose qualities I cannot even
guess; but whose existence is quite independent of my apprehension of
it. But though we do and must act on this hypothesis, it remains only a
hypothesis; and it is one which philosophic scepticism will not let
pass.

<span id="an_iii.i-p34"></span>The external world, say the sceptical
schools, is—so far as I know it—a concept present in my mind. If my mind
ceased to exist, so far as I know the concept which I call the world
would cease to exist too. The one thing which for me indubitably *is,*
isthe self’s experience, its whole consciousness. Outside this circle of
consciousness I have no authority to indulge in guesses as to what may
or may not Be. Hence, for me, the Absolute is a meaningless diagram, a
superfluous complication of thought: since the mind, wholly cut off from
contact with external reality, has no reason to suppose that such a
reality exists except in its own ideas. Every effort made by philosophy
to go forth in search of it is merely the metaphysical squirrel running
round the conceptual cage. In the completion and perfect unfolding of
the set of ideas with which our consciousness is furnished, lies the
only reality which we can ever hope to know. Far better to stay here and
make ourselves at home: only this, for us, truly is.

<span id="an_iii.i-p35"></span>This purely subjective conception of
Being has found representatives in every school of thought: even
including by a curious paradox, that of mystical philosophy—its one
effective antagonist. Thus Delacroix, after an exhaustive and even
sympathetic analysis of St. Teresa’s progress towards union with the
Absolute, ends upon the assumption that the God with whom she was united
was the content of her own subconscious mind.  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) Such a mysticism is that of a kitten running
after its own tail: a different path indeed from that which the great
seekers for reality have pursued. The *reductio ad absurdum* of this
doctrine is found in the so-called “philosophy” of New Thought, which
begs its disciples to “try quietly to realize that the Infinite is
really You.”  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) By its utter denial not
merely of a knowable, but of a logically conceivable Transcendent, it
drives us in the end to the conclusion of extreme pragmatism; that
Truth, for us, is not an immutable reality, but merely that idea which
happens to work out as true and useful <span id="page_15">p. 15</span>
<span id="an_iii.i-Page_15"></span> in any given experience. There is no
reality behind appearance; therefore all faiths, all figments with which
we people that nothingness are equally true, provided they be
comfortable and good to live by.

<span id="an_iii.i-p38"></span>Logically carried out, this conception of
Being would permit each man to regard other men as non-existent except
within his own consciousness: the only place where a strict scepticism
will allow that anything exists. Even the mind which conceives
consciousness exists for us only in our own conception of it; we no more
know what we are than we know what we shall be. Man is left a conscious
Something in the midst, so far as he knows, of Nothing: with no
resources save the exploring of his own consciousness.

<span id="an_iii.i-p39"></span>Philosophic scepticism is particularly
interesting to our present inquiry, because it shows us the position in
which “pure reason,” if left to itself, is bound to end. It is utterly
logical; and though we may feel it to be absurd, we can never prove it
to be so. Those who are temperamentally inclined to credulity may become
naturalists, and persuade themselves to believe in the reality of the
sense world. Those with a certain instinct for the Absolute may adopt
the more reasonable faith of idealism. But the true intellectualist, who
concedes nothing to instinct or emotion, is obliged in the end to adopt
some form of sceptical philosophy. The horrors of nihilism, in fact, can
only be escaped by the exercise of faith, by a trust in man’s innate but
strictly irrational instinct for that Real “above all reason, beyond all
thought” towards which at its best moments his spirit tends. If the
metaphysician be true to his own postulates, he must acknowledge in the
end that we are all forced to live, to think, and at last to die, in an
unknown and unknowable world: fed arbitrarily and diligently, yet how we
know not, by ideas and suggestions whose truth we cannot test but whose
pressure we cannot resist. It is not by sight but by faith—faith in a
supposed external order which we can never prove to exist, and in the
approximate truthfulness and constancy of the vague messages which we
receive from it—that ordinary men must live and move. We must put our
trust in “laws of nature” which have been devised by the human mind as a
convenient epitome of its own observations of phenomena, must, for the
purposes of daily life, accept these phenomena at their face value: an
act of faith beside which the grossest superstitions of the Neapolitan
peasant are hardly noticeable.

<span id="an_iii.i-p40"></span>The intellectual quest of Reality, then,
leads us down one of three blind alleys: (1) To an acceptance of the
symbolic world of appearance as the real; (2) to the elaboration of a
theory also of necessity symbolic—which, beautiful in itself, cannot
help us <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_16"></span> to attain the Absolute which it describes;
(3) to a hopeless but strictly logical skepticism.

<span id="an_iii.i-p41"></span>In answer to the “Why? Why?” of the
bewildered and eternal child in us, philosophy, though always ready to
postulate the unknown if she can, is bound to reply only, *“Nescio!
Nescio!”* In spite of all her busy map-making, she cannot reach the goal
which she points out to us, cannot explain the curious conditions under
which we imagine that we know; cannot even divide with a sure hand the
subject and object of thought. Science, whose business is with phenomena
and our knowledge of them, though she too is an idealist at heart, has
been accustomed to explain that all our ideas and instincts, the
pictured world that we take so seriously, the oddly limited and illusory
nature of our experience, appear to minister to one great end: the
preservation of life, and consequent fulfilment of that highly mystical
hypothesis, the Cosmic Idea. Each perception, she assures us, serves a
useful purpose in this evolutionary scheme: a scheme, by the way, which
has been invented—we know not why—by the human mind, and imposed upon an
obedient universe.

<span id="an_iii.i-p42"></span>By vision, hearing, smell, and touch,
says Science, we find our way about, are warned of danger, obtain our
food. The male perceives beauty in the female in order that the species
may be propagated. It is true that this primitive instinct has given
birth to higher and purer emotions; but these too fulfil a social
purpose and are not so useless as they seem. Man must eat to live,
therefore many foods give us agreeable sensations. If he overeats, he
dies; therefore indigestion is an unpleasant pain. Certain facts of
which too keen a perception would act detrimentally to the life-force
are, for most men, impossible of realization: *i.e.* , the uncertainty
of life, the decay of the body, the vanity of all things under the sun.
When we are in good health, we all feel very real, solid, and permanent;
and this is of all our illusions the most ridiculous, and also the most
obviously useful from the point of view of the efficiency and
preservation of the race.

<span id="an_iii.i-p43"></span>But when we look closer, we see that this
brisk generalization does not cover all the ground—not even that little
tract of ground of which our senses make us free; indeed, that it is
more remarkable for its omissions than for its inclusions. Récéjac has
well said that “from the moment in which man is no longer content to
devise things useful for his existence under the exclusive action of the
will-to-live, the principle of (physical) evolution has been violated.”
 <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) Nothing can be more certain than that
man is not so content. He has been called by utilitarian philosophers a
tool-making animal—the highest praise they knew how to bestow. <span
id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_17"></span> More
surely he is a vision-making animal;  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)
a creature of perverse and unpractical ideals, dominated by dreams no
less than by appetites—dreams which can only be justified upon the
theory that he moves towards some other goal than that of physical
perfection or intellectual supremacy, is controlled by some higher and
more vital reality than that of the determinists. We are driven to the
conclusion that if the theory of evolution is to include or explain the
facts of artistic and spiritual experience—and it cannot be accepted by
any serious thinker if these great tracts of consciousness remain
outside its range—it must be rebuilt on a mental rather than a physical
basis.

<span id="an_iii.i-p46"></span>Even the most ordinary human life
includes in its range fundamental experiences—violent and unforgettable
sensations—forced on us as it were against our will, for which science
finds it hard to account. These experiences and sensations, and the
hours of exalted emotion which they bring with them—often recognized by
us as the greatest, most significant hours of our lives—fulfil no office
in relation to her pet “functions of nutrition and reproduction.” It is
true that they are far-reaching in their effects on character; but they
do little or nothing to assist that character in its struggle for
physical life. To the unprejudiced eye many of them seem hopelessly out
of place in a universe constructed on strictly physico-chemical
lines—look almost as though nature, left to herself, tended to
contradict her own beautifully logical laws. Their presence, more, the
large place which they fill in the human world of appearance, is a
puzzling circumstance for deterministic philosophers; who can only
escape from the dilemma here presented to them by calling these things
illusions, and dignifying their own more manageable illusions with the
title of facts.

<span id="an_iii.i-p47"></span>Amongst the more intractable of these
groups of perceptions and experiences are those which we connect with
religion, with pain and with beauty. All three, for those selves which
are capable of receiving their messages, possess a mysterious authority
far in excess of those feelings, arguments, or appearances which they
may happen to contradict. All three, were the universe of the
naturalists true, would be absurd; all three have ever been treated with
the reverence due to vital matters by the best minds of the race.

<span id="an_iii.i-p48"></span>A. I need not point out the hopelessly
irrational character of all great religions: which rest, one and all, on
a primary assumption that can never be intellectually demonstrated, much
less <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_18"></span>
proved—the assumption that the supra-sensible is somehow important and
real, and is intimately connected with the life of man. This fact has
been incessantly dwelt upon by their critics, and has provoked many a
misplaced exercise of ingenuity on the part of their intelligent
friends. Yet religion—emphasizing and pushing to extremes that general
dependence on faith which we saw to be an inevitable condition of our
lives—is one of the most universal and ineradicable functions of man,
and this although it constantly acts detrimentally to the interests of
his merely physical existence, opposes “the exclusive action of the
will-to-live,” except in so far as that will aspires to eternal life.
Strictly utilitarian, almost logical in the savage, religion becomes
more and more transcendental with the upward progress of the race. It
begins as black magic; it ends as Pure Love. Why did the Cosmic Idea
elaborate this religious instinct, if the construction put upon its
intentions by the determinists be true?

<span id="an_iii.i-p49"></span>B. Consider again the whole group of
phenomena which are known as “the problem of suffering”: the mental
anguish and physical pain which appear to be the inevitable result of
the steady operation of “natural law” and its voluntary assistants, the
cruelty, greed, and injustice of man. Here, it is true, the naturalist
seems at first sight to make a little headway, and can point to some
amongst the cruder forms of suffering which are clearly useful to the
race: punishing us for past follies, spurring to new efforts, warning
against future infringements of “law.” But he forgets the many others
which refuse to be resumed under this simple formula: forgets to explain
how it is that the Cosmic Idea involves the long torments of the
incurable, the tortures of the innocent, the deep anguish of the
bereaved, the existence of so many gratuitously agonizing forms of
death. He forgets, too, the strange fact that man’s capacity for
suffering tends to increase in depth and subtlety with the increase of
culture and civilization; ignores the still more mysterious, perhaps
most significant circumstance that the highest types have accepted it
eagerly and willingly, have found in Pain the grave but kindly teacher
of immortal secrets, the conferrer of liberty, even the initiator into
amazing joys.

<span id="an_iii.i-p50"></span>Those who “explain” suffering as the
result of nature’s immense fecundity—a by-product of that overcrowding
and stress through which the fittest tend to survive—forget that even
were this demonstration valid and complete it would leave the real
problem untouched. The question is not, whence come those conditions
which provoke in the self the experiences called sorrow, anxiety, pain:
but, why do these conditions *hurt* the self? The pain is mental; a
little chloroform, and though the conditions continue <span
id="page_19">p. 19</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_19"></span> unabated
the suffering is gone. Why does full consciousness always include the
mysterious capacity for misery as well as for happiness—a capacity which
seems at first sight to invalidate any conception of the Absolute as
Beautiful and Good? Why does evolution, as we ascend the ladder of life,
foster instead of diminishing the capacity for useless mental anguish,
for long, dull torment, bitter grief? Why, when so much lies outside our
limited powers of perception, when so many of our own most vital
functions are unperceived by consciousness, does suffering of some sort
form an integral part of the experience of man? For utilitarian purposes
acute discomfort would be quite enough; the Cosmic Idea, as the
determinists explain it, did not really need an apparatus which felt all
the throes of cancer, the horrors of neurasthenia, the pangs of birth.
Still less did it need the torments of impotent sympathy for other
people’s irremediable pain the dreadful power of feeling the world’s
woe. We are hopelessly over-sensitized for the part science calls us to
play.

<span id="an_iii.i-p51"></span>Pain, however we may look at it,
indicates a profound disharmony between the sense-world and the human
self. If it is to be vanquished, either the disharmony must be resolved
by a deliberate and careful adjustment of the self to the world of
sense, or, that self must turn from the sense-world to some other with
which it is in tune.  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) Pessimist and
optimist here join hands. But whilst the pessimist, resting in
appearance, only sees “nature red in tooth and claw” offering him little
hope of escape, the optimist thinks that pain and anguish—which may in
their lower forms be life’s harsh guides on the path of physical
evolution—in their higher and apparently “useless” developments are her
leaders and teachers in the upper school of Supra-sensible Reality. He
believes that they press the self towards another world, still “natural”
for him, though “supernatural” for his antagonist, in which it will be
more at home. Watching life, he sees in Pain the complement of Love: and
is inclined to call these the wings on which man’s spirit can best take
flight towards the Absolute. Hence he can say with A Kempis, “Gloriari
in tribulatione non est grave amanti,”  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) and needs not to speak of morbid folly
when he sees the Christian saints run eagerly and merrily to the Cross.
 <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)

<span id="an_iii.i-p55"></span>He calls suffering the “gymnastic of
eternity,” the “terrible <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_20"></span> initiative caress of God”; recognizing in
it a quality for which the disagreeable rearrangement of nerve molecules
cannot account. Sometimes, in the excess of his optimism, he puts to the
test of practice this theory with all its implications. Refusing to be
deluded by the pleasures of the sense world, he accepts instead of
avoiding pain, and becomes an ascetic; a puzzling type for the convinced
naturalist, who, falling back upon contempt—that favourite resource of
the frustrated reason—can only regard him as diseased.

<span id="an_iii.i-p56"></span>Pain, then, which plunges like a sword
through creation, leaving on the one side cringing and degraded animals
and on the other side heroes and saints, is one of those facts of
universal experience which are peculiarly intractable from the point of
view of a merely materialistic philosophy.

<span id="an_iii.i-p57"></span>C. From this same point of view the
existence of music and poetry, the qualities of beauty and of rhythm,
the evoked sensations of awe, reverence, and rapture, are almost as
difficult to account for. The question *why* an apparent corrugation of
the Earth’s surface, called for convenience’ sake an Alp, coated with
congealed water, and perceived by us as a snowy peak, should produce in
certain natures acute sensations of ecstasy and adoration, why the
skylark’s song should catch us up to heaven, and wonder and mystery
speak to us alike in “the little speedwell’s darling blue” and in the
cadence of the wind, is a problem that seems to be merely absurd, until
it is seen to be insoluble. Here Madam How and Lady Why alike are
silent. With all our busy seeking, we have not found the sorting house
where loveliness is extracted from the flux of things. We know not why
“great” poetry should move us to unspeakable emotion, or a stream of
notes, arranged in a peculiar sequence, catch us up to heightened levels
of vitality: nor can we guess how a passionate admiration for that which
we call “best” in art or letters can possibly contribute to the physical
evolution of the race. In spite of many lengthy disquisitions on
Esthetics, Beauty’s secret is still her own. A shadowy companion, half
seen, half guessed at, she keeps step with the upward march of life: and
we receive her message and respond to it, not because we understand it
but because we *must* .

<span id="an_iii.i-p58"></span>Here it is that we approach that attitude
of the self, that point of view, which is loosely and generally called
*mystical.* Here, instead of those broad blind alleys which philosophy
showed us, a certain type of mind has always discerned three strait and
narrow ways going out towards the Absolute. In religion, in pain, and in
beauty—and not only in these, but in many other apparently useless
peculiarities of the empirical world and of the perceiving
consciousness—these persons insist that they recognize at least <span
id="page_21">p. 21</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_21"></span> the fringe
of the real. Down these three paths, as well as by many another secret
way, they claim that news comes to the self concerning levels of reality
which in their wholeness are inaccessible to the senses: worlds wondrous
and immortal, whose existence is not conditioned by the “given” world
which those senses report. “Beauty,” said Hegel, who, though he was no
mystic, had a touch of that mystical intuition which no philosopher can
afford to be without, “is merely the Spiritual making itself known
sensuously.”  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) In the good, the
beautiful, the true,” says Rudolph Eucken, “we see Reality revealing its
personal character. They are parts of a coherent and substantial
spiritual world.”  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) Here, some of
the veils of that substantial world are stripped off: Reality peeps
through and is recognized, dimly or acutely, by the imprisoned self.

<span id="an_iii.i-p61"></span>Récéjac only develops this idea when he
says,  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) “If the mind penetrates
deeply into the facts of aesthetics, it will find more and more, that
these facts are based upon an ideal identity between the mind itself and
things. At a certain point the harmony becomes so complete, and the
finality so close that it gives us actual emotion. The Beautiful then
becomes the sublime; brief apparition, by which the soul is caught up
into the true mystic state, and touches the Absolute. It is scarcely
possible to persist in this Esthetic perception without feeling lifted
up by it above things and above ourselves, in an ontological vision
which closely resembles the Absolute of the Mystics.” It was of this
underlying reality—this truth of things—that St. Augustine cried in a
moment of lucid vision, “Oh, Beauty so old and so new, too late have I
loved thee!”  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) It is in this sense
also that “beauty is truth, truth beauty”: and as regards the knowledge
of ultimate things which is possible to ordinary men, it may well be
that

> <span id="an_iii.i-p63.1"></span> “That is all  
> Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.”  

<span id="an_iii.i-p64"></span>“Of Beauty,” says Plato in an immortal
passage, “I repeat again that we saw her there shining in company with
the celestial forms; and coming to earth we find her here too, shining
in clearness through the clearest aperture of sense. For sight is the
most piercing of our bodily senses: though not by that is wisdom seen;
her loveliness would have been transporting if there had been a visible
image of her, and the other ideas, if they had visible counterparts,
would be equally lovely. But this is the privilege of Beauty, that being
the loveliest she is also the most palpable to sight. Now <span
id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_22"></span> he who is
not newly initiated, or who has been corrupted, does not easily rise out
of this world to the sight of true beauty in the other. . . . But he
whose initiation is recent, and who has been the spectator of many
glories in the other world, is amazed when he sees anyone having a
godlike face or form, which is the expression of Divine Beauty; and at
first a shudder runs through him, and again the old awe steals over him.
. . .”  <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

<span id="an_iii.i-p66"></span>Most men in the course of their lives
have known such Platonic hours of initiation, when the sense of beauty
has risen from a pleasant feeling to a passion, and an element of
strangeness and terror has been mingled with their joy. In those hours
the world has seemed charged with a new vitality; with a splendour which
does not belong to it but is poured through it, as light through a
coloured window, grace through a sacrament, from that Perfect Beauty
which “shines in company with the celestial forms” beyond the pale of
appearance. In such moods of heightened consciousness each blade of
grass seems fierce with meaning, and becomes a well of wondrous light: a
“little emerald set in the City of God.” The seeing self is indeed an
initiate thrust suddenly into the sanctuary of the mysteries: and feels
the “old awe and amazement” with which man encounters the Real. In such
experiences, a new factor of the eternal calculus appears to be thrust
in on us, a factor which no honest seeker for truth can afford to
neglect; since, if it be dangerous to say that any two systems of
knowledge are mutually exclusive, it is still more dangerous to give
uncritical priority to any one system. We are bound, then, to examine
this path to reality as closely and seriously as we should investigate
the most neatly finished safety-ladder of solid ash which offered a
*salita alle stelle.*

<span id="an_iii.i-p67"></span>Why, after all, take as our standard a
material world whose existence is affirmed by nothing more trustworthy
than the sense-impressions of “normal men”; those imperfect and easily
cheated channels of communication? The mystics, those adventurers of
whom we spoke upon the first page of this book, have always declared,
implicitly or explicitly, their distrust in these channels of
communication. They have never been deceived by phenomena, nor by the
careful logic of the industrious intellect. One after another, with
extraordinary unanimity, they have rejected that appeal to the unreal
world of appearance which is the standard of <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_23"></span> sensible men: affirming
that there is another way, another secret, by which the conscious self
may reach the actuality which it seeks. More complete in their grasp of
experience than the votaries of intellect or of sense, they accept as
central for life those spiritual messages which are mediated by
religion, by beauty, and by pain. More reasonable than the rationalists,
they find in that very hunger for reality which is the mother of all
metaphysics, an implicit proof that such reality exists; that there is
something else, some final satisfaction, beyond the ceaseless stream of
sensation which besieges consciousness. “In that thou hast sought me,
thou hast already found me,” says the voice of Absolute Truth in their
ears. This is the first doctrine of mysticism. Its next is that only in
so far as the self is real can it hope to know Reality: like to like:
<span id="an_iii.i-p67.1"></span>Cot ad cot loquitur. Upon the
propositions implicit in these two laws the whole claim and practice of
the mystic life depends.

<span id="an_iii.i-p68"></span>“Finite as we are,” they say—and here
they speak not for themselves, but for the race—“lost though we seem to
be in the woods or in the wide air’s wilderness, in this world of time
and of chance, we have still, like the strayed animals or like the
migrating birds, our homing instinct. . . . We seek. That is a fact. We
seek a city still out of sight. In the contrast with this goal, we live.
But if this be so, then already we possess something of Being even in
our finite seeking. For the readiness to seek is already something of an
attainment, even if a poor one.”  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

<span id="an_iii.i-p70"></span>Further, in this seeking we are not
wholly dependent on that homing instinct. For some, who have climbed to
the hill-tops, that city is not really out of sight. The mystics see it
and report to us concerning it. Science and metaphysics may do their
best and their worst: but these pathfinders of the spirit never falter
in their statements concerning that independent spiritual world which is
the only goal of “pilgrim man.” They say that messages come to him from
that spiritual world, that complete reality which we call Absolute: that
we are not, after all, hermetically sealed from it. To all who will
receive it, news comes of a world of Absolute Life, Absolute Beauty,
Absolute Truth, beyond the bourne of time and place: news that most of
us translate—and inevitably distort in the process—into the language of
religion, of beauty, of love, or of pain.

<span id="an_iii.i-p71"></span>Of all those forms of life and thought
with which humanity has fed its craving for truth, mysticism alone
postulates, and in the persons of its great initiates proves, not only
the existence of the Absolute, but also this link: this possibility
first of knowing, finally of attaining it. It denies that possible
knowledge is to be limited (*a*) to sense impressions, (*b*) to any
process of intellection, <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_24"></span> (*c*) to the unfolding of the content of
normal consciousness. Such diagrams of experience, it says, are
hopelessly incomplete. The mystics find the basis of their method not in
logic but in life: in the existence of a discoverable “real,” a spark of
true being, within the seeking subject, which can, in that ineffable
experience which they call the “act of union,” fuse itself with and thus
apprehend the reality of the sought Object. In theological language,
their theory of knowledge is that the spirit of man, itself essentially
divine, is capable of immediate communion with God, the One Reality.
 <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="an_iii.i-p73"></span>In mysticism that love of truth which we
saw as the beginning of all philosophy leaves the merely intellectual
sphere, and takes on the assured aspect of a personal passion. Where the
philosopher guesses and argues, the mystic lives and looks; and speaks,
consequently, the disconcerting language of first-hand experience, not
the neat dialectic of the schools. Hence whilst the Absolute of the
metaphysicians remains a diagram—impersonal and unattainable—the
Absolute of the mystics is lovable, attainable, alive.

<span id="an_iii.i-p74"></span>“Oh, taste and see!” they cry, in accents
of astounding certainty and joy. “Ours is an experimental science. We
can but communicate our system, never its result. We come to you not as
thinkers, but as doers. Leave your deep and absurd trust in the senses,
with their language of dot and dash, which may possibly report fact but
can never communicate personality. If philosophy has taught you
anything, she has surely taught you the length of her tether, and the
impossibility of attaining to the doubtless admirable grazing land which
lies beyond it. One after another, idealists have arisen who, straining
frantically at the rope, have announced to the world their approaching
liberty; only to be flung back at last into the little circle of
sensation. But here we are, a small family, it is true, yet one that
refuses to die out, assuring you that we have slipped the knot and are
free of those grazing grounds. This is evidence which you are bound to
bring into account before you can add up the sum total of possible
knowledge; for you will find it impossible to prove that the world as
seen by the mystics, ‘unimaginable, formless, dark with excess of
bright,’ is less real than that which is expounded by the youngest and
most promising demonstrator of a physicochemical universe. We will be
quite candid with you. Examine us as much as you like: our machinery,
our veracity, our results. We cannot promise that you shall see what we
have seen, for here each man must adventure for himself; <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span id="an_iii.i-Page_25"></span> but we
defy you to stigmatize our experiences as impossible or invalid. Is your
world of experience so well and logically founded that you dare make of
it a standard? Philosophy tells you that it is founded on nothing better
than the reports of your sensory apparatus and the traditional concepts
of the race. Certainly it is imperfect, probably it is illusion in any
event, it never touches the foundation of things. Whereas ‘what the
world, which truly knows nothing, calls “mysticism” is the science of
ultimates, . . . the science of self-evident Reality, which cannot be
“reasoned about,” because it is the object of pure reason or
perception.’“  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)

<span id="an_iii.i-p76"></span><span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="an_iii.i-Page_26"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:1](myst04.htm#fr_0) <span
id="an_iii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p7"></span> Even this I AM, which has seemed safe
ground to most metaphysicians, is of course combated by certain schools
of philosophy. “The word *Sum* ,” said Eckhart long ago, “can be spoken
by no creature but by God only: for it becomes the creature to testify
of itself *Non Sum* .” In a less mystical strain Lotze, and after him
Bradley and other modern writers, have devoted much destructive
criticism to the concept of the Ego as the starting-point of philosophy:
looking upon it as a large, and logically unwarrantable, assumption.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:2](myst04.htm#fr_1) <span
id="an_iii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p9"></span> Plato, “Phaedrus,” § 250.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[6:3](myst04.htm#fr_2) <span
id="an_iii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p12"></span> Thus Eckhart, “Every time that the
powers of the soul come into contact with created things, they receive
the *create* images and likenesses from the created thing and absorb
them. In this way arises the soul’s knowledge of created things. Created
things cannot come nearer to the soul than this, and the soul can only
approach created things by the voluntary reception of images. And it is
through the presence of the image that the soul approaches the created
world: for *the* *image is a Thing, which the soul creates* with her own
powers. Does the soul want to know the nature of a stone—horse—a man?
She forms an image.”—-Meister Eckhart, Pred. i. (“Mystische Schriften,”
p. 15).

<span id="fn_3"></span>[7:4](myst04.htm#fr_3) <span
id="an_iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p16"></span> Thus Edward Carpenter says of his own
experience of the mystical consciousness, “The perception seems to be
one in which all the senses unite into one sense” (quoted in Bucke’s
“Cosmic Consciousness,” p. 198).

<span id="fn_4"></span>[8:5](myst04.htm#fr_4) <span
id="an_iii.i-p19.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p20"></span> “A Pluralistic Universe,” p. 10.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[12:6](myst04.htm#fr_5) <span
id="an_iii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p30"></span> There are four main groups of such
schemes: (1) Subjective; (2) Objective; (3) Transcendental (Kantian);
(4) Absolute (Hegelian). To this last belongs by descent the Immanental
Idealism of Croce and Gentile.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[14:7](myst04.htm#fr_6) <span
id="an_iii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p36"></span> Delacroix, “Études sur le Mysticisme,”
p. 62.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[14:8](myst04.htm#fr_7) <span
id="an_iii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p37"></span> E. Towne, “Just how to Wake the Solar
Plexus,” p. 25.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[16:9](myst04.htm#fr_8) <span
id="an_iii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p44"></span> “Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique,” p. 15.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[17:10](myst04.htm#fr_9) <span
id="an_iii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p45"></span> Or, as Aristotle, and after him St.
Thomas Aquinas, suggest, a contemplative animal, since “this act alone
in man is proper to him, and is in no way shared by any other being in
this world” (“Summa Contra Gentiles,” 1. iii, cap. xxxvii., Rickaby’s
translation).

<span id="fn_10"></span>[19:11](myst04.htm#fr_10) <span
id="an_iii.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p52"></span> All the healing arts, from Aesculapius
and Galen to Metchnikoff and Mrs. Eddy, have virtually accepted and
worked upon these two principles.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[19:12](myst04.htm#fr_11) <span
id="an_iii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p53"></span> “De Imitatione Christi.” I. ii. cap. vi.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[19:13](myst04.htm#fr_12) <span
id="an_iii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p54"></span> “Such as these, I say, as if enamoured
by My honour and famished for the food of souls, run to the table of the
Most holy Cross, willing to suffer pain. . . . To these, My most dear
sons, trouble is a pleasure, and pleasure and every consolation that the
world would offer them are a toil” (St. Catherine ofSiena, Dialogo, cap.
xxviii.). Here and throughout I have used Thorold’s translation.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[21:14](myst04.htm#fr_13) <span
id="an_iii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p59"></span> “Philosophy of Religion,” vol. ii. p. 8.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[21:15](myst04.htm#fr_14) <span
id="an_iii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p60"></span> “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens,” p. 148.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[21:16](myst04.htm#fr_15) <span
id="an_iii.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p62"></span> “Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique,” p. 74.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[21:17](myst04.htm#fr_16) <span
id="an_iii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p63"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. x. cap. xxvii.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[22:18](myst04.htm#fr_17) <span
id="an_iii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p65"></span> “Phaedrus,” § 250 (Jowett’s
translation). The reference in the phrase “he whose initiation is
recent” is to the rite of admission into the Orphic Mysteries. It is
believed by some authorities that the neophyte may have been cast into
an hypnotic sleep by his “initiator,” and whilst in this condition a
vision of the “glories of the other world” suggested to him. The main
phenomena of “conversion” would thus be artificially produced: but the
point of attack being the mind rather than the heart, the results, as
would appear from the context, were usually transient.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[23:19](myst04.htm#fr_18) <span
id="an_iii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p69"></span> Royce, “The World and the Individual,”
vol. i. p. 181.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[24:20](myst04.htm#fr_19) <span
id="an_iii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p72"></span> The idea of Divine Union as man’s true
end is of course of great antiquity. Its first definite appearance in
the religious consciousness of Europe seems to coincide with the
establishment of the Orphic Mysteries in Greece and Southern Italy in
the sixth century B.C. See Rohde: “Psyche,” cap. 10, and Adam, “The
Religious Teachers of Greece,” p. 92.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[25:21](myst04.htm#fr_20) <span
id="an_iii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.i-p75"></span> Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root,
and the Flower,” “Aurea Dicta,” cxxviii.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. Mysticism and Vitalism](myst05)

</div>
