<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst08)  [Next](myst10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI. Mysticism and Symbolism

<span id="an_iii.vi"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p1"></span>In<span id="an_iii.vi-p1.1"></span> our
study of theology we saw the Christian mystic adopting, as chart and
pilot book of his voyages and adventures, the scheme of faith, and
diagram of the spiritual world, which is accepted by ordinary Christian
men. We saw that he found in it a depth and richness of content which
the conventional believer in that theology, the “good churchman,” seldom
suspects: and that which is true of the Christian mystic is also true in
its measure and as regards their respective theologies, of the Pagan,
the Mahommedan and the Buddhist.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p2"></span>But since the spiritual adventures of the
mystic are not those of ordinary men, it will follow that this map,
though always true for him, is not complete. He can press forward to
countries which unmystical piety must mark as unexplored, Pushing out
from harbour to “the vast and stormy sea of the divine,” he can take
soundings, and mark dangers the existence of which such piety never
needs to prove. Hence it is not strange that certain maps, artistic
representations or symbolic schemes, should have come into being which
describe or suggest the special experiences of the mystical
consciousness, and the doctrines to which these experiences have given
birth. Many of these maps have an uncouth, even an impious appearance in
the eyes of those unacquainted with the facts which they attempt to
translate: as the charts of the deep-sea sailor seem ugly and
unintelligible things to those who have never been out of sight of land.
Others—and these the most pleasing, most easily understood—have already
been made familiar, perhaps tiresomely familiar, to us by the poets;
who, intuitively recognizing their suggestive qualities, their links
with <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_126"></span> truth, have borrowed and adapted them to
their own business of translating Reality into terms of rhythm and
speech. Ultimately, however, they owe their origin to the mystics, or to
that mystical sense which is innate in all true poets: and in the last
resort it is the mystic’s kingdom, and the mystic’s experience, which
they affect to describe.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p3"></span>These special mystical diagrams, these
symbolic and artistic descriptions of man’s inward history—his secret
adventures with God—are almost endless in their variety: since in each
we have a picture of the country of the soul seen through a different
temperament. To describe all would be to analyse the whole field of
mystical literature, and indeed much other literature as well; to
epitomize in fact all that has been dreamed and written concerning the
so-called “inner life”—a dreary and a lengthy task. But the majority of
them, I think, express a comparatively small number of essential
doctrines or fundamental ways of seeing things; and as regards their
imagery, they fall into three great classes, representative of the three
principal ways in which man’s spiritual consciousness reacts to the
touch of Reality, the three primary if paradoxical facts of which that
consciousness must be aware. Hence a consideration of mystic symbols
drawn from each of these groups may give us a key with which to unlock
some at least of the verbal riddles of the individual adventurer.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p4"></span>Thanks to the spatial imagery inseparable
from human thinking and human expression, no direct description of
spiritual experience is or can be possible to man. It must always be
symbolic, allusive, oblique: always suggest, but never tell, the truth:
and in this respect there is not much to choose between the fluid and
artistic language of vision and the arid technicalities of philosophy.
In another respect, however, there is a great deal to choose between
them: and here the visionary, not the philosopher, receives the palm.
The greater the suggestive quality of the symbol used, the more
answering emotion it evokes in those to whom it is addressed, the more
truth it will convey. A good symbolism, therefore, will be more than
mere diagram or mere allegory: it will use to the utmost the resources
of beauty and of passion, will bring with it hints of mystery and
wonder, bewitch with dreamy periods the mind to which it is addressed.
Its appeal will not be to the clever brain, but to the desirous heart,
the intuitive sense, of man.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p5"></span>The three great classes of symbols which
I propose to consider, appeal to three deep cravings of the self, three
great expressions of man’s restlessness, which only mystic truth can
fully satisfy. The first is the craving which makes him a pilgrim and
wanderer. It is the longing to go out from his normal world in search of
a lost home, a “better country”; an Eldorado, a Sarras, a Heavenly <span
id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_127"></span> Syon.
The next is that craving of heart for heart, of the soul for its perfect
mate, which makes him a lover. The third is the craving for inward
purity and perfection, which makes him an ascetic, and in the last
resort a saint.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p6"></span>These three cravings, I think, answer to
three ways in which mystics of different temperaments attack the problem
of the Absolute: three different formulae under which their
transcendence of the sense-world can be described. In describing this
transcendence, and the special adventures involved in it, they are
describing a change from the state of ordinary men, in touch with the
sense-world, responding to its rhythms, to the state of spiritual
consciousness in which, as they say, they are “in union” with Divine
Reality, with God. Whatever be the theological creed of the mystic, he
never varies in declaring this close, definite, and actual intimacy to
be the end of his quest. “Mark me like the tulip with Thine own
streaks,” says the Sufi.  <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257) “I
would fain be to the Eternal Goodness what his own hand is to a man,”
says the German contemplative.  <span id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258)
“My *me* isGod, nor do I know my self-hood save in Him,” says the
Italian saint.  <span id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p10"></span>But, since this Absolute God is for him
substance, ground or underlying Reality of all that *is* : present yet
absent, near yet far: He is already as truly immanent in the human soul
as in the Universe. The seeker for the Real may therefore objectify his
quest in two apparently contradictory, yet really mutually explanatory
ways. First he may see it as an outgoing journey from the world of
illusion to the real or transcendental world: a leaving of the visible
for the invisible. Secondly, it may appear to him as an inward
alteration, remaking or regeneration, by which his personality or
character is so changed as to be able to enter into communion with that
Fontal Being which he loves and desires; is united with and dominated by
the indwelling God who is the fount of his spiritual life. In the first
case, the objective idea “God” is the pivot of his symbolism: the
Blazing Star, or Magnet of the Universe which he has seen far off, and
seeing, has worshipped and desired. In the second case, the emphasis
falls on the subjective idea “Sanctity,” with its accompanying
consciousness of a disharmony to be abolished. The Mystic Way will then
be described, not as a journey, but as an alteration of personality, the
transmuting of “earthly” into “heavenly” man. Plainly these two aspects
are obverse and reverse of one whole. They represent that mighty pair of
opposites, Infinite and Finite, God and Self, which it is the business
of mysticism to carry up into a higher synthesis. <span id="page_128">p.
128</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_128"></span> Whether the process be
considered as outward search or inward change, its object and its end
are the same. Man enters into that Order of Reality for which he was
made, and which is indeed the inciting cause of his pilgrimage and his
purification: for however great the demand on the soul’s own effort may
be, the initiative always lies with the living Divine World itself.
Man’s small desire is evoked, met, and fulfilled by the Divine Desire,
his “separated will” or life becomes one with the great Life of the All.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p11"></span>From what has been said in the last
chapter, it will be clear that the symbolism of outward search and of
inward change will be adopted respectively by the two groups of selves
whose experience of “union with the Divine” leans (1) to the
Transcendent or external, (2) to the Immanent or internal way of
apprehending Reality. A third or intermediate group of images will be
necessary to express the experience of those to whom mystic feeling—the
satisfaction of love—is the supreme factor in the mystic life.
According, then, to whether man’s instinct prompts him to describe the
Absolute Reality which he knows and craves for as a Place, a Person, or
a State—all three of course but partial and inadequate translations of
the one Indescribable Truth—so will he tend to adopt a symbolism of one
or other of these three types.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p12"></span>A. Those who conceive the Perfect as a
beatific vision exterior to them and very far off, who find in the
doctrine of Emanations something which answers to their inward
experience, will feel the process of their entrance into reality to be a
quest, an arduous journey from the material to the spiritual world. They
move away from, rather than transmute to another form, the life of
sense. The ecstasies of such mystics will answer to the root-meaning of
that much perverted word, as a “standing out” from themselves; a flight
to happier countries far away. For them, the soul is outward bound
towards its home.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p13"></span>B. Those for whom mysticism is above all
things an intimate and personal relation, the satisfaction of a deep
desire—who can say with Gertrude More, “never was there or can there be
imagined such a love, as is between an humble soul and Thee”—will fall
back upon imagery drawn largely from the language of earthly passion.
Since the Christian religion insists upon the personal aspect of the
Godhead, and provides in Christ an object of such intimacy, devotion and
desire, an enormous number of Christian mystics inevitably describe
their experiences under symbolism of this kind.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p14"></span>C. Those who are conscious rather of the
Divine as a Transcendent Life immanent in the world and the self, and of
a strange spiritual seed within them by whose development man, moving to
higher levels of character and consciousness, attains his end, <span
id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_129"></span> will
see the mystic life as involving inward change rather than outgoing
search. Regeneration is their watchword, and they will choose symbols of
growth or transmutation: saying with St. Catherine of Genoa, “my Being
is God, not by simple participation, but by a true transformation of my
Being.”  <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p16"></span>These three groups of mystics, then,
stand for three kinds of temperament; and we may fairly take as their
characteristic forms of symbolic expression the Mystic Quest, the
Marriage of the Soul, and the “Great Work” of the Spiritual Alchemists.

#### <span id="an_iii.vi-p16.1"></span>I

<span id="an_iii.vi-p17"></span>The pilgrimage idea, the outgoing quest,
appears in mystical literature under two different aspects. One is the
search for the “Hidden Treasure which desires to be found.” Such is the
“quest of the Grail” when regarded in its mystic aspect as an allegory
of the adventures of the soul. The other is the long, hard journey
towards a known and definite goal or state. Such are Dante’s “Divine
Comedy” and Bunyan’s “Pilgrim’s Progress”; each in their manner faithful
descriptions of the Mystic Way. The goal of the quest—the Empyrean of
Dante, the Beatific Vision or fulfilment of love—is often called
Jerusalem by the Christian mystics: naturally enough since that city was
for the mediaeval mind the supreme end of pilgrimage. By Jerusalem they
mean not only the celestial country Heaven, but also the spiritual life,
which is “itself a heaven.”  <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261)
“Right as a true pilgrim going to Jerusalem,” says Hilton, “leaveth
behind him house and land, wife and child, and maketh himself poor and
bare from all that he hath, that he may go lightly without letting:
right so, if thou wilt be a ghostly pilgrim, thou shalt make thyself
naked from all that thou hast . . . then shalt thou set in thy heart
wholly and fully that thou wouldst be at Jerusalem, and at none other
place but there.” “Jerusalem,” he says in this same chapter, “is as much
as to say a sight of peace; and betokeneth contemplation in perfect love
of God.”  <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p20"></span>Under this image of a pilgrimage—an
image as concrete and practical, as remote from the romantic and
picturesque, for the mediaeval writers who used it, as a symbolism of
hotel and railway train would be to us—the mystics contrived to
summarize and suggest much of the life history of the ascending soul;
the developing spiritual consciousness. The necessary freedom and
detachment of the traveller, his departure from his normal life and
interests, the difficulties, enemies, and hardships encountered on <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_130"></span> the
road—the length of the journey, the variety of the country, the dark
night which overtakes him, the glimpses of destination far away—all
these are seen more and more as we advance in knowledge to constitute a
transparent allegory of the incidents of man’s progress from the unreal
to the real. Bunyan was but the last of a long series of minds which
grasped this fact.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p21"></span>The Traveller, says the Sufi ‘Aziz bin
Mahommed Nafasi, in whose book, “The Remotest Aim,” the
pilgrimage-symbolism is developed in great detail, is the Perceptive or
Intuitive Sense of Man. The goal to which he journeys is Knowledge of
God. This mysterious traveller towards the only country of the soul may
be known of other men by his detachment, charity, humility, and
patience. These primary virtues, however—belonging to ethical rather
than to spiritual life—are not enough to bring his quest to a successful
termination. They make him, say the Sufis, “perfect in knowledge of his
goal but deficient in the power of reaching it.” Though he has fraternal
love for his fellow-pilgrims, detachment from wayside allurements,
untiring perseverance on the road, he is still encumbered and weakened
by unnecessary luggage. The second stage of his journey, therefore, is
initiated like that of Christian by a casting off of his burden: a total
self-renouncement, the attainment of a Franciscan poverty of spirit
whereby he becomes “Perfectly Free.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p22"></span>Having got rid of all impediments to the
spiritual quest, he must now acquire or develop in their stead the
characteristic mystical qualities, or Three Aids of the Pilgrim; which
are called in this system Attraction, Devotion, and Elevation.
Attraction is consciousness of the mutual desire existing between man’s
spirit and the Divine Spirit: of the link of love which knits up reality
and draws all things to their home in God. This is the universal law on
which all mysticism is based. It is St. Augustine’s “Thou hast made us
for Thyself and our hearts can find no rest except in Thee.” This
“natural magnetism,” then, once he is aware of it, will draw the pilgrim
irresistibly along the road from the Many to the One. His second aid,
Devotion, says the “Remotest Aim” in a phrase of great depth and beauty,
is “the prosecution of the journey *to* God and *in* God.”  <span
id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263) It embraces, in fact, the whole
contemplative life. It is the next degree of spiritual consciousness
after the blind yielding to the attraction of the Real, and the setting
in order of man’s relation to his source.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p24"></span>The Traveller’s journey *to* God is
complete when he attains <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_131"></span> knowledge of Him—“Illumination,” in the
language of European mystics. The point at which this is reached is
called the Tavern or resting-place upon the road, where he is fed with
the Divine Mysteries. There are also “Wine Shops” upon the way, where
the weary pilgrim is cheered and refreshed by a draught of the wine of
Divine Love.  <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) Only when the
journey *to* God is completed begins the “Journey *in* God”—that which
the Christian mystics call the Unitive Way—and this, since it is the
essence of Eternal Life, can have no end. Elevation, the pilgrim’s third
aid, is the exalted or ecstatic form of consciousness peculiar to the
contemplative, and which allows the traveller a glimpse of the spiritual
city towards which he goes.  <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p27"></span>The Sufi poet ‘Attar, in his mystical
poem, “The Colloquy of the Birds,” has described the stages of this same
spiritual pilgrimage with greater psychological insight, as the journey
through “Seven Valleys.” The lapwing, having been asked by other birds
what is the length of the road which leads to the hidden Palace of the
King, replies that there are Seven Valleys through which every traveller
must pass: but since none who attain the End ever come back to describe
their adventures, no one knows the length of the way.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p28"></span>(1) The first valley, says the lapwing,
is the Valley of the Quest. It is long and toilsome: and there the
traveller must strip himself of all earthly things, becoming poor, bare,
and desolate: and so stay till the Supernal Light casts a ray on his
desolation. It is in fact, Dante’s Purgatorio, the Christian Way of
Purgation: the period of self-stripping and purification which no mystic
system omits.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p29"></span>(2) When the ray of Supernal Light has
touched the pilgrim he enters the limitless Valley of Love: begins, that
is to say, the mystic life. It is Dante’s “Earthly Paradise,” or, in the
traditional system of the mystics, the onset of Illumination.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p30"></span>(3) Hence he passes to the Valley of
Knowledge or Enlightenment—the contemplative state—where each finds in
communion with Truth the place that belongs to him. No Dante student
will fail to see here a striking parallel with those planetary heavens
where each soul partakes of the Divine, “not supremely in the absolute
sense,” as St. Bonaventura has it, but “supremely in respect of
*himself.”* The mystery of Being is now revealed to the traveller. He
sees Nature’s secret, and God in all things. It is the height of
illumination. <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_132"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p31"></span>(4) The next stage is the Valley of
Detachment, of utter absorption in Divine Love—the Stellar Heaven of the
Saints—where Duty is seen to be all in all. This leads to—

<span id="an_iii.vi-p32"></span>(5) The Valley of the Unity, where the
naked Godhead is the one object of contemplation. This is the stage of
ecstasy, or the Beatific Vision: Dante’s condition in the last canto of
the “Paradiso.” It is transient, however, and leads to—

<span id="an_iii.vi-p33"></span>(6) The Valley of Amazement; where the
Vision, far transcending the pilgrim’s receptive power, appears to be
taken from him and he is plunged in darkness and bewilderment. This is
the state which Dionysius the Areopagite, and after him many mediaeval
mystics, called the Divine Dark, and described as the truest and closest
of all our apprehensions of the Godhead. It is the Cloud of Unknowing,
“dark from excessive bright.” The final stage is—

<span id="an_iii.vi-p34"></span>(7) The Valley of Annihilation of Self:
the supreme degree of union or theopathetic state, in which the self is
utterly merged “like a fish in the sea” in the ocean of Divine Love.
 <span id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p36"></span>Through all these metaphors of
pilgrimage to a goal—of a road followed, distance overpassed, fatigue
endured—there runs the definite idea that the travelling self in
undertaking the journey is fulfilling a destiny, a law of the
transcendental life; obeying an imperative need. The chosen Knights are
destined or *called* to the quest of the Grail. “All men are *called* to
their origin,” says Rulman Merswin, and the fishes which he sees in his
Vision of Nine Rocks are impelled to struggle, as it were “against
nature,” uphill from pool to pool towards their source.  <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p38"></span>All mystical thinkers agree in declaring
that there is a mutual attraction between the Spark of the Soul, the
free divine germ in man, and the Fount from which it came forth. “We
long for the Absolute,” says Royce, “only in so far as in us the
Absolute also longs, and seeks, through our very temporal striving, the
peace that is nowhere in Time, but only, and yet Absolutely, in
Eternity.”  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) So, many centuries
before the birth of American philosophy, Hilton put the same truth of
experience in lovelier words. “He it is that desireth in thee, and He it
is that is desired. He is all and He doth all if thou might see Him.”
 <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p41"></span>The homeward journey of man’s spirit,
then, may be thought of as due to the push of a divine life within,
answering to the pull of <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_133"></span> a divine life without.  <span
id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) It is only possible because there is
already in that spirit a certain kinship with the Divine, a capacity for
Eternal Life; and the mystics, in undertaking it, are humanity’s
pioneers on the only road to rest. Hence that attraction which the
Moslem mystic discerned as the traveller’s necessary aid, is a
fundamental doctrine of all mysticism: and as a consequence, the
symbolism of mutual desire is here inextricably mingled with that of
pilgrimage. The spiritual pilgrim goes because he is called; because he
wants to go, must go, if he is to find rest and peace. “God *needs*
man,” says Eckhart. It is Love calling to love: and the journey, though
in one sense a hard pilgrimage, up and out, by the terraced mount and
the ten heavens to God, in another is the inevitable rush of the roving
comet, caught at last, to the Central Sun. “My weight is my love,” said
St. Augustine.  <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271) Like
gravitation, it inevitably compels, for good or evil, every spirit to
its own place. According to another range of symbols, that love flings
open a door, in order that the larger Life may rush in and it and the
soul be “one thing.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p44"></span>Here, then, we run through the whole
gamut of symbolic expression; through Transcendence, Desire, and
Immanence. All are seen to point to one consummation, diversely and
always allusively expressed: the need of union between man’s separated
spirit and the Real, his remaking in the interests of transcendent life,
his establishment in that Kingdom which is both “near and far.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p45"></span>“In the book of Hidden Things it is
written,” says Eckhart, “‘I stand at the door and knock and wait’ . . .
thou needst not seek Him here or there: He is no farther off than the
door of the heart. There He stands and waits and waits until He finds
thee ready to open and let Him in. Thou needst not call Him from a
distance; to wait until thou openest is harder for Him than for thee. He
needs thee a thousand times more than thou canst need Him. *Thy opening
and His entering are but one moment* .”  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) “God,” he says in another place, “can
as little do without us, as we without Him.”  <span
id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) Our attainment of the Absolute is not
a one-sided ambition, but the fulfilment of a mutual desire. “For our
natural Will,” says Lady Julian, “is to have God, and the Good will of
<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_134"></span>
God is to have us; and we may never cease from longing till we have Him
in fullness of joy.”  <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p49"></span>So, in the beautiful poem or ritual
called the “Hymn of Jesus,” contained in the apocryphal “Acts of John”
and dating from primitive Christian times, the Logos, or Eternal Christ,
is thus represented as matching with His own transcendent, self-giving
desire every need of the soul.  <span id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p51"></span>The Soul says:—

> <span id="an_iii.vi-p51.1"></span> “‘I would be saved.’”  

<span id="an_iii.vi-p52"></span>Christ replies:—

> <span id="an_iii.vi-p52.1"></span> “‘And I would save.’ Amen.”  

<span id="an_iii.vi-p53"></span>The Dialogue continues:—

> <span id="an_iii.vi-p53.1"></span> “‘I would be loosed.’  
> ‘And I would loose.’ Amen.  
> ‘I would be pierced.’  
> ‘And I would pierce.’ Amen.  
> ‘I would be born.’  
> ‘And I would bear.’ Amen.  
> ‘I would eat.’  
> ‘And I would be eaten.’ Amen.  
> ‘I would hear.’  
> ‘And I would be heard.’ Amen.”  
> “‘I am a Lamp to thee who beholdest Me,  
> I am a Mirror to thee who perceivest Me,  
> I am a Door to thee, who knockest at Me,  
> I am a Way to thee a wayfarer.’”  

<span id="an_iii.vi-p54"></span>The same fundamental idea of the mutual
quest of the Soul and the Absolute is expressed in the terms of another
symbolism by the great Mahommedan mystic:—

> <span id="an_iii.vi-p54.1"></span> “No lover ever seeks union with his
> beloved,  
> But his beloved is also seeking union with him.  
> But the lover’s love makes his body lean  
> While the beloved’s love makes her fair and lusty.  
> When in *this* heart the lightning spark of love arises,  
> Be sure this love is reciprocated in *that* heart.  
> When the love of God arises in thy heart,  
> Without doubt God also feels love for thee.”  <span
> id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276)  

<span id="an_iii.vi-p56"></span>The mystic vision, then, is of a
spiritual universe held within <span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_135"></span> the bonds of love:  <span
id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) and of the free and restless human
soul, having within it the spark of divine desire, the “tendency to the
Absolute,” pnly finding satisfaction and true life when united with this
Life of God. Then, in Patmore’s lovely image, “the babe is at its
mother’s breast,” “the lover has returned to the beloved.”  <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p63"></span>Whatever their outward sense, all true
mystic symbols express aspects of this “secret of the world,” this
primal verity. But whereas such great visionary schemes as those of
‘Attar and of Dante show it in its cosmic form, in many symbolic
descriptions—particularly those which we meet in the writings of the
ecstatic saints—the personal subjective note, the consciousness of an
individual relation between that one self and the Supernal Self,
overpowers all general applications. Then philosophy and formal allegory
must step aside: the sacramental language of exalted emotion, of
profoundly felt experience, takes its place. The phases of mutual love,
of wooing and combat, awe and delight—the fevers of desire, the ecstasy
of surrender—are drawn upon and made to contribute something to the
description of the great and secret drama of the soul.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p64"></span>To such symbolic transcripts of intimate
experience belongs one amazing episode of the spiritual life-history
which, because it has been given immortal expression by the greatest
mystical poet of modern times, is familiar to thousands of readers who
know little or nothing of the more normal adventures incidental to man’s
attainment of the Absolute. In “The Hound of Heaven” Francis Thompson
described with an almost terrible power, not the self’s quest of adored
Reality, but Reality’s quest of the unwilling self. He shows to us the
remorseless, untiring seeking and following of the soul by the Divine
Life to which it will not surrender: the inexorable onward sweep of
“this tremendous Lover,” hunting the separated spirit, “strange piteous
futile thing” that flees Him “down the nights and down the days.” This
idea of the love-chase, of the spirit rushing in terror from the
overpowering presence of God, but followed, sought, conquered in the
end, is common to all the mediaeval mystics: it is the obverse of their
general doctrine of the necessary fusion of human and divine life,
“escape from the flame of separation.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p65"></span>“I chased thee, for in this was my
pleasure,” says the voice of Love to Mechthild of Magdeburg; “I captured
thee, for this was my desire; I bound thee, and I rejoice in thy bonds;
I have <span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_136"></span> wounded thee, that thou mayst be united
to me. If I gave thee blows, it was that I might be possessed of thee.”
 <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p67"></span>So in the beautiful Middle English poem
of “Quia amore langueo,”—

> <span id="an_iii.vi-p67.1"></span> “I am true love that fals was
> nevere,  
> Mi sistyr, mannis soule, I loved hir thus;  
> Bicause we wolde in no wise discevere  
> I lefte my Kyngdom glorious.  
> I purveyde for hir a paleis precious;  
> She fleyth, I folowe, I sought hir so.  
> I suffride this peyne piteous  
> Quia amore langueo,”  <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)  

<span id="an_iii.vi-p69"></span>Meister Eckhart has the same idea of the
inexorable Following Love, impossible to escape, expressed under less
personal images. “Earth,” he says, “cannot escape the sky; let it flee
up or down, the sky flows into it, and makes it fruitful whether it will
or no. So God does to man. He who will escape Him only runs to His
bosom; for all corners are open to Him.”  <span
id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p71"></span>We find in all the mystics this strong
sense of a mysterious spiritual life—a Reality—over against man, seeking
him and compelling him to Its will. It is not for him, they think, to
say that he will or will not aspire to the transcendental world.  <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) Hence sometimes this inversion of
man’s long quest of God. The self resists the pull of spiritual
gravitation, flees from the touch of Eternity; and the Eternal seeks it,
tracks it ruthlessly down. The Following Love, the mystics say, is a
fact of experience, not a poetic idea. “Those strong feet that follow,
follow after,” once set upon the chase, are bound to win. Man, once
conscious of Reality, cannot evade it. For a time his separated spirit,
his disordered loves, may wilfully frustrate the scheme of things: but
he must be conquered in the end. Then the mystic process unfolds itself:
Love triumphs: the “purpose of the worlds” fulfils itself in the
individual life.

#### <span id="an_iii.vi-p72.1"></span>II

<span id="an_iii.vi-p73"></span>It was natural and inevitable that the
imagery of human love and marriage should have seemed to the mystic the
best of all images of his own “fulfilment of life”; his soul’s
surrender, first to the call, finally to the embrace of Perfect Love. It
lay ready to <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_137"></span> his hand: it was understood of all men:
and moreover, it certainly does offer, upon lower levels, a strangely
exact parallel to the sequence of states in which man’s spiritual
consciousness unfolds itself, and which form the consummation of the
mystic life.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p74"></span>It has been said that the constant use
of such imagery by Christian mystics of the mediaeval period is
traceable to the popularity of the Song of Songs, regarded as an
allegory of the spiritual life. I think that the truth lies rather in
the opposite statement: namely, that the mystic loved the Song of Songs
because he there saw reflected, as in a mirror, the most secret
experiences of his soul. The sense of a desire that was insatiable, of a
personal fellowship so real, inward, and intense that it could only be
compared with the closest link of human love, of an intercourse that was
no mere spiritual self-indulgence, but was rooted in the primal duties
and necessities of life—more, those deepest, most intimate secrets of
communion, those self-giving ecstasies which all mystics know, but of
which we, who are not mystics, may not speak—all these he found
symbolized and suggested, their unendurable glories veiled in a merciful
mist, in the poetry which man has invented to honour that august passion
in which the merely human draws nearest to the divine.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p75"></span>The great saints who adopted and
elaborated this symbolism, applying it to their pure and ardent passion
for the Absolute, were destitute of the prurient imagination which their
modern commentators too often possess. They were essentially pure of
heart; and when they “saw God” they were so far from confusing that
unearthly vision with the products of morbid sexuality, that the
dangerous nature of the imagery which they employed did not occur to
them. They knew by experience the unique nature of spiritual love: and
no one can know anything about it in any other way.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p76"></span>Thus for St. Bernard, throughout his
deeply mystical sermons on the Song of Songs, the Divine Word is the
Bridegroom, the human soul is the Bride: but how different is the effect
produced by his use of these symbols from that with which he has been
charged by hostile critics! In the place of that “sensuous imagery”
which is so often and so earnestly deplored by those who have hardly a
nodding acquaintance with the writings of the saints, we find images
which indeed have once been sensuous; but which are here anointed and
ordained to a holy office, carried up, transmuted, and endowed with a
radiant purity, an intense and spiritual life.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p77"></span>“ *‘Let Him kiss me* *with the kisses of
His mouth.’* Who is it speaks these words? It is the Bride. Who is the
Bride? It is the Soul thirsting for God. . . . She who asks this is held
by the bond of love to him from whom she asks it. Of all the sentiments
of nature, <span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_138"></span> this of love is the most excellent,
especially when it is rendered back to Him who is the principle and
fountain of it—that is, God. Nor are there found any expressions equally
sweet to signify the mutual affection between the Word of God and the
soul, as those of Bridegroom and of Bride; inasmuch as between
individuals who stand in such relation to each other all things are in
common, and they possess nothing separate or divided. They have one
inheritance, one dwelling-place, one table, and they are in fact one
flesh. If, then, mutual love is especially befitting to a bride and
bridegroom, it is not unfitting that the name of Bride is given to a
soul which loves.”  <span id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p79"></span>To women mystics of the Catholic Church,
familiar with the antique and poetic metaphor which called every
cloistered nun the Bride of Christ, that crisis in their spiritual
history in which they definitely vowed themselves to the service of
Transcendent Reality seemed, naturally enough, the veritable betrothal
of the soul. Often, in a dynamic vision, they saw as in a picture the
binding vows exchanged between their spirits and their God.  <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284) That further progress on the mystic
way which brought with it a sharp and permanent consciousness of union
with the Divine Will, the constant sustaining presence of a Divine
Companion, became, by an extension of the original simile, Spiritual
Marriage. The elements of duty, constancy, irrevocableness, and loving
obedience involved in the mediaeval conception of the marriage tie, made
it an apt image of a spiritual state in which humility, intimacy, and
love were the dominant characteristics. There is really no need to seek
a pathological explanation of these simple facts.  <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) Moreover with few exceptions, the
descriptions of spiritual marriage which the great mystics have left are
singularly free from physical imagery. “So mysterious is the secret,”
says St. Teresa, “and so sublime the favour that God thus bestows
instantaneously on the soul, that it feels a supreme delight, only to be
described by saying that our Lord vouchsafes for the moment to reveal to
it His own heavenly glory in a far more subtle way than by any vision or
spiritual delight. As far as can be understood, the soul, I mean the
spirit of this soul, is made one with God, who is <span id="page_139">p.
139</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_139"></span> Himself a spirit, and
Who has been pleased to show certain persons how far His love for us
extends in order that we may praise His greatness. He has thus deigned
to unite Himself to His creature: He has bound Himself to her as firmly
as two human beings are joined in wedlock and will never separate
Himself from her.”  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p83"></span>The great Richard of St. Victor, in one
of his most splendid mystical treatises,  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) has given us perhaps the most daring
and detailed application of the symbolism of marriage to the adventures
of the spirit of man. He divides the “steep stairway of love,” by which
the contemplative ascends to union with the Absolute, into four stages.
These he calls the betrothal, the marriage, the wedlock, and the
fruitfulness of the soul.  <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288) In
the betrothal, he says, the soul “thirsts for the Beloved”; that is to
say, it longs to experience the delights of Reality. “The Spirit comes
to the Soul, and seems sweeter than honey.” It is conversion, the
awakening to mystical truth; the kindling of the passion for the
Absolute. “Then the Soul with pertinacity demands more”: and because of
her burning desire she attains to pure contemplation, and so passes to
the second degree of love. In this she is “led in bridal” by the
Beloved. Ascending “above herself” in contemplation, she “sees the Sun
of Righteousness.” She is now confirmed in the mystic life; the
irrevocable marriage vows are made between her spirit and her God. At
this point she can “see the Beloved,” but “cannot yet come in to Him,”
says Richard. This degree, as we shall see later, answers more or less
to that which other mystics call the Illuminative Way: but any attempt
to press these poetic symbols into a cast-iron series, and establish
exact parallels, is foredoomed to failure, and will merely succeed in
robbing them of their fragrance and suggestive power. In Richard’s
“third stage,” however, that of union, or wedlock, it is clear that the
soul enters upon the “Unitive Way.” She has passed the stages of
ecstatic and significant events, and is initiated into the Life. She is
“deified,” “passes utterly *into* God, and is glorified in Him”: is
transfigured, he says, by immediate contact with the Divine Substance,
into an utterly different quality of being. “Thus,” says St. John of the
Cross, “the soul, when it shall have driven away from itself all that is
contrary to the divine will, becomes transformed in God by love.  <span
id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p87"></span>“The Soul,” says Richard again, “is
utterly concentrated on the One.” She is “caught up to the divine
light.” The expression of <span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_140"></span> the personal passion, the intimate
relation, here rises to its height. But this is not enough. Where most
mystical diagrams leave off, Richard of St. Victor’s “steep stairway of
Love” goes on: with the result that this is almost the only symbolic
system bequeathed to us by the great contemplatives in which all the
implications contained in the idea of the spiritual marriage have been
worked out to their term. He saw clearly that the union of the soul with
its Source could not be a barren ecstasy. That was to mistake a means
for an end; and to frustrate the whole intention of life, which is, on
all levels, fruitful and creative. Therefore he says that in the fourth
degree, the Bride who has been so greatly honoured, caught up to such
unspeakable delight, sinks her own will and “is humiliated below
herself.” She accepts the pains and duties in the place of the raptures
of love; and becomes a source, a “parent” of fresh spiritual life. The
<span id="an_iii.vi-p87.1"></span> *Sponsa Dei* develops into the <span
id="an_iii.vi-p87.2"></span> *Mater Divinae gratiae.* That imperative
need of life, to push on, to create, to spread, is here seen operating
in the spiritual sphere. This forms that rare and final stage in the
evolution of the great mystics, in which they return to the world which
they forsook; and there live, as it were, as centres of transcendental
energy, the creators of spiritual families, the partners and
fellow-labourers with the Divine Life.  <span
id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290)

#### <span id="an_iii.vi-p88.1"></span>III

<span id="an_iii.vi-p89"></span>We come now to the symbols which have
been adopted by those mystics in whom temperamental consciousness of
their own imperfection, and of the unutterable perfection of the
Absolute Life for which they longed, has overpowered all other aspects
of man’s quest of reality. The “seek, and ye shall find” of the pilgrim,
the “by Love shall He be gotten and holden” of the bride, can never seem
an adequate description of experience to minds of this type. They are
intent on the inexorable truth which must be accepted in some form by
both these classes: the crucial fact that “we behold that which we are,”
or, in other words, that “only the Real can know Reality.” Hence the
state of the inward man, the “unrealness” of him when judged by any
transcendental standard, is their centre of interest. His remaking or
regeneration appears to them as the primal necessity, if he is ever to
obtain rights of citizenship in the “country of the soul.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p90"></span>We have seen that this idea of the New
Birth, the remaking or transmutation of the self, clothed in many
different symbols, runs through the whole of mysticism and much of
theology. It is the mystic’s subjective reading of those necessary
psychological <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_141"></span> and moral changes which he observes
within himself as his spiritual consciousness grows. His hard work of
renunciation, of detachment from the things which that consciousness
points out as illusory or impure, his purifications and trials, all form
part of it. If that which is whole or perfect is to come, then that
which is in part must be done away: “for in what measure we put off the
creature, in the same measure are we able to put on the Creator: neither
more nor less.”  <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p92"></span>Of all the symbolic systems in which
this truth has been enshrined none is so complete, so picturesque, and
now so little understood as that of the “Hermetic Philosophers” or
Spiritual Alchemists. This fact would itself be sufficient to justify us
in examining some of the chief features of their symbolism. There is a
further excuse for this apparently eccentric proceeding, however, in the
fact that the language of alchemy was largely—though not always
accurately and consistently—used by the great mystic Jacob Boehme, and
after him by his English disciple, William Law. Without, then, some
knowledge of the terms which they employed, but seldom explained, the
writings of this important school can hardly be understood.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p93"></span>The alchemic symbols, especially as
applied to the mystic life, are full of an often deliberate obscurity;
which makes their exact interpretation a controversial matter at the
best. Moreover, the authors of the various Hermetic writings do not
always use them in the same sense, and whilst many of these writings are
undoubtedly mystical, others clearly deal with the physical quest of
gold: nor have we any sure standard by which to divide class from class.
The elements from which the spiritual alchemists built up their
allegories of the mystic life are, however, easily grasped: and these
elements, with the significance generally attributed to them, are as
much as those who are not specialists can hope to unravel from this very
tangled skein. First, there are the metals; of course the obvious
materials of physical alchemy. These are usually called by the names of
their presiding planets: thus in Hermetic language Luna means silver,
Sol gold, etc. Then there is the Vessel, or Athanor, in which the
transmutation of base metal to gold took place: an object whose exact
nature is veiled in much mystery. The Fire, and various solvents and
waters, peculiar to the different alchemistic recipes, complete the
apparatus necessary to the “Great Work.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p94"></span>The process of this work, sometimes
described in chemical, and sometimes in astrological terms, is more
often than not disguised in a strange heraldic and zoological symbolism
dealing with Lions, Dragons, Eagles, Vultures, Ravens and Doves: which,
<span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_142"></span>
delightful in its picturesqueness, is unequalled in its power of
confusing the anxious and unwary inquirer. It is also the subject of
innumerable and deliberate allegories, which were supposed to convey its
secrets to the elect, whilst most certainly concealing them from the
crowd. Hence it is that the author of “A Short Enquiry concerning the
Hermetic Art” speaks for all investigators of this subject when he
describes the “Hermetic science” as a “great Labyrinth, in which are
abundance of enquirers rambling to this day, many of them undiscerned by
one another.” Like him, I too “have taken several Turns in it myself,
wherein one shall meet with very few; for ‘tis so large, and almost
every one taking a different Path, that they seldom meet. But finding it
a very melancholy place, I resolved to get out of it, and rather content
myself to walk in the little garden before the entrance, where many
things, though not all, were orderly to be seen. Choosing rather to stay
there, and contemplate on the Metaphor set up, than venture again into
the wilderness.”  <span id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p96"></span>Coming, then, to the “contemplation of
the Metaphor set up,”—by far the most judicious course for modern
students of the Hermetic art—we observe first that the prime object of
alchemy was held to be the production of the Philosopher’s Stone, that
perfect and incorrupt substance or “noble Tincture,” never found upon
our imperfect earth in its natural state, which could purge all baser
metals of their dross, and turn them to pure gold. The quest of the
Stone, in fact, was but one aspect of man’s everlasting quest of
perfection, his hunger for the Absolute; and hence an appropriate symbol
of the mystic life. But this quest was not conducted in some far off
transcendental kingdom. It was prosecuted in the Here and Now within the
physical world.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p97"></span>Gold, the Crowned King, or Sol, as it is
called in the planetary symbolism of the alchemists, was their standard
of perfection, the “Perfect Metal.” Towards it, as the Christian towards
sanctity, their wills were set. It had for them a value not sordid but
ideal. Nature, they thought, is always trying to make gold, this
incorruptible and perfect thing; and the other metals are merely the
results of the frustration of her original design. Nor is this aiming at
perfection and achieving of imperfection limited to the physical world.
<span id="an_iii.vi-p97.1"></span> *Quod superius, sicut quod inferius.*
Upon the spiritual plane also they held that the Divine Idea is always
aiming at “Spiritual Gold”—divine humanity, the New Man, citizen of the
transcendental world—and “natural man” as we ordinarily know him is a
lower metal, silver at best. He is a departure from the “plan,” who yet
bears within himself, if we could find it, the spark or seed of absolute
perfection: the “tincture” which makes gold. “The <span id="page_143">p.
143</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_143"></span> smattering I have of
the Philosopher’s Stone,” says Sir Thomas Browne, “(which is something
more than the perfect exaltation of gold) hath taught me a great deal of
divinity, and instructed my belief how that immortal spirit and
incorruptible substance of my soul may lie obscure, and sleep awhile
within this house of flesh.”  <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293)
This “incorruptible substance” is man’s goldness, his perfect principle:
for “the highest mineral virtue resides in Man,” says Albertus Magnus,
“and God may be found everywhere.”  <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) Hence the prosecution of a spiritual
chemistry is a proper part of the true Hermetic science.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p100"></span>The art of the alchemist, whether
spiritual or physical, consists in completing the work of perfection,
bringing forth and making dominant, as it were, the “latent goldness”
which “lies obscure” in metal or man. The ideal adept of alchemy was
therefore an “auxiliary of the Eternal Goodness.” By his search for the
“Noble Tincture” which should restore an imperfect world, he became a
partner in the business of creation, assisting the Cosmic Plan. Thus the
proper art of the Spiritual Alchemist, with whom alone we are here
concerned, was the production of the spiritual and only valid tincture
or Philosopher’s Stone; the mystic seed of transcendental life which
should invade, tinge, and wholly transmute the imperfect self into
spiritual gold. That this was no fancy of seventeenth-century
allegorists, but an idea familiar to many of the oldest writers upon
alchemy—whose quest was truly a spiritual search into the deepest
secrets of the soul—is proved by the words which bring to an end the
first part of the antique “Golden Treatise upon the Making of the
Stone,” sometimes attributed to Hermes Trismegistus. “This, O Son,” says
that remarkable tract, “is the Concealed Stone of Many Colours, which is
born and brought forth in one colour; know this and conceal it . . . it
leads from darkness into light, from this desert wilderness to a secure
habitation, and from poverty and straits to a free and ample fortune.”
 <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p102"></span>Man, then, was for the alchemists “the
true laboratory of the Hermetic art”; which concealed in an entanglement
of vague and contradictory symbols the life-process of his ascension to
that perfect state in which he was able to meet God. This state must not
be confused with a merely moral purity, but is to be understood as
involving utter transmutation into a “new form.” It <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="an_iii.vi-Page_144"></span>
naturally followed from this that the indwelling Christ, the “Corner
Stone,” the Sun of Righteousness, became, for many of the Christian
alchemists, identified with the <span id="an_iii.vi-p102.1"></span>
*Lapis Philosophorum* and with Sol: and was regarded both as the image
and as the earnest of this “great work.” His spirit was the “noble
tincture” which “can bring that which is lowest in the death to its
highest ornament or glory;”  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296)
transmuting the natural to the supernatural, operating the “New Birth.”
“This,” says Boehme, “is the noble precious Stone <span
id="an_iii.vi-p103.1"></span> *(Lapis Philosophorum),* the Philosopher’s
Stone, which the Magi (or wise men) find which *tinctureth nature,* and
generateth a new son in the old. He who findeth that, esteemeth more
highly of it than of this (outward) world. For the Son is many thousand
times greater than the Father.” Again, “If you take the *spirit* of the
tincture, then indeed you go on a way in which *many have found* Sol;
but they have followed on the way to *the heart* of Sol, where the
spirit of the heavenly tincture hath laid hold on *them,* and brought
them into the liberty, into the Majesty, where they have *Known* the
Noble Stone, <span id="an_iii.vi-p103.2"></span> *Lapis Philosophorum,*
the Philosopher’s Stone, and have stood amazed at man’s blindness, and
seen his labouring in vain. Would you fain find the Noble Stone? Behold,
we will show it you plain enough, if you be a *Magus,* and worthy, else
you shall remain blind still: therefore fall to work thus: for it hath
no more but *three numbers.* First tell from *one* till you come to the
Cross, which is ten (X) . . . and *there* lieth the *Stone* without any
great painstaking, for it is pure and not defiled with any earthly
nature.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p104"></span>“In this stone there lieth hidden,
whatsoever God and the Eternity, also heaven, the stars and elements
contain and are able to do. There never was from eternity anything
better or more precious than this, and it is offered by God and bestowed
upon man; every one may have it . . . it is in a simple form, and hath
the power of the whole Deity in it.”  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p106"></span>Boehme is here using alchemic symbols,
according to his custom, in a loose and artistic manner; for the true
Hermetic Philosopher’s Stone is not something which can be found but
something which must be made. The alchemists, whether their search be
for a physical or a spiritual “tincture,” say always that this tincture
is the product of the furnace and Athanor: and further that it is
composed of “three numbers” or elements, which they call Sulphur, Salt,
and Mercury. These, when found, and forced into the proper combination,
form the “Azoth” or “Philosopher’s Egg”—the stuff or First Matter of the
Great Work. Sulphur, Salt, <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_145"></span> and Mercury, however, must not be
understood in too literal a sense. “You need not look for our metallic
seed among the elements,” says Basil the Monk, “it need not be sought so
far back. If you can only rectify the Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt
(understand *those of the sages)* until the metallic spirit and body are
inseparably joined together by means of the metallic soul, you thereby
firmly rivet the chain of love and prepare the palace for the
Coronation.”  <span id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p108"></span>Of these three ingredients, the
important one is the spiritual principle, the unseizable Mercury; which
is far from being the metal which we ordinarily know by that name. The
Mercury which the alchemists sought—often in strange places—is a hidden
and powerful substance. They call it “Mercury of the Wise”; and he who
can discover it, they say, is on the way towards success. The reader in
search of mystical wisdom already begins to be bewildered; but if he
persevere in this labyrinth of symbolism, he presently discovers—as
Basil the Monk indeed hints—that the Sulphur and the Salt, or “metallic
soul and body” of the spiritual chemistry, represent something analogous
to the body and mind of man—Sulphur his earthly nature, seasoned with
intellectual Salt. The Mercury is Spirit in its most mystic sense, the
Synteresis or holy Dweller in the Innermost, the immanent spark or
Divine Principle of his life. Only the “wise,” the mystically awakened,
can know this Mercury, the agent of man’s transmutation: and until it
has been discovered, brought out of the hiddenness, nothing can be done.
“This Mercury or Snowy Splendour, is a Celestial Body drawn from the
beams of the Sun and the Moon. It is the only Agent in the world for
this art.”  <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) It is the
divine-human “spark of the soul,” the bridge between Gold and Silver,
God and man.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p110"></span>The Three Principles being enclosed in
the vessel, or Athanor, which is man himself, and subjected to a gentle
fire—the <span id="an_iii.vi-p110.1"></span> *Incendium Amoris* —the
process of the Great Work, the mystic transmutation of natural into
spiritual man, can begin. This work, like the ingredients which compose
it, has “three numbers”: and the first matter, in the course of its
transmutation, assumes three successive colours: the Black, the White,
and the Red. These three colours are clearly analogous to the three
traditional stages of the Mystic Way: Purgation, Illumination, Union.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p111"></span>The alchemists call the first stage, or
Blackness, Putrefaction. In it the three principles which compose the
“whole man” of body, soul and spirit, are “sublimated” till they appear
as a black powder full of corruption, and the imperfect body is
“dissolved and purified by subtle Mercury”; as man is purified by the
darkness, <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_146"></span> misery, and despair which follows the
emergence of his spiritual consciousness. As psychic uproar and disorder
seems part of the process of mental growth, so “ <span
id="an_iii.vi-p111.1"></span> *Solve et coagula* ”—break down that you
may build up—is the watchword of the spiritual alchemist. The “black
beast,” the passional element, of the lower nature must emerge and be
dealt with before anything further can be done. “There is a black beast
in our forest,” says the highly allegorical “Book of Lambspring,” “his
name is Putrefaction, his blackness is called the Head of the Raven;
when it is cut off, Whiteness appears.”  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) This Whiteness, the state of Luna, or
Silver, the “chaste and immaculate Queen,” is the equivalent of the
Illuminative Way: the highest point which the mystic can attain short of
union with the Absolute. This White Stone is pure, and precious; but in
it the Great Work of man’s spiritual evolution has not yet reached its
term. That term is the attainment of the Red, the colour of Perfection
or alchemic gold; a process sometimes called the “Marriage of Luna and
Sol”—the fusion of the human and divine spirit. Under this image is
concealed the final secret of the mystic life: that ineffable union of
finite and infinite—that loving reception of the inflowing vitality of
God—from which comes forth the *Magnum Opus:* deified or spiritual man.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p113"></span>“This,” says the author of “A
Suggestive Enquiry,” “is the union supersentient, the nuptials sublime,
<span id="an_iii.vi-p113.1"></span> *Mentis et Universi* . . . . Lo!
behold I will open to thee a mystery, cries the Adept, the bridegroom
crowneth the bride of the north \[ *i.e.* , she who comes out of the
cold and darkness of the lower nature\]. In the darkness of the north,
out of the crucifixion of the cerebral life, when the sensual dominant
is occultated in the Divine Fiat, and subdued, there arises a Light
wonderfully about the summit, which wisely returned and multiplied
according to the Divine Blessing, is made substantial in life.”  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p115"></span>I have said, that side by side with the
metallic and planetary language of the alchemists, runs a strange
heraldic symbolism in which they take refuge when they fear—generally
without reason—that they are telling their secrets too plainly to an
unregenerate world. Many of these heraldic emblems are used in an
utterly irresponsible manner; and whilst doubtless conveying a meaning
to the individual alchemist and the disciples for whom he wrote, are,
and must ever be, unintelligible to other men. But others are of a more
general application; and appear so frequently in seventeenth-century
literature, whether mystical or non-mystical, that some discussion of
them may well be of use.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p116"></span>Perhaps the quaintest and most
celebrated of all these allegories <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>
<span id="an_iii.vi-Page_147"></span> is that which describes the quest
of the Philosopher’s Stone as “the hunting of the Green Lion.”  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) The Green Lion, though few would
divine it, is the First Matter of the Great Work: hence, in spiritual
alchemy, natural man in his wholeness—Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury in
their crude state. He is called green because, seen from the
transcendent standpoint, he is still unripe, his latent powers
undeveloped; and a Lion, because of his strength, fierceness, and
virility. Here the common opinion that a pious effeminacy, a diluted and
amiable spirituality, is the proper raw material of the mystic life, is
emphatically contradicted. It is not by the education of the lamb, but
by the hunting and taming of the wild intractable lion, instinct with
vitality, full of ardour and courage, exhibiting heroic qualities on the
sensual plane, that the Great Work is achieved. The lives of the saints
enforce the same law.

> <span id="an_iii.vi-p117.1"></span> “Our lyon wanting maturitie  
> Is called greene for his unripeness trust me:  
> And yet full quickly he can run,  
> And soon can overtake the Sun.”  <span
> id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303)  

<span id="an_iii.vi-p119"></span>The Green Lion, then, in his strength
and wholeness is the only creature potentially able to attain
Perfection. It needs the adoption and purification of all the wealth and
resources of man’s nature, not merely the encouragement of his
transcendental tastes, if he is to “overtake the Sun” and achieve the
Great Work. The Kingdom of Heaven is taken by violence, not by amiable
aspiration. “The Green Lion,” says one alchemist, “is the priest by whom
Sol and Luna are wed.” In other words, the raw stuff of indomitable
human nature is the means by which man is to attain union with the
Absolute. The duty of the alchemist, the transmuting process, is
therefore described as the hunting of the Green Lion through the forest
of the sensual world. He, like the Hound of Heaven, is on a love chase
down the nights and down the days.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p120"></span>When the lion is caught, when Destiny
overtakes it, its head must be cut off as the preliminary to the
necessary taming process. This is called by the alchemists “the head of
the Raven,” the Crow, or the Vulture, “for its blackness.” It represents
the fierce and corrupt life of the passions: and its removal is that
“death of the lower nature” which is the object of all asceticism—
*i.e.* , Purgation. The lion, the whole man, Humanity in its strength,
is as it were “slain to the world,” and then resuscitated; but in a very
different shape. By its passage through this mystic death or the
“putrefaction <span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_148"></span> of the Three Principles” the “colour of
unripeness” is taken away. Its taming completed, it receives wings,
wherewith it may fly up to Sol, the Perfect or Divine; and is
transmuted, say the alchemists, into the Red Dragon. This is to us a
hopelessly grotesque image: but to the Hermetic philosophers, whose
sense of wonder was uncorrupt, it was the deeply mystical emblem of a
new, strange, and transcendental life, powerful alike in earth and in
heaven. As the angel to the man, so was the dragon to the world of
beasts: a creature of splendour and terror, a super-brute, veritably
existent if seldom seen. We realize something of the significance of
this symbol for the alchemic writers, if we remember how sacred a
meaning it has for the Chinese: to whom the dragon is the traditional
emblem of free spiritual life, as the tiger represents the life of the
material plane in its intensest form. Since it is from China that
alchemy is supposed to have reached the European world, it may yet be
found that the Red Dragon is one of the most antique and significant
symbols of the Hermetic Art.

<span id="an_iii.vi-p121"></span>For the Spiritual Chemistry, then, the
Red Dragon represents Deified Man; whose emergence must always seem like
the birth of some monstrous and amazing creature when seen from the
standpoint of the merely natural world. With his coming forth, the
business of the alchemist, in so far as he be a mystic, is done. Man has
transcended his lower nature, has received wings wherewith to live on
higher levels of reality. The Tincture, the latent goldness, has been
found and made dominant, the *Magnum Opus* achieved. That the trite and
inward business of that Work, when stripped of its many emblematic
veils, was indeed the reordering of spiritual rather than material
elements, is an opinion which rests on a more solid foundation than
personal interpretations of old allegories and alchemic-tracts. The
Norwich physician—himself deeply read in the Hermetic science—has
declared to us his own certainty concerning it in few but lovely words.
In them is contained the true mystery of man’s eternal and interior
quest of the Stone: its reconciliation with that other, outgoing quest
of “the Hidden Treasure that desires to be found.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p122"></span>“Do but extract from the corpulency of
bodies, or resolve things beyond their First Matter, and you discover
the habitation of Angels: which, if I call it the ubiquitary and
omnipresent Essence of God, I hope I shall not offend Divinity.”  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)

<span id="an_iii.vi-p124"></span><span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="an_iii.vi-Page_149"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_257"></span>[127:258](myst09.htm#fr_257) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p7"></span> Jámi, “Joseph and Zulaikha. The Poet’s
Prayer.”

<span id="fn_258"></span>[127:259](myst09.htm#fr_258) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p8"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. x.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[127:260](myst09.htm#fr_259) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p9"></span> St. Catherine of Genoa, “ Vita e
Dottrina,” cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[129:261](myst09.htm#fr_260) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p15"></span> “Vita e Dottrina,” p. 36.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[129:262](myst09.htm#fr_261) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p18"></span> This image seems first to have been
elaborated by St. Augustine, from whom it was borrowed by Hugh of St.
Victor, and most of the mediaeval mystics.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[129:263](myst09.htm#fr_262) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p19"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii. cap.
xxi.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[130:264](myst09.htm#fr_263) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p23"></span> So too Ruysbroeck says that “the just
man goes *towards* God by inward love in perpetual activity and *in* God
in virtue of his fruitive affection in eternal rest” (“De Ornatu
Spiritalium Nuptiarum.” I. ii. cap. lxv).

<span id="fn_264"></span>[131:265](myst09.htm#fr_264) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p25"></span> I need not remind the reader of the
fact that this symbolism, perverted to the purposes of his skeptical
philosophy, runs through the whole of the Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyám.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[131:266](myst09.htm#fr_265) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p26"></span> See Palmer’s “Oriental Mysticism,” pt.
I. caps. i., ii., iii., and v.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[132:267](myst09.htm#fr_266) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p35"></span> An abridged translation of ‘Attar’s
allegory of the Valleys will be found in “The Conference of the Birds,”
by R. P. Masani (1924). See also W. S. Lilly’s “Many Mansions,” p. 130.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[132:268](myst09.htm#fr_267) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p37"></span> Jundt, “Rulman Merswin,” p. 27.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[132:269](myst09.htm#fr_268) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p39"></span> Royce, “The World and the Individual,”
vol. ii. p. 386.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[132:270](myst09.htm#fr_269) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p40"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii. cap.
xxiv.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[133:271](myst09.htm#fr_270) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p42"></span> Compare Récéjac (“Fondements de la
Connaissance Mystique,” p. 252). “According to mysticism, morality leads
the soul to the frontiers of the Absolute and even gives it an impulsion
to enter, but this is not enough. This movement of pure Freedom cannot
succeed unless there is an equivalent movement within the Absolute
itself.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[133:272](myst09.htm#fr_271) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p43"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. xiii. cap. 9. “All
those who love,” says Ruysbroeck, “feel this attraction: more or less
according to the degree of their love.” (“De Calculo sive de Perfectione
filiorum Dei.”)

<span id="fn_272"></span>[133:273](myst09.htm#fr_272) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p46"></span> Meister Eckhart, Pred. iii.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[133:274](myst09.htm#fr_273) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p47"></span> *Ibid* ., Pred. xiii.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[134:275](myst09.htm#fr_274) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p47.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p48"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. vi.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[134:276](myst09.htm#fr_275) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p50"></span> The Greek and English text will be
found in the “Apocrypha Anecdota” of Dr. M. R. James, series 2
(Cambridge, 1897), pp. 1-25. I follow his translation. It will be seen
that I have adopted the hypotheses of Mr. G. R. S. Mead as to the
dramatic nature of this poem. See his “Echoes from the Gnosis,” 1896.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[134:277](myst09.htm#fr_276) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p54.10"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p55"></span> Jalalu d’ Din Rumi (Wisdom of the East
Series), p. 77.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[135:278](myst09.htm#fr_277) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p56.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p57"></span> So Dante—

<span id="an_iii.vi-p58"></span>“ Nel suo profondo vidi che s’interna

<span id="an_iii.vi-p59"></span>legato con amore in un volume

<span id="an_iii.vi-p60"></span>cio che per l’universo si squaderna.”

<span id="an_iii.vi-p61"></span>(Par. xxxiii. 85.)

<span id="fn_278"></span>[135:279](myst09.htm#fr_278) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p62"></span> “The Rod, the Root, and the Flower,”
“Aurea Dicta,” ccxxviii.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[136:280](myst09.htm#fr_279) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p65.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p66"></span> “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit,”
pt. i. cap. iii.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[136:281](myst09.htm#fr_280) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p67.10"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p68"></span> “Quia amore langueo,” an anonymous
fifteenth-century poem. Printed from the Lambeth MS. by the E.E.T.S.,
1866-67.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[136:282](myst09.htm#fr_281) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p70"></span> Pred. lxxxviii.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[136:283](myst09.htm#fr_282) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p71.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p72"></span> So we are told of St. Francis of
Assisi, that in his youth he “tried to flee God’s hand.” Thomas of
Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. ii.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[138:284](myst09.htm#fr_283) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p77.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p78"></span> Sr. Bernard, “Cantica Canticorum,”
Sermon vii. For a further and excellent discussion of St. Bernard’s
mystical language, see Dom Cuthbert Butler, “Western Mysticism,” 2nd
ed., pp. 160 *seq* .

<span id="fn_284"></span>[138:285](myst09.htm#fr_284) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p79.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p80"></span> *Vide* *infra,* Pt. II. cap. v.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[138:286](myst09.htm#fr_285) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p80.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p81"></span> Professor Pratt, by no means an
enthusiastic witness, most justly observes “There are several excellent
reasons why the mystics almost inevitably make use of the language of
human love in describing the joy of the love of God. The first and
simplest is this: that they have no other language to use . . . the
mystic must make use of expressions drawn from earthly love to describe
his experience, or give up the attempt of describing it at all. It is
the only way he has of even suggesting to the non-mystical what he has
felt” (“The Religious Consciousness,” p. 418).

<span id="fn_286"></span>[139:287](myst09.htm#fr_286) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p81.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p82"></span> “El Castillo Interior,” Moradas
Sétimas, cap ii.

<span id="fn_287"></span>[139:288](myst09.htm#fr_287) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p83.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p84"></span> “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae
Charitatis” (Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. cxcvi. col. 1207).

<span id="fn_288"></span>[139:289](myst09.htm#fr_288) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p85"></span> “In primo gradu fit desponsatio, in
secundo nuptiae, in tertio copula, in quarto puerperium. . . . De quarto
dicitur, Coucepimus, et quasi parturivimus et peperimus spiritum” (Isa.
xviii . 26). ( *Op. cit.,* 1216, D.)

<span id="fn_289"></span>[139:290](myst09.htm#fr_289) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p85.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p86"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” lii. cap.
v.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[140:291](myst09.htm#fr_290) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p87.3"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p88"></span> *Vide infra* , pt. ii. caps. i. and x.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[141:292](myst09.htm#fr_291) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p90.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p91"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. i.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[142:293](myst09.htm#fr_292) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p94.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p95"></span> “A Short Enquiry Concerning the
Hermetic Art,” p. 29.

<span id="fn_293"></span>[143:294](myst09.htm#fr_293) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p97.2"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p98"></span> “Religio Medici,” pt. i.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[143:295](myst09.htm#fr_294) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p98.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p99"></span> “A Suggestive Enquiry into the Hermetic
Mystery,” p. 143. This rare and curious study of spiritual alchemy was
the anonymous work of the late Mrs. Atwood. She attempted to suppress it
soon after publication under the impression—common amongst mystics of a
certain type—that she had revealed matters which might not be spoken of;
as Coventry Patmore for the same reason destroyed his masterpiece,
“Sponsa Dei.”

<span id="fn_295"></span>[143:296](myst09.htm#fr_295) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p100.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p101"></span> Quoted in “A Suggestive Enquiry into
the Hermetic Mystery,” p. 107. The whole of the “Golden Treatise” will
be found set out in this work.

<span id="fn_296"></span>[144:297](myst09.htm#fr_296) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p102.2"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p103"></span> Jacob Boehme, “The Threefold Life of
Man,” cap. iv. § 23.

<span id="fn_297"></span>[144:298](myst09.htm#fr_297) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p104.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p105"></span> Boehme, “The Threefold Life of Man,”
cap. vi. § 98; cap. x. §§ 3, 4; and cap. xiii. § 1.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[145:299](myst09.htm#fr_298) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p106.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p107"></span> “The Golden Tripod of the Monk
Basilius Valentinus” (“The Hermetic Museum, “ vol. i. p. 319).

<span id="fn_299"></span>[145:300](myst09.htm#fr_299) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p108.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p109"></span> “A Short Enquiry Concerning the
Hermetic Art,” p. 17.

<span id="fn_300"></span>[146:301](myst09.htm#fr_300) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p111.2"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p112"></span> “The Hermetic Museum,” vol. i. p. 272.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[146:302](myst09.htm#fr_301) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p113.2"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p114"></span> “A Suggestive Enquiry,” p. 345.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[147:303](myst09.htm#fr_302) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p116.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p117"></span> See “A Short Enquiry,” p. 17, and “A
Suggestive Enquiry,” pp. 297 *et seq* ., where the rhymed Alchemic tract
called “Hunting the Greene Lyon” is printed in full.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[147:304](myst09.htm#fr_303) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p117.6"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p118"></span> *Op. cit.*

<span id="fn_304"></span>[148:305](myst09.htm#fr_304) <span
id="an_iii.vi-p122.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.vi-p123"></span> Sir Thomas Browne, “Religio Medici,”
pt. i.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. Mysticism and Magic](myst10)

</div>
