<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst22)  [Next](myst24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Appendix: Historical Sketch of Mysticism

<span id="an_v"></span>

<span id="an_v-p1"></span>If<span id="an_v-p1.1"></span> we try to
represent the course of Mysticism in Europe during the Christian period
by the common device of a chronological curve, showing by its rises and
falls as it passes across the centuries the absence or preponderance in
any given epoch of mystics and mystical thought, we shall find that the
great periods of mystical activity tend to correspond with the great
periods of artistic, material, and intellectual civilization. As a rule,
they come immediately after, and seem to complete such periods: those
outbursts of vitality in which man makes fresh conquests over his
universe apparently producing, as their last stage, a type of heroic
character which extends these victories to the spiritual sphere. When
science, politics, literature, and the arts—the domination of nature and
the ordering of life—have risen to their height and produced their
greatest works, the mystic comes to the front; snatches the torch, and
carries it on. It is almost as if he were humanity’s finest flower; the
product at which each great creative period of the race had aimed.

<span id="an_v-p2"></span>Thus the thirteenth century expressed to
perfection the medieval ideal in religion, art, philosophy, and public
life. It built the Gothic cathedrals, put the finishing touch to the
system of chivalry, and nourished the scholastic philosophers. It has
many saints, but not very many mystics; though they increase in number
as the century draws on. The fourteenth century is filled by great
contemplatives; who lifted this wave of activity to spiritual levels,
and brought the intellectual vigour, the romance and passion of the
mediaeval temperament, to bear upon the deepest mysteries of the
transcendental life. Again, the sixteenth century, that period of
abounding vitality which left no corner of existence unexplored, which
produced the Renaissance and the Humanists and remade the mediaeval
world, had hardly reached its full development before the great
procession of the post-Renaissance mystics, with St. Teresa at their
head, began. If life, then—the great and restless life of the race—be
described under the trite metaphor of a billowy sea, each great wave as
it rises from the deep bears the mystic type upon its crest.

<span id="an_v-p3"></span>Our curve will therefore follow close behind
that other curve which represents the intellectual life of humanity. Its
course will be studded and defined for us by the names of the great
mystics; the possessors of spiritual genius, the pathfinders to the
country of the soul. These starry names are significant not only in
themselves but also as links in the chain of manes growing spiritual
history. They are not isolated <span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_454"></span> phenomena, but are related to one another.
Each receives something from his predecessors: each by his personal
adventures enriches it, and hands it on to the future. As we go on, we
notice more and more this cumulative power of the past. Each mystic,
original though he be, yet owes much to the inherited acquirement of his
spiritual ancestors. These ancestors form his tradition, are the classic
examples on which his education is based; and from them he takes the
language which they have sought out and constructed as a means of
telling their adventures to the world. It is by their help too, very
often, that he elucidates for himself the meaning of the dim perceptions
of his amazed soul. From his own experiences he adds to this store; and
hands on an enriched tradition of the transcendental life to the next
spiritual genius evolved by the race. Hence the names of the great
mystics are connected by a thread; and it becomes possible to treat them
as subjects of history rather than of biography.

<span id="an_v-p4"></span>I have said that this thread forms a curve,
following the fluctuations of the intellectual life of the race. At its
highest points, the names of the mystics are clustered most thickly, at
its descents they become fewer and fewer, at the lowest points they die
away. Between the first century A.D. and the nineteenth, this curve
exhibits three great waves of mystical activity besides many minor
fluctuations. They correspond with the close of the Classical, the
Mediaeval, and the Renaissance periods in history: reaching their
highest points in the third, fourteenth, and seventeenth centuries. In
one respect, however, the mystic curve diverges from the historical one.
It rises to its highest point in the fourteenth century, and does not
again approach the level it there attains; for the mediaeval period was
more favourable to the development of mysticism than any subsequent
epoch has been. The fourteenth century is as much the classic moment for
the spiritual history of our race as the thirteenth is for the history
of Gothic, or the fifteenth for that of Italian art.

<span id="an_v-p5"></span>The names upon our curve, especially during
the first ten centuries of the Christian era, are often separated by
long periods of time. This, of course, does not necessarily mean that
these centuries produced few mystics: merely that few documents relating
to them have survived. We have now no means of knowing, for instance,
the amount of true mysticism which may have existed amongst the
initiates of the Greek or Egyptian Mysteries; how many advanced but
inarticulate contemplatives there were amongst the Alexandrian
Neo-platonists, amongst the pre-Christian communities of contemplatives
described by **Philo** , the deeply mystical Alexandrian Jew (20
B.C.-A.D. 40), or the innumerable Gnostic sects which replaced in the
early Christian world the Orphic and Dionysiac mystery-cults of Greece
and Italy. Much real mystical inspiration there must have been, for we
know that from these centres of life came many of the doctrines best
loved by later mystics: that the Neoplatonists gave them the concepts of
Pure Being and the One, that the New Birth and the Spiritual Marriage
were foreshadowed in the Mysteries, that Philo anticipated the theology
of the Fourth Gospel. <span id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_455"></span>

<span id="an_v-p6"></span>As we stand at the beginning of the Christian
period we see three great sources whence its mystical tradition might
have been derived. These sources are Greek, Oriental, and Christian—
*i.e.* , primitive Apostolic—doctrine or thought. As a matter of fact
all contributed their share: but where Christianity gave the new vital
impulse to transcendence, Greek and Oriental thought provided the
principal forms in which it was expressed. The Christian religion, by
its very nature, had a profoundly mystical side. Putting the personality
of its Founder outside the limits of the present discussion, **St.
Paul** and the author of the Fourth Gospel are obvious instances of
mystics of the first rank amongst its earliest missionaries. Much of the
inner history of primitive Christianity still remains unknown to us, but
in what has been already made out we find numerous, if scattered,
indications that the mystic life was indigenous in the Church and the
natural mystic had little need to look for inspiration outside the
limits of his creed. Not only the epistles of St. Paul and the Johannine
writings, but also the earliest liturgic fragments which we possess, and
such primitive religious poetry as the “Odes of Solomon” and the “Hymn
of Jesus,” show how congenial was mystical expression to the mind of the
Church how easily that Church could absorb and transmute the mystic
elements of Essene, Orphic, and Neoplatonic thought.

<span id="an_v-p7"></span>Towards the end of the second century this
tendency received brilliant literary expression at the hands of
**Clement of Alexandria** (c. 160-220)—who first adapted the language of
the pagan Mysteries to the Christian theory of the spiritual life—and
his great pupil **Origen** (c. 183-253). Nevertheless, the first person
after St. Paul of whom it can now be decisively stated that he was a
practical mystic of the first rank, and in whose writings the central
mystic doctrine of union with God is found, is a pagan. That person is
**Plotinus** , the great Neoplatonic philosopher of Alexandria (A.D.
205-c. 270). His mysticism owes nothing to the Christian religion, which
is never mentioned in his works. Intellectually it is based on the
Platonic philosophy, and also shows the influence of the Mysteries, and
perhaps certain of the Oriental cults and philosophies which ran riot in
Alexandria in the third century. Ostensibly a metaphysician, however,
Plotinus possessed transcendental genius of a high order, and was
consumed by a burning passion for the Absolute: and the importance of
his work lies in the degree in which his intellectual constructions are
made the vehicle of mystical experience. His disciple Porphyry has left
it on record that on four occasions he saw his master rapt to ecstatic
union with “the One.”

<span id="an_v-p8"></span>The Neoplatonism of which Plotinus was the
greatest exponent became the medium in which much of the mysticism—both
Christian and pagan—of the first six centuries was expressed. But since
mysticism is a way of life—an experience of Reality, not a philosophic
account of Reality—Neoplatonism, and the mysticism which used its
language, must not be identified with one another. **Porphyry**
(233-304) the favourite pupil of Plotinus seems to have inherited
something of his master’s mysticism, but Neoplatonism as a whole was a
confused, semi-religious philosophy, containing many inconsistent
elements. Appearing <span id="page_456">p. 456</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_456"></span> when the wreck of paganism was complete, but
before Christianity had conquered the educated world, it made a strong
appeal to the spiritually minded; and also to those who hankered after
the mysterious and the occult. It taught the illusory nature of all
temporal things, and in the violence of its idealism outdid its master
Plato. It also taught the existence of an Absolute God, the
“Unconditioned One,” who might be known in ecstasy and contemplation;
and here it made a direct appeal to the mystical instincts of men. Those
natural mystics who lived in the time of its greatest popularity found
in it therefore a ready means of expressing their own intuitions of
reality. Hence the early mysticism of Europe, both Christian and pagan,
has come down to us in a Neoplatonic dress; and speaks the tongue of
Alexandria rather than that of Jerusalem, Athens, or Rome.

<span id="an_v-p9"></span>The influence of Plotinus upon later Christian
mysticism was enormous though indirect. During the patristic period all
that was best in the spirit of Neoplatonism flowed into the veins of the
Church. **St. Augustine** (A.D. 354-430) and **Dionysius the
Areopagite** (writing between 475 and 525) are amongst his spiritual
children; and it is mainly through them that his doctrine reached the
mediaeval world. **Proclus** (412-c. 490), the last of the pagan
philosophers, also derives from his teaching. Through these three there
is hardly one in the long tale of the European contemplatives whom his
powerful spirit has failed to reach.

<span id="an_v-p10"></span>The mysticism of St. Augustine is partly
obscured for us by the wealth of his intellectual and practical life:
yet no one can read the “Confessions” without being struck by the
intensity and actuality of his spiritual experience, and the
characteristically mystical formula under which he apprehended Reality.
It is clear that when he composed this work he was already an advanced
contemplative. The immense intellectual activities by which he is best
remembered were fed by the solitary adventures of his soul. No merely
literary genius could have produced the wonderful chapters in the
seventh and eighth books, or the innumerable detached passages in which
his passion for the Absolute breaks out. Later mystics, recognizing this
fact, constantly appeal to his authority, and his influence ranks next
to that of the Bible in the formation of the mediaeval school.

<span id="an_v-p11"></span>Second only to that of St. Augustine was the
influence exercised by the strange and nameless writer who chose to
ascribe his works to Dionysius the Areopagite, the friend of St. Paul,
and to address his letters upon mysticism to Paul’s fellow-worker,
Timothy. The pseudo-Dionysius was probably a Syrian monk. The patristic
quotations detected in his work prove that he cannot have written before
A.D.475; it is most likely that he flourished in the early part of the
sixth century. His chief works are the treatises on the Angelic
Hierarchies and on the Names of God, and a short but priceless tract on
mystical theology. From the ninth century to the seventeenth these
writings nourished the most spiritual intuitions of men, and possessed
an authority which it is now hard to realize. Medieval mysticism is
soaked in Dionysian conceptions. Particularly in the fourteenth century,
the golden <span id="page_457">p. 457</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_457"></span> age of mystical literature, the phrase
“Dionysius saith” is of continual recurrence: and has for those who use
it much the same weight as quotations from the Bible or the great
fathers of the Church.

<span id="an_v-p12"></span>The importance of Dionysius lies in the fact
that he was the first and for a long time the only, Christian writer who
attempted to describe frankly and accurately the workings of the
mystical consciousness, and the nature of its ecstatic attainment of
God. So well did he do h s work that later contemplatives, reading him,
found their most sublime experiences reflected and partly explained.
Hence in describing those experiences, they adopted his language and
metaphors; which afterwards became the classic terms of contemplative
science. To him Christian literature owes the paradoxical concept of the
Absolute Godhead as the “Divine Dark,” the Unconditioned, “the negation
of all that *is* ”— *i.e* ., of all that the surface consciousness
perceives—and of the soul’s attainment of the Absolute as a “divine
ignorance,” a way of negation. This idea is common to Greek and Indian
philosophy. With Dionysius it enters the Catholic fold.

<span id="an_v-p13"></span>Side by side with the Neoplatonic mysticism
of St. Augustine and Dionysius runs another line of spiritual culture,
hardly less important for the development of the contemplative life.
This takes its rise among the Fathers of the Egyptian desert, whose
heroic spirituality was a contributory factor in St. Augustine’s
conversion. It finds beautiful expression in the writings of **St.
Marcarius of Egypt** (c. 295-386), the disciple of St. Anthony and
friend of St. Basil, and reaches the West through the “Dialogues” of
**John Cassian** (c. 350- ), one of the most important documents for the
history of Christian mysticism. The fruit of a seven-year pilgrimage
among the Egyptian monasteries, and many conversations on spiritual
themes with the monks, we find in these dialogues for the first time a
classified and realistic description of the successive degrees of
contemplative prayer, and their relation to the development of the
spiritual life. Adopted by St. Benedict as part of the regular spiritual
food of his monks, they have had a decisive influence on the cloistered
mysticism of the Middle Ages. Their sober and orderly doctrine, destined
to be characteristic of the Roman Church, received fresh emphasis in the
works of **St. Gregory the Great** (540-604), which also helped to form
the souls of succeeding generations of contemplatives.

<span id="an_v-p14"></span>We have therefore, at the opening of the
Middle Ages, two great streams of spiritual culture; the Benedictine,
moderate and practical, formed chiefly on Cassian and St. Gregory, and
the Neoplatonic, represented by Dionysius the Areopagite, and in a less
exclusive form by St. Augustine. The works of Dionysius were translated
from Greek into Latin about A.D. 850 by the Irish philosopher and
theologian, **John Scotus Erigena** , one of the scholars assembled at
the court of Charlemagne: and this event marks the beginning of a full
tradition of mysticism in Western Europe. John the Scot, many of whose
own writings exhibit a strong mystical bias, is the only name in this
period which the history of mysticism can claim. We are on the
descending <span id="page_458">p. 458</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_458"></span> line of the “Dark Ages”: and here the curve
of mysticism runs parallel with the curves of intellectual and artistic
activity.

<span id="an_v-p15"></span>The great current of medieval mysticism first
shows itself in the eleventh century, and chiefly in connection with the
Benedictine Order for the work of such monastic reformers as **St.
Romuald** (c. 950-1027) **St. Peter Damian** (1007-1072), and **St.
Bruno** (1032-1101), the founder of the Grande Chartreuse, was really
the effort of contemplative souls to establish an environment in which
the mystical life could be lived. Thus too we must regard at least a
large proportion of the hermits and solitaries who became so marked a
feature in the religion of the West. At this period mysticism was not
sharply distinguished from the rest of the religious complex, but was
rather the realistic experience of the truths on which religion rests.
It spread mainly through personal instruction and discipleship. Its
literary monuments were few among the most important and widely
influential being the “Meditations” of **St. Anselm** (1033-1109),
which, disentangled by recent scholarship from the spurious material
passing under his name, are now seen to have been a chief channel of
transmission for the Augustinian mysticism which dominated the early
Middle Ages. The general religious revival of the twelfth century had
its marked mystical aspect, and produced four personalities of great
historical importance: the Benedictines **St. Bernard of Clairvaux**
(1091-1153), **St. Hildegarde of Bingen** (1098-1179), and **Joachim of
Flora** (1132-1202); and the Scotch or Irish Augustinian **Richard of
St. Victor** *(ob. c.* 1173), whom Dante held to be “in contemplation
more than man.” Richard’s master and contemporary, the scholastic
philosopher **Hugh** (1097-1141) of the same Abbey of St. Victor at
Paris, is also generally reckoned amongst the mystics of thus period,
but with less reason; since contemplation occupies a small place in his
theological writings. In spite of the deep respect shown towards him by
Aquinas and other theologians, Hugh’s influence on later mystical
literature was slight. The spirit of Richard and of St. Bernard, on the
contrary, was destined to dominate it for the next two hundred years.
With them the literature of mediaeval mysticism properly so called
begins.

<span id="an_v-p16"></span>This literature Falls into two classes: the
personal and the didactic. Sometimes, as in a celebrated sermon of St.
Bernard, the two are combined; the teacher appealing to his own
experience in illustration of his theme. In the works of the Victorines
the attitude is didactic: one might almost say scientific. In them
mysticism—that is to say, the degrees of contemplation, the training and
exercise of the spiritual sense—takes its place as a recognized
department of theology. It is in Richard’s favourite symbolism,
“Benjamin,” the beloved child of Rachel, emblem of the Contemplative
Life: and in his two chief works, “Benjamin Major” and “Benjamin Minor,”
it is classified and described in all its branches. Though mysticism was
for Richard the “science of the heart” and he had little respect for
secular learning, yet his solid intellectuality did much to save the
medieval school from the perils of religious emotionalism. In his hands
the antique mystical tradition which flowed through Plotinus and the
Areopagite, was codified and <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_459"></span> transmitted to the mediaeval world. Like his
master, Hugh, he had the mediaeval passion for elaborate allegory, neat
arrangement, rigid classification, and significant numbers in things. As
Dante parcelled out Heaven, Purgatory, and Hell with mathematical
precision, and proved that Beatrice was herself a Nine, so these writers
divide and subdivide the stages of contemplation, the states of the
soul, the degrees of Divine Love: and perform terrible *tours de force*
in the course of compelling the ever-variable expressions of man’s
spiritual vitality to fall into orderly and parallel series, conformable
to the mystic numbers of Seven, Four, and Three.

<span id="an_v-p17"></span>The influence of Richard of St. Victor, great
as it was, is exceeded by that of St. Bernard; the dominant spiritual
personality of the twelfth century. Bernard’s career of ceaseless and
varied activity sufficiently disproves the “idleness” of the
contemplative type. He continued and informed with his own spirit the
Benedictine tradition, and his writings quickly took their place, with
those of Richard of St. Victor, among the living forces which
conditioned the development of later mysticism. Both these mystics
exerted a capital influence on the formation of our national school of
mysticism in the fourteenth century. Translations and paraphrases of the
“Benjamin Major,” “Benjamin Minor,” and other works of Richard of St.
Victor, and of various tracts and epistles of St. Bernard, are
constantly met with in the MS. collections of mystical and theological
literature written in England in the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries. An early paraphrase of the “Benjamin Minor,” sometimes
attributed to Richard Rolle, was probably made by the anonymous author
of “The Cloud of Unknowing,” who was also responsible for the first
appearance of the Areopagite in English dress.

<span id="an_v-p18"></span>If mediaeval mysticism in the West develops
mainly under the sane and enduring influence of the Victorines and St.
Bernard, in Germany and Italy it appeared in a more startling form;
seeking, in the prophetic activities of St. Hildegarde of Bingen and the
Abbot Joachim of Flora, to influence the course of secular history. In
St. Hildegarde and her fellow-Benedictine **St. Elizabeth of Shönau**
(1138-1165) we have the first of that long line of women
mystics—visionaries, prophetesses, and political reformers—combining
spiritual transcendence with great practical ability, of whom St.
Catherine of Siena is probably the greatest example. Exalted by the
strength of their spiritual intuitions, they emerged from an obscure
life to impose their wills, and their reading of events, upon the world.
From the point of view of Eternity, in whose light they lived, they
attacked the sins of their generation. St. Hildegarde, a woman of
powerful character, apparently possessed of abnormal psychic gifts, was
driven by that Living Light which was her inspiration to denounce the
corruptions of Church and State. In the inspired letters which she sent
like firebrands over Europe, we see German idealism and German
practicality struggling together; the unflinching description of abuses,
the vast poetic vision by which they are condemned. These qualities are
seen again in the South German mystics of the next century: the four
Benedictine women of genius, who <span id="page_460">p. 460</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_460"></span> had their home in the convent of Helfde.
These are the **Nun Gertrude** (Abbess 1251-1291) and her sister **St.
Mechthild of Hackborn** *(ob.* 1310), with her sublime symbolic visions:
then, the poet of the group, the exquisite **Mechthild of Magdeburg**
(1212-1299), who, first a *béguine* at Magdeburg, where she wrote the
greater part of “The Flowing Light of the Godhead,” came to Helfde in
1268; last the celebrated **St. Gertrude the Great** (1256-1311). In
these contemplatives the political spirit is less marked than in St.
Hildegarde: but religious and ethical activity takes its place. St.
Gertrude the Great is a characteristic Catholic visionary of the
feminine type: absorbed in her subjective experiences, her often
beautiful and significant dreams, her loving conversations with Christ
and the Blessed Virgin. Close to her in temperament is St. Mechthild of
Hackborn; but her attitude as a whole is more impersonal, more truly
mystic. The great symbolic visions in which her most spiritual
perceptions are expressed are artistic creations rather than
psycho-sensorial hallucinations, and dwell little upon the humanity of
Christ, with which St. Gertrude is constantly occupied. The terms in
which Mechthild of Magdeburg—an educated and well-born woman, half poet,
half seer—describes her union with God are intensely individual, and
apparently owe more to the romantic poets of her time than to earlier
religious writers. The works of this Mechthild, early translated into
Latin, were read by Dante. Their influence is traceable in the
“Paradiso”; and by some scholars she is believed to be the Matilda of
his Earthly Paradise, though others give this position to her
sister-mystic, St. Mechthild of Hackborn.

<span id="an_v-p19"></span>Modern scholarship tends more and more to see
in the strange personality of the Abbot Joachim of Flora, whom Dante
placed among the great contemplatives in the Heaven of the Sun, the
chief influence in the development of Italian mysticism. The true import
of his prophecies, which proclaimed in effect the substitution of
mystical for institutional Christianity, was only appreciated after his
death. But their prestige grew during the course of the thirteenth
century; especially after the appearance of the mendicant friars, who
seemed to fulfil his prediction that the new era of the Holy Spirit
would be brought in about the year 1260 by two new Orders who would live
in poverty the spiritual life. From this time, Joachism found its chief
vehicle of expression through Franciscan mysticism of the more
revolutionary sort. Though there is no evidence that **St. Francis of
Assisi** (1182-1226) knew the prophecies of the “Eternal Gospel,” he can
hardly have grown up without some knowledge of them, and also of the
Cathari and other semi-mystical heresies—many of them stressing the idea
of evangelical poverty—which were spreading through Italy from the
north. But the mystical genius which may have received food from these
sources was itself strikingly original; the spontaneous expression of a
rare personality, a great spiritual realist who admitted no rival to the
absolute claims of the mystical life of poverty and joy. St. Francis was
untouched by monastic discipline, or the writings of Dionysius or St.
Bernard. His only literary influence was the New Testament. With him,
mysticism comes into the open air, seeks to transform the stuff of daily
life, <span id="page_461">p. 461</span> <span id="an_v-Page_461"></span>
speaks the vernacular, turns the songs of the troubadours to the
purposes of Divine love; yet remains completely loyal to the Catholic
Church. None who came after him succeeded in recapturing his secret
which was the secret of spiritual genius of the rarest type: but he left
his mark upon the history, art and literature of Western Europe, and the
influence of his spirit still lives.

<span id="an_v-p20"></span>In a general sense it is true to say that
Italian mysticism descends from St. Francis, and in its first period
seems almost to be the prerogative of his disciples; especially those of
the “Spiritual” party who strove to maintain his ideals in their purity.
It is here that we find Franciscan ardour and singlemindedness in
alliance with apocalyptic notions deriving from Joachist ideas. In
Provence, a widespread mystical movement coloured by Joachism was led by
Hugues de Digne and his sister **St. Douceline** ( *n* . 1214); in whom
we find a spirit which, like that of Francis, could find the Divine
through flowers and birds and simple natural things. In Italy, nourished
by the influence of such deeply mystical friars as **John of Parma**
*(ob.* 1288 *)* and **John of La Verna** , this Franciscan spirituality
entered into conflict with the ecclesiastical politics of the day;
taking up that duty of denouncing the corruptions of the Church, which
has so often attracted the mystics. Here the typical figure is that of
**Jacopone da Todi** *(* 1228-1306), the converted lawyer turned
mystical poet. On one hand deeply influenced by St. Augustine and
Dionysius the Areopagite, on the other the devoted exponent of the
Founder’s ideals, his “spiritual songs” lift Franciscan mysticism to the
heights of ecstatic rapture and literary expression; whilst his savage
castigations of the Papacy give him a place among the great mediaeval
satirists. Jacopone’s poems have been shown by Von Hügel to have had a
formative influence on St. Catherine of Genoa; and have probably
affected many other mystics, not only in Italy but elsewhere, for they
quickly attained considerable circulation.

<span id="an_v-p21"></span>In his contemporary the **Blessed Angela of
Foligno** (1248-1309) who was converted from a sinful life to become a
tertiary hermit of the Franciscan Order we have a mystic of the first
rank whose visions and revelations place her in the same class as St.
Catherine of Genoa and St. Teresa. Known to her followers as the
Mistress of Theologians, and numbering among her disciples the brilliant
and tempestuous “spiritual” friar Ubertino da Casale, the lofty
metaphysical element in Angela’s mysticism suggests the high level of
spiritual culture achieved in Franciscan circles of her time. By the
sixteenth century her works, translated into the vernacular, had taken
their place amongst the classics of mysticism. In the seventeenth they
were largely used by St. François de Sales, Madame Guyon, and other
Catholic contemplatives. Seventeen years older than Dante, whose great
genius properly closes this line of spiritual descent, she is a link
between the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries in Italian mysticism.

<span id="an_v-p22"></span>We now approach the Golden Age of Mysticism:
and at the opening of that epoch, dominating it by their peculiar
combination of intellectual and spiritual power stand the figures of the
“Seraphic and Angelic <span id="page_462">p. 462</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_462"></span> Doctors,” **St. Bonaventura** , the
Franciscan (1221-1274), and **St. Thomas Aquinas** , the Dominican
(1226-1274). As with St. Augustine, the intellectual greatness of St.
Thomas has obscured his mystical side, whilst St. Bonaventura, the
apostle of a wise moderation, may easily appear to the hurried reader
the least mystical of the Franciscan mystics. Yet both were
contemplatives, and because of this were able to interpret to the
medieval world the great spiritual tradition of the past. Hence their
immense influence on the mystical schools of the fourteenth century. It
is sometimes stated that these schools derive mainly from St.
Bonaventura, and represent an opposition to scholastic theology; but as
a matter of fact their greatest personalities—in particular Dante and
the German Dominicans—are soaked in the spirit of Aquinas, and quote his
authority at every turn.

<span id="an_v-p23"></span>In Europe the mystic curve is now approaching
its highest point. In the East that point has already been passed. Sufi,
or Mahommedan mysticism, appearing in the eighth century in the
beautiful figure of **Rabi’a** , the “Moslem St. Teresa” (717-801), and
continued by the martyr **Al Hallaj** *(ob.* 922), attains literary
expression in the eleventh in the “Confessions” of **Al Ghazzali**
(1058-1111), and has its classic period in the thirteenth in the works
of the mystic poets **‘Attar** (c. 1140-1234), **Sadi** (1184-1263), and
the saintly **Jalalu ‘d Din** (1207-1273). Its tradition is continued in
the fourteenth century by the rather erotic mysticism of **Hafiz** (c.
1300-1388) and his successors, and in the fifteenth by the poet **Jámí**
(1414-1492).

<span id="an_v-p24"></span>Whilst Hafiz already strikes a note of
decadence for the mysticism of Islam, the year 1300 is for Western
Europe a vital year in the history of the spiritual life. Mystics of the
first rank are appearing, or about to appear. The Majorcan
scholar-mystic **Ramon Lull** *(ob.* 1315) is drawing to the end of his
long life. In Italy **Dante** (1265-1321) is forcing human language to
express one of the most sublime visions of the Absolute which has ever
been crystallized into speech. He inherits and fuses into one that
loving and artistic reading of reality which was the heart of Franciscan
mysticism, and that other ordered vision of the transcendental world
which the Dominicans through Aquinas poured into the stream of European
thought. For the one the spiritual world was all love: for the other all
law. For Dante it was both. In the “Paradiso” his stupendous genius
apprehends and shows to us a Beatific Vision in which the symbolic
systems of all great mystics and many whom the world does not call
mystics—of Dionysius, Richard, St. Bernard, Mechthild, Aquinas, and
countless others—are included and explained.

<span id="an_v-p25"></span>The moment in which the “Commedia” was being
written coincides with the awakening of mystical activity in Germany and
Flanders. Between the years 1280 and 1309 was produced, probably in the
Liege district and under Franciscan influence, the curious anonymous
work which isnow only known to us in Latin and English translations—
**“The Mirror of Simple Souls.”** This long treatise, clearly influenced
by Dionysius, the Victorines, and the twelfth-century tract known as the
“Letter to the Brethren of Mons Dei,” is a piece of mystical literature
of an advanced kind, often fringing the borders of orthodoxy and looking
<span id="page_463">p. 463</span> <span id="an_v-Page_463"></span>
forward to the speculative Flemish mysticism of the fourteenth century.
Its writer was probably contemporary with the founder of this school;
the great Dominican scholar **Meister Eckhart** (1260-1327), who
resembled Dante in his combination of mystical insight with intense
intellectual power, and laid the foundations at once of German
philosophy and German mysticism. These two giants stand side by side at
the opening of the century; perfect representatives of the Teutonic and
Latin instinct for transcendental reality.

<span id="an_v-p26"></span>Eckhart, though only a few years younger than
St. Gertrude the Great, seems to belong to a different world. His
commanding personality, his genius for the supra-sensible nourished by
the works of Dionysius and Erigena, moulded and inspired all whom it
came near. The German and Flemish mystics of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, differing much in temperament from their master and
from each other, have yet something in common: something which is shared
by no other school. This something is derived from Eckhart; for all have
passed under his hand, being either his immediate disciples, or the
friends or pupils of his disciples. Eckhart’s doctrine is chiefly known
to us by reports of his vernacular sermons delivered at Strassburg; then
the religious centre of Germany. In these we see him as a teaching
mystic full of pastoral zeal, but demanding a high level both of
intellect and spirituality in those he addressed. Towards the end of his
life he fell into disgrace. A number of propositions extracted from his
writings, and representing his more extreme views, were condemned by the
Church as savouring of pantheism and other heresies: and certainly the
violence and daring of his language laid him open to misconstruction. In
his efforts to speak of the unspeakable he was constantly betrayed into
expressions which were bound to seem paradoxical and exaggerated to
other men. Eckhart’s influence, however, was little hurt by
ecclesiastical condemnation. His pupils, though they remained loyal
Catholics, contrived also to be loyal disciples. To the end of their
lives their teaching was coloured—often inspired—by the doctrines of the
great, if heretical, scholar whose memory they venerated as that of a
saint.

<span id="an_v-p27"></span>The contrast in type between Eckhart and his
two most famous disciples is an interesting one. All three were
Dominican friars; all were devout followers of St. Augustine, the
Areopagite, St. Bernard, and Aquinas; all had been trained in the
schools of Cologne, where Albert the Great and St. Thomas had taught,
and where their powerful influence still lived. The mysticism of
Eckhart, so far as he allows us to see it in his sermons and fragmentary
writings, is objective—one might almost say dogmatic. He describes with
an air of almost terrible certainty and intimacy, not that which he has
felt, but the place or plane of being he has known—“the desert of the
Godhead were no one is at home.” He is a great scholar, a natural
metaphysician passionately condensed with the quest of Absolute Truth.

<span id="an_v-p28"></span>Of his two pupils, **John Tauler** (c.
1300-1361), friar-preacher of Strassburg, was a born missionary: a man
who combined with great theological learning and mystical genius of a
high order an overwhelming <span id="page_464">p. 464</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_464"></span> zeal for souls. He laboured incessantly to
awaken men to a sense of their transcendental heritage. Without the hard
intellectualism occasionally noticeable in Eckhart, or the tendency to
introspection and the excessive artistic sensibility of Suso, Tauler is
the most virile of the German mystics. The breadth of his humanity is
only equalled by the depth of his spirituality. His sermons—his only
authentic works—are trumpet-calls to heroic action upon spiritual
levels. They influenced many later mystics, especially St. Teresa and
St. John of the Cross. Tauler is not a subjective writer: only by
implication can we assure ourselves that he speaks from personal
experience. He has sometimes, though unfairly, been described as a
precursor of the Reformation. Such a claim could only be made by those
who look upon all pure Christianity as a form of Protestant heresy. He
attacked, like St. Hildegarde, St. Catherine of Siena, and many others,
the ecclesiastical corruption of his period: but his writings, if read
in unexpurgated editions, prove him to have been a fervent and orthodox
Catholic.

<span id="an_v-p29"></span>Tauler was one of the leading spirits in the
great informal society of the **Friends of God** , which sprang into
being in Strassburg, spread through the Rhenish province and beyond to
Switzerland and Bavaria, and worked in this moment of religious
decadence for the spiritual regeneration of the people. In a spirit of
fierce enthusiasm and wholehearted devotion, the Friends of God set
themselves to the mystic life as the only life worthy of the name. A
great outburst of transcendental activity took place: many visions and
ecstasies were reported: amazing conversions occurred. The movement had
many features in common with that of the Quakers; except that it took
place within, instead of without, the official Church, and was partly
directed against the doctrines of the Brethren of the Free Spirit and
other heretical sects. With it was connected the third of the trio of
great German Dominican mystics, the **Blessed Henry Suso** (c.
1295-1365), a natural recluse and ascetic, and a visionary of the most
exuberant Catholic type. To Suso, subjective, romantic, deeply
interested in his own soul and his personal relation with God, mysticism
was not so much a doctrine to be imparted to other men as an intimate
personal adventure. Though a trained philosopher and theologian, and a
devoted follower of Eckhart, his autobiography—a human document far more
detailed and ingenuous than St. Teresa’s more celebrated “Life”—is
mainly the record of his griefs and joys, his pains, visions, ecstasies,
and miseries. Even his mystical treatises are in dialogue form, as if he
could hardly get away from the personal and dramatic aspect of the
spiritual life.

<span id="an_v-p30"></span>Around these three—Eckhart, Tauler, Suso—are
gathered other and more shadowy personalities: members of this mystical
society of the Friends of God, bound to the heroic attempt to bring
life—the terribly corrupt and disordered religious life of the
fourteenth century—back into relation with spiritual reality, to
initiate their neighbours into the atmosphere of God. From one of these
nameless members comes the literary jewel of the movement: the beautiful
little treatise called the **“Theologia Germanica,”** or “Book of the
Perfect Life,” probably written in Frankfort about the year 1350 by a
priest of the Teutonic Order. <span id="page_465">p. 465</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_465"></span> One of the most successful of many attempts
to make mystic principles available for common men, this book was
greatly loved by Luther, who published an incomplete edition in 1518.
Other Friends of God are now only known to us as the authors of letters,
descriptions of conversions, visions, and spiritual
adventures—literature which the movement produced in enormous
quantities. No part of the history of mysticism has been more changed by
recent research than that of the Rhenish school: and the work is still
but partly done. At present we can only record the principal names which
we find connected with the mystical propaganda of the Friends of God.
These are first the nuns **Margaret Ebner** (1291-1351) and her sister
**Christina** , important personages in the movement upon whose
historicity no doubts have been cast. Margaret appears to have been a
psychic as well as a mystic: and to have possessed, like Madame Guyon,
telepathic and clairvoyant powers. Next the rather shadowy pair of
laymen, **Henry of Nordlingen** and **Nicolas of Basle** . Lastly the
puzzling figure of **Rulman Merswin** (c. 1310-1382), author of the
series of apocalyptic visions called The Book of the Nine Rocks”; whose
story of his conversion and mystic life, whether it be regarded as fact
or “tendency literature,” is a psychological document of the first rank.

<span id="an_v-p31"></span>In immediate dependence on the German school,
and like it drawing its intellectual vigour from the genius of Eckhart,
is the mysticism of Flanders: best known to us in the work of its most
sublime representative, the **Blessed John Ruysbroeck** (1293-1381), one
of the greatest mystics whom the world has yet known. In Ruysbroeck’s
works the metaphysical and personal aspects of mystical truth are fused
and attain their highest expression. Intellectually indebted to St.
Augustine, Richard of St. Victor, and Eckhart, his value lies in the
fact that the Eckhartian philosophy was merely the medium by which he
expressed the results of profound experience. In his early years a
priest in Brussels, in old age a recluse in the forest of Soignes,
Ruysbroeck’s influence on his own generation was great. Through his
disciple **Gerard Groot** (1340-1384), founder of the Brotherhood of the
Common Life, it formed the inspiration of the religious movement of the
New Devotion; which carried over into the next century the spirit of the
great mediaeval mystics. The mystical writings of **Henry de Mande** (c.
1360-1415), the “Ruysbroeck of the North,” the beautiful and deeply
Platonic “Fiery Soliloquy with God” of **Gerlac Petersen** (1378-1411),
and above all the “Imitation of Christ” of his friend **Thomas à
Kempis** (1380-1471), in which some of Gerard Groot’s meditations may be
enshrined, are the chief channels through which this mystical current
passed. In the next century the Franciscan **Henry de Herp** or Harphius
*(ob.* 1477) and two greater personalities—the learned and holy
Platonist, Cardinal **Nicolas of Cusa** (1401-1464), and his friend the
theologian and contemplative **Denis the Carthusian** (1402-1471), one
of the great religious figures of the fifteenth century—drew their
inspiration from Ruysbroeck. Denis translated the whole of his works
into Latin; and calls him “another Dionysius” but “clear where the
Areopagite is obscure.” It was mainly through the voluminous writings of
Denis, widely read <span id="page_466">p. 466</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_466"></span> during succeeding centuries, that the
doctrine of the mediaeval mystics was carried over to the Renaissance
world. Ruysbroeck’s works, with those of Suso, appear in English MSS.
early in the fifteenth century, taking their place by the side of St.
Bernard, St. Bonaventura, and the great English mystic Richard Rolle.
The influence of his genius has also been detected in the mystical
literature of Spain.

<span id="an_v-p32"></span>English mysticism seems to have its roots in
the religious revival which arose during Stephen’s reign. It was then,
and throughout its course, closely linked with the solitary life. Its
earnest literary monument, the “Ancren Riwle,” was written early in the
twelfth century for the use of three anchoresses. So too the
“Meditations” of **St. Aldred** (Abbot of Rievaulx 1146-1166), and the
Rule he wrote for his anchoress sister, presuppose the desire for the
mystical life. But the first English mystic we can name with certainty
is **Margery Kempe** (probably writing c. 1290), the anchoress of Lynn.
Even so, we know nothing of this woman’s life; and only a fragment of
her “Contemplations” has survived. It is with the next name, **Richard
Rolle of Hampole** (c. 1300-1349), that the short but brilliant
procession of English mystics begins. Rolle, educated at Oxford and
perhaps at Paris, and widely read in theology, became a hermit in order
to live in perfection that mystic life of “Heat, Sweetness, and Song,”
to which he felt himself to be called. Richard of St. Victor, St.
Bernard, and St. Bonaventura are the authors who have influenced him
most; but he remains, in spite of this, one of the most individual of
all writers on mysticism. A voluminous author, his chief works are still
in MS., and he seems to have combined the careers of writer and
wandering preacher with that of recluse. He laid claim to direct
inspiration, was outspoken in his criticisms of religious and secular
life, and in the next generation the Lollards were found to appeal to
his authority. Rolle already shows the practical temper characteristic
of the English school. His interest was not philosophy, but spiritual
life; and especially his own experience of it. There is a touch of
Franciscan poetry in his descriptions of his communion with Divine Love,
and the “heavenly song” in which it was expressed, of Franciscan ardour
in his zeal for souls. His works greatly influenced succeeding English
mystics.

<span id="an_v-p33"></span>He was followed in the second half of the
fourteenth century by the unknown author of **“The Cloud of Unknowing”**
and its companion treatises, and by the gracious spirit of **Walter
Hilton** *(ob.* 1396). With “The Cloud of Unknowing,” the spirit of
Dionysius first appears in English literature. It is the work of an
advanced contemplative, deeply influenced by the Areopagite and the
Victorines, who was also an acute psychologist. From the hand that wrote
it came the first English translation of the “Theologia Mystica,”
“Dionise Hid Divinite”: a work which says an old writer, “ran across
England at deere rates,” so ready was the religious consciousness of the
time for the reception of mystical truth.

<span id="an_v-p34"></span>Hilton, though also influenced by Dionysius
and Richard of St. Victor, addresses a wider audience. He is
pre-eminently a spiritual director, the practical teacher of interior
ways, not a metaphysician; and his great work “The Scale of Perfection”
quickly took rank among the <span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_467"></span> classics of the spiritual life. The moment of
his death coincides with the completion of the most beautiful of all
English mystical works, the “Revelations of Love” of the anchoress
**Julian of Norwich** (1343–died after 1413), <span
id="an_v-p34.1"></span>“theodidacta, profunda, ecstatica,” whose unique
personality closes and crowns the history of English mediaeval
mysticism. In her the best gifts of Rolle and Hilton are transmuted by a
“genius for the infinite” of a peculiarly beautiful and individual type.
She was a seer, a lover, and a poet. Though considerable theological
knowledge underlies her teaching, it is in essence the result of a
direct and personal vision of singular intensity.

<span id="an_v-p35"></span>Already before the completion of Julian’s
revelations two other women of genius, the royal prophetess and founder
**St. Bridget of Sweden** (1303-1373) and **St. Catherine of Siena**
(1347-1380), had lived and died. St. Bridget, or Birgitta, a mystic and
visionary of the Hildegardian type, believed herself called to end the
exile of the Papacy and bring peace to the Church. Four months after her
death, St. Catherine—then aged 26—took up her unfinished work. The true
successor of Dante as a revealer of Reality, and next to St. Francis the
greatest of Italian mystics, Catherine exhibits the Unitive Life in its
richest, most perfect form. She was a great active and a great ecstatic:
at once politician, teacher, and contemplative, holding a steady balance
between the inner and the outer life. Well named “the mother of
thousands of souls,” with little education she yet contrived, in a short
career dogged by persistent ill-health, to change the course of history,
rejuvenate religion, and compose, in her “Divine Dialogue,” one of the
jewels of Italian religious literature.

<span id="an_v-p36"></span>With the first half of the fifteenth century
it is plain that the mystic curve droops downwards. At its opening we
find the influential figure of the Chancellor **Gerson** (1363-1429) at
once a mystic in his own right and a keen and impartial critic of
extravagant mystical teachings and phenomena. But the great period is
over: the new life of the Renaissance, already striving in other spheres
of activity, has hardly touched the spiritual plane. A transient revival
of Franciscan spirituality is associated with the work of three
reforming mystics; the energetic French visionary **St. Colette of
Corbie** (1381-1447), her Italian disciple **St. Bernardino of Siena**
(1380-1444), and the ecstatic Clarisse, **St. Catherine of Bologna**
(1413-1463). Contemporary with this group are the careers of two
strongly contrasted woman-mystics: **St. Joan of Arc** (1412-1431), and
the suffering Flemish visionary **St. Lydwine of Schiedam** (1380-1432).

<span id="an_v-p37"></span>With the second half of the century the scene
shifts to Italy, where a spiritual genius of the first rank appeared in
**St. Catherine of Genoa** (1447-1510). She, like her namesake of Siena,
was at once an eager lover and an indomitable doer. More, she was a
constructive mystic, a profound thinker as well as an ecstatic: an
original teacher, a busy and practical philanthropist. Her influence
lived on, and is seen in the next generation in the fine, well-balanced
nature of another contemplative: the **Venerable Battista Vernazza**
(1497-1587), her goddaughter and the child of one of her most loyal
friends. Catherine of Genoa <span id="page_468">p. 468</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_468"></span> stands alone in her day as an example of the
sane and vigorous mystic life. Her contemporaries were for the most part
visionaries of the more ordinary female type, such as **Osanna Andreasi
of Mantua** (1449-1505), **Columba Rieti** (c. 1430-1501) and her
disciple **Lucia of Narni** . They seem to represent the slow extinction
of the spirit which burned so bright in St. Catherine of Siena.

<span id="an_v-p38"></span>That spirit reappears in the sixteenth
century in Flanders in the works of the Benedictine Abbot **Blosius**
(1506-1565); and, far more conspicuously, in Spain, a country hardly
touched by the outburst of mystical life which elsewhere closed the
medieval period. Spanish mysticism first appears in close connection
with the religious orders: in the Franciscans **Francisco de Osuna**
*(ob. c.* 1540), whose manual of contemplative prayer influenced the
development of St. Teresa, and **St. Peter of Alcantara** (1499-1562),
her friend and adviser; in the Dominican **Luis de Granada** (1504-1588)
and the Augustinian **Luis de Leon** (1528-1591). It attains definite
and characteristic expression in the life and personality of **St.
Ignatius Loyola** (1491-1556), the great founder of the Society of
Jesus. The concrete nature of St. Ignatius’ work, and especially its
later developments, has blinded historians to the fact that he was a
true mystic, own brother to such great actives as St. Teresa and George
Fox, actuated by the same vision of reality, passing through the same
stages of psychological growth. His spiritual sons greatly influenced
the inner life of the great Carmelite, **St. Teresa** (1515-1582).

<span id="an_v-p39"></span>Like St. Catherine of Siena, these
mystics—and to them we must add St. Teresa’s greatest disciple, the poet
and contemplative **St. John of the Cross** (1542-1591)—seem to have
arisen in direct response to the need created by the corrupt or
disordered religious life of their time. They were the “saints of the
counter-Reformation”; and, in a period of ecclesiastical chaos, flung
the weight of their genius and their sanctity into the orthodox Catholic
scale. Whilst St. Ignatius organized a body of spiritual soldiery, who
should attack heresy and defend the Church, St. Teresa, working against
heavy odds, infused new vitality into a great religious order and
restored it to its duty of direct communion with the transcendental
world. In this she was helped by St. John of the Cross; who, a
psychologist and philosopher as well as a great mystic, performed the
necessary function of bringing the personal experience of the Spanish
school back again into touch with the main stream of mystic tradition.
All three, practical organizers and profound contemplatives, exhibit in
its splendour the dual character of the mystic life. They left behind
them in their literary works an abiding influence which has guided the
footsteps and explained the discoveries of succeeding generations of
adventurers in the transcendental world. The true spiritual children of
these mystics are to be found, not in their own country, where the
religious life which they had lifted to transcendent levels degenerated
when their overmastering influence was withdrawn, but amongst the
innumerable contemplative souls of succeeding generations who have
fallen under the spell of the “Spiritual Exercises,” the “Interior
Castle,” or the “Dark Night of the Soul.” <span id="page_469">p.
469</span> <span id="an_v-Page_469"></span>

<span id="an_v-p40"></span>The Divine fire lit by the great Carmelites
of Spain is next seen in Italy, in the lives of the Dominican nun **St.
Catherine dei Ricci** (1522-1590) and the Florentine Carmelite **St.
Maria Maddelena dei Pazzi** (1566-1607), the author of voluminous
literary works. It appears in the New World in the beautiful figure of
**St. Rose of Lima** (1586-1617), the Peruvian nun; and at the same
moment, under a very different aspect, in Protestant Germany, in the
person of one of the giants of mysticism, the “inspired shoemaker”
**Jacob Boehme** (1575-1624).

<span id="an_v-p41"></span>Boehme, one of the most astonishing cases in
history of a natural genius for the transcendent, has left his mark upon
German philosophy as well as upon the history of mysticism. William Law,
Blake, and Saint-Martin are amongst those who have sat at his feet. The
great sweep of Boehme’s vision includes both Man and the Universe: the
nature of God and of the Soul. In him we find again that old doctrine of
Rebirth which the earlier German mystics had loved. Were it not for the
difficult symbolism in which his vision is expressed, his influence
would be far greater than it is. He remains one of those cloud-wrapped
immortals who must be rediscovered and reinterpreted by the adventurers
of every age.

<span id="an_v-p42"></span>The seventeenth century rivals the fourteenth
in the richness and variety of its mystical life. Two main currents are
to be detected in it: dividing between them the two main aspects of
man’s communion with the Absolute. One, symbolic, constructive,
activistic, bound up with the ideas of regeneration, and often using the
language of the alchemists sets out from the Teutonic genius of Boehme.
It achieves its successes outside the Catholic Church, and chiefly in
Germany and England, where by 1650 his works were widely known. In its
decadent forms it runs to the occult: to alchemy, Rosicrucianism,
apocalyptic prophecy, and other aberrations of the spiritual sense. The
other current arises within the Catholic Church, and in close touch with
the great tradition of Christian mysticism. It achieves fullest
expansion in France, and tends to emphasize the personal and intimate
side of contemplation: encouraging passive receptivity and producing in
its exaggerated forms the aberrations of the Quietists.

<span id="an_v-p43"></span>In the seventeenth century England was
peculiarly rich, if not in great mystics, at any rate in mystically
minded men, seekers after Reality. Mysticism, it seems, was in the air;
broke out under many disguises and affected many forms of life. It
produced in **George Fox** (1624-1690), the founder of the Quakers, a
“great active” of the first rank, entirely unaffected by tradition, and
in the Quaker movement itself an outbreak of genuine mysticism which is
only comparable to the fourteenth-century movement of the Friends of
God.

<span id="an_v-p44"></span>We meet in Fox that overwhelming sense of
direct relationship with God, that consciousness of the transcendent
characteristic of the mystic; and Quaker spirituality, in spite of its
marked aversion to institutional religion, has much in common not only
with those Continental Quietists who are its most obvious spiritual
affinities, but also with the doctrine of the Catholic contemplatives.
Mysticism crops up frequently in the writings of the school; and finds
expression in the first generation in <span id="page_470">p. 470</span>
<span id="an_v-Page_470"></span> the works of **Isaac Penington**
(1616-1679) and in the second in the Journal of the heroic American
Friend **John Woolman** (1720-1772).

<span id="an_v-p45"></span>At the opposite end of the theological scale,
the seventeenth century gives us a group ofEnglish mystics ofthe
Catholic type, closely related to the contemporary French school. Of
these, one of the most individual is the young Benedictine nun
**Gertrude More** (1606-1633), who carries on that tradition of the
communion oflove which flows from St. Augustine through St. Bernard and
Thomas à Kempis, and is the very heart of Catholic mysticism. In the
writings of her director, and the preserver of her works, the
**Venerable Augustine Baker** (1575-1641)—one of the most lucid and
orderly of guides to the contemplative life—we see what were still the
formative influences in the environment where her mystical powers were
trained. Richard of St. Victor, Hilton, and “The Cloud of Unknowing”;
Angela of Foligno; Tauler, Suso, Ruysbroeck; St. Teresa and St. John of
the Cross; these are the authorities to whom Augustine Baker most
constantly appeals, and through these, as we know, the family tree of
the mystics goes back to the Neoplatonists and the first founders of the
Church.

<span id="an_v-p46"></span>Outside that Church, the twins **Thomas
Vaughan** the spiritual alchemist and **Henry Vaughan** , Silurist, the
mystical poet (1622-1695) show the reaction of two very different
temperaments upon the transcendental life. Again, the group of
“Cambridge Platonists,” **Henry More** (1614-1687), **John Smith**
(1618-1652), **Benjamin Whichcote** (1609-1683), **Peter Sterry** (c.
1614-1672), and **John Norris** (1657-1711) developed and preached a
philosophy deeply tinged with mysticism; and **Thomas Traherne** (c.
1637-1674) gave poetic expression to the Platonic vision of life. In
**Bishop Hall** (1574-1656) the same spirit takes a devotional form.
Finally, the Rosicrucians, symbolists, and other spiritually minded
occultists—above all the extraordinary sect of Philadelphians, ruled by
**Dr. Pordage** (1608-1698) and the prophetess **Jane Lead**
(1623-1704)—exhibit mysticism in its least balanced aspect mingled with
mediumistic phenomena, wild symbolic visions, and apocalyptic
prophecies. The influence of these Philadelphians, who were themselves
strongly affected by Boehme’s works, lingered for a century, appearing
again in Saint-Martin the “Unknown Philosopher.”

<span id="an_v-p47"></span>The Catholic mysticism of this period is best
seen in France, where the intellectual and social expansion of the
Grande Siècle had also its spiritual side. Over against the brilliant
worldly life of seventeenth-century Paris and the slackness and even
corruption of much organized religion there sprang up something like a
cult of the inner life. This mystical renaissance seems to have
originated in the work of an English Capuchin friar, William Fitch, in
religion **Benedict Canfield** (1520-1611), who settled in Paris in old
age and there became a centre of spiritual influence. Among his pupils
were **Madame Acarie** (1566-1618) and **Pierre de Bérulle**
(1575-1629), and through them his teaching on contemplation affected all
the great religious personalities of the period. The house of Madame
Acarie—a woman equally remarkable for spiritual genius and practical
ability—became the gathering-point of a growing mystical enthusiasm,
which also expressed itself in a vigorous <span id="page_471">p.
471</span> <span id="an_v-Page_471"></span> movement of reform within
the Church. Bérulle was one of the founders of the Oratory. Madame
Acarie, known as the “conscience of Paris,” visited the relaxed convents
and persuaded them to a more strict and holy life. Largely by her
instrumentality, the first houses of reformed Carmelites were
established in France in 1604, nuns being brought to direct them from
St. Teresa’s Spanish convents, and French mysticism owes much to this
direct contact with the Teresian school. Madame Acarie and her three
daughters all became Carmelite nuns; and it was from the Dijon
Carmelites that **St. Jeanne Françoise de Chantal** (1572-1641) received
her training in contemplation. Her spiritual father, and co-founder of
the Order of the Visitation, **St. François de Sales** (1567-1622), had
also been in youth a member of Madame Acarie’s circle. He shows at its
best the peculiar talent of the French school for the detailed and
individual direction of souls. Outside this cultured and aristocratic
group two great and pure mystics arise from humbler social levels. First
the intrepid Ursuline nun **Marie de l’Incarnation** (1599-1672), the
pioneer of education in the New World, in whom we find again St.
Teresa’s twin gifts for high contemplation and practical initiative.
Secondly the Carmelite friar **Brother Lawrence** (1611-1691), who shows
the passive tendency of French mysticism in its most sane, well-balanced
form. He was a humble empiricist, laying claim to no special gifts: a
striking contrast to his contemporary, the brilliant and unhappy genius
**Pascal** (1623-1662), who fought his way through many psychic storms
to the vision of the Absolute.

<span id="an_v-p48"></span>The genuine French and Flemish mysticism of
this period, greatly preoccupied with the doctrines of self-naughting
and passivity, constantly approached the frontiers of Quietism. The
three great Capuchin teachers of contemplation, the Flemings
**Constantine Barbançon** (1581-1632) and **John Evangelist of Barluke**
(1588-1635), and the English Benedict Canfield, were not entirely beyond
suspicion in this regard; as their careful language, and the scrutiny to
which they were subjected by contemporary authority, clearly shows. The
line between the true and false doctrine was a fine one, as we see in
the historic controversy between Bossuet and Fenelon; and the perilous
absurdities of the Quietist writers often tempted the orthodox to draw
it in the wrong place.

<span id="an_v-p49"></span>The earliest in date and most exaggerated in
type of these true Quietists is the Franco-Flemish **Antoinette
Bourignan** (1616-1680): a strong-willed and wrong-headed woman who,
having renounced the world with Franciscan thoroughness, founded a sect,
endured considerable persecutions, and made a great stir in the
religious life of her time. An even greater uproar resulted from the
doctrinal excesses of the devout Spanish priest **Miguel de Molinos**
(1640-1697); whose extreme teachings were condemned by the Church, and
for a time brought the whole principle of passive contemplation into
disrepute. Quietism, at bottom, was the unbalanced expression of that
need which produced the contemporary Quaker movement in England: a need
for personal contact with spiritual realities, evoked by the formal and
unsatisfying quality of the official religion of the time. Unfortunately
the great <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_472"></span> Quietists were not great mystics. Hence their
propaganda, in which the principle of passivity—divorced from, and
opposed to, all spiritual action—was pressed to its logical conclusion,
resulted in a doctrine fatal not only to all organized religion but to
the healthy development of the inner life.

<span id="an_v-p50"></span> **Madame Guyon** (1648-1717), the
contemporary of Molinos, is usually quoted as a typical Quietist. She is
an example of the unfortunate results of an alliance of mystical
tendencies with a feeble surface intelligence. Had she possessed the
robust common sense so often found in the great contemplatives, her
temperamental inclination to passivity would have been checked, and she
would hardly have made use of the exaggerated expressions which brought
about the official condemnation of her works. In spite of the brilliant
championship of Fenelon, and the fact that much of her writing merely
reproduces orthodox teaching on contemplative prayer in an inferior
form, she was involved in the general condemnation of “passive orison”
which the aberrations of the extreme Quietists had called forth.

<span id="an_v-p51"></span>The end of the seventeenth century saw a
great outburst of popular Quietism, some within and some without the
official Church. Well within the frontiers of orthodoxy, and exhibiting
the doctrine of passivity in its noblest form, was the Jesuit **J. P. de
Caussade** (still living 1739). Among those who over-stepped the
boundary—though all the Quietists appealed to the general tradition of
mysticism in support of their one-sided doctrine—were **Malaval** ,
whose “Théologie Mystique” contains some beautiful French translations
from St. Teresa, and **Peter Poiret** (1646-1719), once a Protestant
pastor, then the devoted disciple of Antoinette Bourignan. Later
generations owe much to the enthusiasm and industry of Poiret, whose
belief in spiritual quiescence was combined with great literary
activity. He rescued and edited all Madame Guyon’s writings; and has
left us, in his “Bibliotheca Mysticorum,” the memorial of many lost
works on mysticism. From this unique bibliography we can see how
“orthodox” was the food which nourished even the most extreme of the
Quietists: how thoroughly they believed themselves to represent not a
new doctrine, but the true tradition of Christian mysticism.

<span id="an_v-p52"></span>With the close of the seventeenth century,
the Quietist movement faded away. The beginning of the eighteenth sees
the triumph of that other stream of spiritual vitality which arose
outside the Catholic Church and flowed from the great personality of
Jacob Boehme. If the idea of surrender be the mainspring of Quietism,
the complementary idea of rebirth is the mainspring of this school. In
Germany, Boehme’s works had been collected and published by an obscure
mystic, **John Gichtel** (1638-1710); whose life and letters constantly
betray his influence. In England, where that influence had been a living
force from the middle of the seventeenth century, when Boehme’s writings
first became known, the Anglo-German **Dionysius Andreas Freher** was
writing between 1699 and 1720. In the early years of the eighteenth
century, Freher was followed by **William Law** (1686-1761), the
Nonjuror: a brilliant stylist, and one of the most profound of English
religious writers. <span id="page_473">p. 473</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_473"></span> Law, who was converted by the reading of
Boehme’s works from the narrow Christianity to which he gave classic
expression in the “Serious Call” to a wide and philosophic mysticism,
gave, in a series of writings which burn with mystic passion, a new
interpretation and an abiding place in English literature to the
“inspired shoemaker’s” mighty vision of Man and the Universe.

<span id="an_v-p53"></span>The latter part of a century which clearly
represents the steep downward trend of the mystic curve gives us three
strange personalities; all of whom have passed through Boehme’s school,
and have placed themselves in opposition to the ecclesiasticism of their
day. In Germany, **Eckartshausen** (1752-1803), in “The Cloud upon the
Sanctuary” and other works, continued upon individual lines that
tradition of esoteric and mystical Christianity, and of rebirth as the
price of man’s entrance into Reality, which found its best and sanest
interpreter in William Law. In France the troubled spirit of the
transcendentalist **Saint-Martin** (1743-1803), the “Unknown
Philosopher,” was deeply affected in his passage from a merely occult to
a mystical philosophy by the reading of Boehme and Eckartshausen, and
also by the works of the English “Philadelphians,” Dr. Pordage and Jane
Lead, who had long sunk to oblivion in their native land. In England,
**William Blake** , poet, painter, visionary, and prophet (1757-1827),
shines like a solitary star in the uncongenial atmosphere of the
Georgian age.

<span id="an_v-p54"></span>The career of Blake provides us with a rare
instance of mystical genius, forcing not only rhythm and words, but also
colour and form to express its vision of truth. So individual in his
case was this vision, so strange the elements from which his symbolic
reconstructions were built up, that he failed in the attempt to convey
it to other men. Neither in his prophetic books nor in his beautiful
mystical paintings does he contrive to transmit more than great and
stimulating suggestions of “things seen” in some higher and more valid
state of consciousness. Whilst his visionary symbolism derives to a
large extent from Swedenborg, whose works were the great influence of
his youth, Blake has learned much from Boehme, and probably from his
English interpreters. Almost alone amongst English Protestant mystics,
he has also received and assimilated the Catholic tradition of the
personal and inward communion of love. In his great vision of
“Jerusalem,” St. Teresa and Madame Guyon are amongst the “gentle souls”
whom he sees guarding that Four-fold Gate which opens towards Beulah—the
gate of the contemplative life—and guiding the great “Wine-press of
Love” whence mankind, at the hands of its mystics, has received, in
every age, the Wine of Life.

<span id="an_v-p55"></span><span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span
id="an_v-Page_475"></span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](myst24.md)

</div>
