<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst21)  [Next](myst23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Conclusion

<span id="an_iv.xi"></span>

<span id="an_iv.xi-p1"></span>Far from being academic or unreal, that
history, I think, is vital for the deeper understanding of the history
of humanity. It shows us, upon high levels, the psychological process to
which every self which desires to rise to the perception of Reality must
submit: the formula under which man’s spiritual consciousness, be it
strong or weak, must necessarily unfold. In the great mystics we see the
highest and widest development of that consciousness <span
id="page_445">p. 445</span> <span id="an_iv.xi-Page_445"></span> to
which the human race has yet attained. We see its growth exhibited to us
on a grand scale, perceptible of all men: the stages of its slow
transcendence of the sense-world marked by episodes of splendour and of
terror which are hard for common men to accept or understand as a part
of the organic process of life. But the germ of that same transcendent
life, the spring of the amazing energy which enables the great mystic to
rise to freedom and dominate his world, is latent in all of us, an
integral part of our humanity. Where the mystic has a genius for the
Absolute, we have each a little buried talent, some greater, some less;
and the growth of this talent, this spark of the soul, once we permit
its emergence, will conform in little, and according to its measure, to
those laws of organic growth those inexorable conditions of
transcendence which we found to govern the Mystic Way.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p2"></span>Every person, then, who awakens to
consciousness of a Reality which transcends the normal world of
sense—however small, weak imperfect that consciousness may be—is put
upon a road which follows at low levels the path which the mystic treads
at high levels. The success with which he follows this way to freedom
and full life will depend on the intensity of his love and will, his
capacity for self-discipline, his steadfastness and courage. It will
depend on the generosity and completeness of his outgoing passion for
absolute beauty, absolute goodness, or absolute truth. But if he move at
all, he will move through a series of states which are, in their own
small way, analogous to those experienced by the greatest contemplative
on his journey towards that union with God which is the term of the
spirit’s ascent towards its home.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p3"></span>As the embryo of physical man, be he saint
or savage, passes through the same stages of initial growth, so too with
spiritual man. When the “new birth” takes place in him, the new
life-process of his deeper self begins, the normal individual, no less
than the mystic, will know that spiral ascent towards higher levels,
those oscillations of consciousness between light and darkness, those
odd mental disturbances, abrupt invasions from the subliminal region,
and disconcerting glimpses of truth, which accompany the growth of the
transcendental powers; though he may well interpret them in other than
the mystic sense. He too will be impelled to drastic self-discipline, to
a deliberate purging of his eyes that he may see: and receiving a new
vision of the world, will be spurred by it to a total self-dedication,
an active surrender of his whole being, to that aspect of the Infinite
which he has perceived. He too will endure in little the psychic
upheavals of the spiritual adolescence: will be forced to those
sacrifices which every form of <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="an_iv.xi-Page_446"></span> genius demands. He will know according to
his measure the dreadful moments of lucid self-knowledge, the
counter-balancing ecstasy of an intuition of the Real. More and more, as
we study and collate all the available evidence, this fact—this law—is
borne in on us: that the general movement of human consciousness, when
it obeys its innate tendency to transcendence, is always the same. There
is only one road from Appearance to Reality. “Men pass on, but the
States are permanent for ever.”

<span id="an_iv.xi-p4"></span>I do not care whether the consciousness be
that of artist or musician, striving to catch and fix some aspect of the
heavenly light or music, and denying all other aspects of the world in
order to devote themselves to this: or of the humble servant of Science,
purging his intellect that he may look upon her secrets with innocence
of eye: whether the higher reality be perceived in the terms of
religion, beauty, suffering; of human love, of goodness, or of truth.
However widely these forms of transcendence may seem to differ, the
mystic experience is the key to them all. All in their different ways
are exhibitions here and now of the Eternal; extensions of man’s
consciousness which involve calls to heroic endeavour, incentives to the
remaking of character about new and higher centres of life. Through
each, man may rise to freedom and take his place in the great movement
of the universe: may “understand by dancing that which is done.” Each
brings the self who receives its revelation in good faith, does not
check it by self-regarding limitations, to a humble acceptance of the
universal law of knowledge: the law that “we behold that which we are,”
and hence that “only the Real can know Reality.” Awakening, Discipline,
Enlightenment, Self-surrender, and Union, are the essential phases of
life’s response to this fundamental fact: the conditions of our
attainment of Being, the necessary formula under which alone our
consciousness of any of these fringes of Eternity—any of these aspects
of the Transcendent—can unfold, develop, attain to freedom and full
life.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p5"></span>We are, then, one and all the kindred of
the mystics; and it is by dwelling upon this kinship, by interpreting—so
far as we may—their great declarations in the light of our little
experience, that we shall learn to understand them best. Strange and far
away though they seem, they are not cut off from us by some impassable
abyss. They belong to us. They are our brethren; the giants, the heroes
of our race. As the achievement of genius belongs not to itself only,
but also to the society that brought it forth; as theology declares that
the merits of the saints avail for all; so, because of the solidarity of
the human family, the supernal accomplishment of the mystics is ours
also. Their attainment is the earnest-money of our eternal life. <span
id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span id="an_iv.xi-Page_447"></span>

<span id="an_iv.xi-p6"></span>To be a mystic is simply to participate
here and now in that real and eternal life; in the fullest, deepest
sense which is possible to man. It is to share, as a free and conscious
agent—not a servant, but a son—in the joyous travail of the Universe:
its mighty onward sweep through pain and glory towards its home in God.
This gift of “sonship,” this power of free co-operation in the
world-process, is man’s greatest honour. The ordered sequence of states,
the organic development, whereby his consciousness is detached from
illusion and rises to the mystic freedom which conditions instead of
being conditioned by, its normal world, is the way he must tread if that
sonship is to be realized. Only by this deliberate fostering of his
deeper self, this transmutation of the elements of his character, can he
reach those levels of consciousness upon which he hears, and responds
to, the measure “whereto the worlds keep time” on their great pilgrimage
towards the Father’s heart. The mystic act of union, that joyous loss of
the transfigured self in God, which is the crown of man’s conscious
ascent towards the Absolute, is the contribution of the individual to
this, the destiny of the Cosmos.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p7"></span>The mystic knows that destiny. It is laid
bare to his lucid vision, as our puzzling world of form and colour is to
normal sight. He is the “hidden child” of the eternal order, an initiate
of the secret plan. Hence, whilst “all creation groaneth and
travaileth,” slowly moving under the spur of blind desire towards that
consummation in which alone it can have rest, he runs eagerly along the
pathway to reality. He is the pioneer of Life on its age-long voyage to
the One: and shows us, in his attainment, the meaning and value of that
life.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p8"></span>This meaning, this secret plan of
Creation, flames out, had we eyes to see, from every department of
existence. Its exultant declarations come to us in all great music; its
magic is the life of all romance. Its law—the law of love—is the
substance of the beautiful, the energizing cause of the heroic. It
lights the altar of every creed. All man’s dreams and diagrams
concerning a transcendent Perfection near him yet intangible, a
transcendent vitality to which he can attain—whether he call these
objects of desire God, grace, being, spirit, beauty, “pure idea”—are but
translations of his deeper self’s intuition of its destiny; clumsy
fragmentary hints at the all-inclusive, living Absolute which that
deeper self knows to be real. This supernal Thing, the adorable
Substance of all that Is—the synthesis of Wisdom, Power, and Love—and
man’s apprehension of it, his slow remaking in its interests, his union
with it at last; this is the theme of mysticism. That twofold extension
of consciousness which allows him communion with its transcendent and
immanent aspects is, in all its gradual <span id="page_448">p.
448</span> <span id="an_iv.xi-Page_448"></span> processes, the Mystic
Way. It is also the crown of human evolution; the fulfilment of life,
the liberation of personality from the world of appearance, its entrance
into the free creative life of the Real.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p9"></span>Further, Christians may well remark that
the psychology of Christ, as presented to us in the Gospels, is of a
piece with that of the mystics. In its pain and splendour, its dual
character of action and fruition, it reflects their experience upon the
supernal plane of more abundant life. Thanks to this fact, for them the
Ladder of Contemplation—that ladder which mediaeval thought counted as
an instrument of the Passion, discerning it as essential to the true
salvation of man—stretches without a break from earth to the Empyrean.
It leans against the Cross; it leads to the Secret Rose. By it the
ministers of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty go up and down between the
transcendent and the apparent world. Seen, then, from whatever
standpoint we may choose to adopt—whether of psychology, philosophy, or
religion—the adventure of the great mystics intimately concerns us. It
is a master-key to man’s puzzle: by its help he may explain much in his
mental makeup, in his religious constructions, in his experience of
life. In all these departments he perceives himself to be climbing
slowly and clumsily upward toward some attainment yet unseen. The
mystics, expert mountaineers, go before him: and show him, if he cares
to learn, the way to freedom, to reality, to peace. He cannot rise in
this, his earthly existence, to the awful and solitary peak, veiled in
the Cloud of Unknowing, where they meet that “death of the summit,”
which is declared by them to be the gate of Perfect Life: but if he
choose to profit by their explorations, he may find his level, his place
within the Eternal Order. He may achieve freedom, live the “independent
spiritual life.”

<span id="an_iv.xi-p10"></span>Consider once more the Mystic Way as we
have traced it from its beginning. To what does it tend if not to this?

<span id="an_iv.xi-p11"></span>It began by the awakening within the self
of a new and embryonic consciousness: a consciousness of divine reality,
as opposed to the illusory sense-world in which she was immersed.
Humbled, awed by the august possibilities then revealed to her, that
self retreated into the “cell of self-knowledge” and there laboured to
adjust herself to the Eternal Order which she had perceived, stripped
herself of all that opposed it, disciplined her energies, purified the
organs of sense. Remade in accordance with her intuitions of reality,
the “eternal hearing and seeing were revealed in her.” She opened her
eyes upon a world still natural, but no longer illusory; since it was
perceived to be illuminated by the Uncreated Light. She knew then the
beauty, the majesty, the divinity of the living World of Becoming which
holds in its meshes <span id="page_449">p. 449</span> <span
id="an_iv.xi-Page_449"></span> every living thing. She had transcended
the narrow rhythm by which common men perceive but one of its many
aspects, escaped the machine-made universe presented by the
cinematograph of sense, and participated in the “great life of the All.”
Reality came forth to her, since her eyes were cleansed to see It, not
from some strange far-off and spiritual country, but gently, from the
very heart of things. Thus lifted to a new level, she began again her
ceaseless work of growth: and because by the cleansing of the senses she
had learned to see the reality which is shadowed by the sense-world, she
now, by the cleansing of her will, sought to draw nearer to that Eternal
Will, that Being, which life, the World of Becoming, manifests and
serves. Thus, by the surrender of her selfhood in its wholeness, the
perfecting of her love, she slid from Becoming to Being, and found her
true life hidden in God.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p12"></span>Yet the course of this transcendence,
this amazing inward journey, was closely linked, first and last, with
the processes of human life. It sprang from that life, as man springs
from the sod. We were even able to describe it under those symbolic
formulae which we are accustomed to call the “laws” of the natural
world. By an extension of these formulae, their logical application, we
discovered a path which led us without a break from the sensible to the
supra-sensible; from apparent to absolute life. There is nothing
unnatural about the Absolute of the mystics: He sets the rhythm of His
own universe, and conforms to the harmonies which He has made. We,
deliberately seeking for that which we suppose to be spiritual, too
often overlook that which alone is Real. The true mysteries of life
accomplish themselves so softly, with so easy and assured a grace, so
frank an acceptance of our breeding, striving, dying, and unresting
world, that the unimaginative natural man—all agog for the marvellous—is
hardly startled by their daily and radiant revelation of infinite wisdom
and love. Yet this revelation presses incessantly upon us. Only the hard
crust of surface-consciousness conceals it from our normal sight. In
some least expected moment, the common activities of life in progress,
that Reality in Whom the mystics dwell slips through our closed doors,
and suddenly we see It at our side.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p13"></span>It was said of the disciples at Emmaus,
<span id="an_iv.xi-p13.1"></span>“Mensam igitur ponunt panes cibosque
offerunt, et Deum, quem in Scripturae sacrae expositione non
cognoverant, in panis fractione cognoscunt.” So too for us the
Transcendent Life for which we crave is revealed and our living within
it, not on some remote and arid plane of being, in the cunning
explanations of philosophy; but in the normal acts of our diurnal
experience, suddenly made significant for us. Not in the backwaters of
existence, not amongst subtle arguments and occult doctrines, but in all
those places where the direct <span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="an_iv.xi-Page_450"></span> and simple life of earth goes on. It is
found in the soul of man so long as that soul is alive and growing: it
is not found in any sterile place.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p14"></span>This fact of experience is our link with
the mystics, our guarantee of the truthfulness of their statements, the
supreme importance of their adventure, their closer contact with
Reality. The mystics on their part are our guarantee of the end towards
which the Immanent Love, the hidden steersman which dwells in our midst,
is moving: our “lovely forerunners” on the path towards the Real. They
come back to us from an encounter with life’s most august secret, as
Mary came running from the tomb; filled with amazing tidings which they
can hardly tell. We, longing for some assurance, and seeing their
radiant faces, urge them to pass on their revelation if they can. It is
the old demand of the dim-sighted and incredulous:—

> <span id="an_iv.xi-p14.1"></span> “Dic nobis Maria  
> Quid vidisti in via?”  

<span id="an_iv.xi-p15"></span>But they cannot say: can only report
fragments of the symbolic vision:—

> <span id="an_iv.xi-p15.1"></span> <span
> id="an_iv.xi-p15.3"></span>“Angelicos testes, sudarium, et vestes”—  

<span id="an_iv.xi-p16"></span>not the inner content, the final divine
certainty. We must ourselves follow in their footsteps if we would have
that.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p17"></span>Like the story of the Cross, so too the
story of man’s spirit ends in a garden: in a place of birth and
fruitfulness, of beautiful and natural things. Divine Fecundity is its
secret: existence, not for its own sake, but for the sake of a more
abundant life. It ends with the coming forth of divine humanity, never
again to leave us: living in us, and with us, a pilgrim, a worker, a
guest at our table, a sharer at all hazards in life. The mystics witness
to this story: waking very early they have run on before us, urged by
the greatness of their love. We, incapable as yet of this sublime
encounter, looking in their magic mirror, listening to their stammered
tidings, may see far off the consummation of the race.

<span id="an_iv.xi-p18"></span>According to the measure of their
strength and of their passion, these, the true lovers of the Absolute,
have conformed here and now to the utmost tests of divine sonship, the
final demands of life. They have not shrunk from the sufferings of the
cross. They have faced the darkness of the tomb. Beauty and agony alike
have called them: alike have awakened a heroic response. For them the
winter is over: the time of the singing of birds is come. From the deeps
<span id="page_451">p. 451</span> <span id="an_iv.xi-Page_451"></span>
of the dewy garden, Life—new, unquenchable, and ever lovely—comes to
meet them with the dawn.

> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.1"></span> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.3"></span>Et
> hoc intellegere, quis bominum dabit bomini?  
> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.5"></span>Quis angelus angelo?  
> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.7"></span>Quis angelus bomini?  
> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.9"></span>El te petatur,  
> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.11"></span>In te quaeratur,  
> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.13"></span>Eld te pulsetur,  
> <span id="an_iv.xi-p18.15"></span>Sic, sic accipietur invenietur, sic
> aperietur.  

<span id="an_iv.xi-p19"></span><span id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span
id="an_iv.xi-Page_453"></span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix: Historical Sketch of Mysticism](myst23.md)

</div>
