<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst15)  [Next](myst17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. Voices and Visions

<span id="an_iv.v"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p1"></span>We<span id="an_iv.v-p1.1"></span> now come
to that eternal battle-ground, the detailed discussion of those abnormal
psychic phenomena which appear so persistently in the history of the
mystics. That is to say, visions, auditions, automatic script, and those
dramatic dialogues between the Self and some other factor—the Soul,
Love, Reason, of the Voice of God—which seem sometimes to arise from an
exalted and uncontrolled imaginative power, sometimes to attain the
proportions of auditory hallucination.

<span id="an_iv.v-p2"></span>Here, moderate persons are like to be hewn
in pieces between the two “great powers” who have long disputed this
territory. On the one hand we have the strangely named rationalists, who
feel that they have settled the matter once for all by calling attention
to the obvious parallels which exist between the bodily symptoms of
acute spiritual stress and the bodily symptoms of certain forms of
disease. These considerations, reinforced by those comfortable words
“auto-suggestion” “psychosensorial hallucination” and “association
neurosis”—which do but reintroduce mystery in another and less
attractive form—enable them to pity rather than blame the peculiarities
of the great contemplatives. French psychology, in particular, revels in
this sort of thing: and <span id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_267"></span> would, if it had its way, fill the wards
of the Salpêtriére with patients from the Roman Calendar. The modern
interpreter, says Rufus Jones, finds in the stigmata of St. Francis of
Assisi a point of weakness rather than a point of strength: not “the
marks of a saint,” but “the marks of emotional and physical
abnormality.”  <span id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557.md) This is a very
moderate statement of the “rational” position, by a writer who is in
actual sympathy with certain aspects of mysticism. Yet it may well be
doubted whether that flame of living love which could, for one dazzling
instant, weld body and soul in one, was really a point of weakness in a
saint: whether Blake was quite as mad as some of his interpreters, or
the powers of St. Paul and St. Teresa are fully explained on a basis of
epilepsy or hysteria: whether, finally, it is as scientific as it looks,
to lump together all visions and voices—from Wandering Willy to the
Apocalypse of St. John—as examples of unhealthy cerebral activity.

<span id="an_iv.v-p4"></span>As against all this, the intransigeant
votaries of the supernatural seem determined to play into the hands of
their foes. They pin themselves, for no apparent reason, to the
objective reality and absolute value of visions, voices, and other
experiences which would be classed, in any other department of life, as
the harmless results of a vivid imagination: and claim as examples of
miraculous interference with “natural law” psychic phenomena which may
well be the normal if rare methods by which a certain type of intuitive
genius actualizes its perceptions of the spiritual world.  <span
id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p6"></span>Materialistic piety of this kind, which
would have us believe that St. Anthony of Padua really held the Infant
Christ in his arms, and that the Holy Ghost truly told the Blessed
Angela of Foligno that He loved her better than any other woman in the
Vale of Spoleto, and she knew Him more intimately than the Apostles
themselves,  <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559.md) is the best friend
the “rationalists” possess. It turns dreams into miracles and drags down
the symbolic visions of genius to the level of pious hallucination. Even
the profound and beautiful significance of St. Margaret Mary Alacoque’s
vision of the Sacred Heart—a pictured expression of one of the deepest
intuitions of the human soul, caught up to the contemplation of God’s
love—has been impaired by the grossly material interpretation which it
has been forced to bear. So, too, the beautiful reveries of Suso, the
divine visitations experienced by Francis, Catherine, <span
id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_268"></span> Teresa
and countless other saints, have been degraded in the course of their
supposed elevation to the sphere called “supernatural”—a process as
fatal to their truth and beauty as the stuffing of birds.  <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p9"></span>All this, too, is done in defiance of the
great mystics themselves, who are unanimous in warning their disciples
against the danger of attributing too much importance to “visions” and
“voices,” or accepting them at their face value as messages from God.
Nevertheless, these visions and voices are such frequent accompaniments
of the mystic life, that they cannot be ignored. The messengers of the
invisible world knock persistently at the doors of the senses: and not
only at those which we refer to hearing and to sight. In other words,
supersensual intuitions—the contact between man’s finite being and the
Infinite Being in which it is immersed—can express themselves by means
of almost any kind of sensory automatism. Strange sweet perfumes and
tastes, physical sensations of touch, inward fires, are reported over
and over again in connection with such spiritual adventures.  <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) Those symbols under which the mystic
tends to approach the Absolute easily become objectivized, and present
themselves to the consciousness as parts of experience, rather than as
modes of interpretation. The knowledge which is obtained in such an
approach is wholly transcendental. It consists in an undifferentiated
act of the whole consciousness, in which under the spur of love life
draws near to Life. Thought, feeling, vision, touch—all are hopelessly
inadequate to it: yet all, perhaps, may hint at that intense perception
of which they are the scattered parts. “And we shall endlessly be all
had in God,” says Julian of this supreme experience, “Him verily seeing
and fully feeling, Him spiritually hearing and Him delectably smelling
and sweetly swallowing.”  <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p12"></span>All those so-called “hallucinations of the
senses” which appear in the history of mysticism must, then, be
considered soberly, frankly, and without prejudice in the course of our
inquiry into the psychology of man’s quest of the Real. The question for
their critics must really be this: do these automatisms, which appear so
persistently as a part of the contemplative life, represent merely <span
id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_269"></span> the
dreams and fancies, the old digested percepts of the visionary,
objectivized and presented to his surface-mind in a concrete form; or,
are they ever representations—symbolic, if you like—of some fact, force,
or personality, some “triumphing spiritual power,” external to himself?
Is the vision only a pictured thought, an activity of the dream
imagination: or, is it the violent effort of the self to translate
something impressed upon its deeper being, some message received from
without,  <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563.md) which projects this
sharp image and places it before the consciousness?

<span id="an_iv.v-p14"></span>The answer seems to be that the voice or
vision may be either of these two things: and that pathology and
religion have both been over-hasty in their eagerness to snatch at these
phenomena for their own purposes. Many—perhaps most—voices do but give
the answer which the subject has already suggested to itself;  <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564.md) many—perhaps most—visions are the
picturings of dreams and desires.  <span
id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565.md) Some are morbid hallucinations: some
even symptoms of insanity. All probably borrow their shape, as apart
from their content, from suggestions already present in the mind of the
seer.  <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p18"></span>But there are some, experienced by minds
of great power and richness, which are crucial for those who have them.
These bring wisdom to the simple and ignorant, sudden calm to those who
were tormented by doubts. They flood the personality with new light:
accompany conversion, or the passage from one spiritual state to
another: arrive at moments of indecision, bringing with them
authoritative commands or counsels, opposed to the inclination of the
self: confer a convinced knowledge of some department of the spiritual
life before unknown. Such visions, it is clear, belong to another and
higher plane of experience from the radiant appearances of our Lady, the
piteous exhibitions of the sufferings of Christ, which swarm in the
lives of the saints, and contain no feature which is not traceable to
the subject’s religious enthusiasms or previous knowledge.  <span
id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567.md) These, in the apt phrase of
Godfernaux, <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_270"></span> are but “images floating on the moving
deeps of feeling,”  <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568.md) not symbolic
messages from another plane of consciousness. Some test, then, must be
applied, some basis of classification discovered, if we are to
distinguish the visions and voices which seem to be symptoms of real
transcendental activity from those which are only due to imagination
raised to the *n* th power, to intense reverie, or to psychic illness.
That test, I think, must be the same as that which we shall find useful
for ecstatic states; namely, their life-enhancing quality.

<span id="an_iv.v-p21"></span>Those visions and voices which are the
*media* by which the “seeing self” truly approaches the Absolute; which
are the formula under which ontological perceptions are expressed; are
found by that self to be sources of helpful energy, charity, and,
courage. They infuse something new in the way of strength, knowledge,
direction; and leave it—physically, mentally, or spiritually—better than
they found it. Those which do not owe their inception to the contact of
the soul with external reality—in theological language, do not “come
from God”—do not have this effect. At best, they are but the results of
the self’s turning over of her treasures: at worst, they are the
dreams—sometimes the diseased dreams—of an active, rich, but imperfectly
controlled subliminal consciousness.

<span id="an_iv.v-p22"></span>Since it is implicit in the make-up of the
mystical temperament, that the subliminal consciousness should be active
and rich—and since the unstable nervous organization which goes with it
renders it liable to illness and exhaustion—it is not surprising to find
that the visionary experience even of the greatest mystics is mixed in
type. Once automatism has established itself in a person, it may as
easily become the expression of folly as of wisdom. In the moments when
inspiration has ebbed, old forgotten superstitions may take its place.
When Julian of Norwich in her illness saw the “horrible showing” of the
Fiend, red with black freckles, which clutched at her throat with its
paws:  <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569.md) when St. Teresa was
visited by Satan, who left a smell of brimstone behind, or when she saw
him sitting on the top of her breviary and dislodged him by the use of
holy water:  <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570.md) it is surely
reasonable to allow that we are in the presence of visions which tend
towards the psychopathic type, and which are expressive of little else
but an exhaustion and temporary loss of balance on the subject’s part,
which allowed her intense consciousness of the reality of evil to assume
a concrete form.  <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571.md) <span
id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_271"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p26"></span>Because we allow this, however, it does
not follow that all the visionary experience of such a subject is
morbid: any more than “Oedipus Tyrannus” invalidates “Prometheus
Unbound,” or occasional attacks of dyspepsia invalidate the whole
process of nutrition. The perceptive power and creative genius of
mystics, as of other great artists, sometimes goes astray. That visions
or voices should sometimes be the means by which the soul consciously
assimilates the nourishment it needs, is conceivable: it is surely also
conceivable that by the same means it may present to the
surface-intelligence things which are productive of unhealthy rather
than of healthy reactions.

<span id="an_iv.v-p27"></span>If we would cease, once for all, to regard
visions and voices as objective, and be content to see in them forms of
symbolic expression, ways in which the subconscious activity of the
spiritual self reaches the surface-mind, many of the disharmonies
noticeable in visionary experience, which have teased the devout, and
delighted the agnostic, would fade away. Visionary experience is—or at
least may be—the outward sign of a real experience. It is a picture
which the mind constructs, it is true, from raw materials already at its
disposal: as the artist constructs his picture with canvas and paint.
But, as the artist’s paint and canvas picture is the fruit, not merely
of contact between brush and canvas, but also of a more vital contact
between his creative genius and visible beauty or truth; so too we may
see in vision, where the subject is a mystic, the fruit of a more
mysterious contact between the visionary and a transcendental beauty or
truth. Such a vision, that is to say, is the “accident” which represents
and enshrines a “substance” unseen: the paint and canvas picture which
tries to show the surface consciousness that ineffable sight, that
ecstatic perception of good or evil—for neither extreme has the
monopoly—to which the deeper, more real soul has attained. The
transcendental powers take for this purpose such material as they can
find amongst the hoarded beliefs and memories of the self.  <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572.md) Hence Plotinus sees the Celestial
Venus, Suso the Eternal Wisdom, St. Teresa the <span id="page_272">p.
272</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_272"></span> Humanity of Christ, Blake
the strange personages of his prophetic books: others more obviously
symbolic objects. St. Ignatius Loyola, for instance, in a moment of
lucidity, “saw the most Holy Trinity as it were under the likeness of a
triple plectrum or of three spinet keys” and on another occasion “the
Blessed Virgin without distinction of members.”  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p30"></span>Visions and voices, then, may stand in the
same relation to the mystic as pictures, poems, and musical compositions
stand to the great painter, poet, musician. They are the artistic
expressions and creative results ( *a* ) of thought, ( *b* ) of
intuition, ( *c* ) of direct perception. All would be ready to
acknowledge how conventional and imperfect of necessity are those
transcripts of perceived Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which we owe to
artistic genius: how unequal is their relation to reality. But this is
not to say that they are valueless or absurd. So too with the mystic,
whose proceedings in this respect are closer to those of the artist than
is generally acknowledged. In both types there is a constant and
involuntary work of translation going on, by which Reality is
interpreted in the terms of appearance. In both, a peculiar mental
make-up conduces to this result.

<span id="an_iv.v-p31"></span>In artistic subjects, the state of reverie
tends easily to a visionary character: thought becomes pictorial,
auditory or rhythmic as the case may be. Concrete images, balanced
harmonies, elusive yet recognizable, surge up mysteriously without the
intervention of the will, and place themselves before the mind. Thus the
painter really sees his impainted picture, the novelist hears the
conversation of his characters, the poet receives his cadences
ready-made, the musician listens to a veritable music which “pipes to
the spirit ditties of no tone.” In the mystic, the same type of activity
constantly appears. Profound meditation takes a pictorial or dramatic
form. Apt symbols which suggest themselves to his imagination become
objectivized. The message that he longs for is heard within his mind.
Hence, those “interior voices” and “imaginary visions” which are
sometimes—as in Suso—indistinguishable from the ordinary accompaniments
of intense artistic activity.

<span id="an_iv.v-p32"></span>Where, however, artistic “automatisms”
spend themselves upon the artist’s work, mystical “automatisms” in their
highest forms have to do with that transformation of personality which
is the essence of the mystic life. They are *media* by which the self
receives spiritual stimulus; is reproved, consoled, encouraged and
guided on its upward way. Moreover, they are frequently coordinated. The
voice and the vision go together: corroborate one another, and “work out
right” in relation to the life of the self. <span id="page_273">p.
273</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_273"></span> Thus St. Catherine of
Siena’s “mystic marriage” was preceded by a voice, which ever said in
answer to her prayers, “I will espouse thee to Myself in faith”; and the
vision in which that union was consummated was again initiated by a
voice saying, “I will *this day* celebrate solemnly with thee the feast
of the betrothal of thy soul, and even as I promised I will espouse thee
to Myself in faith.”  <span id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574.md) “Such
automatisms as these,” says Delacroix, “are by no means scattered and
incoherent. They are systematic and progressive: they are governed by an
interior aim; they have, above all, a teleological character. They
indicate the continuous intervention of a being at once wiser and more
powerful than the ordinary character and reason; they are the
realization, in visual and auditory images, of a secret and permanent
personality of a superior type to the conscious personality. They are
its voice, the exterior projection of its life. They translate to the
conscious personality the suggestions of the subconscious: and they
permit the continuous penetration of the conscious personality by these
deeper activities. They establish a communication between these two
planes of existence, and, by their imperative nature, they tend to make
the inferior subordinate to the superior.”  <span
id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575.md)

#### <span id="an_iv.v-p34.1"></span>Audition

<span id="an_iv.v-p35"></span>The simplest and as a rule the first way
in which automatism shows itself, is in “voices” or auditions. The
mystic becomes aware of Something which speaks to him either clearly or
implicitly; giving him abrupt and unexpected orders and encouragements.
The reality of his contact with the Divine Life is thus brought home to
him by a device with which the accidents of human intercourse have made
him familiar. His subliminal mind, open as it now is to transcendental
impressions, “at one with the Absolute,” irradiated by the Uncreated
Light, but still dissociated from the surface intelligence which it is
slowly educating, seems to that surface self like another being. Hence
its messages are often heard, literally, as Voices: either (1) the
“immediate” or inarticulate voice, which the auditive mystic knows so
well, but finds it so difficult to define; (2) the distinct interior
voice, perfectly articulate, but recognized as speaking only within the
mind; (3) by a hallucination which we have all experienced in dream or
reverie, the exterior voice, which appears to be speaking externally to
the subject and to be heard by the outward ear. This, the traditional
classification of auditions, also answers exactly to she three main
types of vision—(1) intellectual, (2) imaginary, (3) corporeal. <span
id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_274"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p36"></span>Of these three kinds of voices the mystics
are unanimous in their opinion that the first and least “marvellous” is
by far the best: belonging indeed to an entirely different plane of
consciousness from the uttered interior or exterior “word,” which few of
the great contemplatives are willing to accept without scrutiny as a
“message from God.” The articulate word is inevitably subject to some
degree of illusion, even at the best; since so far as it possesses
transcendental content it represents the translation of the simultaneous
into successive speech.

<span id="an_iv.v-p37"></span>“Let Thy good Spirit enter my heart and
there be heard without utterance, and without the sound of words speak
all truth,” says a prayer attributed to St. Ambrose,  <span
id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576.md) exactly describing the function of
these unmediated or “intellectual words.” Dynamic messages of this kind,
imperative intuitions which elude the containing formula of speech, are
invariably attributed by the self to the direct action of the Divine.
They are indeed their own guarantee, bringing with them an infusion of
new knowledge or new life. Their character is less that of messages than
of actual “invasions” from beyond the threshold; transcending succession
and conveying “all at once” fresh truth or certitude. “Intellectual
words,” in fact, are a form of inspiration. Eternal truth bursts in upon
the temporally-conditioned human mind. Thus St. Hildegarde tells us that
each of her great revelations was received “in an instant” and St.
Bridget of Sweden that the whole substance of her 5th Book was given “in
a flash.”  <span id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p40"></span>“Distinct interior words,” on the other
hand, lack this character of simultaneity. Nor are they invariably
authoritative for those who hear them. St. Teresa, whose brilliant
self-criticisms are our best source of information on mystical
auditions, considers that, though they often “come from God,” they are
not due to direct contact with the Divine; and agrees with all the great
mystics on the need of subjecting them to criticism. She hesitated long
before obeying the Voice which told her to leave the Convent of the
Incarnation and make the first foundation of her Reform. Genuine
locutions may however be distinguished from those “words” which result
merely from voluntary activity of the imagination, as much by the sense
of certitude, peace and interior joy which they produce, as by the fact
that they force themselves upon the attention in spite of its
resistance, and bring with them knowledge which was not previously
within the field of consciousness. That is to say, they are really
automatic presentations of the result of mystic intuition, not mere
rearrangements of the constituents <span id="page_275">p. 275</span>
<span id="an_iv.v-Page_275"></span> of thought.  <span
id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578.md) Hence they bring to the surface-self
new conviction or material: have a positive value for life.

<span id="an_iv.v-p42"></span>Those purely self-created locutions, or
rearrangements of thought “which the mind self-recollected forms and
fashions within itself”—often difficult to distinguish from true
automatic audition—are called by Philip of the trinity, St. John of the
Cross and other mystical theologians “successive words.” They feel it to
be of the highest importance that the contemplative should learn to
distinguish such hallucinations from real transcendental perceptions
presented in auditive form.

<span id="an_iv.v-p43"></span>“I am really terrified,” says St. John of
the Cross, with his customary blunt common sense, “by what passes among
us in these days. Anyone who has barely begun to meditate, if he becomes
conscious of words of this kind during his self-recollection, pronounces
them forthwith to be the work of God;  <span
id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579.md) and, convinced that they are so, goes
about proclaiming ‘God has told me this,’ or ‘I have had that answer
from God.’ But all is illusion and fancy; such an one has only been
speaking to himself. Besides, the desire for these words, and the
attention they give to them, end by persuading men that all the
observations which they address to themselves are the responses of God.”
 <span id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580.md) These are the words of one who
was at once the sanest of saints and the most penetrating of
psychologists: words which our modern unruly amateurs of the
“subconscious” might well take to heart.

<span id="an_iv.v-p46"></span>True auditions are usually heard when the
mind is in a state of deep absorption without conscious thought: that is
to say, at the most favourable of all moments for contact with the
transcendental world. They translate into articulate language some
aspect of that ineffable apprehension of Reality which the contemplative
enjoys: crystallize those clairvoyant intuitions, those prophetic hints
which surge in on him so soon as he lays himself open to the influence
of the supra-sensible. Sometimes, however, mystical intuition takes the
form of a sudden and ungovernable uprush of knowledge from the deeps of
personality. Then, auditions may break in upon the normal activities of
the self with startling abruptness. It is in such cases that their
objective and uncontrollable character is most sharply felt. However
they may appear, they are, says St. Teresa, “very distinctly formed; but
by the bodily ear they are not heard. They are, however, much more
clearly understood than if they were heard by the ear. It is impossible
not to understand them, whatever resistance we may offer. . . . The
words formed by the understanding effect nothing, but when our Lord
speaks, it is *at once word* <span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_276"></span> *and work. . . .* The human locution \[
*i.e.* , the work of imagination\] is as something we cannot well make
out, as if we were half asleep: but the divine locution is a voice so
clear, that not a syllable of its utterance is lost. It may occur, too,
when the understanding and the soul are so troubled and distracted that
they cannot form one sentence correctly: and yet grand sentences,
perfectly arranged such as the soul in its most recollected state never
could have formed, are uttered: and at the first word, as I have said,
change it utterly.”  <span id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p48"></span>St. Teresa’s mystic life was governed by
voices: her active career as a foundress was much guided by them. They
advised her in small things as in great. Often they interfered with her
plans, ran counter to her personal judgment, forbade a foundation on
which she was set, or commanded one which appeared imprudent or
impossible. They concerned themselves with journeys, with the purchase
of houses; they warned her of coming events.  <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582.md) As her mystical life matured, Teresa
seems to have learned to discriminate those locutions on which action
should properly be based. She seldom resisted them, though it constantly
happened that the action on which they insisted seemed the height of
folly: and though they frequently involved her in hardships and
difficulties, she never had cause to regret this reliance upon decrees
which she regarded as coming direct from God, and which certainly did
emanate from a life greater than her own. So too St. Hildegarde, when
she prefaced her prophecies and denunciations by “Thus saith the Living
Light” was not making use of a poetic metaphor. She lived under the
direction of a Power which was precise and articulate in its
communications, and at her peril disobeyed its commands.

<span id="an_iv.v-p50"></span>So far from mere vague intuitions are the
“distinct interior words” which the mystic hears within his mind, that
Suso is able to state that the hundred meditations on the Passion thus
revealed to him were spoken in German and not in Latin.  <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583.md) St. Teresa’s own auditions were all of
this interior kind—some “distinct” and some “substantial” or
inarticulate—as her corresponding visions were nearly all of the
“intellectual” or “imaginary” sort: that is to say, she was not subject
to sensible hallucination. Often, however, the boundary is overpassed,
and the locution seems to be heard by the mystic’s outward ear; as in
the case of those voices which guided the destinies of St. Joan of Arc,
or the Figure upon the Cross which spoke to St. Francis of Assisi. We
then have the <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_277"></span> third form—“exterior words”—which the
mystics for the most part regard with suspicion and dislike.

<span id="an_iv.v-p52"></span>Sometimes audition assumes a musical
rather than a verbal character: a form of perception which probably
corresponds to the temperamental bias of the self, the ordered sweetness
of Divine Harmony striking responsive chords in the music-loving soul.
The lives of St. Francis of Assisi, St. Catherine of Siena, and Richard
Rolle provide obvious instances of this:  <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md) but Suso, in whom automatism assumed
its richest and most varied forms, has also given in his autobiography
some characteristic examples.

<span id="an_iv.v-p54"></span>“One day . . . whilst the Servitor was
still at rest, he heard within himself a gracious melody by which his
heart was greatly moved. And at the moment of the rising of the morning
star, a deep sweet voice sang within him these words, <span
id="an_iv.v-p54.1"></span> *Stella Maria maris, hodie processit ad
ortum* . That is to say, Mary Star of the Sea is risen today. And this
song which he heard was so spiritual and so sweet, that his soul was
transported by it and he too began to sing joyously. . . . And one
day—it was in carnival time—the Servitor had continued his prayers until
the moment when the bugle of the watch announced the dawn. Therefore he
said to himself, Rest for an instant, before you salute the shining
Morning Star. And, whilst that his senses were at rest, behold! angelic
spirits began to sing the fair Respond: <span id="an_iv.v-p54.2"></span>
*‘Illuminare, illuminare, Jerusalem* !’And this song was echoed with a
marvellous sweetness in the deeps of his soul. And when the angels had
sung for some time his soul overflowed with joy: and his feeble body
being unable to support such happiness, burning tears escaped from his
eyes.”  <span id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p56"></span>Closely connected on the one hand with the
phenomena of automatic words, on the other with those of prophecy and
inspiration, is the prevalence in mystical literature of revelations
which take the form of dialogue: intimate colloquies between Divine
Reality and the Soul. The Revelations of Julian of Norwich and St.
Catherine of Siena, and many of those of the Blessed Angela of Foligno
and of the modern mystic Lucie-Christine appear to have been received by
them in this way. We seem as we read them to be present at veritable
outpourings of the Divine Mind, crystallized into verbal form on their
way through the human consciousness. We feel on the one hand a “one-ness
with the Absolute” on the part of the mystic which has made her really,
for the time being, the “voice of God”: whilst on the other we recognize
in her the persistence of the individual—exalted, but not yet wholly
absorbed <span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_278"></span> in the Divine—whose questions, here and
there, break in upon the revelation which is mediated by the deeper
mind.

<span id="an_iv.v-p57"></span>Duologues of this sort are reported with
every appearance of realism and good faith by Suso, Tauler, Mechthild of
Magdeburg, Angela of Foligno, St. Teresa, and countless other mystics.
The third book of the “Imitation of Christ” contains some conspicuously
beautiful examples, which may or may not be due to literary artifice.
The self, wholly absorbed by the intimate sense of divine companionship,
receives its messages in the form of “distinct interior words”; as of an
alien voice, speaking within the mind with such an accent of validity
and spontaneity as to leave no room for doubt as to its character.
Often, as in Julian’s Revelations, the discourses of the “Divine Voice,”
its replies to the eager questions of the self, are illustrated by
imaginary visions. Since these dialogues are, on the whole, more
commonly experienced in the illuminative than the unitive way, that
self—retaining a clear consciousness of its own separateness, and
recognizing the Voice as personal and distinct from its own
soul—naturally enters into a communion which has an almost
conversational character, replies to questions or asks others in its
turn: and in this dramatic style the content of its intuitions is
gradually expressed. We have then an extreme form of that dissociation
which we all experience in a slight degree when we “argue with
ourselves.” But in this case one of the speakers is become the
instrument of a power other than itself, and communicates to the mind
new wisdom and new life.

<span id="an_iv.v-p58"></span>The peculiar rhythmical language of
genuine mystic dialogue of this kind—for often enough, as in Suso’s
“Book of the Eternal Wisdom,” it is deliberately adopted as a literary
device—is an indication of its automatic character.  <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586.md) Expression, once it is divorced from
the critical action of the surface intelligence, always tends to assume
a dithyrambic form. Measure and colour, exaltation of language, here
take a more important place than the analytic intellect will generally
permit. This feature is easily observable in prophecy, and in automatic
writing. It forms an interesting link with poetry; which—in so far as it
is genuine and spontaneous—is largely the result of subliminal activity.
Life, which eludes language, can yet—we know not why—be communicated by
rhythm: and the mystic fact is above all else the communication of a
greater Life. Hence we must not take it amiss if the voice of the
Absolute, as translated to us by those mystics who are alone capable of
hearing it, often seems to adopt the “grand manner.” <span
id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_279"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p60"></span>We pass from the effort of man’s deeper
mind to *speak* truth to his surface-intelligence, to the effort of the
same mysterious power to *show* truth: in psychological language, from
auditory to visual automatism. “Vision,” that vaguest of words, has been
used by the friends and enemies of the mystics to describe or obscure a
wide range of experience: from formless intuition, through crude optical
hallucination, to the voluntary visualizations common to the artistic
mind. In it we must include that personal and secret vision which is the
lover’s glimpse of Perfect Love, and the great pictures seen by
clairvoyant prophets acting in their capacity as eyes of the race. Of
these, the two main classes of vision, says Denis the Carthusian, the
first kind are to be concealed, the second declared. The first are more
truly mystic, the second prophetic: but excluding prophetic vision from
our inquiry, a sufficient variety of experience remains in the purely
mystical class. St. Teresa’s fluid and formless apprehension of the
Trinity, her concrete visions of Christ, Mechthild of Madeburg’s poetic
dreams, Suso’s sharply pictured allegories, even Blake’s soul of a flea,
all come under this head.

<span id="an_iv.v-p61"></span>Since no one can know what it is really
like to have a vision but the visionaries themselves, it will be
interesting to see what they have to say on this subject: and notice the
respects in which these self-criticisms agree with the conclusions of
psychology. We forget, whilst arguing on these matters, that it is as
impossible for those who have never heard a voice or seen a vision to
discuss these experiences with intelligence, as it is for stay-at-homes
to discuss the passions of the battle-field on the material supplied by
war correspondents. No second-hand account can truly report the
experience of the person whose perceptions or illusions present
themselves in this form. “We cannot,” says Récéjac, “remind ourselves
too often that the mystic act consists in relations between the Absolute
and Freedom which are incommunicable. We shall never know, for instance,
what was the state of consciousness of some citizen of the antique world
when he gave himself without reserve to the inspiring suggestions of the
Sacred Fire, or some other image which evoked the infinite.”  <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587.md) Neither shall we ever know, unless it
be our good fortune to attain to it, the secret of that consciousness
which is able to apprehend the Transcendent in visionary terms.

<span id="an_iv.v-p63"></span>The first thing we notice when we come to
this inquiry is that the mystics are all but unanimous in their refusal
to attribute <span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_280"></span> importance to any kind of visionary
experience.  <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588.md) The natural
timidity and stern self-criticism with which they approach auditions is
here greatly increased: and this, if taken to heart, might well give
pause to their more extreme enemies and defenders. “If it be so,” says
Hilton of automatisms in general, “that thou see any manner of light or
brightness with thy bodily eye or in imagining, other than every man may
see; or if thou hear any merry sounding with thy ear, or in thy mouth
any sweet sudden savour, other than of kind \[nature\], or any heat in
thy breast as it were fire, or any manner delight in any part of thy
body, or if a spirit bodily appeareth to thee as it were an angel, for
to comfort thee and kiss thee, or any such feeling, which thou wost well
that it cometh not of thyself, nor of no bodily creature, be then wary
in that time or soon after, and wisely behold the stirrings of thy
heart. If thou be stirred because of that liking that thou feelest for
to draw out thine heart . . . from the inward desire of virtues and of
ghostly knowing and feeling of God, for to set the sight of thy heart
and thine affection, thy delight and thy rest, principally therein,
weening that bodily feeling should be a part of heavenly joy and of
angels’ bliss . . . this feeling is suspect and of the enemy. And
therefore, though it be never so liking and wonderful, refuse it, and
assent not thereto.”  <span id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589.md) Nearly
every master of the contemplative life has spoken to the same effect:
none, perhaps, more strongly than that stern and virile lover of the
invisible, St. John of the Cross, who was relentless in hunting down
even the most “spiritual” illusions, eager to purge mind as well as
morals of all taint of the unreal.

<span id="an_iv.v-p66"></span>“It often happens,” he says “that
spiritual men are affected supernaturally by sensible representations
and objects. They sometimes see the forms and figures of those of
another life, saints or angels, good and evil, or certain extraordinary
lights and brightness. They hear strange words, sometimes seeing those
who utter them and sometimes not. They have a sensible perception at
times of most sweet odours, without knowing whence they proceed. . . .
Still, though all these experiences may happen to the bodily senses in
the way of God, we must never delight in them nor encourage them; yea,
rather we must fly from them, without seeking to know whether their
origin be good or evil. For, inasmuch as they are exterior and physical,
the less is the likelihood of their being from God. That which properly
and generally comes <span id="page_281">p. 281</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_281"></span> from God is a purely spiritual
communication; wherein there is greater security and profit for the soul
than through the senses, wherein there is usually much danger and
delusion, because the bodily sense decides upon, and judges, spiritual
things, thinking them to be what itself feels them to be, when in
reality they are as different as body and soul, sensuality and reason.”
 <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p68"></span>Again, “in the high state of the union of
love, God does not communicate Himself to the soul under the disguise of
imaginary visions, similitudes or figures, neither is there place for
such, but mouth to mouth. . . . The soul, therefore, that will ascend to
this perfect union with God, must be careful not to lean upon imaginary
visions, forms, figures, and particular intelligible objects, for these
things can never serve as proportionate or proximate means towards so
great an end; yea, rather they are an obstacle in the way, and therefore
to be guarded against and rejected.”  <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p70"></span>So, too, St. Teresa. “In such matters as
these there is always cause to fear illusion; until we are assured that
they truly proceed from the Spirit of God. Therefore at the beginning it
is always best to resist them. If it is indeed God who is acting, the
soul will but progress still more quickly, for the trial will favour her
advancement.”  <span id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p72"></span>Vision, then, is recognized by the true
contemplative as at best an imperfect, oblique, and untrustworthy method
of apprehension: it is ungovernable, capricious, liable to deception,
and the greater its accompanying hallucination the more suspicious it
becomes. All, however, distinguish different classes of visionary
experience; and differentiate sharply between the value of the vision
which is “felt” rather than seen, and the true optical hallucination
which is perceived, exterior to the subject, by the physical sight.

<span id="an_iv.v-p73"></span>We may trace in visions, as in voices—for
these, from the psychologist’s point of view, are strictly parallel
phenomena—a progressive externalization on the self’s part of those
concepts or intuitions which form the bases of all automatic states.
Three main groups have been distinguished by the mystics, and
illustrated again and again from their experiences. These are (1)
Intellectual (2) Imaginary, and (3) Corporeal vision: answering to (1)
Substantial or inarticulate, (2) Interior and distinct, (3) Exterior
words. With the first two we must now concern ourselves. As to corporeal
vision, it has few peculiarities of interest to the student of pure
mysticism. Like the “exterior word” it is little else than a more or
less uncontrolled externalization of inward memories, thoughts, or <span
id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_282"></span>
intuitions—even of some pious picture which has become imprinted on the
mind—which may, in some subjects, attain the dimensions of true
sensorial hallucination.

<span id="an_iv.v-p74"></span>(1) *Intellectual Vision.—* The
“intellectual vision,” like the “substantial word” as described to us by
the mystics, is of so elusive, spiritual, and formless a kind that it is
hard to distinguish it from that act of pure contemplation in which it
often takes its rise. These moods and apprehensions of the soul are so
closely linked together—the names applied to them are so often little
more than the struggles of different individuals to describe by analogy
an experience which is *one—* that we risk a loss of accuracy the moment
that classification begins. The intellectual vision, so far as we can
understand it, seems to be a *something* not sought but put before the
mind, and seen or perceived by the whole self by means of a sense which
is neither sight nor feeling, but partakes of the character of both. It
is intimate but indescribable: definite, yet impossible to define. There
is a passage in the Revelations of Angela of Foligno which vividly
describes the sequence of illuminated states leading up to and including
the intuitions which constitute the substance of this “formless vision”
and its complement the “formless word”: and this does far more towards
making us realize its nature than the most painstaking psychological
analysis could ever do. “At times God comes into the soul without being
called; and He instills into her fire, love, and sometimes sweetness;
and the soul believes this comes from God, and delights therein. But she
does not yet know, or see, that He dwells in her; she perceives His
grace, in which she delights. And again God comes to the soul, and
speaks to her words full of sweetness, in which she has much joy, and
she feels Him. This *feeling* of God gives her the greatest delight; but
even here a certain doubt remains; for the soul has not the certitude
that God is in her. . . . And beyond this the soul receives the gift of
seeing God. God says to her, ‘Behold Me!’ and the soul sees Him dwelling
within her. She sees Him more clearly than one man sees another. For
*the eyes of the soul behold a plenitude of which I cannot speak: a
plenitude which is not bodily but spiritual, of which I can say
nothing.* And the soul rejoices in that sight with an ineffable joy; and
this is the manifest and certain sign that God indeed dwells in her. And
the soul can behold nothing else, because this fulfils her in an
unspeakable manner. This beholding, whereby the soul can behold no other
thing, is so profound that it grieves me that I can say nothing of it.
It is not a thing which can be touched or imagined, for it is
ineffable.”  <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593.md) <span
id="page_283">p. 283</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_283"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p76"></span>Intellectual vision, then, seems to be
closely connected with that “consciousness of the Presence of God” which
we discussed in the last chapter: though the contemplatives themselves
declare that it differs from it.  <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md) It is distinguished apparently from
that more or less diffused consciousness of Divine Immanence by the fact
that although unseen of the eyes, it can be exactly located in space.
The mystic’s general awareness of the divine is here focussed upon one
point—a point to which some theological or symbolic character is at once
attached. The result is a sense of presence so concrete defined, and
sharply personal that, as St. Teresa says, it carries more conviction
than bodily sight. This invisible presence is generally identified by
Christian mystics rather with the Humanity of Christ than with the
unconditioned Absolute. “In the prayer of union and of quiet,” says St.
Teresa, “certain inflowings of the Godhead are present; but in the
*vision,* the Sacred Humanity also, together with them, is pleased to be
our companion and to do us good.”  <span
id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) “A person who is in no way expecting
such a favour,” she says again, “nor has ever imagined herself worthy of
receiving it, is conscious that Jesus Christ stands by her side;
although she sees Him neither with the eyes of the body nor of the soul.
This is called an intellectual vision; I cannot tell why. This vision,
unlike an imaginary one, does not pass away quickly but lasts for
several days and even sometimes for more than a year. . . . Although I
believe some of the former favours are more sublime, yet this brings
with it a special knowledge of God; a most tender love for Him results
from being constantly in His company while the desire of devoting one’s
whole being to His service is more fervent than any hitherto described.
The conscience is greatly purified by the knowledge of His perpetual and
near presence, for although we know that God sees all we do, yet nature
inclines us to grow careless and forgetful of it. This is impossible
here, since our Lord makes the soul conscious that He is close at hand.”
 <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p80"></span>In such a state—to which the term “vision”
is barely applicable—it will be observed that consciousness is at its
highest, and hallucination at its lowest point. Nothing is seen, even
with the eyes of the mind: as, in the parallel case of the “substantial
word,” nothing is said. It is pure apprehension: in the one case of
Personality, in the other of knowledge. “The immediate vision of the
naked Godhead,” says Suso of this, “is without doubt the pure truth: a
vision is to be esteemed the more noble the more <span id="page_284">p.
284</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_284"></span> intellectual it is, the
more it is stripped of all image and approaches the state of pure
contemplation.”  <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p82"></span>We owe to St. Teresa our finest first-hand
account of this strange condition of “awareness.” It came upon her
abruptly, after a period of psychic distress, and seemed to her to be an
answer to her unwilling prayers that she might be “led” by some other
way than that of “interior words”; which were, in the opinion of her
director, “so suspicious.” “I could not force myself,” she says, “to
desire the change, nor believe that I was under the influence of Satan.
Though I was doing all I could to believe the one and to desire the
other, it was not in my power to do so.” She resolved this divided state
by making an act of total surrender to the will of God: and it seems to
have been as the result of this release of stress, this willing
receptivity, that the new form of automatism suddenly developed itself,
reinforcing and justifying her auditions and bringing peace and
assurance to the distracted surface-self.

<span id="an_iv.v-p83"></span>“At the end of two years spent in prayer
by myself and others for this end, namely, that our Lord would either
lead me by another way, or show the truth of this—for now the locutions
of our Lord were extremely frequent—this happened to me. I was in prayer
one day—it was the feast of the glorious St. Peter—when I saw Christ
close by me, or, to speak more correctly, felt Him; for I saw nothing
with the eyes of the body, nothing with the eyes of the soul. He seemed
to me to be close beside me; and I saw, too, as I believe, that it was
He who was speaking to me. As I was utterly ignorant that such a vision
was possible, I was extremely afraid at first, and did nothing but weep;
however, when He spoke to me but one word to reassure me, I recovered
myself, and was, as usual, calm and comforted, without any fear
whatever. Jesus Christ seemed to be by my side continually. As the
vision was not imaginary, I saw no form, but I had a most distinct
feeling that He was always on my right hand, a witness of all I did; and
never at any time, if I was but slightly recollected, or not too much
distracted, could I be ignorant of His near presence. I went at once to
my confessor in great distress, to tell him of it. He asked in what form
I saw our Lord. I told him I saw no form. He then said: ‘How did you
know that it was Christ?’ I replied that I did not know how I knew it;
but I could not help knowing that He was close beside me . . . there are
no words whereby to explain—at least, none for us women, who know so
little; learned men can explain it better.

<span id="an_iv.v-p84"></span>“For if I say that I see Him neither with
the eyes of the body nor those of the soul—because it was not an
imaginary vision—how is it that I can understand and maintain that He
stand <span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_285"></span> beside me, and be *more certain of it than
if I saw Him* ? If it be supposed that it is as if a person were blind,
or in the dark, and therefore unable to see another who is close to him,
the comparison is not exact. There is a certain likelihood about it,
however, but not much, because the other senses tell him who is blind of
that presence: he hears the other speak or move, or he touches him; but
in these visions there is nothing like this. The darkness is not felt;
only He renders Himself present to the soul by a certain knowledge of
Himself which is more clear than the sun. I do not mean that we now see
either a sun or any other brightness, only that there is a light not
seen, which illumines the understanding, so that the soul may have the
fruition of so great a good. This vision brings with it great
blessings.”  <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p86"></span>(2) In *Imaginary Vision,* as in “interior
words,” there is again no sensorial hallucination. The self sees sharply
and clearly, it is true: but is perfectly aware that it does so in
virtue of its most precious organ—“that inward eye which is the bliss of
solitude.”  <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md) Imaginary Vision is
the spontaneous and automatic activity of a power which all artists, all
imaginative people, possess. So far as the machinery employed in it is
concerned, there is little real difference except in degree between
Wordsworth’s imaginary vision of the “dancing daffodils” and Suso’s of
the dancing angels, who “though they leapt very high in the dance, did
so without any lack of gracefulness.”  <span
id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600.md) Both are admirable examples of
“passive imaginary vision”: though in the first the visionary is aware
that the picture seen is supplied by memory, whilst in the second it
arises spontaneously like a dream from the subliminal region, and
contains elements which may be attributed to love, belief, and direct
intuition of truth.

<span id="an_iv.v-p90"></span>Such passive imaginary vision—by which I
mean spontaneous mental pictures at which the self looks, but in the
action of which it does not participate—takes in the mystics two main
forms: (a) symbolic, (b) personal.

<span id="an_iv.v-p91"></span>(a) In the symbolic form there is no
mental deception: the self is aware that it is being shown truth “under
an image.” Many of the visions of the great prophetic mystics—e.g., St.
Hildegarde—have so elaborate a symbolic character, that much
intellectual activity is involved in their interpretation. This
interpretation is <span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_286"></span> sometimes “given” with the vision. Rulman
Merswin’s “Vision of Nine Rocks” is thus described to us as being seen
by him in a sharp picture, the allegorical meaning of which was
simultaneously presented to his mind. In Suso’s life these symbolic
visions abound: he seems to have lived always on the verge of such a
world of imagination, and to have imbibed truth most easily in this
form. Thus: “It happened one morning that the Servitor saw in a vision
that he was surrounded by a troop of heavenly spirits. He therefore
asked one of the most radiant amongst these Princes of the Sky to show
him how God dwelt in his soul. The angel said to him, ‘Do but fix your
eyes joyously upon yourself, and watch how God plays the game of love
within your loving soul.’ And he looked quickly, and saw that his body
in the region of his heart was pure and transparent like crystal: and he
saw the Divine Wisdom peacefully enthroned in the midst of his heart,
and she was fair to look upon. And by her side was the soul of the
Servitor, full of heavenly desires; resting lovingly upon the bosom of
God, Who had embraced it, and pressed it to His Heart. And it remained
altogether absorbed and inebriated with love in the arms of God its
well-beloved.”  <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p93"></span>In such a vision as this, we see the
mystic’s passion for the Absolute, his intuition of Its presence in his
soul, combining with material supplied by a poetic imagination, and
expressing itself in an allegorical form. It is really a visualized
poem, inspired by a direct contact with truth. Of the same kind are many
of those reconstructions of Eternity in which mystics and seers of the
transcendent and outgoing type actualized their profound apprehensions
of reality. In such experiences, as Beatrice told Dante when he saw the
great vision of the River of Light, the thing seen is the shadowy
presentation of a transcendent Reality which the self is not yet strong
enough to see.

> <span id="an_iv.v-p93.1"></span> “E vidi lume in forma di rivera  
> fulvido di fulgore, intra due rive  
> dipinte di mirabil primavera.  
> Di tal fiumana uscian faville vive,  
> e d’ ogni parte si mettean nei fiori,  
> quasi rubin che oro circonscrive.  
> Poi, come inebriate dagli odori,  
> riprofondavan sè nel miro gurge,  
> e, s’una entrava, un’ altra n’ uscia fuori.”  
> . . . .  
> “il sol degli occhi miei  
> anco soggiunse: Il fiume, e li topazii  
> ch’ entrano ed escono, e il rider dell’ erbe  
> son di lor vero ombriferi prefazii. <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>
> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_287"></span>  
> Non che da sè sien queste cose acerbe:  
> ma è difetto dalla parte tua,  
> che non hai viste ancor tanto superbe.” <span
> id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602.md)  

<span id="an_iv.v-p95"></span>In the last two lines of this wonderful
passage, the whole philosophy of vision is expressed. It is an
accommodation of the supra-sensible to our human disabilities, a
symbolic reconstruction of reality on levels accessible to sense. This
symbolic reconstruction is seen as a profoundly significant, vivid, and
dramatic dream: and since this dream conveys transcendental truth, and
initiates the visionary into the atmosphere of the Eternal, it may well
claim precedence over that prosaic and perpetual vision which we call
the “real world.” In it—as in the less significant dreams of our common
experience—vision and audition are often combined. Many of the visions
of St. Mechthild of Hackborn are of this complex type. Thus—“She saw in
the Heart of God, as it were a virgin exceeding fair, holding a ring in
her hand on which was a diamond: with which, incessantly, she touched
the Heart of God. Moreover, the soul asked why that virgin thus touched
the Heart of God. And the virgin answered, ‘I am Divine Love, and this
stone signifieth the sin of Adam. . . . As soon as Adam sinned, I
introduced myself and intercepted the whole of his sin, and by thus
ceaselessly touching the Heart of God and moving Him to pity, I suffered
Him not to rest until the moment when I took the Son of God from His
Father’s Heart and laid him in the Virgin Mother’s womb.’ . . . Another
time, she saw how Love, under the likeness of a fair Virgin, went round
about the consistory singing *Alone I have made the circuit of heaven,
and I have walked on the waves of the sea.* In these words she
understood how Love had subjected to herself the Omnipotent Majesty of
God, had inebriated His Unsearchable Wisdom, had drawn forth all His
most sweet goodness; and, by wholly conquering His divine justice and
changing it into gentleness and mercy, had moved the Lord of all
Majesty.”  <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p97"></span>Imaginary vision of this kind is probably
far more common than is generally supposed: and can exist without any
disturbance of that balance of faculties which is usually recognized as
“sane.” <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_288"></span> “If,” says Pratt, “there be any truth in
Freud’s insistence upon the symbolic nature of normal dreams, it is the
less surprising that the dream imagination of the Christian mystic
should work up visions of a symbolic sort. . . . Our modern tendency to
consider visions quite extraordinary and pathological is probably
mistaken.  <span id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md) It is certain that
the meditations of those persons who are “good visualizers” often take a
pictorial form; and indeed St. Ignatius Loyola, the great teacher of
meditation, advised a deliberate effort so to visualize the subject
dwelt upon. The picture may appear involuntarily, at the summit of a
train of thought, which it sometimes illustrates and sometimes
contradicts. It may show itself faintly against a background of mist; or
start into existence sharply focussed, well-lighted, and alive. It
always brings with it a greater impression of reality than can be
obtained by the operations of the discursive mind.

<span id="an_iv.v-p99"></span>( *b* ) The symbolic and artistic
character of the visions we have been discussing is obvious. There is,
however, another form of imaginary vision which must be touched on with
a gentler hand. In this, the imagery seized upon by the subliminal
powers, or placed before the mind by that Somewhat Other of which the
mystic is always conscious over against himself, is at once so vivid, so
closely related to the concrete beliefs and spiritual passions of the
self, and so perfectly expresses its apprehensions of God, that it is
not always recognized as symbolic in kind. A simple example of this is
the vision of Christ at the moment of consecration at Mass, experienced
by so many Catholic ecstatics.  <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md)
Another is St. Margaret Mary Alacoque’s vision of the Sacred Heart. St.
Teresa is one of the few mystics who have detected the true character of
automatisms of this sort: which bring with them—like their purer forms,
the intellectual visions of God—a vivid apprehension of Personality, the
conviction of a living presence, rather than the knowledge of new facts.
“Now and then,” she says of her own imaginary visions of Christ, “it
seemed to me that what I saw was an image: but most frequently it was
not so. I thought it was Christ Himself, judging by the brightness in
which He was pleased to show Himself. Sometimes the vision was so
indistinct, that I <span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_289"></span> thought it was an image: but still, not
like a picture, however well painted, and I have seen a good many
pictures. It would be absurd to suppose that the one bears any
resemblance whatever to the other, for they differ as a living person
differs from his portrait, which, however well drawn, cannot be
lifelike, for it is plain that it is a dead thing.”  <span
id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p102"></span>“The vision,” she says in another place,
“passes as quickly as a flash of lightning, yet this most glorious
picture makes an impression on the imagination that I believe can never
be effaced until the soul at last sees Christ to enjoy Him for ever.
Although I call it a ‘picture,’ you must not imagine that it looks like
a painting; Christ appears as a living Person, Who sometimes speaks and
reveals deep mysteries.”  <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p104"></span>It seems, then, that this swift and
dazzling vision of Divine Personality may represent a true contact of
the soul with the Absolute Life—a contact immediately referred to the
image under which the self is accustomed to think of its God. Obviously
in the case of Christian contemplatives this image will most usually be
the historical Person of Christ, as He is represented in sacred
literature and art.  <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608.md) The
life-enhancing quality of such an abrupt apprehension, however, the
profound sense of reality which it brings, permit of its being classed
not amongst vivid dreams, but amongst those genuine mystic states in
which “the immanent God, formless, but capable of assuming all forms,
expresses Himself in vision as He had expressed Himself in words.”
 <span id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609.md) Certainty and joy are the
feeling-states accompanying this experience; which is as it were a
love-letter received by the ardent soul, bringing with it the very
fragrance of personality, along with the sign-manual of the beloved.

<span id="an_iv.v-p107"></span>This concrete vision of Christ has the
true mystic quality of ineffability, appearing to the self under a form
of inexpressible beauty, illuminated with that unearthly light which is
so persistently reported as a feature of transcendent experience. The
artist’s exalted consciousness of Beauty as a form of Truth is here seen
operating on the transcendental plane. Thus when St. Teresa saw only the
Hands of God, she was thrown into an <span id="page_290">p. 290</span>
<span id="an_iv.v-Page_290"></span> ecstasy of adoration by their
shining loveliness.  <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610.md) “If I were
to spend many years in devising how to picture to myself anything so
beautiful,” she says of the imaginary vision of Christ, “I should never
be able, nor even know how, to do it; for it is beyond the scope of any
possible imagination here below: the whiteness and brilliancy alone are
inconceivable. It is not a brightness which dazzles, but a delicate
whiteness, an infused brightness, giving excessive delight to the eyes,
which are never wearied thereby nor by the visible brightness which
enables us to see a beauty so divine. It is a light so different from
any light here below, that the very brightness of the sun we see, in
comparison with the brightness and light before our eyes, seems to be
something so obscure that no one would ever wish to open his eyes again.
. . . In short, it is such that no man, however gifted he may be, can
ever in the whole course of his life arrive at any imagination of what
it is. God puts it before us so instantaneously, that we could not open
our eyes in time to see it, if it were necessary for us to open them at
all. But whether our eyes be open or shut, it makes no difference
whatever: for when our Lord wills, we must see it, whether we will or
not.”  <span id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p110"></span>There is another and highly important
class of visual automatisms: those which I have chosen to call *Active
Imaginary Visions.* Whereas vision of the passive kind is the expression
of thought, perception, or desire on the part of the deeper self: active
vision is the expression of a change in that self, and generally
accompanies some psychological crisis. In this vision, which always has
a dramatic character, the self seems to itself to act, not merely to
look on. Such visions may possess many of the characters of dreams; they
may be purely symbolic; they may be theologically “realistic.” They may
entail a journey through Hell, Purgatory and Heaven, an excursion into
fairyland, a wrestling with the Angel in the Way. Whatever their outward
form, they are always connected with inward results. They are the
automatic expressions of intense subliminal activity: not merely the
*media* by which the self’s awareness of the Absolute is strengthened
and enriched, but the outward and visible signs of its movement towards
new levels of consciousness. Hence we are not surprised to find that a
dynamic vision of this sort often initiates the Unitive Life. Such are
the imaginary visions reported by St. Francis of Assisi and St.
Catherine of Siena at the moment of their stigmatization: the <span
id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_291"></span>
transverberation of St. Teresa; the heavenly visitor who announced to
Suso his passage from the “lower school” to the “upper school” of the
Holy Spirit.  <span id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612.md) But perhaps the
most picturesque and convincing example of all such dramas of the soul,
is that which is known in art as the “Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine
of Siena.”

<span id="an_iv.v-p112"></span>We have seen that Catherine, who was
subject from childhood to imaginary visions and interior words, had long
been conscious of a voice reiterating the promise of this sacred
bretrothal; and that on the last day of the Carnival, A.D. 1366, it said
to her, “I will this day celebrate solemnly with thee the feast of the
betrothal of thy soul, and even as I promised I will espouse thee to
Myself in faith.” “Then,” says her legend, “whilst the Lord was yet
speaking, there appeared the most glorious Virgin His Mother, the most
blessed John, Evangelist, the glorious Apostle Paul, and the most holy
Dominic, father of her order; and with these the prophet David, who had
the psaltery set to music in his hands; and while he played with most
sweet melody the Virgin Mother of God took the right hand of Catherine
with her most sacred hand, and, holding out her fingers towards the Son,
besought Him to deign to espouse her to Himself in faith. To which
graciously consenting the Only Begotten of God drew out a ring of gold,
which had in its circle four pearls enclosing a most beauteous diamond;
and placing this ring upon the ring finger of Catherine’s right hand He
said, ‘Lo, I espouse thee to Myself, thy Creator and Saviour in the
faith, which until thou dost celebrate thy eternal nuptials with Me in
Heaven thou wilt preserve ever without stain. Henceforth, my daughter,
do manfully and without hesitation those things which by the ordering of
My providence will be put into thy hands; for being now armed with the
fortitude of the faith, thou wilt happily overcome all thy adversaries.’
Then the vision disappeared, but that ring ever remained on her finger,
not indeed to the sight of others, but only to the sight of the virgin
herself; for she often, albeit with bashfulness, confessed to me that
she always saw that ring on her finger, nor was there any time when she
did not see it.”’  <span id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613.md) <span
id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_292"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p114"></span>It is not difficult to discern the
materials from which this vision has been composed. As far as its
outward circumstances go, it is borrowed intact from the legendary
history of St. Catherine of Alexandria, with which her namesake must
have been familiar from babyhood.  <span
id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614.md) Caterina Benincasa showed a
characteristic artistic suggestibility and quickness in transforming the
stuff of this old story into the medium of a profound personal
experience: as her contemporaries amongst the Sienese painters took
subject, method, and composition from the traditional Byzantine source,
yet forced them to become expressions of their overpowering
individuality. The important matter for us, however, is not the way in
which the second Catherine adapted a traditional story to herself,
actualized it in her experience: but the fact that it was for her the
sacramental form under which she became acutely and permanently
conscious of union with God. Long prepared by that growing disposition
of her deeper self which caused her to hear the reiterated promise of
her Beloved, the vision when it came was significant, not for its
outward circumstances, but for its permanent effect upon her life. In it
she passed to a fresh level of consciousness; entering upon that state
of spiritual wedlock, of close and loving identification with the
interests of Christ, which Richard of St. Victor calls the “Third Stage
of Ardent Love.”

<span id="an_iv.v-p116"></span>Of the same active sort is St. Teresa’s
great and celebrated vision, or rather experience, of the
Transverberation; in which imagery and feeling go side by side in their
effort towards expressing the anguish of insatiable love. “I saw,” she
says, “an angel close by me, on my left side, in bodily form. This I am
not accustomed to see unless very rarely. Though I have visions of
angels frequently, yet I see them only by an intellectual vision, such
as I have spoken of before. It was our Lord’s will that in this vision I
should see the angel in this wise. He was not large, but small of
stature, and most beautiful—his face burning, as if he were one of the
highest angels, who seem to be all of fire: they must be those whom we
call Cherubim. . . . I saw in his hand a long spear of gold, and at the
iron’s point there seemed to be a little fire. He appeared to me to be
thrusting it at times into my heart, and to pierce my very entrails;
when he drew it out, he seemed to draw them out also and to leave me all
on fire with a great love of God. The pain was so great that it made me
moan; and yet so surpassing was the sweetness of this excessive pain
that I could not wish to be rid of it. The soul is satisfied now with
nothing less than God. The pain is not bodily, but spiritual; though the
body has its share in it, even a large one. It is a caressing of love so
sweet which now takes <span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_293"></span> place between the soul and God, that I
pray God of His goodness to make him experience it who may think that I
am lying.”  <span id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p118"></span>Finally it should be added that dynamic
vision may assume a purely intellectual form; as in the case of the
Blessed Angela of Foligno. “During last Lent I found myself,” she says,
“altogether in God, without knowing how, and in a way more exalted than
was customary for me. I seemed to be in the midst of the Trinity in a
more exalted way than I had ever been before for greater than usual were
the blessings I received, and I enjoyed these blessings without
interruption. And thus to be absorbed in God filled me with joy and with
delight. And feeling myself to be in this beatitude and this great and
unspeakable delight, which were above all I had experienced before, such
ineffable divine operations took place in my soul, as neither saint nor
angel could describe or explain. And I see and understand that these
divine operations, that unfathomable abyss, no angel or other creature
howsoever great or wise, could comprehend; and all I say now of it
seemeth to me so ill said that it is blasphemy.”  <span
id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616.md)

#### <span id="an_iv.v-p119.1"></span>Automatic Script

<span id="an_iv.v-p120"></span>The rarest of the automatic activities
reported to us in connection with mysticism is that of “automatic
writing.” This form of subliminal action has already been spoken of in
an earlier chapter;  <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617.md) where two
of the most marked examples—Blake and Madame Guyon—are discussed. As
with voice and vision, so this power of automatic composition may and
does exist in various degrees of intensity: ranging from that
“inspiration,” that irresistible impulse to write, of which all artists
are aware, to the extreme form in which the hand of the conscious self
seems to have become the agent of another personality. We are not here
in the presence of phenomena which require a “supernatural” explanation.
From the point of view of the psychologist, the inspirational writing of
the mystics differs in degree rather than in kind from such poetic
creation as that described by de Russet: “it is not work, it is
listening; it is as if some unknown person were speaking in your ear.”
 <span id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618.md) Such subliminal activity is
probably present to some extent in all the literary work of the great
mystics, whose creative power, like that of most poets, is largely
dissociated from the control of the will and the surface intelligence.

<span id="an_iv.v-p123"></span>St. Catherine of Siena, we are told,
dictated her great Dialogue to her secretaries whilst in the state of
ecstasy: which may mean <span id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_294"></span> no more than the absorbed state of
recollection in which the creative faculty works most freely, or may
have been a condition of consciousness resembling the “trance” of
mediums, in which the deeper mind governs the tongue. Had she been more
accustomed to the use of the pen—she did not learn writing until after
the beginning of her apostolic life—that deeper mind would almost
certainly have expressed itself by means of automatic script. As it is,
in the rhythm and exaltation of its periods, the Dialogue bears upon it
all the marks of true automatic composition of the highest type. The
very discursiveness of its style, its loose employment of metaphor, the
strangely mingled intimacy and remoteness of its tone, link it with
prophetic literature; and are entirely characteristic of subliminal
energy of a rich type, dissociated from the criticism and control of the
normal consciousness.  <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p125"></span>So too the writings of Rulman Merswin, if
we accept the ingenious and interesting theory of his psychic state
elaborated by M. Jundt,  <span id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620.md) were
almost wholly of this kind. So Blake insisted that he was “under the
direction of Messengers from Heaven, Daily and Nightly,”  <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621.md) and stated on his deathbed that the
credit for all his works belonged not to himself, but to his “celestial
friends,”  <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622.md) *i.e.* , to the
inspiration of a personality which had access to levels of truth and
beauty unknown to his surface mind.

<span id="an_iv.v-p129"></span>St. Teresa was of much the same opinion
in respect of her great mystical works: which were, she said, like the
speech of a parrot repeating, though he cannot understand, the things
which his master has taught him. There is little doubt that her powers
of composition—as we might expect in one so apt at voice and vision—were
largely of the uncontrolled, inspired, or “automatic” kind. She wrote
most usually after the reception of Holy Communion—that is to say, when
her mystic consciousness was in its most active state—and always
swiftly, without hesitations or amendments. Ideas and images welled up
from her rich and active subliminal region too quickly, indeed, for her
eager, hurrying pen: so that she sometimes exclaimed, “Oh, that I could
write with many hands, so that none were forgotten!”  <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623.md) In Teresa’s unitive state, a slight
suggestion was enough to change the condition of her consciousness,
place her under the complete domination of her deeper mind. Often, she
said, when composing the “Interior Castle,” her work reacted upon
herself. She would suddenly be caught up into the very degree of
contemplation <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_295"></span> which she was trying to describe, and
continued to write in this absorbed or entranced condition, clearly
perceiving that her pen was guided by a power not her own, and expressed
ideas unknown to her surface mind, which filled her with astonishment.

<span id="an_iv.v-p131"></span>In the evidence given during the process
for St. Teresa’s beatification, Maria de San Francisco of Medina, one of
her early nuns, stated that on entering the saint’s cell whilst she was
writing this same “Interior Castle” she found her so absorbed in
contemplation as to be unaware of the external world. “If we made a
noise close to her,” said another, Maria del Nacimiento, “she neither
ceased to write nor complained of being disturbed.” Both these nuns, and
also Ana de la Encarnacion, prioress of Granada, affirmed that she wrote
with immense speed, never stopping to erase or to correct: being
anxious, as she said, to “write what the Lord had given her, before she
forgot it.” They and many others declared that when she was thus writing
she seemed like another being: and that her face, excessively beautiful
in expression, shone with an unearthly splendour which afterwards faded
away.  <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p133"></span>As for Madame Guyon, whose temperament
had in it almost as much of the medium as of the mystic, and whose
passion for quietism and mental passivity left her almost wholly at the
mercy of subconscious impulses, she exhibits by turns the phenomena of
clairvoyance, prophecy, telephathy, and automatic writing, in
bewildering profusion.

<span id="an_iv.v-p134"></span>“I was myself surprised,” she says, “at
the letters which Thou didst cause me to write, and in which I had no
part save the actual movement of my hand: and it was at this time that I
received that gift of writing according to the interior mind, and not
according to my own mind, which I had never known before. Also my manner
of writing was altogether changed, and every one was astonished because
I wrote with such great facility.”  <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p136"></span>Again, “. . . Thou didst make me write
with so great a detachment that I was obliged to leave off and begin
again as Thou didst choose. Thou didst try me in every way: suddenly
Thou wouldst cause me to write, then at once to cease, and then to begin
again. When I wrote during the day, I would be suddenly interrupted, and
often left words half written, and afterwards Thou wouldst give me
whatever was pleasing to Thee. Nothing of that which I wrote was in my
mind: my mind, in fact, was so wholly at liberty that it seemed a blank,
I was so detached from that which I wrote that it seemed foreign to me.
. . . All the faults in my writings come from this: that being
unaccustomed to the operations of God, I was <span id="page_296">p.
296</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_296"></span> often unfaithful to them,
thinking that I did well to continue writing when I had time, without
being moved thereto, because I had been told to finish the work. So that
it is easy to distinguish the parts which are fine and sustained, and
those which have neither savour nor grace. I have left them as they are;
so that the difference between the Spirit of God and the human or
natural spirit may be seen. . . . I continued always to write, and with
an inconceivable swiftness, for the hand could hardly keep up with the
dictating spirit: and during this long work, I never changed my method,
nor did I make use of any book. The scribe could not, however great his
diligence, copy in five days that which I wrote in a single night. . . .
I will add to all that I have been saying on my writings, that a
considerable part of the book on ‘Judges’ was lost. Being asked to
complete it, I rewrote the lost portions. Long afterwards, when I was
moving house, these were found in a place where no one could have
imagined that they would be; and the old and new versions were exactly
alike—a circumstance which greatly astonished those persons of learning
and merit who undertook its verification.”  <span
id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p138"></span>A far greater and stronger mystic than
Madame Guyon, Jacob Boehme, was also in his literary composition the
more or less helpless tool of some power other than his normal
surface-mind. It is clear from his own words that his first book, the
“Aurora,” produced after the great illumination which he received in the
year 1610, was no deliberate composition, but an example of inspired or
automatic script. This strange work, full of sayings of a deep yet
dazzling darkness, was condemned by the local tribunal; and Boehme was
forbidden to write more. For seven years he obeyed. Then “a new motion
from on high” seized him, and under the pressure of this subliminal
impulse—which, characteristically, he feels as coming from without not
from within—he began to write again.

<span id="an_iv.v-p139"></span>This second outburst of composition, too,
was almost purely automatic in type. The transcendental consciousness
was in command, and Boehme’s surface-intellect could exert but little
control. “Art,” he says of it himself, “has not wrote here, neither was
there any time to consider how to set it punctually down, according to
the Understanding of the Letters, but all was ordered according to the
Direction of the Spirit, which often went in haste, so that in many
words Letters may be wanting, and in some Places a Capital Letter for a
Word; so that the Penman’s Hand, by reason he was not accustomed to it,
did often shake. And though I could have <span id="page_297">p.
297</span> <span id="an_iv.v-Page_297"></span> wrote in a more accurate,
fair and plain Manner, yet the Reason was this, that the burning Fire
often forced forward with Speed and the Hand and Pen must hasten
directly after it, for it comes and goes as a sudden shower.”  <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627.md)

<span id="an_iv.v-p141"></span>No description could give more vividly
than this the spontaneous and uncontrollable character of these
automatic states; the welling-up of new knowledge, the rapid formation
of sentences: so quick, that the hand of the subject can hardly keep
pace with that “burning Fire,” the travail of his inner mind. As in
vision, so here, the contents of that inner mind, its hoarded memories
will influence the form of the message. Hence, in Boehme’s works, the
prevalence of that obscure Kabalistic and Alchemical imagery which
baffles even his most eager readers, and which is the result of an
earlier acquaintance with the works of Paracelsus, Weigel, and Sebastian
Franck.  <span id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628.md) Such language, however,
no more discredits the “power behind the pen,” than the form under which
St. Catherine of Siena apprehended the mystic marriage discredits her
attainment of the unitive life. In the fruit of such automatic travail,
such a “wrestling with the Angel in the way,” the mystic offers to our
common humanity the chalice of the Spirit of Life. We may recognize the
origins of the ornament upon the chalice: but we cannot justly charge
him with counterfeiting the Wine.

<span id="an_iv.v-p143"></span>We have been dealing throughout this
section with means rather than with ends: means snatched at by the
struggling self which has not yet wholly shaken itself free from
“image,” in its efforts to seize somehow—actualize, enjoy, and
adore—that Absolute which is the sum of its desires. No one will ever
approach an understanding of this phase of the mystical consciousness,
who brings to it either a contempt for the minds which could thus simply
and sometimes childishly objectivize the Divine, or a superstitious
reverence for the image, apart from the formless Reality at which it
hints. Between these two extremes lies our hope of grasping the true
place of automatisms on the Mystic Way: of seeing in them instances of
the adaptation of those means by which we obtain consciousness of the
phenomenal world, to an apprehension of that other world whose
attainment is humanity’s sublimest end.

<span id="an_iv.v-p144"></span><span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="an_iv.v-Page_298"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_557"></span>[267:558](myst16.htm#fr_557.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p3"></span> “Studies in Mystical Religion,” p. 165.
Those who wish to study the “rationalist” argument in an extreme form
are directed to Prof. Janet, “L’Automatisme psychologique” and “L’État
mentale des hysteriques,” and Prof. Leuba, “Introduction to the
Psychology of Religious Mysticism.”

<span id="fn_558"></span>[267:559](myst16.htm#fr_558.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p5"></span> On the difference in this respect between
the “normal” and the “average,” see Granger, “The Soul of a Christian,”
p. 12.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[267:560](myst16.htm#fr_559.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p7"></span> See St. Angèle de Foligno, *op. cit* ., p.
130 (English translation, p. 245).

<span id="fn_560"></span>[268:561](myst16.htm#fr_560.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p8"></span> Poulain, “Les Graces d’Oraison,” cap. xx.
Farges, “Mystical Phenomena,” and Ribet’s elaborate work, “La Mystique
Divine,” well represent the “supernaturalist” position. As against the
“rationalistic” theory of stigmatization already described, one feels
that this last-named writer hardly advances his own cause when he
insists on attributing equal validity ( *a* ) to the Stigmata as marks
of the Divine, ( *b* ) to the imprint of a toad, bat, spider <span
id="an_iv.v-p8.1"></span>“ou de tout autre objet exprimant l’abjection”
on the bodies of those who have had commerce with the devil (tome iii.
p. 482).

<span id="fn_561"></span>[268:562](myst16.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p10"></span> *Vide infra,* quotations from Hilton and
St. John of the Cross. Also Rolle “The Fire of Love,” Prologue. E.
Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena,” p. 15. Von Hügel, “The Mystical
Element of Religion,” vol. i. pp. 178-181.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[268:563](myst16.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p11"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. xliii.
I have restored the bold language of the original, which is somewhat
toned down in modern versions.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[269:564](myst16.htm#fr_563.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p13"></span> Here as elsewhere the reader will kindly
recollect that all spatial language is merely symbolic when used in
connection with spiritual states.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[269:565](myst16.htm#fr_564.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p15"></span> For instance when Margaret Ebner, the
celebrated “Friend of God,” heard a voice telling her that Tauler, who
was the object of great veneration in the circle to which she belonged,
was the man whom God loved best and that He dwelt in him like melodious
music (see Rufus Jones, *op. cit* ., p. 257).

<span id="fn_565"></span>[269:566](myst16.htm#fr_565.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p16"></span> “There are persons to be met with,” says
St. Teresa, “and I have known them myself, who have so feeble a brain
and imagination that they think they see whatever they are thinking
about, and this is a very dangerous condition.” (“El Castillo Interior,”
Moradas Cuartas, cap. iii.)

<span id="fn_566"></span>[269:567](myst16.htm#fr_566.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p17"></span> The dream-theory of vision is well and
moderately stated by Pratt: “The Religious Consciousness,” cap. xviii,
pp. 402 *seq.* But his statement *(loc. cit.)* that “the visions of the
mystics are determined in content by their belief, and are due to the
dream imagination working upon the mass of theological material which
fills the mind” is far too absolute.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[269:568](myst16.htm#fr_567.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p19"></span> The book of Angela of Foligno, already
cited, contains a rich series of examples.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[270:569](myst16.htm#fr_568.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p20"></span> “Sur la psychologie du Mysticisme” (
*Revue* *Philosophique,* February, 1902 *).*

<span id="fn_569"></span>[270:570](myst16.htm#fr_569.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p23"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. lxvi.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[270:571](myst16.htm#fr_570.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p24"></span> Vida, cap. xxxi. §§ 5 and 10.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[270:572](myst16.htm#fr_571.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p25"></span> Thus too in the case of St. Catherine of
Siena, the intense spiritual strain of that three years’ retreat which I
have already described *(supra,* Pt. II, Cap 1.) showed itself towards
the end of the period by a change in the character of her visions.
These, which had previously been wholly concerned with intuitions of the
good and beautiful, now took on an evil aspect and greatly distressed
her (Vita (Acta SS.), i. xi. 1; see E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of
Siena,” p. 20). We are obliged to agree with Pratt that such visions as
these are “pathological phenomena quite on a level with other
hallucinations.”(“The Religious Consciousness,” p 405.)

<span id="fn_572"></span>[271:573](myst16.htm#fr_572.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p28"></span> An excellent example of such
appropriation of material is related without comment by Huysmans
(“Sainte Lyndwine de Schiedam,” p. 258): “Lydwine found again in heaven
those forms of adoration, those ceremonial practices of the divine
office, which she had known here below during her years of health. The
Church Militant had been, in fact, initiated by the inspiration of its
apostles, its popes, and its saints into the liturgic joys of Paradise.”
In this same vision, which occurred on Christmas Eve, when the hour of
the Nativity was rung from the belfries of heaven, the Divine Child
appeared on His Mother’s knee: just as the crèche is exhibited in
Catholic churches the moment that Christmas has dawned.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[272:574](myst16.htm#fr_573.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p29"></span> Testament, cap. iii.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[273:575](myst16.htm#fr_574.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p33"></span> E. Gardner “St. Catherine of Siena,” p.
25.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[273:576](myst16.htm#fr_575.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p34"></span> Delacroix, “Études sur le Mysticisme,” p.
114.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[274:577](myst16.htm#fr_576.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p38"></span> Missale Romanum. Praeparatio ad Missam;
Die Dominica.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[274:578](myst16.htm#fr_577.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p39"></span> Given in Poulain: “Les Grâces d’Oraison,”
p. 318.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[275:579](myst16.htm#fr_578.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p41"></span> “El Castillo Interior.” Moradas Sextas,
cap. iii.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[275:580](myst16.htm#fr_579.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p44"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. ii. cap.
xxvii.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[275:581](myst16.htm#fr_580.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p45"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. ii. cap.
xxvii.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[276:582](myst16.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p46.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p47"></span> Vida. cap. xxv. §§ *2,* 5, 6. See also
for a detailed discussion of all forms of auditions St. John of the
Cross, *op. cit* ., I. ii. caps. xxviii. to xxxi.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[276:583](myst16.htm#fr_582.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p48.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p49"></span> “El Libro de las Fundaciones” is full of
instances.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[276:584](myst16.htm#fr_583.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p51"></span> Suso, “Buchlein von der ewigen Weisheit,”
Prologue.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[277:585](myst16.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p52.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p53"></span> “Fioretti,” “Delle Istimate,” *2.;* E.
Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena.” p. 15; Rolle, “The Fire of Love,” bk.
i. cap. xvi., and other places.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[277:586](myst16.htm#fr_585.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p54.3"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p55"></span> Leben, cap. vi.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[278:587](myst16.htm#fr_586.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p58.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p59"></span> Compare p. 80.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[279:588](myst16.htm#fr_587.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p61.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p62"></span> “Les Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique.” p. 149.

<span id="fn_588"></span>[280:589](myst16.htm#fr_588.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p63.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p64"></span> Here the exception which proves the rule
is Blake. But Blake’s visions differed in some important respects from
those of his fellow-mystics. They seem to have been “corporeal,” not
“imaginary” in type, and were regarded by him as actual perceptions of
that “real and eternal world” in which he held that it was man’s
privilege to dwell.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[280:590](myst16.htm#fr_589.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p64.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p65"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. i. cap.
xi.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[281:591](myst16.htm#fr_590.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p66.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p67"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. ii. cap.
xi. The whole chapter should be read in this connection.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[281:592](myst16.htm#fr_591.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p68.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p69"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. ii. cap.
xvi.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[281:593](myst16.htm#fr_592.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p70.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p71"></span> El Castillo Interior,” Moradas Sextas,
cap. iii.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[282:594](myst16.htm#fr_593.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p74.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p75"></span> St. Angels de Foligno, “Livre de
l’Expérience des Vrais Fidèles,” pp. 170 *seq.* (English translation, p.
24).

<span id="fn_594"></span>[283:595](myst16.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p76.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p77"></span> “It is not like that presence of God
which is frequently felt . . . this is a great grace . . . but it is not
vision” (St. Teresa, Vida, cap, xxvii. § 6).

<span id="fn_595"></span>[283:596](myst16.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p77.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p78"></span> *Op. cit., loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_596"></span>[283:597](myst16.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p78.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p79"></span> St. Teresa, “El Castillo Interior,”
Moradas Sextas, cap. viii.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[284:598](myst16.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p80.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p81"></span> Leben, cap. liv.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[285:599](myst16.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p85"></span> St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxvii. §§ 2-5.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[285:600](myst16.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p86.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p87"></span> “For oft, when on my couch I lie  
In vacant or in pensive mood,  
They flash upon that inward eye  
Which is the bliss of solitude:  
And then my heart with pleasure fills  
And dances with the daffodils.”

<span id="an_iv.v-p88"></span> *Wordsworth* , “The Daffodils.”

<span id="fn_600"></span>[285:601](myst16.htm#fr_600.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p88.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p89"></span> Leben, cap. vii.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[286:602](myst16.htm#fr_601.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p91.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p92"></span> Suso, Leben, cap. vi.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[287:603](myst16.htm#fr_602.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p93.19"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p94"></span> Par. xxx. 61-81: “And I saw light in the
form of a river blazing with radiance, streaming between banks painted
with a marvellous spring. Out of that river issued living sparks and
settled on the flowers on every side, like rubies set in gold. Then, as
it were inebriated by the perfume, they plunged again into the wondrous
flood, and as one entered another issued forth. . . . Then added the Sun
of my eyes: The river, the topazes that enter and come forth, the
smiling flowers are shadowy foretastes of their reality. Not that these
things are themselves imperfect; but on thy side is the defect, in that
thy vision cannot rise so high.” This passage probably owes something to
Mechthild of Magdeburg’s concept of Deity as a Flowing Light.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[287:604](myst16.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p95.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p96"></span> Mechthild of Hackborn, “Liber Specialis
Gratiae,” I. ii. caps. xvii. and xxxv.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[288:605](myst16.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p97.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p98"></span> Pratt, “The Religious Consciousness,” p.
404.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[288:606](myst16.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p99.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p100"></span> For instance, the Blessed Angela of
Foligno, who gives in her “Revelations” a complete series of such
experiences, ranging from an apprehension of Divine Beauty “shining from
within and surpassing the splendour of the sun” *(op. cit.,* p. 64,
English translation, p. 222)to a concrete vision of two eyes shining in
the Host *(loc. cit.,* English translation, p. 230).“I saw Him most
plainly with the eyes of the mind,” she says, “first living, suffering,
bleeding, crucified, and then dead upon the Cross” (p. *326,* English
translation p. 223).“Another time I beheld the Child Christ in the
consecrated Host. He Appeared beautiful and full of majesty, He seemed
as a child of twelve years of age (p. 67. English translation, p. 229).

<span id="fn_606"></span>[289:607](myst16.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p100.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p101"></span> Vida, cap. xxviii. § 11.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[289:608](myst16.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p102.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p103"></span> ”El Castillo Interior,” Moradas Sextas,
cap. ix.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[289:609](myst16.htm#fr_608.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p104.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p105"></span> “On one of the feasts of St. Paul, while
I was at Mass, there stood before me the most sacred Humanity as
painters represent Him after the resurrection” (St. Teresa, Vida, cap.
xxviii § 4). So too the form assumed by many of the visions of Angela of
Foligno is obviously due to her familiarity with the frescoed churches
of Assisi and the Vale of Spoleto. “When I bent my knees upon entering
in at the door of the church,” she says, “I immediately beheld a picture
of St. Francis lying in Christ’s bosom. Then said Christ unto me, ‘Thus
closely will I hold thee and so much closer, that bodily eyes can
neither perceive nor comprehend it’.” *(op. cit.,* p. 53. English
translation, p. 165).

<span id="fn_609"></span>[289:610](myst16.htm#fr_609.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p105.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p106"></span> Delacroix. “Études sur le Mysticisme.”
p. 116.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[290:611](myst16.htm#fr_610.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p107.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p108"></span> Vida, cap. xxviii. § 2.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[290:612](myst16.htm#fr_611.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p108.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p109"></span> St. Teresa, *op. cit* ., cap. xxviii. §§
7, 8. Angela of Foligno says of a similar vision of Christ, “His beauty
and adornment were so great . . . and so great was my joy at the sight,
that I think I shall never lose it. And so great was my certitude that I
cannot doubt it in any point” (St. Angèle de Foligno, *op. cit* ., p.
66. English translation, p. 229).

<span id="fn_612"></span>[291:613](myst16.htm#fr_612.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p110.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p111"></span> Leben, cap. xxi.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[291:614](myst16.htm#fr_613.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p112.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p113"></span> E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena,” p.
25. Vita, i. xii. 1, 2 (Acta S.S., *loc. cit* .). In the ring which she
always saw upon her finger. we seem to have an instance of true
corporeal vision; which finds a curiously exact parallel in the life of
St. Teresa. “On one occasion when I was holding in my hand the cross of
my rosary, He took it from me into His own hand. He returned it, but it
was then four large stones incomparably more precious than diamonds. He
said to me that for the future that cross would so appear to me always:
*and so it did.* I never saw the wood of which it was made, but only the
precious stones. They were seen, however, by no one else” (Vida, cap.
xxix. § 8). This class of experience, says Augustine Baker, particularly
gifts of roses, rings, and jewels, is “much to be suspected,” except in
“souls of a long-continued sanctity” (“Holy Wisdom.” Treatise iii. § iv.
cap. iii.).

<span id="fn_614"></span>[292:615](myst16.htm#fr_614.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p114.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p115"></span> *Vide* “Legenda Aurea,” Nov. xxv.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[293:616](myst16.htm#fr_615.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p116.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p117"></span> Vida, cap. xxix. §§ 16, 17.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[293:617](myst16.htm#fr_616.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p118.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p119"></span> St. Angèle de Foligno *op. cit* ., p.
232 (English translation, p. 186).

<span id="fn_617"></span>[293:618](myst16.htm#fr_617.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p120.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p121"></span> P. 66.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[293:619](myst16.htm#fr_618.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p121.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p122"></span> Quoted by Prescott, “The Poetic Mind,”
p. 102.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[294:620](myst16.htm#fr_619.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p123.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p124"></span> On this point I must respectfully differ
from Mr. E. Gardner. See his “St. Catherine of Siena,” p. 354.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[294:621](myst16.htm#fr_620.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p125.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p126"></span> *Supra* , p. 185.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[294:622](myst16.htm#fr_621.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p126.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p127"></span> Quoted by M. Wilson, “Life of William
Blake,” p. 135.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[294:623](myst16.htm#fr_622.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p127.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p128"></span> Berger, “William Blake,” p. 54.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[294:624](myst16.htm#fr_623.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p129.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p130"></span> G. Cunninghame Graham. “Santa Teresa.”
vol. i, pp. 202.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[295:625](myst16.htm#fr_624.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p131.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p132"></span> G. Cunninghame Graham. “Santa Teresa.”
vol. i, pp. 203-4.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[295:626](myst16.htm#fr_625.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p134.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p135"></span> Vie, pt. ii. cap. ii.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[296:627](myst16.htm#fr_626.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p136.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p137"></span> Vie, pt. ii. cap. xxi. Those who wish to
compare this vivid subjective account of automatic writing with modern
attested instances may consult Myers, “Human Personality,” and Oliver
Lodge, “The Survival of Man.”

<span id="fn_627"></span>[297:628](myst16.htm#fr_627.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p139.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p140"></span> Works of Jacob Boehme (English
translation, vol. i. p. xiv.).

<span id="fn_628"></span>[297:629](myst16.htm#fr_628.md) <span
id="an_iv.v-p141.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.v-p142"></span> See E. Boutroux, “Le Philosophe
Allemand, Jacob Boehme.”

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Introversion. Part I: Recollection and Qui](myst17.md)

</div>
