<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst12)  [Next](myst14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II. The Awakening of the Self

<span id="an_iv.ii"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p1"></span>First<span id="an_iv.ii-p1.1"></span> in
the sequence of the mystic states, we must consider that decisive event,
the awakening of the transcendental consciousness.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p2"></span>This awakening, from the psychological
point of view, appears to be an intense form of the phenomenon of
“conversion”; and closely akin to those deep and permanent conversions
of the adult type which some religious psychologists call
“sanctification.”  <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) It is a
disturbance of the equilibrium of the self, which results in the
shifting of the field of consciousness from lower to higher levels, with
a consequent removal of the centre of interest from the subject to an
object now brought into view: the necessary beginning of any process of
transcendence. It must not, however, be confused or identified with
religious conversion as ordinarily understood: the sudden and emotional
acceptance of theological beliefs which the self had previously either
rejected or treated as conventions dwelling upon the margin of
consciousness and having no meaning for her actual life. The mechanical
process may be much the same; but the material involved, the results
attained, belong to a higher order of reality.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p4"></span>“Conversion,” says Starbuck, in words
which are really far more descriptive of mystical awakening than of the
revivalistic phenomena encouraged by American Protestantism, “is
primarily an unselfing. The first birth of the individual is into his
own little world. He is controlled by the deep-seated instincts of
self-preservation and self-enlargement—instincts which are, doubtless, a
direct <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_177"></span> inheritance from his brute ancestry. The
universe is organized around his own personality as a centre.”
Conversion, then, is “the larger world-consciousness now pressing in on
the individual consciousness. Often it breaks in suddenly and becomes a
great new revelation. This is the first aspect of conversion: the person
emerges from a smaller limited world of existence into a larger world of
being. His life becomes swallowed up in a larger whole.”  <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p6"></span>All conversion entails the abrupt or
gradual emergence of intuitions from below the threshold, the consequent
remaking of the field of consciousness, an alteration in the self’s
attitude to the world. “It is,” says Pratt, “a change of taste—the most
momentous one that ever occurs in human experience.”  <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) But in the mystic this process is
raised to the nth degree of intensity, for in him it means the first
emergence of that passion for the Absolute which is to constitute his
distinctive character: an emergence crucial in its effect on every
department of his life. Those to whom it happens, often enough, are
already “religious”: sometimes deeply and earnestly so. Rulman Merswin,
St. Catherine of Genoa, George Fox, Lucie-Christine—all these had been
bred up in piety, and accepted in its entirety the Christian tradition.
They were none the less conscious of an utter change in their world when
this opening of the soul’s eye took place.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p8"></span>Sometimes the emergence of the mystical
consciousness is gradual, unmarked by any definite crisis. The self
slides gently, almost imperceptibly, from the old universe to the new.
The records of mysticism, however, suggest that this is exceptional:
that travail is the normal accompaniment of birth. In another type, of
which George Fox is a typical example, there is no conversion in the
ordinary sense; but a gradual and increasing lucidity, of which the
beginning has hardly been noticed by the self, intermittently
accompanies the pain, misery of mind, and inward struggles
characteristic of the entrance upon the Way of Purgation. Conversion and
purification then go hand in hand, finally shading off into the serenity
of the Illuminated State. Fox’s “Journal” for the year 1647 contains a
vivid account of these “showings” or growing transcendental perceptions
of a mind not yet at one with itself, and struggling towards clearness
of sight. “Though my exercises and troubles,” he says, “were very great,
yet were they not so continual but I had some intermissions, and was
sometimes brought into such a heavenly joy that I thought I had been in
Abraham’s bosom. . . . Thus in the deepest miseries, and in the greatest
sorrows and temptations that many times <span id="page_178">p.
178</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_178"></span> beset me, the Lord in
His mercy did keep me. I found that there were two thirsts in me, the
one after the creatures to get help and strength there; and the other
after the Lord, the Creator. . . . It was so with me, that there seemed
to be two pleadings in me. . . . One day when I had been walking
solitarily abroad and was come home, I was wrapped up in the love of
God, so that I could not but admire the greatness of his love. While I
was in that condition it was opened unto me by the eternal Light and
Power, and I saw clearly therein. . . . But O! then did I see my
troubles, trials, and temptations more clearly than ever I had done.”
 <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p10"></span>The great oscillations of the typical
mystic between joy and pain are here replaced by a number of little
ones. The “two thirsts” of the superficial and spiritual consciousness
assert themselves by turns. Each step towards the vision of the Real
brings with it a reaction. The nascent transcendental powers are easily
fatigued, and the pendulum of self takes a shorter swing. “I was swept
up to Thee by Thy Beauty, and torn away from Thee by my own weight,”
says St. Augustine, crystallizing the secret of this experience in an
unforgettable phrase.  <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p12"></span>Commonly, however, if we may judge from
those first-hand accounts which we possess, mystic conversion is a
single and abrupt experience, sharply marked off from the long, dim
struggles which precede and succeed it. It usually involves a sudden and
acute realization of a splendour and adorable reality in the world—or
sometimes of its obverse, the divine sorrow at the heart of things—never
before perceived. In so far as I am acquainted with the resources of
language, there are no words in which this realization can be described.
It is of so actual a nature that in comparison the normal world of past
perception seems but twilit at the best. Consciousness has suddenly
changed its rhythm and a new aspect of the universe rushes in. The
teasing mists are swept away, and reveal, if only for an instant, the
sharp outline of the Everlasting Hills. “He who knows this will know
what I say, and will be convinced that the soul has then another life.”
 <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p14"></span>In most cases, the onset of this new
consciousness seems to the self so sudden, so clearly imposed from
without rather than developed from within, as to have a supernatural
character. The typical case is, of course, that of St. Paul: the sudden
light, the voice, the ecstasy, the complete alteration of life. We shall
see, however, when we come to study the evidence of those mystics who
have left a detailed record of their preconverted state, that <span
id="page_179">p. 179</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_179"></span> the
apparently abrupt conversion is really, as a rule, the sequel and the
result of a long period of restlessness, uncertainty, and mental stress.
The deeper mind stirs uneasily in its prison, and its emergence is but
the last of many efforts to escape. The temperament of the subject, his
surroundings, the vague but persistent apprehensions of a supersensual
reality which he could not find yet could not forget; all these have
prepared him for it.  <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p16"></span>When, however, the subconscious
intuitions, long ago quickened, are at last brought to birth and the
eyes are opened on new light—and it is significant that an actual sense
of blinding radiance is a constant accompaniment of this state of
consciousness—the storm and stress, the vague cravings and oscillations
of the past life are forgotten. In this abrupt recognition of reality
“all things are made new”: from this point the life of the mystic
begins. Conversion of this sort has, says De Sanctis, three marked
characteristics: a sense of liberation and victory: a conviction of the
nearness of God: a sentiment of love towards God.  <span
id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) We might describe it as a sudden,
intense, and joyous perception of God immanent in the universe; of the
divine beauty and unutterable power and splendour of that larger life in
which the individual is immersed, and of a new life to be lived by the
self in correspondence with this now dominant fact of existence.
“Suddenly,” says the French contemplative Lucie-Christine of the
beginning of her mystical life, “I saw before my inward eyes these
words— *God only . . .* they were at the same time a Light, an
Attraction and a Power. A Light which showed me how I could belong
completely to God alone in this world, and I saw that hitherto I had not
well understood this; an Attraction by which my heart was subdued and
delighted; a Power which inspired me with a generous resolution and
somehow placed in my hands the means of carrying it out.”  <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p19"></span>I will here set down for comparison a few
instances of such mystical conversion; quoting, where this is available,
the actual description left by the subject of his own experience, or in
default of it, the earliest authentic account. In these cases, when
grouped together, we shall see certain constant characteristics, from
which it may be possible to deduce the psychological law to which they
owe their peculiar form. <span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_180"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p20"></span>First in point of time, and perhaps also
in importance, amongst those I have chosen, is the case of that great
poet and contemplative, that impassioned lover of the Absolute, St.
Francis of Assisi. The fact that St. Francis wrote little and lived
much, that his actions were of unequalled simplicity and directness,
long blinded his admirers to the fact that he is a typical mystic: the
only one, perhaps, who forced the most trivial and sordid circumstances
of sensual life to become perfect expressions of Reality.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p21"></span>Now the opening of St. Francis’s eyes,
which took place in A.D. 1206 when he was twenty-four years old, had
been preceded by a long, hard struggle between the life of the world and
the persistent call of the spirit. His mind, in modern language, had not
unified itself. He was a high-spirited boy, full of vitality: a natural
artist, with all the fastidiousness which the artistic temperament
involves. War and pleasure both attracted him, and upon them, says his
legend, he “miserably squandered and wasted his time.”  <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) Nevertheless, he was vaguely
dissatisfied. In the midst of festivities, he would have sudden fits of
abstraction: abortive attempts of the growing transcendental
consciousness, still imprisoned below the threshold but aware of and in
touch with the Real, to force itself to the surface and seize the reins.
“Even in ignorance,” says Thomas of Celano again, “he was being led to
perfect knowledge.” He loved beauty, for he was by nature a poet and a
musician, and shrank instinctively from contact with ugliness and
disease. But something within ran counter to this temperamental bias,
and sometimes conquered it. He would then associate with beggars, tend
the leprous, perform impulsive acts of charity and self-humiliation.
 <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p24"></span>When this divided state, described by the
legend as “the attempt to flee God’s hand,” had lasted for some years,
it happened one day that he was walking in the country outside the gates
of Assisi, and passed the little church of S. Damiano, “the which” (I
again quote from Thomas of Celano’s “Second Life”) “was almost ruinous
and forsaken of all men. And, being led by the Spirit, he went in to
pray; and he fell down before the Crucifix in devout supplication, and
*having been smitten by unwonted visitations, found himself another man
than he who had gone in.”*

<span id="an_iv.ii-p25"></span>Here, then, is the first stage of
conversion. The struggle between two discrepant ideals of life has
attained its term. A sudden and apparently “irrational” impulse to some
decisive act reaches the surface-consciousness from the seething deeps.
The impulse is followed; and the swift emergence of the transcendental
sense <span id="page_181">p. 181</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_181"></span> results. This “unwonted visitation”
effects an abrupt and involuntary alteration in the subject’s
consciousness: whereby he literally “finds himself another man.” He is
as one who has slept and now awakes. The crystallization of this new, at
first fluid apprehension of Reality in the form of vision and audition:
the pointing of the moral, the direct application of truth to the
awakened self, follow. “And whilst he was thus moved, straightway—a
thing unheard of for long ages!—the painted image of Christ Crucified
spoke to him from out its pictured lips. And, calling him by his name,
“Francis,” it said, “go, repair My house, the which as thou seest is
falling into decay.” And Francis trembled, being utterly amazed, and
almost as it were carried away by these words. And he prepared to obey,
for he was wholly set on the fulfilling of this commandment. But
*forasmuch as he felt that the change he had undergone was ineffable,*
it becomes us to be silent concerning it. . . .” From this time he “gave
untiring toil to the repair of that Church. For though the words which
were said to him concerned that divine Church which Christ bought with
His own Blood, he would not hasten to such heights, but little by little
from things of the flesh would pass to those of the Spirit.”  <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p27"></span>In a moment of time, Francis’s whole
universe has suffered complete rearrangement. There are no hesitations,
no uncertainties. The change, which he cannot describe, he knows to be
central for life. Not for a moment does he think of disobeying the
imperative voice which speaks to him from a higher plane of reality and
demands the sacrifice of his career.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p28"></span>Compare now with the experience of St.
Francis that of another great saint and mystic, who combined, as he did,
the active with the contemplative life. Catherine of Genoa, who seems to
have possessed from childhood a religious nature, was prepared for the
remaking of her consciousness by years of loneliness and depression, the
result of an unhappy marriage. She, like St. Francis—but in sorrow
rather than in joy—had oscillated between the world, which did not
soothe her, and religion, which helped her no more. At last, she had
sunk into a state of dull wretchedness, a hatred alike of herself and of
life.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p29"></span>Her emancipation was equally abrupt. In
the year 1474, she being twenty-six years old, “The day after the feast
of St. Benedict (at the instance of her sister that was a nun),
Catherine went to make her confession to the confessor of that nunnery;
but she was not disposed to do it. Then said her sister, ‘At least go
and recommend yourself to him, because he is a most worthy religious’;
and in fact he was a very holy man. And suddenly, as she knelt before
him, she received in her heart the wound of the unmeasured Love <span
id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_182"></span> of God,
with so clear a vision of her own misery and her faults, and of the
goodness of God, that she almost fell upon the ground. And by these
sensations of infinite love, and of the offenses that had been done
against this most sweet God, she was so greatly drawn by purifying
affection away from the poor things of this world that she was almost
beside herself, and for this she cried inwardly with ardent love, ‘No
more world! no more sin!’ And at this point if she had possessed a
thousand worlds, she would have thrown all of them away. . . . And she
returned home, kindled and deeply wounded with so great a love of God,
the which had been shown her inwardly, with the sight of her own
wretchedness, that she seemed beside herself. And she shut herself in a
chamber, the most secluded she could find, with burning sighs. And in
this moment she was inwardly taught the whole practice of orison: but
her tongue could say naught but this—‘O Love, can it be that thou has
called me with so great a love, and made me to know in one instant that
which worlds cannot express?’” This intuition of the Absolute was
followed by an interior vision of Christ bearing the Cross, which
further increased her love and self-abasement. “And she cried again, ‘O
Love, no more sins! no more sins!’ And her hatred of herself was more
than she could endure.”  <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p31"></span>Of this experience Von Hügel says, “If
the tests of reality in such things are their persistence and large and
rich spiritual applicability and fruitfulness, then something profoundly
real and important took place in the soul of that sad and weary woman of
six-and-twenty, within that convent-chapel, at that Annunciation-tide.”
 <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) It is certain that for St.
Catherine, as for St. Francis, an utterly new life did, literally, begin
at this point. The centre of interest was shifted and the field of
consciousness remade. She “knew in an instant that which words cannot
express.” Some veil about her heart was torn away; so abruptly, that it
left a wound behind. For the first time she saw and knew the Love in
which life is bathed; and all the energy and passion of a strong nature
responded to its call.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p33"></span>The conversion of Madame Guyon to the
mystic life, as told by herself in the eighth chapter of Part I. of her
Autobiography—“How a holy Religious caused her to find God within her
heart, with Admirable Results,” is its characteristic title—is curiously
like a dilute version of this experience of St. Catherine’s. It, too,
followed upon a period of mental distress; also the result of an
uncongenial marriage. But since Madame Guyon’s unbalanced, diffuse, and
sentimental character entirely lacks the richness and dignity, the
repressed ardours and exquisite delicacy of <span id="page_183">p.
183</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_183"></span> St. Catherine’s mind,
so, too, her account of her own interior processes is marred by a
terrible and unctuous interest in the peculiar graces vouchsafed to her.
 <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p35"></span>Madame Guyon’s value to the student of
mysticism partly consists in this feeble quality of her
surface-intelligence, which hence had little or no modifying or
contributory effect upon her spiritual life and makes her an ideal
“laboratory specimen” for the religious psychologist. True to her great
principle of passivity or “quiet,” it lets the uncriticized interior
impulses have their way; thus we are able to observe their workings
uncomplicated by the presence of a vigorous intellect or a disciplined
will. The wind that bloweth where it listeth whistles through her soul:
and the response which she makes is that of a weathercock rather than a
windmill. She moves to every current; she often mistakes a draught for
the divine breath; she feels her gyrations to be of enormous importance.
But in the description of her awakening to the deeper life, even her
effusive style acquires a certain dignity.  <span
id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p37"></span>Madame Guyon had from her childhood
exhibited an almost tiresome taste for pious observances. At twelve
years old she studied St. François de Sales and St. Jeanne Françoise de
Chantal; begged her confessor to teach her the art of mental prayer; and
when he omitted to do so, tried to teach herself, but without result.
 <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) She wished at this time to
become a nun of the Visitation, as St. Catherine at the same age wanted
to be an Augustinian canoness; but as the longings of little girls of
twelve for the cloister are seldom taken seriously, we are not surprised
to find the refusal of her parents’ consent chronicled in the chapter
which is headed *“* <span id="an_iv.ii-p38.1"></span> *Diverses croix
chez M. son père* *.”* Growing up into an unusually beautiful young
woman, she went into society, and for a short time enjoyed life in an
almost worldly way. Her marriage with Jacques Guyon, however—a marriage
of which she signed the articles without even being told the
bridegroom’s name—put an end to her gaiety. “The whole town was pleased
by this marriage; and in all this rejoicing only I was sad . . . hardly
was I married, when the remembrance of my old desire to be a nun
overcame me.”  <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p40"></span>Her early married life was excessively
unhappy. She was soon <span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_184"></span> driven to look for comfort in the
practices of religion. “Made to love much, and finding nothing to love
around her, she gave her love to God,” says Guerrier tersely.  <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) But she was not satisfied: like most
of her fellow-contemplatives, she was already vaguely conscious of
something that she missed, some vital power unused, and identified this
something with the “orison of quiet,” the “practice of the presence of
God” which mystically minded friends had described to her. She tried to
attain to it deliberately, and naturally failed. “I could not give
myself by multiplicity that which Thou Thyself givest, and which is only
experienced in simplicity.”  <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p43"></span>When these interior struggles had lasted
for nearly two years, and Madame Guyon was nineteen, the long desired,
almost despaired of, apprehension came—as it did to St.
Catherine—suddenly, magically almost; and under curiously parallel
conditions. It was the result of a few words spoken by a Franciscan
friar whom a “secret force” acting in her interest had brought into the
neighbourhood, and whom she had been advised to consult. He was a
recluse, who disliked hearing the confessions of women, and appears to
have been far from pleased by her visit; an annoyance which he
afterwards attributed to her fashionable appearance, “which filled him
with apprehension.” “He hardly came forward, and was a long time without
speaking to me. I, however, did not fail to speak to him and to tell him
in a few words my difficulties on the subject of orison. He at once
replied, ‘Madame, you are seeking without that which you have within.
Accustom yourself to seek God in your own heart, and you will find him.’
Having said this, he left me. The next morning he was greatly astonished
when I again visited him and told him the effect which these words had
had upon my soul: for, indeed, they were as an arrow, which pierced my
heart through and through. I felt in this moment a *profound wound,*
which was full of delight and of love—a wound so sweet that I desired
that it might never heal. These words had put into my heart that which I
sought for so many years, or, rather, they caused me to find that which
was there. O, my Lord, you were within my heart, and you asked of me
only that I should return within, in order that I might feel your
presence. O, Infinite Goodness, you were so near, and I running here and
there to seek you, found you not!” She, too, like St. Catherine, learned
in this instant the long-sought practice of orison, or contemplation.
“From the moment of which I have spoken, my orison was emptied of all
form, species, and images; nothing of my orison passed through the mind;
but it was an orison of joyous possession in the Will, where the taste
for God was so great, pure, <span id="page_185">p. 185</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_185"></span> and simple that it attracted and absorbed
the two other powers of the soul in a profound recollection without
action or speech.”  <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p45"></span>Take now the case of a less eminent
mystic, who has also left behind him a vivid personal description of his
entrance upon the Mystic Way. Rulman Merswin was a wealthy, pious, and
respected merchant of Strassburg. In the year 1347, when he was about
thirty-six years old, he retired from business in order that he might
wholly devote himself to religious matters. It was the time of that
spiritual revival within the Catholic Church in Germany which, largely
influenced by the great Rhenish mystics Suso and Tauler, is identified
with the “Friends of God”; and Merswin himself was one of Tauler’s
disciples.  <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p47"></span>One evening, in the autumn which followed
his retirement, “about the time of Martinmas,” he was strolling in his
garden alone. Meditating as he walked, a picture of the Crucifix
suddenly presented itself to his mind. In such an imaginary vision as
this there is nothing, of course, that we can call abnormal. The
thoughts of a devout Catholic, influenced by Tauler and his school, must
often have taken such a direction during his solitary strolls. This
time, however, the mental image of the Cross seems to have released
subconscious forces which had long been gathering way. Merswin was
abruptly filled with a violent hatred of the world and of his own
free-will. “Lifting his eyes to heaven he solemnly swore that he would
utterly surrender his own will, person, and goods to the service of
God.”  <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p49"></span>This act of complete surrender, releasing
as it were the earthbound self, was at once followed by the onset of
pure mystical perception. “The reply from on high came quickly. A
brilliant light shone about him: he heard in his ears a divine voice of
<span id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_186"></span>
adorable sweetness; he felt as if he were lifted from the ground and
carried several times completely round his garden.”  <span
id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) Optical disturbance, auditions, and
the sense of levitation, are of course frequent physical accompaniments
of these shiftings of the level of consciousness. There are few cases in
which one or other is not present; and in some we find all. Coming to
himself after this experience, Merswin’s heart was filled by a new
consciousness of the Divine; and by a transport of intense love towards
God which made him undertake with great energy the acts of mortification
which he believed necessary to the purification of his soul. From this
time onwards, his mystical consciousness steadily developed. That it was
a consciousness wholly different in kind from the sincere piety which
had previously caused him to retire from business in order to devote
himself to religious truth, is proved by the name of *Conversion* which
he applies to the vision of the garden; and by the fact that he dates
from this point the beginning of his real life.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p51"></span>The conversion of Merswin’s greater
contemporary, Suso, seems to have been less abrupt. Of its first stage
he speaks vaguely at the beginning of his autobiography, wherein he says
that “he began to be converted when in the eighteenth year of his age.”
 <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) He was at this time, as St.
Francis had been, restless, dissatisfied; vaguely conscious of something
essential to his peace, as yet unfound. His temperament, at once deeply
human and ardently spiritual, passionately appreciative of sensuous
beauty yet unable to rest in it, had not “unified itself”: nor did it do
so completely until after a period of purgation which is probably
unequalled for its austerity in the history of the mysticism of the
West. “He was kept of God in this, that when he turned to those things
that most enticed him he found neither happiness nor peace therein. He
was restless, and-it seemed to him that something which was as yet
unknown could alone give peace to his heart. And he suffered greatly of
this restlessness. . . . God at last delivered him by a complete
conversion. His brothers in religion were astonished by so quick a
change: for the event took them unawares. Some said of it one thing, and
some another: but none could know the reason of his conversion. It was
God Who, *by a* *hidden light,* had caused this return to Himself.”
 <span id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p54"></span>This secret conversion was completed by a
more violent uprush of the now awakened and active transcendental
powers. Suso, whom one can imagine as a great and highly nervous artist
if his <span id="page_187">p. 187</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_187"></span> genius had not taken the channel of
sanctity instead, was subject all his life to visions of peculiar
richness and beauty. Often these visions seem to have floated up, as it
were, from the subliminal region without disturbing the course of his
conscious life; and to be little more than pictorial images of his
ardour towards and intuition of, divine realities. The great ecstatic
vision—or rather apprehension—with which the series opens, however, is
of a very different kind; and represents the characteristic experience
of Ecstasy in its fullest form. It is described with a detail and
intensity which make it a particularly valuable document of the mystical
life. It is doubtful whether Suso ever *saw* more than this: the course
of his long education rather consisted in an adjustment of his nature to
the Reality which he then perceived.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p55"></span>“In the first days of his conversion it
happened upon the Feast of St. Agnes, when the Convent had breakfasted
at midday, that the Servitor went into the choir. He was alone, and he
placed himself in the last stall on the prior’s side. And he was in much
suffering, for a heavy trouble weighed upon his heart. And being there
alone, and devoid of all consolations—no one by his side, no one near
him—of a sudden his soul was rapt in his body, or out of his body. Then
did he see and hear that which no tongue can express.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p56"></span>“That which the Servitor saw had no form
neither any manner of being; yet he had of it a joy such as he might
have known in the seeing of the shapes and substances of all joyful
things. His heart was hungry, yet satisfied, his soul was full of
contentment and joy: his prayers and hopes were all fulfilled. And the
Friar could do naught but contemplate this Shining Brightness, and he
altogether forgot himself and all other things. Was it day or night? He
knew not. It was, as it were, a manifestation of the sweetness of
Eternal Life in the sensations of silence and of rest. Then he said, ‘If
that which I see and feel be not the Kingdom of Heaven, I know not what
it can be: for it is very sure that the endurance of all possible pains
were but a poor price to pay for the eternal possession of so great a
joy.’”

<span id="an_iv.ii-p57"></span>The physical accompaniments of ecstasy
were also present. “This ecstasy lasted from half an hour to an hour,
and whether his soul were in the body or out of the body he could not
tell. But when he came to his senses it seemed to him that he returned
from another world. And so greatly did his body suffer in this short
rapture that it seemed to him that none, even in dying, could suffer so
greatly in so short a time. The Servitor came to himself moaning, and he
fell down upon the ground like a man who swoons. And he cried inwardly,
heaving great sighs from the depth of his soul and saying, ‘Oh, my God,
where was I and where <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_188"></span> am I?’ And again, ‘Oh, my heart’s joy,
never shall my soul forget this hour!’ He walked, but it was but his
body that walked, as a machine might do. None knew from his demeanour
that which was taking place within. But his soul and his spirit were
full of marvels; heavenly lightnings passed and repassed in the deeps of
his being, and it seemed to him that he walked on air. And all the
powers of his soul were full of these heavenly delights. He was like a
vase from which one has taken a precious ointment, but in which the
perfume long remains.”

<span id="an_iv.ii-p58"></span>Finally, the last phrases of the chapter
seem to suggest the true position of this exalted pleasure-state as a
first link in the long chain of mystical development. “This foretaste of
the happiness of heaven,” he says, “the which the Servitor enjoyed for
many days, excited in him a most lively desire for God.”  <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p60"></span>Mystical activity, then, like all other
activities of the self, opens with that sharp stimulation of the will,
which can only be obtained through the emotional life.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p61"></span>Suso was a scholar, and an embryo
ecclesiastic. During the period which elapsed between his conversion and
his description of it, he was a disciple of Meister Eckhart, a student
of Dionysius and St. Thomas Aquinas. His writings show familiarity with
the categories of mystical theology; and naturally enough this
circumstance, and also the fact that they were written for purposes of
edification, may have dictated to some extent the language in which his
conversion-ecstasy is described. As against this, I will give two
first-hand descriptions of mystical conversion in which it is obvious
that theological learning plays little or no part. Both written in
France within a few years of one another, they represent the impact of
Reality on two minds of very different calibre. One is the secret
document in which a great genius set down, in words intended only for
his own eyes, the record of a two hours’ ecstasy. The other is the
plain, unvarnished statement of an uneducated man of the peasant class.
The first is, of course, the celebrated Memorial, or Amulet, of Pascal;
the second is the Relation of Brother Lawrence.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p62"></span>The Memorial of Pascal is a scrap of
parchment on which, round a rough drawing of the Flaming Cross, there
are written a few strange phrases, abrupt and broken words; all we know
about one of the strangest ecstatic revelations chronicled in the
history of the mystic type. After Pascal’s death a servant found a copy
of this little document, now lost, sewn up in his doublet. He seems
always to have worn it upon his person: a perpetual memorial of the
supernal experience, the initiation into Reality, which it describes.
Though Bremand has shown that the opening <span id="page_189">p.
189</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_189"></span> of Pascal’s spiritual
eyes had begun, on his own declaration, eleven months earlier, <span
id="an_iv.ii-p62.1"></span> “d’une manière douce et obligeante,”  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) the conversion thus prepared was only
made actual by this abrupt illumination; ending a long period of
spiritual stress, in which indifference to his ordinary interests was
counterbalanced by an utter inability to feel the attractive force of
that Divine Reality which his great mind discerned as the only adequate
object of desire.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p64"></span>The Memorial opens thus:—

<span id="an_iv.ii-p65"></span>“L’an de grace 1654

<span id="an_iv.ii-p66"></span>lundi, 23 novembre, jour de Saint
Clément, pape

<span id="an_iv.ii-p67"></span>et martyr, et autres au martyrologe,

<span id="an_iv.ii-p68"></span>veille de Saint Chrysogone, martyr et
autres

<span id="an_iv.ii-p69"></span>depuis environ dix heures et demie du
soir jusques

<span id="an_iv.ii-p70"></span>environ minuit et demie,

<span id="an_iv.ii-p71"></span>Feu.”

<span id="an_iv.ii-p72"></span>“From half-past ten till half-past
twelve, Fire!” That is all, so far as description is concerned; but
enough, apparently, to remind the initiate of all that passed. The rest
tells us only the passion of joy and conviction which this nameless
revelation—this long, blazing vision of Reality—brought in its train. It
is but a series of amazed exclamations, crude, breathless words, placed
there helter-skelter, the artist in him utterly in abeyance; the names
of the overpowering emotions which swept him, one after the other, as
the Fire of Love disclosed its secrets, evoked an answering flame of
humility and rapture in his soul.

> <span id="an_iv.ii-p72.1"></span> “Dieu d’Abraham, Dieu d’Isaac, Dieu
> de Jacob,  
> Non des philosophes et des savants.  
> Certitude. Certitude. Sentiment. Joie. Paix”.  

<span id="an_iv.ii-p73"></span>“Not the God of philosophers and of
scholars!” cries in amazement this great scholar and philosopher
abruptly turned from knowledge to love.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p74"></span>“Oubli du monde et de tout hormis Dieu,”
he says again, seeing his universe suddenly swept clean of all but this
Transcendent Fact. Then, <span id="an_iv.ii-p74.1"></span> “Le monde ne
t’a point connu, *mais je t’ai connu.* Joie! joie joie! pleurs de joie!”
Compare with the classic style, the sharp and lucid definition of the
“Pensées,” the irony and glitter of the “Provinciales,” these little
broken phrases—this child-like stammering speech—in which a supreme
master of language has tried to tell his wonder and his delight. I know
few things in the history of mysticism at once more convincing, more
poignant than this hidden talisman; upon which the brilliant <span
id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_190"></span> scholar
and stylist, the merciless disputant, has jotted down in hard, crude
words, which yet seem charged with passion—the inarticulate language of
love—a memorial of the certitude, the peace, the joy, above all, the
reiterated, all-surpassing joy, which accompanied his ecstatic
apprehension of God.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p75"></span>“ <span id="an_iv.ii-p75.1"></span> Mon
Dieu, me quitterez vous?” he says again; the fire apparently beginning
to die down, the ecstasy drawing to an end. “ <span
id="an_iv.ii-p75.2"></span> Que je n’en sois pas séparé éternellement!”
“Are you going to leave me? Oh, let me not be separated from you for
ever!—the one unendurable thought which would, said Aquinas, rob the
Beatific Vision of its glory, were we not sure that it can never fade.
 <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) But the rhapsody is over, the
vision of the Fire has gone; and the rest of the Memorial clearly
contains Pascal’s meditations upon his experience, rather than a
transcript of the experience itself. It ends with the watchword of all
mysticism, Surrender—“ <span id="an_iv.ii-p76.1"></span> Renonciation,
totale et douce” in Pascal’s words—the only way, he thinks, in which he
can avoid continued separation from Reality.  <span
id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p78"></span>Pascal’s vision of Light, Life, and Love
was highly ecstatic; an indescribable, incommunicable experience, which
can only be suggested by his broken words of certitude and joy. By his
simple contemporary, Brother Lawrence, that Transcendent Reality Who “is
not the God of philosophers and scholars,” was perceived in a moment of
abrupt intuition, peculiarly direct, unecstatic and untheological in
type, but absolutely enduring in its results. Lawrence was an uneducated
young man of the peasant class; who first served as a soldier, and
afterwards as a footman in a great French family, where he annoyed his
masters by breaking everything. When he was between fifty and sixty
years of age, he entered the Carmelite Order as a lay brother; and the
letters, “spiritual maxims,” and conversations belonging to this period
of his life were published after his death in 1691. “He told me,” says
the anonymous reporter of the conversations, supposed to be M. Beaufort,
who was about 1660 Grand Vicar to the Cardinal de Noailles, “that God
had done him a singular favour in his conversion at the age of eighteen.
That in the winter, seeing a tree stripped of its leaves, and
considering that within a little time the leaves would be renewed, and
after that the flowers and fruit appear, he received a high view of the
Providence and Power of God, which has never since been effaced from his
soul. That this <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_191"></span> view had set him perfectly loose from the
world and kindled in him such a love for God that he could not tell
whether it had increased in above forty years that he had lived since.”
 <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p80"></span>Such use of visible nature as the stuff
of ontological perceptions, the medium whereby the self reaches out to
the Absolute, is not rare in the history of mysticism. The mysterious
vitality of trees, the silent magic of the forest, the strange and
steady cycle of its life, possess in a peculiar degree this power of
unleashing the human soul: are curiously friendly to its cravings,
minister to its inarticulate needs. Unsullied by the corroding touch of
consciousness, that life can make a contact with the “great life of the
All”; and through its mighty rhythms man can receive a message
concerning the true and timeless World of “all that is, and was, and
evermore shall be.” Plant life of all kinds, indeed, from the “flower in
the crannied wall” to the “Woods of Westermain” can easily become, for
selves of a certain type, a “mode of the Infinite.” So obvious does this
appear when we study the history of the mystics, that Steiner has drawn
from it the hardly warrantable inference that “plants are just those
natural phenomena whose qualities in the higher world are similar to
their qualities in the physical world.”  <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p82"></span>Though the conclusion be not convincing,
the fact remains. The flowery garment of the world is for some mystics a
medium of ineffable perception, a source of exalted joy, the veritable
clothing of God. I need hardly add that such a state of things has
always been found incredible by common sense. “The tree which moves some
to tears of joy,” says Blake, who possessed in an eminent degree this
form of sacramental perception, “is in the Eyes of others only a green
thing that stands in the Way.”  <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p84"></span>Such a perception of the Divine in
Nature, of the true and holy meaning of that rich, unresting life in
which we are immersed, is really a more usual feature of Illumination
than of Conversion. All the most marked examples of it must be referred
to that state; and will be discussed when we come to its consideration.
Sometimes, however, as in the case of Brother Lawrence, the first
awakening of the self to consciousness of Reality does take this form.
The Uncreated Light manifests Itself in and through created things. This
characteristically immanental discovery of the Absolute occurs chiefly
in two classes: in unlettered men who have lived close to Nature, and to
whom her symbols are more familiar than those of the Churches or the
schools, and in temperaments of the mixed or mystical type, who are
nearer to the poet than to the true contemplative, for whom as a rule
the Absolute <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_192"></span> “hath no image.” “It was like entering
into another world, a new state of existence,” says a witness quoted by
Starbuck, speaking of his own conversion. “Natural objects were
glorified. My spiritual vision was so clarified that I saw beauty in
every material object in the universe. The woods were vocal with
heavenly music.” “Oh, how I was changed! Everything became new. My
horses and hogs and everybody became changed!” exclaims with naive
astonishment another in the same collection.  <span
id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) “When I went in the morning into the
fields to work,” says a third, “the glory of God appeared in all His
visible creation. I well remember we reaped oats, and how every straw
and head of the oats seemed, as it were, arrayed in a kind of rainbow
glory, or to glow, if I may so express it, in the glory of God.”  <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p87"></span>Amongst modern men, Walt Whitman
possessed in a supreme degree the permanent sense of this glory, the
“light rare, untellable, lighting the very light.”  <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) But evidences of its existence, and
the sporadic power of apprehending it, are scattered up and down the
literature of the world. Its discovery constitutes the awakening of the
mystical consciousness in respect of the World of Becoming: a sharp and
sudden break with the old and obvious way of seeing things. The human
cinematograph has somehow changed its rhythm, and begins to register new
and more real aspects of the external world. With this, the self’s first
escape from the limitations of its conventional universe, it receives an
immense assurance of a great and veritable life surrounding, sustaining,
explaining its own. Thus Richard Jefferies says, of the same age as that
at which Suso and Brother Lawrence awoke to sudden consciousness of
Reality, “I was not more than eighteen when an inner and esoteric
meaning began to come to me from all the visible universe.” “I now
became lost, and absorbed into the being or existence of the universe .
. . and losing thus my separateness of being, came to seem like a part
of the whole.” “I feel on the margin of a life unknown, very near,
almost touching it—on the verge of powers which, if I could grasp, would
give men an immense breadth of existence.”  <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p90"></span>What was this “life unknown” but the Life
known to the great mystics, which Richard Jefferies apprehended in these
moments of insight, yet somehow contrived to miss?

<span id="an_iv.ii-p91"></span>Such participation in the deep realities
of the World of Becoming, the boundless existence of a divine
whole—which a modern <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_193"></span> psychologist has labelled and described
as “Cosmic Consciousness”  <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378)
—whilst it is not the final object of the mystic’s journey, is a
constant feature of it. It may represent one-half of his characteristic
consciousness: an entrance into communion with the second of the Triune
Powers of God, the Word which “is through all things everlastingly.”
Jefferies stood, as so many mystically minded men have done, upon the
verge of such a transcendental life. The “heavenly door,” as Rolle calls
it, was ajar but not pushed wide. He peeped through it to the greater
world beyond; but, unable to escape from the bonds of his selfhood, he
did not pass through to live upon the independent spiritual plane.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p93"></span>Rolle, Jefferies’s fellow countryman, and
his predecessor by close upon six hundred years in the ecstatic love and
understanding of natural things, shall be our last example of the
mystical awakening. He, like his spiritual brother St. Francis, and
other typical cases, had passed through a preliminary period of struggle
and oscillation between worldly life and a vague but growing
spirituality: between the superficial and the deeper self. “My youth was
fond, my childhood vain, my young age unclean,”  <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) but “when I should flourish unhappily,
and youth of wakeful age was now come, the grace of my Maker was near,
the which lust of temporal shape restrained, and unto ghostly
supplications turned my desires, and the soul, from low things lifted,
to heaven has borne.”  <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p96"></span>The real “life-changing,” however, was
sharply and characteristically marked off from this preparatory state.
Rolle associates it with the state which he calls “Heat”: the form in
which his ardour of soul was translated to the surface consciousness.
“Heat soothly I call when the mind truly is kindled in Love Everlasting,
and the heart on the same manner to burn not hopingly but verily is
felt. The heart truly turned into fire, gives feeling of burning love.”
 <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) This burning heat is not merely
a mental experience. In it we seem to have an unusual but not unique
form of psychophysical parallelism: a bodily expression of the psychic
travail and distress accompanying the “New Birth.”  <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) “More have I marvelled than I show,
forsooth,” he says in his prologue, “when I first felt my heart wax
warm, and truly, *not imaginingly, but as it were with a sensible fire*
, burned. I was forsooth marvelled, as this burning burst up in my soul,
and of an unwonted solace; for <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_194"></span> in my ignorance of such healing
abundance, oft have I groped my breast, seeing whether this burning were
of any bodily cause outwardly. But when I knew that only it was kindled
of ghostly cause inwardly, and this burning was naught of fleshly love
or desire, in this I conceived it was the gift of my Maker.”  <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) Further on, he gives another and more
detailed account. “From the beginning, forsooth, of my life-changing and
of my mind, to the opening of the heavenly door which Thy Face showed,
that the heart might behold heavenly things and see by what way its Love
it might seek and busily desire, three years are run except three months
or four. The door, forsooth, biding open, a year near-by I passed unto
the time in which the heat of Love Everlasting was verily felt in heart.
I sat forsooth in a chapel and whilst with sweetness of prayer and
meditation greatly I was delighted, suddenly in me I felt a merry heat
and unknown. But at first I wondered, doubting of whom it should be; but
a long time I am assured that not of the Creature but of my Maker it
was, for more hot and gladder I found it.”  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p101"></span>To this we must add a passage which I
cannot but think one of the most beautiful expressions of spiritual joy
to be found in mystical literature. Based though it certainly is upon a
passage in St. Augustine—for the nightingale is not a Yorkshire bird—its
sketch of the ideal mystic life, to the cultivation of which he then set
himself, reveals in a few lines the most charming aspect of Rolle’s
spirituality, its poetic fervour, its capacity for ardent love.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p102"></span>“In the beginning truly of my conversion
and singular purpose, I though I would be like the little bird that for
love of her lover longs, but in her longing she is gladdened when he
comes that she loves. And joying she sings, and singing she longs, but
in sweetness and heat. It is said the nightingale to song and melody all
night is given, that she may please him to whom she is joined. How
muckle more with greatest sweetness to Christ my Jesu should I sing,
that is spouse of my soul by all this present life, that is night in
regard of clearness to come.”  <span id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p104"></span>Glancing back at the few cases here
brought together, we can see in them, I think, certain similarities and
diversities which are often of great psychological interest and
importance: and have their influence upon the subsequent development of
the mystic life. We see in particular at this point—before purification,
or the remaking of character, begins—the reaction of the natural self,
its heart and its mind, upon that uprush of new truth which operates
“mystical conversion.” This reaction is highly significant, <span
id="page_195">p. 195</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_195"></span> and
gives us a clue not only to the future development of the mystic, but to
the general nature of man’s spiritual consciousness.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p105"></span>We have said  <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386) that this consciousness in its full
development seems to be extended not in one but in two directions. These
directions, these two fundamental ways of apprehending Reality may be
called the eternal and temporal, transcendent and immanent, absolute and
dynamic aspects of Truth. They comprise the twofold knowledge of a God
Who is both Being and Becoming near and far: pairs of opposites which
the developed mystical experience will carry up into a higher synthesis.
But the first awakening of the mystic sense, the first breaking in of
the suprasensible upon the soul, commonly involves the emergence of one
only of these complementary forms of perception. One side always wakes
first: the incoming message always choosing the path of least
resistance. Hence mystical conversion tends to belong to one of two
distinctive types: tends also, as regards its expression, to follow that
temperamental inclination to objectivize Reality as a Place, a Person,
or a State which we found to govern the symbolic systems of the mystics.
 <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p108"></span>There is first, then, the apprehension
of a splendour without: an expansive, formless, ineffable vision, a
snatching up of the self, as it were, from knowledge of this world to
some vague yet veritable knowledge of the next. The veil parts, and the
Godhead is perceived as transcendent to, yet immanent in, the created
universe. Not the personal touch of love transfiguring the soul, but the
impersonal glory of a transfigured world, is the dominant note of this
experience: and the reaction of the self takes the form of awe and
rapture rather than of intimate affection. Of such a kind was the
conversion of Suso, and in a less degree of Brother Lawrence. Of this
kind also were the Light which Rulman Merswin saw, and the mystical
perception of the Being of the universe reported by Richard Jefferies
and countless others.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p109"></span>This experience, if it is to be
complete, if it is to involve the definite emergence of the self from
“the prison of I-hood,” its setting out upon the Mystic Way, requires an
act of concentration on the self’s part as the complement of its initial
act of expansion. It must pass beyond the stage of metaphysical rapture
or fluid splendour, and crystallize into a willed response to the
Reality perceived; a definite and personal relation must be set up
between the self and the Absolute Life. To be a spectator of Reality is
not enough. The awakened subject is not merely to perceive transcendent
life, but to participate therein; and for this, a drastic and costly
life-changing is required. In Jefferies’s case this crystallization,
this heroic effort towards participation did not take place, and <span
id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span id="an_iv.ii-Page_196"></span> he
never therefore laid hold of “the glory that has been revealed.” In
Suso’s it did, “exciting in him a most lively desire for God.”

<span id="an_iv.ii-p110"></span>In most cases this crystallization, the
personal and imperative concept which the mind constructs from the
general and ineffable intuition of Reality, assumes a theological
character. Often it presents itself to the consciousness in the form of
visions or voices: objective, as the Crucifix which spoke to St.
Francis, or mental, as the visions of the Cross experienced by Rulman
Merswin and St. Catherine of Genoa. Nearly always, this concept, this
intimate realization of the divine, has reference to the love and sorrow
at the heart of things, the discord between Perfect Love and an
imperfect world; whereas the complementary vision of Transcendence
strikes a note of rapturous joy. “The beatings of the Heart of God
sounded like so many invitations which thus spake: Come and do penance,
come and be reconciled, come and be consoled, come and be blessed; come,
My love, and receive all that the Beloved can give to His beloved. . . .
Come, My bride, and enjoy My Godhead.”  <span
id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p112"></span>It is to this personal touch, to the
individual appeal of an immediate Presence, not to the great light and
the Beatific Vision, that the awakened self makes its most ardent, most
heroic response. Not because he was rapt from himself, but because the
figure on the Cross called him by name, saying, “Repair My Church” did
St. Francis, with that simplicity, that disregard of worldly values
which constituted his strength, accept the message in a literal sense
and set himself instantly to the work demanded; bringing stones, and, in
defiance alike of comfort and convention, building up with his own hands
the crumbling walls.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p113"></span>In many conversions to the mystic life,
the revelation of an external splendour, the shining vision of the
transcendent spiritual world, is wholly absent. The self awakes to that
which is within, rather than to that which is without: to the immanent
not the transcendent God, to the personal not the cosmic relation. Where
those who look out receive the revelation of Divine Beauty, those who
look in receive rather the wound of Divine Love: another aspect of the
“triple star.” Emotional mystics such as Richard Rolle and Madame Guyon
give us this experience in an extreme form. We find in St. Catherine of
Genoa a nobler example of the same type of response. That inward
revelation in its anguish and abruptness, its rending apart of the hard
tissues of I-hood and vivid disclosures of the poverty of the finite
self, seemed, says the legend of St. Catherine “the wound of Unmeasured
Love,” an image in which we seem to hear the very accents of the saint.
“A wound full of delight,” says the effusive Madame Guyon, “I wished
that it <span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_197"></span> might never heal.” Rolle calls this
piercing rapture a great heat: the heat which is to light the Fire of
Love. “As it were if the finger were put in fire, it should be clad with
feeling of burning so the soul with love (as aforesaid) set afire, truly
feels most very heat.”  <span id="fr_389"></span>[390](#fn_389)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p115"></span>Love, passionate and all-dominant, here
takes the place of that joyous awe which we noticed as the
characteristic reaction upon reality in conversions of the Transcendent
type. In the deep and strong temperaments of the great mystics this love
passes quickly—sometimes instantly—from the emotional to the volitional
stage. Their response to the voice of the Absolute is not merely an
effusion of sentiment, but an act of will: an act often of so deep and
comprehensive a kind as to involve the complete change of the outward no
less than of the inward life. “Divine love,” says Dionysius “draws those
whom it seizes beyond themselves: and this so greatly that they belong
no longer to themselves but wholly to the Object loved.”  <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390)

<span id="an_iv.ii-p117"></span>Merswin’s oath of self-surrender: St.
Catherine of Genoa’s passionate and decisive “No more world! no more
sins!”: St. Francis’s naive and instant devotion to church-restoration
in its most literal sense: these things are earnests of the reality of
the change. They represent—symbolize as well as they can upon the
sensual plane—the spontaneous response of the living organism to a fresh
external stimulus: its first effort of adjustment to the new conditions
which that stimulus represents. They complete the process of conversion;
which is not one-sided, not merely an infusion into the
surface-consciousness of new truth, but rather the beginning of a
life-process, a breaking down of the old and building up of the new. A
never to be ended give-and-take is set up between the individual and the
Absolute. The Spirit of Life has been born: and the first word it learns
to say is *Abba,* Father. It aspires to its origin, to Life in its most
intense manifestation: hence all its instincts urge it to that activity
which it feels to be inseparable from life. It knows itself a member of
that mighty family in which the stars are numbered: the family of the
sons of God, who, free and creative, sharing the rapture of a living,
striving Cosmos, “shout for joy.”

<span id="an_iv.ii-p118"></span>So, even in its very beginning, we see
how active, how profoundly organic, how deeply and widely alive is the
true contemplative life; how truly on the transcendent as on the
phenomenal plane, the law of living things is action and reaction, force
and energy. The awakening of the self is to a new and more active plane
of being, new and more personal relations with Reality; hence to a new
and more real work which it must do.

<span id="an_iv.ii-p119"></span><span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span
id="an_iv.ii-Page_198"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_341"></span>[176:342](myst13.htm#fr_341) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p3"></span> See Starbuck, “The Psychology of
Religion,” cap. xxix.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[177:343](myst13.htm#fr_342) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p5"></span> *Op. cit.,* cap. xii.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[177:344](myst13.htm#fr_343) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p7"></span> J. B. Pratt, “The Religious
Consciousness,” cap. xiii. The whole chapter deserve careful study.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[178:345](myst13.htm#fr_344) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p9"></span> Journal of George Fox, cap. i.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[178:346](myst13.htm#fr_345) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p11"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xvii. We can
surely trace the influence of such an experience in St. Paul’s classic
description of the “endopsychic conflict”: <span
id="an_iv.ii-p11.1"></span>[Rom. vii.
14-25](../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span id="an_iv.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[178:347](myst13.htm#fr_346) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p13"></span> Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[179:348](myst13.htm#fr_347) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p15"></span> “It is certain,” says De Sanctis, “that
when we attempt to probe deeper in our study of sudden converts, we
discover that the <span id="an_iv.ii-p15.1"></span> *coup de foudre* *,*
which in the main is observable in only a small minority of conversions,
is in fact the least significant, though the most Esthetic, moment of
the conversion.” (“Religious Conversion,” Eng. trans., p. 65. Compare
St. Augustine’s Confessions, with their description of the years of
uncertainty and struggle which prepared him for the sudden and final
“Tolle, lege!” that initiated him into the long-sought life of Reality.)

<span id="fn_348"></span>[179:349](myst13.htm#fr_348) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p17"></span> *Op. cit.* , p. 171.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[179:350](myst13.htm#fr_349) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p18"></span> “Journal Spirituel de Lucie-Christine,”
p. 11.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[180:351](myst13.htm#fr_350) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p22"></span> Thomas of Celano, Legenda Prima, cap. 1.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[180:352](myst13.htm#fr_351) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p23"></span> Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap.
v. Compare P. Sabatier. “Vie de S. François d’Assise,” cap. ii., where
the authorities are fully set out.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[181:353](myst13.htm#fr_352) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p26"></span> Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap.
vi.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[182:354](myst13.htm#fr_353) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p30"></span> “Vita e Dottrina di Santa Caterina da
Genova,” cap ii.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[182:355](myst13.htm#fr_354) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p32"></span> Von Hügel, “The Mystical Element of
Religion,” vol. ii p. 29.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[183:356](myst13.htm#fr_355) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p34"></span> It is clear from the heading of cap. x.
(pt. i.) of her Autobiography that Madame Guyon’s editors were
conscious, if she was not, of some of the close coincidences between her
experiences and those of St. Catherine of Genoa. The parallel between
their early years is so exact and descends to such minute details that I
am inclined to think that the knowledge of this resemblance, and the
gratification with which she would naturally regard it, has governed or
modified her memories of this past. Hence a curious and hitherto
unnoticed case of “unconscious spiritual plagiarism.”

<span id="fn_356"></span>[183:357](myst13.htm#fr_356) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p36"></span> For a thoroughly hostile account see
Leuba: ‘The Psychology of Religious Mysticism,” cap. iv.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[183:358](myst13.htm#fr_357) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p38"></span> Vie, pt. i. cap. iv.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[183:359](myst13.htm#fr_358) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p39"></span> *Op. cit.,* pt. i. cap. vi.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[184:360](myst13.htm#fr_359) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p41"></span> “Madame Guyon,” p. 36.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[184:361](myst13.htm#fr_360) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p42"></span> Vie, pt. i. cap. viii.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[185:362](myst13.htm#fr_361) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p44"></span> *Op. cit., loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_362"></span>[185:363](myst13.htm#fr_362) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p46"></span> One of the best English accounts of this
movement and the great personalities concerned in it is in Rufus Jones,
“Studies in Mystical Religion,” cap. xiii.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[185:364](myst13.htm#fr_363) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p48"></span> A. Jundt, “Rulman Merswin,” p. 19. M.
Jundt has condensed his account which I here translate, from Merswin’s
autobiographical story of his conversion, published in *Breiträge zu den
theologischen Wissenschaften* , v . (Jena, 1854). Our whole knowledge of
Merswin’s existence depends on the group of documents which includes
this confession, the “Book of Two Men,” the “Vision of Nine Rocks,” and
his other reputed works. The authenticity of these documents has been
much questioned, and they have doubtless suffered severely from the
editorial energy of his followers. Some critics even regard them as
pious fictions, useless as evidence of the incidents of Merswin’s life.
With this view, upheld by Karl Reider (“Der Gottesfreund von Oberland,”
1905), I cannot agree. A possible solution of the many difficulties is
that of M. Jundt, who believes that we have in Merswin and the
mysterious “Friend of God of the Oberland,” who pervades his spiritual
career, a remarkable case of dissociated personality. Merswin’s peculiar
psychic make up, as described in his autobiography, supports this view:
the adoption of which I shall assume in future references to his life.
It is incredible that the vivid account of his conversion which I quote
should be merely “tendency-literature,” without basis in fact. Compare
Jundt’s monograph, and also Rufus Jones, *op. cit.* pp . 245-253, where
the whole problem is discussed.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[186:365](myst13.htm#fr_364) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p50"></span> Jundt, *op. cit., loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_365"></span>[186:366](myst13.htm#fr_365) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p52"></span> “Leben und Schriften” (Diepenbrock),
cap. i. Suso’s autobiography is written in the third person. He refers
to himself throughout under the title of “Servitor of the Eternal
Wisdom.”

<span id="fn_366"></span>[186:367](myst13.htm#fr_366) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p53"></span> *Op. cit., loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_367"></span>[188:368](myst13.htm#fr_367) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p59"></span> Leben, cap. iii.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[189:369](myst13.htm#fr_368) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p63"></span> Bremond, “Histoire Littérario du
Sentiment Religieux en France.” vol. iv. pp. 359 *seq.*

<span id="fn_369"></span>[190:370](myst13.htm#fr_369) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p75.3"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p76"></span> “Summa contra Gentiles,” I. iii. cap.
lxii.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[190:371](myst13.htm#fr_370) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p77"></span> The complete test of the *Memorial*
isprinted, among other places, in Faugère’s edition of the “Pensées,
Fragments et Lettres de Blaise Pascal,” 2nd ed., Paris, 1897. Tome i. p.
269; and is reproduced in facsimile by Bremond *loc. cit.* Bremond holds
that the *Memorial* is the record of two distinct experiences: a
“mystical experience in the proper meaning of the word,” and an
“affective meditation arising from it.” This view does not seem
incompatible with my original description, which I therefore retain.
(Note to 12th ed.)

<span id="fn_371"></span>[191:372](myst13.htm#fr_371) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p79"></span> Brother Lawrence, “The Practice of the
Presence of God,” p. 9.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[191:373](myst13.htm#fr_372) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p81"></span> “The Way of Initiation,” p. 134.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[191:374](myst13.htm#fr_373) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p83"></span> “Letters of William Blake,” p. 62.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[192:375](myst13.htm#fr_374) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p85"></span> “The Psychology of Religion,” p. 120.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[192:376](myst13.htm#fr_375) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p85.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p86"></span> James, “Varieties of Religion
Experience,” p. 253. This phenomenon receives brilliant literary
expression in John Masefield’s poem “The Everlasting Mercy” (1911).

<span id="fn_376"></span>[192:377](myst13.htm#fr_376) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p88"></span> Whitman, “The Prayer of Colombus.”

<span id="fn_377"></span>[192:378](myst13.htm#fr_377) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p89"></span> “The Story of My Heart,” pp. 8, 9, 45,
181.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[193:379](myst13.htm#fr_378) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p92"></span> Bucke, “Cosmic Consciousness, a Study in
the Evolution of the Human Mind.” Philadelphia. 1905.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[193:380](myst13.htm#fr_379) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p94"></span> “Fire of Love,” bk. i. cap. xii.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[193:381](myst13.htm#fr_380) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p95"></span> *Ibid.* , bk. i. cap. xv.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[193:382](myst13.htm#fr_381) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p97"></span> *Ibid.,* cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[193:383](myst13.htm#fr_382) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p97.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p98"></span> Hilton and the author of “The Cloud of
Unknowing” both refer to “sensible heat” as a well-known but dubious
concomitant of spiritual experience. Compare the confession of a modern
convert, “I was siezed and possessed by an interior flame, for which
nothing had prepared me; *waves of fire* succeeding one another for more
than two hours.” (“Madeleine Sémer, Convertie et Mystique,” 1874-1921,
p. 71.)

<span id="fn_383"></span>[194:384](myst13.htm#fr_383) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p99"></span> “Fire of Love,” bk. i. Prologue.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[194:385](myst13.htm#fr_384) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p100"></span> *Ibid* ., bk. i. cap. xv.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[194:386](myst13.htm#fr_385) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p103"></span> *Ibid* ., bk. ii. cap. xii.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[195:387](myst13.htm#fr_386) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p106"></span> *Supra* , p. 35.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[195:388](myst13.htm#fr_387) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p107"></span> *Ibid* ., p. 128.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[196:389](myst13.htm#fr_388) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p111"></span> St. Mechthild of Hackborn, “Liber
Specialis Gratiae,” I. ii. cap. i

<span id="fn_389"></span>[197:390](myst13.htm#fr_389) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p114"></span> “The Fire of Love,” bk. i. cap. i.

<span id="fn_390"></span>[197:391](myst13.htm#fr_390) <span
id="an_iv.ii-p115.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.ii-p116"></span> Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Divinis
Nominibus,” iv. 13.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Purification of the Self](myst14)

</div>
