<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst01)  [Next](myst03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_ii"></span>

## <span id="an_ii-p0.1"></span>PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

<span id="an_ii-p1"></span> <span id="an_ii-p1.1"></span>This book falls
naturally into two parts; each of which is really complete in itself,
though they are in a sense complementary to one another. Whilst the
second and longest part contains a somewhat detailed study of the nature
and development of man’s spiritual or mystical consciousness, the first
is intended rather to provide an introduction to the general subject of
mysticism. Exhibiting it by turns from the point of view of metaphysics,
psychology, and symbolism, it is an attempt to gather between the covers
of one volume information at present scattered amongst many monographs
and text-books written in divers tongues, and to give the student in a
compact form at least the elementary facts in regard to each of those
subjects which are most closely connected with the study of the mystics.

<span id="an_ii-p2"></span>Those mystics, properly speaking, can only be
studied in their works: works which are for the most part left unread by
those who now talk much about mysticism. Certainly the general reader
has this excuse, that the masterpieces of mystical literature, full of
strange beauties though they be, offer considerable difficulties to
those who come to them unprepared. In the first seven chapters of this
book I have tried to remove a few of these difficulties; to provide the
necessary preparation; and to exhibit the relation in which mysticism
stands to other forms of life. If, then, the readers of this section are
enabled by it to come to the encounter of mystical literature with a
greater power of sympathetic comprehension than they previously
possessed, it will have served the purpose for which it has been
composed.

<span id="an_ii-p3"></span>It is probable that almost every such reader,
according to the angle from which he approaches the subject, will here
find a good deal which seems to him superfluous. But different types of
mind will find this unnecessary elaboration in different places. The
psychologist, approaching from the scientific standpoint, eager for
morbid phenomena, has little use for disquisitions on symbolism,
religious or other. The symbolist, approaching from the artistic
standpoint, seldom admires the proceedings of psychology. I believe,
however, that none who wish to obtain an idea of mysticism in its
wholeness, as a form of life, can afford <span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>
<span id="an_ii-Page_xx"></span> to neglect any of the aspects on which
these pages venture to touch. The metaphysician and the psychologist are
unwise if they do not consider the light thrown upon the ideas of the
mystics by their attitude towards orthodox theology. The theologian is
still more unwise if he refuse to hear the evidence of psychology. For
the benefit of those whose interest in mysticism is chiefly literary,
and who may care to be provided with a clue to the symbolic and
allegorical element in the writings of the contemplatives, a short
section on those symbols of which they most often make use has been
added. Finally, the persistence amongst us of the false opinion which
confuses mysticism with occult philosophy and psychic phenomena, has
made it necessary to deal with the vital distinction which exists
between it and every form of magic.

<span id="an_ii-p4"></span>Specialists in any of these great departments
of knowledge will probably be disgusted by the elementary and
superficial manner in which their specific sciences are here treated.
But this book does not venture to address itself to specialists. From
those who are already fully conversant with the matters touched upon, it
asks the indulgence which really kindhearted adults are always ready to
extend towards the efforts of youth. Philosophers are earnestly advised
to pass over the first two chapters, and theologians to practise the
same charity in respect of the section dealing with their science.

<span id="an_ii-p5"></span>The giving of merely historical information
is no part of the present plan: except in so far as chronology has a
bearing upon the most fascinating of all histories, the history of the
spirit of man. Many books upon mysticism have been based on the
historical method: amongst them two such very different works as
Vaughan’s supercilious and unworthy “Hours with the Mystics” and Dr.
Inge’s scholarly Bampton lectures. It is a method which seems to be open
to some objection: since mysticism avowedly deals with the individual
not as he stands in relation to the civilization of his time, but as he
stands in relation to truths that are timeless. All mystics, said
Saint-Martin, speak the same language and come from the same country. As
against that fact, the place which they happen to occupy in the kingdom
of this world matters little. Nevertheless, those who are unfamiliar
with the history of mysticism properly so called, and to whom the names
of the great contemplatives convey no accurate suggestion of period or
nationality, may be glad to have a short statement of their order in
time and distribution in space. Also, some knowledge of the genealogy of
mysticism is desirable if we are to distinguish the original
contributions of each individual from the mass of speculation and
statement which he inherits <span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_xxi"></span> from the past. Those entirely unacquainted
with these matters may find it helpful to glance at the Appendix before
proceeding to the body of the work; since few things are more
disagreeable than the constant encounter of persons to whom we have not
been introduced.

<span id="an_ii-p6"></span>The second part of the book, for which the
first seven chapters are intended to provide a preparation, is avowedly
psychological. It is an attempt to set out and justify a definite theory
of the nature of man’s mystical consciousness: the necessary stages of
organic growth through which the typical mystic passes, the state of
equilibrium towards which he tends. Each of these stages—and also the
characteristically mystical and still largely mysterious experiences of
visions and voices, contemplation and ecstasy—though viewed from the
standpoint of psychology, is illustrated from the lives of the mystics;
and where possible in their own words. In planning these chapters I have
been considerably helped by M. Delacroix’s brilliant “Etudes sur le
Mysticisme,” though unable to accept his conclusions: and here gladly
take the opportunity of acknowledging my debt to him and also to Baron
von Hügel’s classic “Mystical Element of Religion.” This book, which
only came into my hands when my own was planned and partly written, has
since been a constant source of stimulus and encouragement.

<span id="an_ii-p7"></span>Finally, it is perhaps well to say something
as to the exact sense in which the term “mysticism” is here understood.
One of the most abused words in the English language, it has been used
in different and often mutually exclusive senses by religion, poetry,
and philosophy: has been claimed as an excuse for every kind of
occultism, for dilute transcendentalism, vapid symbolism, religious or
aesthetic sentimentality, and bad metaphysics. On the other hand, it has
been freely employed as a term of contempt by those who have criticized
these things. It is much to be hoped that it may be restored sooner or
later to its old meaning, as the science or art of the spiritual life.

<span id="an_ii-p8"></span>Meanwhile, those who use the term “Mysticism”
are bound in self-defence to explain what they mean by it. Broadly
speaking, I understand it to be the expression of the innate tendency of
the human spirit towards complete harmony with the transcendental order;
whatever be the theological formula under which that order is
understood. This tendency, in great mystics, gradually captures the
whole field of consciousness; it dominates their life and, in the
experience called “mystic union,” attains its end. Whether that end be
called the God of Christianity, the World-soul of Pantheism, the
Absolute of Philosophy, the desire to attain it and the movement towards
it—so long as this is a genuine <span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>
<span id="an_ii-Page_xxii"></span> life process and not an intellectual
speculation—is the proper subject of mysticism. I believe this movement
to represent the true line of development of the highest form of human
consciousness.

<span id="an_ii-p9"></span>It is a pleasant duty to offer my heartiest
thanks to the many kind friends and fellow students, of all shades of
opinion, who have given me their help and encouragement. Amongst those
to whom my heaviest debt of gratitude is due are Mr. W. Scott Palmer,
for much valuable, generous, and painstaking assistance, particularly in
respect of the chapter upon Vitalism: and Miss Margaret Robinson, who in
addition to many other kind offices, has made all the translations from
Meister Eckhart and Mechthild of Magdeburg here given.

<span id="an_ii-p10"></span>Sections of the MS. have been kindly read by
the Rev. Dr. Inge, by Miss May Sinclair, and by Miss Eleanor Gregory;
from all of whom I have received much helpful and expert advice. To Mr.
Arthur Symons my thanks and those of my readers are specially due; since
it is owing to his generous permission that I am able to make full use
of his beautiful translations of the poems of St. John of the Cross.
Others who have given me much help in various directions, and to whom
most grateful acknowledgments are here offered, are Miss Constance
Jones, Miss Ethel Barker, Mr. J. A. Herbert of the British Museum—who
first brought to my notice the newly discovered “Mirror of Simple
Souls”—the Rev. Dr. Arbuthnot Nairn, Mr. A. E. Waite, and Mr. H. Stuart
Moore, F.S.A. The substance of two chapters—those upon “The
Characteristics of Mysticism” and “Mysticism and Magic”—has already
appeared in the pages of *The Quest* and *The Fortnightly Review.* These
sections are here reprinted by kind permission of their respective
editors.

<span id="an_ii-p11"></span> *Feast of St. John of the Cross* E. U.

<span id="an_ii-p12"></span>1910

<span id="an_ii-p13"></span><span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="an_ii-Page_1"></span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part One: The Mystic Fact](myst03)

</div>
