<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst18)  [Next](myst20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII. Ecstasy and Rapture

<span id="an_iv.viii"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p1"></span>Since<span id="an_iv.viii-p1.1"></span>
the object of all contemplation is the production of that state of
intimate communion in which the mystics declare that the self is “in God
and God is in her,” it might be supposed that the orison of union
represented the end of mystical activity, in so far as it is concerned
with the attainment of a transitory but exalted consciousness of
“oneness with the Absolute.” Nearly all the great contemplatives,
however, describe as a distinct, and regard as a more advanced phase of
the spiritual consciousness, the group of definitely ecstatic states in
which the concentration of interest on the Transcendent is so complete,
the gathering up and pouring out of life on this one point so intense,
that the subject is more or less entranced, and becomes, for the time of
the ecstasy, unconscious of the external world. In ordinary
contemplation he refused to attend to that external world: it was there,
a blurred image, at the fringe of his conscious field, but he
deliberately left it on one side. In ecstasy he *cannot* attend to it.
None of its messages reach him: not even those most insistent of all
messages which are translated into the terms of bodily pain.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p2"></span>All mystics agree in regarding such
ecstasy as an exceptionally favourable state; the one in which man’s
spirit is caught up to the most immediate union with the divine. The
word has become a synonym for joyous exaltation, for the inebriation of
the Infinite. <span id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_359"></span> The induced ecstasies of the Dionysian
mysteries, the metaphysical raptures of the Neoplatonists, the voluntary
or involuntary trance of Indian mystics and Christian saints—all these,
however widely they may differ in transcendental value, agree in
claiming such value, in declaring that this change in the quality of
consciousness brought with it a valid and ineffable apprehension of the
Real. Clearly, this apprehension will vary in quality and content with
the place of the subject in the spiritual scale. The ecstasy is merely
the psycho-physical condition which accompanies it. “It is hardly a
paradox to say,” says Myers, “that the evidence for ecstasy is stronger
than the evidence for any other religious belief. Of all the subjective
experiences of religion, ecstasy is that which has been most urgently,
perhaps to the psychologist most convincingly asserted; and it is not
confined to any one religion. . . . From the medicine man of the lowest
savages up to St. John, St. Peter, and St. Paul, with Buddha and Mahomet
on the way, we find records which, though morally and intellectually
much differing, are in psychological essence the same.”  <span
id="fr_731"></span>[732](#fn_731.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p4"></span>There are three distinct aspects under
which the ecstatic state may be studied: ( *a* ) the physical, ( *b* )
the psychological, ( *c* ) the mystical. Many of the deplorable
misunderstandings and still more deplorable mutual recriminations which
surround its discussion come from the refusal of experts in one of these
three branches to consider the results arrived at by the other two.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p5"></span>A. Physically considered, ecstasy is a
trance; more or less deep, more or less prolonged. The subject may slide
into it gradually from a period of absorption in, or contemplation of,
some idea which has filled the field of consciousness: or, it may come
on suddenly, the appearance of the idea—or even some word or symbol
suggesting the idea—abruptly throwing the subject into an entranced
condition. This is the state which some mystical writers call Rapture.
The distinction, however, is a conventional one: and the works of the
mystics describe many intermediate forms.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p6"></span>During the trance, breathing and
circulation are depressed. The body is more or less cold and rigid,
remaining in the exact position which it occupied at the oncoming of the
ecstasy, however difficult and unnatural this pose may be. Sometimes
entrancement is so deep that there is complete anaesthesia, as in the
case which I quote from the life of St. Catherine of Siena.  <span
id="fr_732"></span>[733](#fn_732.md) Credible witnesses report that
Bernadette, the visionary of Lourdes, held the flaming end of a candle
in her hand for fifteen minutes during one of her ecstasies. She felt no
pain, neither did the flesh show any marks <span id="page_360">p.
360</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_360"></span> of burning. Similar
instances of ecstatic anesthesia abound in the lives of the saints, and
are also characteristic of certain pathological states.  <span
id="fr_733"></span>[734](#fn_733.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p9"></span>The trance includes, according to the
testimony of the ecstatics, two distinct phases—( *a* ) the short period
of lucidity and ( *b* ) a longer period of complete unconsciousness,
which may pass into a death like catalepsy, lasting for hours; or, as
once with St. Teresa, for days. “The difference between union and
trance,” says Teresa, “is this: that the latter lasts longer and is more
visible outwardly, because the breathing gradually diminishes, so that
it becomes impossible to speak or to open the eyes. And though this very
thing occurs when the soul is in union, there is more violence in a
trance, for the natural warmth vanishes, I know not how, when the
rapture is deep, and in all these kinds of orison there is more or less
of this. When it is deep, as I was saying, the hands become cold and
sometimes stiff and straight as pieces of wood; as to the body if the
rapture comes on when it is standing or kneeling it remains so; and the
soul is so full of the joy of that which Our Lord is setting before it,
that it seems to forget to animate the body and abandons it. If the
rapture lasts, the nerves are made to feel it.”  <span
id="fr_734"></span>[735](#fn_734.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p11"></span>Such ecstasy as this, so far as its
physical symptoms go, is not of course the peculiar privilege of the
mystics. It is an abnormal bodily state, caused by a psychic state: and
this causal psychic state may be healthy or unhealthy, the result of
genius or disease. It is common in the little understood type of
personality called “sensitive” or mediumistic: it is a well-known
symptom of certain mental and nervous illnesses. A feeble mind
concentrated on one idea—like a hypnotic subject gazing at one
spot—easily becomes entranced; however trivial the idea which gained
possession of his consciousness. Apart from its content, then, ecstasy
carries no guarantee of spiritual value. It merely indicates the
presence of certain abnormal psycho-physical conditions: an alteration
of the normal equilibrium, a shifting of the threshold of consciousness,
which leaves the body, and the whole usual “external world” outside
instead of inside the conscious field, and even affects those physical
functions—such as breathing—which are almost entirely automatic. Thus
ecstasy, physically considered, may occur in any person in whom (1) the
threshold of consciousness is exceptionally mobile and (2) there is a
tendency to dwell upon one governing idea or intuition. Its worth
depends entirely on the objective value of that idea or intuition.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p12"></span>In the hysterical patient, thanks to an
unhealthy condition of the centres of consciousness, any trivial or
irrational idea, any <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_361"></span> one of the odds and ends stored up in
the subliminal region, may thus become fixed, dominate the mind, and
produce entrancement. Such ecstasy is an illness: the emphasis is on the
pathological state which makes it possible. In the mystic, the idea
which fills his life is so great a one—the idea of God—that, in
proportion as it is vivid, real, and intimate, it inevitably tends to
monopolize the field of consciousness. Here the emphasis is on the
overpowering strength of spirit, not on the feeble and unhealthy state
of body or mind.  <span id="fr_735"></span>[736](#fn_735.md) This true
ecstasy, says Godferneaux, is not a malady, but “the extreme form of a
state which must be classed amongst the ordinary accidents of conscious
life.”  <span id="fr_736"></span>[737](#fn_736.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p15"></span>The mystics themselves are fully aware
of the importance of this distinction. Ecstasies, no less than visions
and voices, must they declare, be subjected to unsparing criticism
before they are recognized as divine: whilst some are undoubtedly “of
God,” others are no less clearly “of the devil.” “The great doctors of
the mystic life,” says Malaval, “teach that there are two sorts of
rapture, which must be carefully distinguished. The first are produced
in persons but little advanced in the Way, and still full of selfhood;
either by the force of a heated imagination which vividly apprehends a
sensible object, or by the artifice of the Devil. These are the raptures
which St. Teresa calls, in various parts of her works, Raptures of
Feminine Weakness. The other sort of Rapture is, on the contrary, the
effect of pure intellectual vision in those who have a great and
generous love for God. To generous souls who have utterly renounced
themselves, God never fails in these raptures to communicate high
things.”  <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p17"></span>All the mystics agree with Malaval in
finding the test of a true ecstasy, not in its outward sign, but in its
inward grace, its after-value: and here psychology would do well to
follow their example. The ecstatic states, which are supreme instances
of the close connection between body and soul, have bodily as well as
mental results: and those results are as different and as characteristic
as those observed in healthy and in morbid organic processes. If the
concentration has been upon the highest centre of consciousness, the
organ of spiritual perception—if a door has really been opened by which
the self has escaped for an instant to the vision of That Which Is—the
ecstasy will be good for life. The entrancement of <span
id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_362"></span>
disease, on the contrary is always bad for life. Its concentration being
upon the lower instead of the higher levels of mentality, it depresses
rather than enhances the vitality, the fervour, or the intelligence of
its subject: and leaves behind it an enfeebled will, and often moral and
intellectual chaos.  <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738.md) “Ecstasies
that do not produce considerable profit either to the persons themselves
or others, deserve to be suspected,” says Augustine Baker, “and when any
marks of their approaching are perceived, the persons ought to divert
their minds some other way.”  <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739.md) It
is the difference between a healthy appetite for nourishing food and a
morbid craving for garbage. The same organs of digestion are used in
satisfying both: yet he would be a hardy physiologist who undertook to
discredit all nutrition by a reference to its degenerate forms.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p20"></span>Sometimes both kinds of ecstasy, the
healthy and the psychopathic, are seen in the same person. Thus in the
cases of St. Catherine of Genoa and St. Catherine of Siena it would seem
that as their health became feebler and the nervous instability always
found in persons of genius increased, their ecstasies became more
frequent; but these were not healthy ecstasies, such as those which they
experienced in the earlier stages of their careers, and which brought
with them an access of vitality. They were the results of increasing
weakness of body, not of the overpowering strength of the spirit: and
there is evidence that Catherine of Genoa, that acute self-critic, was
conscious of this. “Those who attended on her did not know how to
distinguish one state from the other. And hence on coming to; she would
sometimes say, ‘Why did you let me remain in this quietude, from which I
have almost died?’”  <span id="fr_740"></span>[741](#fn_740.md) Her earlier
ecstasies, on the contrary, had in a high degree the positive character
of exaltation and life-enhancement consequent upon extreme concentration
on the Absolute; as well as the merely negative character of
annihilation of the surface-consciousness. She came from them with
renewed health and strength, as from a resting in heavenly places and a
feeding on heavenly food: and side by side with this ecstatic life,
fulfilled the innumerable duties of her active vocation as hospital
matron and spiritual mother of a large group of disciples. “Many times,”
says her legend, “she would hide herself in some secret place and there
stay: and being sought she was found upon the ground, her face hidden in
her hands, altogether beyond herself, in such a state of joy as is
beyond thought or speech: and being called—yea, even in a loud voice—she
heard not. And at other times she would go up and down. . . . <span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_363"></span> as if
beyond herself, drawn by the impulse of love, she did this. And certain
other times she remained for the space of six hours as if dead: but
hearing herself called, suddenly she got up, and answering she would at
once go about all that needed to be done even the humblest things.
 <span id="fr_741"></span>[742](#fn_741.md) And in thus leaving the All,
she went without any grief, because she fled all selfhood (*la
proprietà*) as if it were the devil. And when she came forth from her
hiding-place her face was rosy as it might be a cherub’s; and it seemed
as if she might have said, ‘Who shall separate me from the love of
God?’”  <span id="fr_742"></span>[743](#fn_742.md) “Very often,” says St.
Teresa, describing the results of such rapturous communion with Pure
Love as that from which St. Catherine came joyous and rosy-faced, “he
who was before sickly and full of pain comes forth healthy and even with
new strength: for it is something great that is given to the soul in
rapture.”  <span id="fr_743"></span>[744](#fn_743.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p25"></span>B. Psychologically considered, all
ecstasy is a form—the most perfect form—of the state which is
technically called “complete mono-ideism,” That withdrawal of
consciousness from circumference to centre, that deliberate attention to
*one thing* , which we discussed in Recollection, is here
pushed—voluntarily or involuntarily—to its logical conclusion. It is (1)
always paid for by psycho-physical disturbances; (2) rewarded in healthy
cases by an enormous lucidity, a supreme intuition in regard to the one
thing on which the self’s interest has been set.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p26"></span>Such ecstasy, then, is an exalted form
of contemplation, and might be expected in appropriate subjects to
develop naturally from that state. “A simple difference of degree,” says
Maury, “separates ecstasy from the action of forcibly fixing an idea in
the mind. Contemplation implies exercise of will, and the power of
interrupting the extreme tension of the mind. In ecstasy, which is
contemplation carried to its highest pitch, the will, although in the
strictest sense able to provoke the state, is nevertheless unable to
suspend it.”  <span id="fr_744"></span>[745](#fn_744.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p28"></span>In “complete mono-ideism” then, the
attention to one thing and the inattention to all else, is so entire
that the subject is entranced. Consciousness has been withdrawn from
those centres which receive and respond to the messages of the external
world: he neither sees, feels, nor hears. The <span
id="an_iv.viii-p28.1"></span> *Ego dormio et cor meum vigilat* of the
contemplative ceases to be a metaphor, and becomes a realistic
description. It must be remembered that the whole trend <span
id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_364"></span> of
mystical education has been toward the production of this fixity of
attention. Recollection and Quiet lead up to it. Contemplation cannot
take place without it. All the mystics assure us that a unification of
consciousness, in which all outward things are forgot, is the necessary
prelude of union with the Divine; for consciousness of the Many and
consciousness of the One are mutually exclusive states. Ecstasy, for the
psychologist, is such a unification in its extreme form. The absorption
of the self in the one idea, the one desire, is so profound—and in the
case of the great mystics so impassioned—that everything else is blotted
out. The tide of life is withdrawn, not only from those higher centres
which are the seats of perception and of thought, but also from those
lower centres which govern the physical life. The whole vitality of the
subject is so concentrated on the transcendental world—or, in a morbid
ecstatic, on the idea which dominates his mind—that body and brain alike
are depleted of their energy in the interests of this supreme act.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p29"></span>Since mystics have, as a rule, the
extreme susceptibility to suggestions and impressions which is
characteristic of artistic and creative types, it is not surprising that
their ecstasies are often evoked, abruptly, by the exhibition of, or
concentration upon, some loved and special symbol of the divine. Such
symbols form the rallying-points about which are gathered a whole group
of ideas and intuitions. Their presence—sometimes the sudden thought of
them—will be enough, in psychological language, to provoke a discharge
of energy along some particular path: that is to say, to stir to life
all those ideas and intuitions which belong to the self’s consciousness
of the Absolute, to concentrate vitality on them, and introduce the self
into that world of perception of which they are, as it were, the
material keys. Hence the profound significance of symbols for some
mystics: their paradoxical clinging to outward forms, whilst declaring
that the spiritual and intangible alone is real.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p30"></span>For the Christian mystics, the
sacraments and mysteries of faith have always provided such a *point
d’appui*; and these often play a large part in the production of their
ecstasies. For St. Catherine of Siena, and also very often for her
namesake of Genoa, the reception of Holy Communion was the prelude to
ecstasy. Julian of Norwich  <span id="fr_745"></span>[746](#fn_745.md) and
St. Francis of Assissi  <span id="fr_746"></span>[747](#fn_746.md) became
entranced whilst gazing on the crucifix. We are told of Denis the
Carthusian that towards the end of his life, hearing the *Veni Creator*
or certain verses of the psalms, he was at once rapt in God and lifted
up from the earth.  <span id="fr_747"></span>[748](#fn_747.md) <span
id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_365"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p34"></span>Of St. Catherine of Siena, her
biographer says that “she used to communicate with such fervour that
immediately afterwards she would pass into the state of ecstasy, in
which for hours she would be totally unconscious. On one occasion,
finding her in this condition, they (the Dominican friars) forcibly
threw her out of the church at midday, and left her in the heat of the
sun watched over by some of her companions till she came to her senses.”
Another, “catching sight of her in the church when she was in ecstasy,
came down and pricked her in many places with a needle. Catherine was
not aroused in the least from her trance, but afterwards, when she came
back to her senses, she felt the pain in her body and perceived that she
had thus been wounded.”  <span id="fr_748"></span>[749](#fn_748.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p36"></span>It is interesting to compare with this
objective description, the subjective account of ecstatic union which
St. Catherine gives in her “Divine Dialogue.” Here, the deeper self of
the mystic is giving in a dramatic form its own account of its inward
experiences: hence we see the inward side of that outward state of
entrancement, which was all that onlookers were able to perceive. As
usual in the Dialogue, the intuitive perceptions of the deeper self are
attributed by St. Catherine to the Divine Voice speaking in her soul.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p37"></span>“Oftentimes, through the perfect union
which the soul has made with Me, she is raised from the earth almost as
if the heavy body became light. But this does not mean that the
heaviness of the body is taken away, but that the union of the soul with
Me is more perfect than the union of the body with the soul; wherefore
the strength of the spirit, united with Me, raises the weight of the
body from the earth, leaving it as if immoveable and all pulled to
pieces in the affection of the soul. Thou rememberest to have heard it
said of some creatures, that were it not for My Goodness, in seeking
strength for them, they would not be able to live; and I would tell thee
that, in the fact that the souls of some do not leave their bodies, is
to be seen a greater miracle than in the fact that some have arisen from
the dead, so great is the union which they have with Me. I, therefore,
sometimes for a space withdraw from the union, making the soul return to
the vessel of her body . . . from which she was separated by the
affection of love. From the body she did not depart, because that cannot
be except in death; the bodily powers alone departed, becoming united to
Me through affection of love. The memory is full of nothing but Me, the
intellect, elevated, gazes upon the object of My Truth; the affection,
which follows the intellect, loves and becomes united with that which
the intellect sees. These powers being united and gathered together and
immersed and inflamed in Me, the body loses its <span id="page_366">p.
366</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_366"></span> feeling, so that the
seeing eye sees not, and the hearing ear hears not, and the tongue does
not speak; except as the abundance of the heart will sometimes permit
it, for the alleviation of the heart and the praise and glory of My
Name. The hand does not touch and the feet walk not, because the members
are bound with the sentiment of Love.”  <span
id="fr_749"></span>[750](#fn_749.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p39"></span>A healthy ecstasy so deep as this seems
to be the exclusive prerogative of the mystics: perhaps because so great
a passion, so profound a concentration, can be produced by nothing
smaller than their flaming love of God. But as the technique of
contemplation is employed more or less consciously by all types of
creative genius—by inventors and philosophers, by poets, prophets, and
musicians, by all the followers of the “Triple Star,” no less than by
the mystic saints—so too this apotheosis of contemplation, the ecstatic
state, sometimes appears in a less violent form, acting healthily and
normally, in artistic and creative personalities at a complete stage of
development. It may accompany the prophetic intuitions of the seer, the
lucidity of the great metaphysician, the artist’s supreme perception of
beauty or truth. As the saint is “caught up to God,” so these are
“caught up” to their vision: their partial apprehensions of the Absolute
Life. Those joyous, expansive outgoing sensations, characteristic of the
ecstatic consciousness, are theirs also. Their greatest creations are
translations to us, not of something they have thought, but of something
they have known, in a moment of ecstatic union with the “great life of
the All.”

<span id="an_iv.viii-p40"></span>We begin, then, to think that the “pure
mono-ideism,” which the psychologist identifies with ecstasy, though
doubtless a part, is far from being the whole content of this state,
True, the ecstatic is absorbed in his one idea, his one love: he is in
it and with it: it fills his universe. But this unified state of
consciousness does not merely pore upon something already possessed.
When it only does this, it is diseased. Its true business is pure
perception. It is outgoing, expansive: its goal is something beyond
itself. The rearrangement of the psychic self which occurs in ecstasy is
not merely concerned with the normal elements of consciousness. It is
rather a temporary unification of consciousness round that centre of
transcendental perception which mystics call the “apex” or the “spark of
the soul.” Those deeper layers of personality which normal life keeps
below the threshold are active in it: and these are fused with the
surface personality by the governing passion, the transcendent love
which lies at the basis of all sane ecstatic states. The result is not
merely a mind concentrated on one idea nor a heart fixed on one desire,
nor even a mind and a <span id="page_367">p. 367</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_367"></span> heart united in the interests of a
beloved thought: but a whole being welded into one, all its faculties,
neglecting their normal universe, grouped about a new centre, serving a
new life, and piercing like a single flame the barriers of the sensual
world. Ecstasy is the psycho-physical state which may accompany this
brief synthetic act.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p41"></span>C. Therefore, whilst on its physical
side ecstasy is an entrancement, on its mental side a complete
unification of consciousness, on its mystical side it is an exalted act
of perception. It represents the greatest possible extension of the
spiritual consciousness in the direction of Pure Being: the “blind
intent stretching” here receives its reward in a profound experience of
Eternal Life. In this experience the departmental activities of thought
and feeling the consciousness of I-hood, of space and time—all that
belongs to the World of Becoming and our own place therein—are
suspended. The vitality which we are accustomed to split amongst these
various things, is gathered up to form a state of “pure apprehension”: a
vivid intuition of—or if you like conjunction with—the Transcendent. For
the time of his ecstasy the mystic is, for all practical purposes, as
truly living in the supersensual world as the normal human animal is
living in the sensual world. He is experiencing the highest and most
joyous of those temporary and unstable states—those “passive unions”—in
which his consciousness escapes the limitations of the senses, rises to
freedom, and is united for an instant with the “great life of the All.”

<span id="an_iv.viii-p42"></span>Ecstasy, then, from the contemplative’s
point of view, is the development and completion of the orison of union,
and he is not always at pains to distinguish the two degrees, a fact
which adds greatly to the difficulties of students.  <span
id="fr_750"></span>[751](#fn_750.md) In both states—though he may, for want
of better language, describe his experience in terms of sight—the
Transcendent is perceived by contact, not by vision: as, enfolded in
darkness with one whom we love, we obtain a knowledge far more complete
than that conferred by the sharpest sight the most perfect mental
analysis. In Ecstasy, the apprehension is perhaps more definitely
“beatific” than in the orison of union. Such memory of his feeling-state
as the ecstatic brings back with him is more often concerned with an
exultant certainty—a conviction that he has known for once the Reality
which hath no image, and solved the paradox of life—than with meek
self-loss in that Cloud of Unknowing where the contemplative in union is
content to meet his Beloved. The true note of ecstasy, however, its only
valid distinction from infused contemplation, lies in <span
id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_368"></span>
*entrancement;* in “being ravished out of fleshly feeling,” as St. Paul
caught up to the Third Heaven,  <span id="fr_751"></span>[752](#fn_751.md)
not in “the lifting of mind unto God.” This, of course, is an outward
distinction only, and a rough one at that, since entrancement has many
degrees: but it will be found the only practical basis of
classification.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p45"></span>Probably none but those who have
experienced these states know the actual difference between them. Even
St. Teresa’s psychological insight fails her here, and she is obliged to
fall back on the difference between voluntary and involuntary absorption
in the divine: a difference, not in spiritual values, but merely in the
psycho-physical constitution of those who have perceived these values.
“I wish I could explain with the help of God,” she says, “wherein union
differs from rapture, or from transport, or from flight of the spirit,
as they call it, or from trance, which are all one. I mean that all
these are only different names for that *one and the same thing, which
is also called ecstasy.* It is more excellent than union, the fruits of
it are much greater, and its other operations more manifold, for union
is uniform in the beginning, the middle, and the end, and is so also
interiorly; but as raptures have ends of a much higher kind, they
produce effects both within and without \[ *i.e.* , both physical and
psychical\]. . . . A rapture is absolutely irresistible; whilst union,
inasmuch as we are then on our own ground, may be hindered, though that
resistance be painful and violent.”  <span
id="fr_752"></span>[753](#fn_752.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p47"></span>From the point of view of mystical
psychology, our interest in ecstasy will centre in two points. (1) What
has the mystic to tell us of the Object of his ecstatic perception? (2)
What is the nature of the peculiar consciousness which he enjoys in his
trance? That is to say, what news does he bring us as to the Being of
God and the powers of man?

<span id="an_iv.viii-p48"></span>It may be said generally that on both
these points he bears out, amplifies, and expresses under formulae of
greater splendour, with an accent of greater conviction, the general
testimony of the contemplatives. In fact, we must never forget that an
ecstatic is really nothing else than a contemplative of a special kind,
with a special psycho-physical make-up. Moreover, we have seen that it
is not always easy to determine the exact point at which entrancement
takes place, and deep contemplation assumes the ecstatic form. The
classification, like all classifications of mental states, is an
arbitrary one. Whilst the extreme cases present no difficulty, there are
others less complete, which form a graduated series between the deeps of
the “Quiet” and the heights of “Rapture.” We shall never know, for
instance, whether the ecstasies of Plotinus and of Pascal involved true
bodily entrancement, or <span id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_369"></span> only a deep absorption of the “unitive”
kind. So, too, the language of many Christian mystics when speaking of
their “raptures” is so vague and metaphorical that it leaves us in great
doubt as to whether they mean by Rapture the abrupt suspension of normal
consciousness, or merely a sudden and agreeable elevation of soul.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p49"></span>“Ravishing,” says Rolle, “as it is
showed, in two ways is to be understood. One manner, forsooth, in which
a man is ravished out of fleshly feeling; so that for the time of his
ravishing plainly he feels nought in flesh, nor what is done of his
flesh, and yet he is not dead but quick, for yet the soul to the body
gives life. And on this manner saints sometime are ravished, to their
profit and other men’s learning; as Paul ravished to the third heaven.
And on this manner sinners also in vision sometime are ravished, that
they may see joys of saints and pains of damned for their correction.
 <span id="fr_753"></span>[754](#fn_753.md) And many other as we read of.
Another manner of ravishing there is, that is lifting of mind into God
by contemplation. And this manner of ravishing is in all that are
perfect lovers of God, and in none of them but that love God. And as
well this is called a ravishing as the other; for with a violence it is
done, and as it were against nature.”  <span
id="fr_754"></span>[755](#fn_754.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p52"></span>It is, however, very confusing to the
anxious inquirer when—as too often—“lifting of mind by contemplation” is
“as well called a ravishing as the other,” and ecstasy is used as a
synonym for gladness of heart. Here, so far as is possible, these words
will be confined to their strict meaning, and not applied generally to
the description of all the outgoing and expansive states of the
transcendental consciousness.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p53"></span>What does the mystic claim that he
attains in this abnormal condition—this irresistible trance? The price
that he pays is heavy, involving much psycho-physical wear and tear. He
declares that his rapture or ecstasy includes a moment—often a very
short, and always an indescribable moment—in which he enjoys a supreme
knowledge of or participation in Divine Reality. He tells us under
various metaphors that he then attains Pure Being, his Source, his
Origin, his Beloved: “is engulphed in the very thing for which he longs,
which is God.”  <span id="fr_755"></span>[756](#fn_755.md) “Oh, wonder of
wonders,” cries Eckhart, “when I think of the union the soul has with
God! He makes the enraptured soul to flee out of herself, for she is no
more satisfied with anything that can be named. The spring of <span
id="page_370">p. 370</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_370"></span>
Divine Love flows out of the soul and draws her out of herself into the
unnamed Being, into her first source, which is God alone.”  <span
id="fr_756"></span>[757](#fn_756.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p56"></span>This momentary attainment of the
Source, the Origin, is the theme of all descriptions of mystic ecstasy.
In Rulman Merswin’s “Book of the Nine Rocks,” that brief and
overwhelming rapture is the end of the pilgrim’s long trials and
ascents. “The vision of the Infinite lasted only for a moment: when he
came to himself he felt inundated with life and joy. He asked, ‘Where
have I been?’ and he was answered, ‘In the upper school of the Holy
Spirit. There you were surrounded by the dazzling pages of the Book of
Divine Wisdom.  <span id="fr_757"></span>[758](#fn_757.md) Your soul
plunged therein with delight, and the Divine Master of the school has
filled her with an exuberant love by which even your physical nature has
been transfigured.’”  <span id="fr_758"></span>[759](#fn_758.md) Another
Friend of God, Ellina von Crevelsheim, who was of so abnormal a psychic
constitution that her absorption in the Divine Love caused her to remain
dumb for seven years, was “touched by the Hand of God” at the end of
that period, and fell into a five-days’ ecstasy, in which “pure truth”
was revealed to her, and she was lifted up to an immediate experience of
the Absolute. There she “saw the interior of the Father’s heart,” and
was “bound with chains of love, enveloped in light, and filled with
peace and joy.”  <span id="fr_759"></span>[760](#fn_759.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p60"></span>In this transcendent act of union, the
mystic sometimes says that he is “conscious of nothing.” But it is clear
that this expression is figurative, for otherwise he would not have
known that there had been an act of union: were his individuality
abolished, it could not have been aware of its attainment of God. What
he appears to mean is that consciousness so changes its form as to be no
longer recognizable or describable in human speech. In the paradoxical
language of Richard of St. Victor, “In a wondrous fashion remembering we
do not remember, seeing we do not see, understanding we not understand,
penetrating we do not penetrate.”  <span
id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760.md) In this indescribable but most actual
state, the whole self, exalted and at white heat, is unified and poured
out in one vivid act of impassioned perception, which leaves no room for
reflection or self-observation. That aloof “somewhat” in us which
watches all our actions, splits our consciousness, has been submerged.
The mystic is attending exclusively to Eternity, not to <span
id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_371"></span> his
own perception of Eternity. That he can only consider when the ecstasy
itself is at an end.

> <span id="an_iv.viii-p61.1"></span> “All things I then forgot,  
> My cheek on Him Who for my coming came,  

> <span id="an_iv.viii-p61.4"></span> *All ceased, and I was not,*  
> Leaving my cares and shame  
> Among the lilies, and forgetting them.” <span
> id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761.md)  

<span id="an_iv.viii-p63"></span>This is that perfect unity of
consciousness, that utter concentration on an experience of love, which
excludes all conceptual and analytic acts. Hence, when the mystic says
that his faculties were suspended, that he “knew all and knew nought,”
he really means that he was so concentrated on the Absolute that he
ceased to consider his separate existence: so merged in it that he could
not perceive it as an object of thought, as the bird cannot see the air
which supports it, nor the fish the ocean in which it swims. He really
“knows all” but “thinks” nought: “perceives all,” but “conceives
nought.”

<span id="an_iv.viii-p64"></span>The ecstatic consciousness is not
self-conscious: it is intuitive not discursive. Under the sway of a
great passion, possessed by a great Idea, it has become “a single state
of enormous intensity.”  <span id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762.md) In this
state, it transcends our ordinary processes of knowledge, and plunges
deep into the Heart of Reality. A fusion which is the anticipation of
the unitive life takes place: and the ecstatic returns from this brief
foretaste of freedom saying, “I know, as having known, the meaning of
Existence; the sane centre of the universe—at once the wonder and the
assurance of the soul.”  <span id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763.md) “This
utter transformation of the soul in God,” says St. Teresa, describing
the same experience in the official language of theology, “continues
only for an instant: yet while it continues no faculty of the soul is
aware of it, or knows what is passing there. Nor can it be understood
while we are living on the earth; at least God will not have us
understand it, because we must be incapable of understanding it. *I know
is* by *experience.* ”  <span id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764.md)
Theutterances of those who know by experience are here of more worth
than all the statements of psychology, which are concerned of necessity
with the “outward signs” of this “inward and spiritual grace.” To these
we must go if we would obtain some hint of that which ecstasy may mean
to the ecstatic.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p68"></span>“When the soul, forgetting itself,
dwells in that radiant darkness,” says Suso, “it loses all its faculties
and all its qualities, as St. Bernard has said. And this, more or less
completely, according <span id="page_372">p. 372</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_372"></span> to whether the soul—whether in the body
or out of the body—is more or less united to God. This forgetfulness of
self is, in a measure, a transformation in God; who then becomes, in a
certain manner, all things for the soul, as Scripture saith. In this
rapture the soul disappears, but not yet entirely. It acquires, it is
true, certain qualities of divinity, but does not naturally become
divine. . . . To speak in the common language, the soul is rapt, by the
divine power of resplendent Being, above its natural faculties, into the
nakedness of the Nothing.”  <span id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p70"></span>Here Suso is trying to describe his
rapturous attainment of God in the negative terms of Dionysian theology.
It is probable that much of the language of that theology originated,
not in the abstract philosophizings, but in the actual ecstatic
experience, of the Neoplatonists, who—Christian and Pagan alike—believed
in, and sometimes deliberately induced, this condition as the supreme
method of attaining the One. The whole Christian doctrine of ecstasy, on
its metaphysical side, really descends from that great practical
transcendentalist Plotinus: who is known to have been an ecstatic, and
has left in his Sixth Ennead a description of the mystical trance
obviously based upon his own experiences. “Then,” he says, “the soul
neither sees, nor distinguishes by seeing, nor imagines that there are
two things; but becomes as it were another thing, ceases to be itself
and belong to itself. It belongs to God and is one with Him, like two
concentric circles: concurring they are One; but when they separate,
they are two. . . . Since in this conjunction with Deity there were not
two things, but the perceiver was one with the thing perceived, if a man
could preserve the memory of what he was when he mingled with the
Divine, he would have within himself an image of God. . . . For then
nothing stirred within him, neither anger, nor desire, nor even reason,
nor a certain intellectual perception nor, in short, was he himself
moved, if we may assert this; but being in an ecstasy, tranquil and
alone with God, he enjoyed an unbreakable calm.”  <span
id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766.md) Ecstasy, says Plotinus in another part
of the same treatise, is “another mode of seeing, a simplification and
abandonment of oneself, a desire of contact, rest, and a striving after
union.” All the phases of the contemplative experience seem to be summed
up in this phrase.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p72"></span>It has been said by some critics that
the ecstasy of Plotinus was different in kind from the ecstasy of the
Christian saints: that it was a philosophic rhapsody, something like
Plato’s “saving madness,” which is also regarded on somewhat
insufficient evidence as being an affair of the head and entirely
unconnected with the heart. At first sight the arid metaphysical
language in which <span id="page_373">p. 373</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_373"></span> Plotinus tries to tell his love, offers
some ground for this view. Nevertheless the ecstasy itself is a
practical matter; and has its root, not in reason, but in a deep-seated
passion for the Absolute which is far nearer to the mystic’s love of God
than to any intellectual curiosity, however sublime. The few passages in
which it is mentioned tell us what his mystical genius drove him to do:
and not what his philosophical mind encouraged him to think or say. At
once when we come to these passages we notice a rise of temperature, an
alteration of values. Plotinus the ecstatic is sure whatever Plotinus
the metaphysician may think, that the union with God is a union of
hearts: that “by love He may be gotten and holden, but by thought
never.” He, no less than the mediaeval contemplatives, is convinced—to
quote his own words—that the Vision is only for the desirous; for him
who has that “loving passion” which “causes the lover to rest in the
object of his love.”  <span id="fr_767"></span>[768](#fn_767.md) The simile
of marriage, of conjunction as the soul’s highest bliss, which we are
sometimes told that we owe in part to the unfortunate popularity of the
Song of Songs, in part to the sexual aberrations of celibate saints, is
found in the work of this hardheaded Pagan philosopher: who was as
celebrated for his practical kindness and robust common sense as for his
transcendent intuitions of the One.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p74"></span>The greatest of the Pagan ecstatics
then, when speaking from experience, anticipates the Christian
contemplatives. His words, too, when compared with theirs, show how
delicate are the shades which distinguish ecstasy such as this from the
highest forms of orison. “Tranquil and alone with God”—mingled for an
instant of time “like two concentric circles” with the Divine Life,”
“perceiver and perceived made one”—this is as near as the subtle
intellect of Alexandria can come to the reality of that experience in
which the impassioned mono-ideism of great spiritual genius conquers the
rebellious senses, and becomes, if only for a moment, operative on the
highest levels accessible to the human soul. Self-mergence, then—that
state of transcendence in which, the barriers of selfhood abolished, we
“receive the communication of Life and of Beatitude, in which all things
are consummated and all things are renewed”  <span
id="fr_768"></span>[769](#fn_768.md) —is the secret of ecstasy, as it was
the secret of contemplation. On their spiritual side the two states
cannot, save for convenience of description, be divided. Where
contemplation becomes expansive, out-going, self-giving, and receives a
definite fruition of the Absolute in return, its content is already
ecstatic. Whether its outward form shall be so depends on the body of
the mystic, not on his soul. <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_374"></span>

> <span id="an_iv.viii-p75.1"></span> “Se l’ atto della mente  
> è tutto consopito,  
> en Dio stando rapito,  
> ch’ en sé non se retrova.  
> . . . .  
> En mezo de sto mare  
> essendo sì abissato,  
> giá non ce trova lato  
> onde ne possa uscire,  
> De sé non può pensare  
> né dir como è formato,  
> però che, trasformato,  
> altro sí ha vestire.  
> Tutto lo suo sentire  
> en ben sí va notando,  
> belleza contemplando  
> la qual non ha colore.” <span id="fr_769"></span>[770](#fn_769.md)  

<span id="an_iv.viii-p77"></span>Thus sang Jacopone da Todi of the
ecstatic soul: and here the descriptive powers of one who was both a
poet and a mystic bring life and light to the dry theories of
psychology.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p78"></span>He continues—and here, in perhaps the
finest of all poetic descriptions of ecstasy, he seems to echo at one
point Plotinus, at another Richard of St. Victor: at once to veil and
reveal the utmost secrets of the mystic life:—

> <span id="an_iv.viii-p78.1"></span> “Aperte son le porte  
> facta ha conjunzione,  
> et e in possessione  
> de tutto quel de Dio.  
> Sente que non sentio,  
> que non cognove vede,  
> possede que non crede,  
> gusta senza sapere.  
> Però ch’ ha sé perduto  
> tutto senza misura,  
> possede quel’ altura  
> de summa smesuranza.  
> Perché non ha tenuto  
> en sé altra mistura,  
> quel ben senza figura  
> recere en abondanza.” <span id="fr_770"></span>[771](#fn_770.md) <span
> id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_375"></span>  

<span id="an_iv.viii-p80"></span>This ineffable “awareness,” <span
id="an_iv.viii-p80.1"></span> *en dio stando rapito* *,* this union with
the Imageless Good, is not the only—though it is the purest—form taken
by ecstatic apprehension. Many of the visions and voices described in a
previous chapter were experienced in the entranced or ecstatic state;
generally when the first violence of the rapture was passed. St. Francis
and St. Catherine of Siena both received the stigmata in ecstasy: almost
all the entrancements of Suso and many of those of St. Teresa and Angela
of Foligno, entailed symbolic vision, rather than pure perception of the
Absolute. More and more, then, we are forced to the opinion that
ecstasy, in so far as it is not a synonym for joyous and expansive
contemplation, is really the name of the outward condition rather than
of any one kind of inward experience.

#### <span id="an_iv.viii-p80.2"></span>Rapture

<span id="an_iv.viii-p81"></span>In all the cases which we have been
considering—and they are characteristic of a large group—the onset of
ecstasy has been seen as a gradual, though always involuntary process.
Generally it has been the culminating point of a period of
contemplation. The self, absorbed in the orison of quiet or of union, or
some analogous concentration on its transcendental interests, has passed
over the limit of these states; and slid into a still ecstatic trance,
with its outward characteristics of rigid limbs, cold, and depressed
respiration.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p82"></span>The ecstasy, however, instead of
developing naturally from a state of intense absorption in the Divine
Vision, may seize the subject abruptly and irresistibly, when in his
normal state of consciousness. This is strictly what ascetic writers
mean by Rapture. We have seen that the essence of the mystic life
consists in the remaking of personality: its entrance into a conscious
relation with the Absolute. This process is accompanied in the mystic by
the development of an art expressive of his peculiar genius: the art of
contemplation. His practice of this art, like the practice of poetry,
music, or any other form of creation, may follow normal lines, at first
amenable to the control of his will, and always dependent on his own
deliberate attention to the supreme Object of his quest; that is to say,
on his orison. His mystic states, however they may end, will owe their
beginning to some voluntary act upon his part: a deliberate response to
the invitation of God, a turning from the visible to the invisible
world. Sometimes, however, his <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="an_iv.viii-Page_376"></span> genius for the transcendent becomes too
strong for the other elements of character, and manifests itself in
psychic disturbances—abrupt and ungovernable invasions from the
subliminal region—which make its exercise parallel to the “fine frenzy”
of the prophet, the composer, or the poet. Such is *Rapture:* a violent
and uncontrollable expression of genius for the Absolute, which
temporarily disorganizes and may permanently injure the nervous system
of the self. Often, but not necessarily, Rapture—like its poetic
equivalent—yields results of great splendour and value for life. But it
is an accident, not an implicit of mystical experience: an indication of
disharmony between the subject’s psychophysical make-up and his
transcendental powers.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p83"></span>Rapture, then, may accompany the whole
development of selves of an appropriate type. We have seen that it is a
common incident in mystical conversion. The violent uprush of subliminal
intuitions by which such conversion is marked disorganizes the normal
consciousness, overpowers the will and the senses, and entails a more or
less complete entrancement. This was certainly the case with Suso and
Rulman Merswin, and perhaps with Pascal: whose “Certitude, Peace, Joy”
sums up the exalted intuition of Perfection and Reality—the conviction
of a final and unforgettable knowledge—which is characteristic of all
ecstatic perception.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p84"></span>In her Spiritual Relations, St. Teresa
speaks in some detail of the different phases or forms of expression of
these violent ecstatic states: trance, which in her system means that
which we have called ecstasy, and transport, or “flight of the spirit,”
which is the equivalent of rapture. “The difference between trance and
transport,” she says, “is this. In a trance the soul gradually dies to
outward things, losing the senses and living unto God. But a transport
comes on by one sole act of His Majesty, wrought in the innermost part
of the soul with such swiftness that it is as if the higher part thereof
were carried away, and the soul were leaving the body.”  <span
id="fr_771"></span>[772](#fn_771.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p86"></span>Rapture, says St. Teresa in another
place, “comes in general as a shock, quick and sharp, before you can
collect your thoughts, or help yourself in any way; and you see and feel
it as a cloud, or a strong eagle rising upwards and carrying you away on
its wings. I repeat it: you feel and see yourself carried away, you know
not whither.”  <span id="fr_772"></span>[773](#fn_772.md) This
carrying-away sensation may even assume the concrete form which is known
as levitation: when the upward and outward sensations so dominate the
conscious field that the subject is convinced that she is raised bodily
from the ground. “It seemed to me, when I tried to make some resistance,
as if a great force beneath my feet lifted me up. I know of nothing with
which to compare it; but it was much more violent than the other <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_377"></span>
spiritual visitations, and I was therefore as one ground to pieces . . .
And further, I confess that it threw me into a great fear, very great
indeed at first; for when I saw my body thus lifted up from the earth,
how could I help it? Though the spirit draws it upwards after itself,
and that with great sweetness if unresisted, the senses are not lost;
*at least I was so much myself as to be able to see that I was being
lifted up* .”  <span id="fr_773"></span>[774](#fn_773.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p89"></span>So Rulman Merswin said that in the
rapture which accompanied his conversion, he was carried round the
garden with his feet off the ground:  <span
id="fr_774"></span>[775](#fn_774.md) and St. Catherine of Siena, in a
passage which I have already quoted, speaks of the strength of the
spirit, which raises the body from the earth.  <span
id="fr_775"></span>[776](#fn_775.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p92"></span>The subjective nature of this feeling
of levitation is practically acknowledged by St. Teresa when she says,
“When the rapture was over, my body seemed frequently to be buoyant, as
if all weight had departed from it; so much so, that now and then I
scarcely knew that my feet touched the ground. But during the rapture
the body is very often as it were dead, perfectly powerless. It
continues in the position it was in when the rapture came upon it—if
sitting, sitting.” Obviously here the outward conditions of physical
immobility coexisted with the subjective sensation of being “lifted Up.”
 <span id="fr_776"></span>[777](#fn_776.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p94"></span>The self’s consciousness when in the
condition of rapture may vary from the complete possession of her
faculties claimed by St. Teresa to a complete entrancement. However
abrupt the oncoming of the transport, it does not follow that the mystic
instantly loses his surface-consciousness. “There remains the power of
seeing and hearing; but it is as if the things heard and seen were at a
great distance far away.”  <span id="fr_777"></span>[778](#fn_777.md) They
have retreated, that is to say, to the fringe of the conscious field,
but may still remain just within it. Though the senses may not be
entirely entranced, however, it seems that the power of movement is
always lost. As in ecstasy, breathing and circulation are much
diminished.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p96"></span>“By the command of the Bridegroom when
He intends ravishing the soul,” says St. Teresa, “the doors of the
mansions and even those of the keep and of the whole castle are closed;
for He takes away the power of speech, and although occasionally the
other faculties are retained rather longer, no word can be uttered.
Sometimes the person is at once deprived of all the senses, the <span
id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_378"></span> hands
and body becoming as cold as if the soul had fled; occasionally no
breathing can be detected. This condition lasts but a short while, I
mean in the same degree, for when this profound suspension diminishes
the body seems to come to itself and gain strength to return again to
this *death* which gives more vigorous *life* to the soul.”  <span
id="fr_778"></span>[779](#fn_778.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p98"></span>This spiritual storm, then, in St.
Teresa’s opinion, enhances the vitality of those who experience it:
makes them “more living than before.” It initiates them into “heavenly
secrets,” and if it does not do this it is no “true rapture,” but a
“physical weakness such as women are prone to owing to their delicacy of
constitution.” Its sharpness and violence, however, leave considerable
mental disorder behind: “This supreme state of ecstasy never lasts long,
but although it ceases, it leaves the will so inebriated, and the mind
so transported out of itself that for a day, or sometimes for several
days, such a person is incapable of attending to anything but what
excites the will to the love of God; although wide awake enough to this,
she seems asleep as regards all earthly matters.”  <span
id="fr_779"></span>[780](#fn_779.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p100"></span>But when equilibrium is
re-established, the true effects of this violent and beatific intuition
of the Absolute begin to invade the normal life. The self which has thus
been caught up to awareness of new levels of Reality, is stimulated to
fresh activity by the strength of its impressions. It now desires an
eternal union with that which it has known; with which for a brief
moment it seemed to be merged. The peculiar talent of the mystic—power
of apprehending Reality which his contemplations have ordered and
developed, and his ecstasies express—here reacts upon his life-process,
his slow journey from the Many to the One. His nostalgia has been
increased by a glimpse of the homeland. His intuitive apprehension of
the Absolute, which assumes in ecstasy its most positive form, spurs him
on towards that permanent union with the Divine which is his goal. “Such
great graces,” says St. Teresa, “leave the soul avid of total possession
of that Divine Bridegroom who has conferred them.”  <span
id="fr_780"></span>[781](#fn_780.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p102"></span>Hence the ecstatic states do not
merely lift the self to an abnormal degree of knowledge: they enrich her
life, contribute to the remaking of her consciousness, develop and
uphold the “strong and stormy love which drives her home.” They give her
the clearest vision she can have of that transcendent standard to which
she must conform: entail her sharpest consciousness of the inflow of
that Life on which her little striving life depends. Little wonder,
then, that—though the violence of the onset may often <span
id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span id="an_iv.viii-Page_379"></span> try
his body to the full—the mystic comes forth from a “good ecstasy” as
Pascal from the experience of the Fire, humbled yet exultant,
marvellously strengthened; and ready, not for any passive enjoyments,
but rather for the struggles and hardships of the Way, the deliberate
pain and sacrifice of love.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p103"></span>In the third Degree of Ardent Love,
says Richard of St. Victor, love paralyses action. Union *(copula)* is
the symbol of this state: ecstasy is its expression. The desirous soul,
he says finely, no longer thirsts *for* God but *into* God. The pull of
its desire draws it into the Infinite Sea. The mind is borne away into
the abyss of Divine Light; and, wholly forgetful of exterior things,
knows not even itself, but passes utterly into its God. In this state,
all earthly desire is absorbed in the heavenly glory. “Whilst the mind
is separated from itself, and whilst it is borne away into the secret
place of the divine mystery and is surrounded on all sides by the fire
of divine love, it is inwardly penetrated and inflamed by this fire, and
utterly puts off itself and puts on a divine love: and being conformed
to that Beauty which it has beheld, it passes utterly into that other
glory.”  <span id="fr_781"></span>[782](#fn_781.md)

<span id="an_iv.viii-p105"></span>Thus does the state of ecstasy
contribute to the business of deification; of the remaking of the soul’s
susbtance in conformity with the Goodness, Truth, and Beauty which is
God, “Being conformed to that Beauty which it has beheld, it passes
utterly into that other glory”; into the flaming heart of Reality, the
deep but dazzling darkness of its home.

<span id="an_iv.viii-p106"></span><span id="page_380">p. 380</span>
<span id="an_iv.viii-Page_380"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_731"></span>[359:732](myst19.htm#fr_731.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p3"></span> “Human Personality and its Survival of
Bodily Death,” vol. ii. p. 260.

<span id="fn_732"></span>[359:733](myst19.htm#fr_732.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p7"></span> *Vide infra,* p. 365.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[360:734](myst19.htm#fr_733.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p8"></span> An interesting modern case is reported
in the *Lancet,* 18 March, 1911.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[360:735](myst19.htm#fr_734.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p10"></span> Relaccion, viii. 8.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[361:736](myst19.htm#fr_735.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p13"></span> St. Thomas proves ecstasies to be
inevitable on just this psychological ground. “The higher our mind is
raised to the contemplation of spiritual things,” he says, “the more it
is abstracted from sensible things. But the final term to which
contemplation can possibly arrive is the divine substance. Therefore the
mind that sees the divine substance must be totally divorced from the
bodily senses, either by death or *by* *some rapture”* (“Sultana contra
Gentiles,” I. iii. cap. xlvii., Rickaby’s translation).

<span id="fn_736"></span>[361:737](myst19.htm#fr_736.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p14"></span> “Sur la Psychologie du Mysticisme”
*(Revue Philosophique,* February, 1902).

<span id="fn_737"></span>[361:738](myst19.htm#fr_737.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p16"></span> Malaval, “La Pratique de la Vraye
Théologie Mystique,” vol. i. p. 89.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[362:739](myst19.htm#fr_738.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p18"></span> Pierre Janet (“The Major Symptoms of
Hysteria,” p. 316) says that a lowering of the mental level in an
invariable symptom or “stigma” of hysteria.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[362:740](myst19.htm#fr_739.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p19"></span> “Holy Wisdom,” Treatise iii. § iv.
cap. iii.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[362:741](myst19.htm#fr_740.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p21"></span> Von Hügel, “The Mystical Element of
Religion,” vol. i. p. 206 .

<span id="fn_741"></span>[363:742](myst19.htm#fr_741.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p22"></span> This power of detecting and hearing
the call of duty, though she was deaf to everything else, is evidently
related to the peculiarity noticed by Ribot; who says that an ecstatic
hears no sounds, save, in some cases, the voice of one specific person,
which is always able to penetrate the trance. (“Les Maladies de la
Volonté,” p. 125.)

<span id="fn_742"></span>[363:743](myst19.htm#fr_742.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p23"></span> Vita e Dottrina, cap. v.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[363:744](myst19.htm#fr_743.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p24"></span> Vida, cap. xx. § 29.

<span id="fn_744"></span>[363:745](myst19.htm#fr_744.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p27"></span> A. Maury, “Le Sommeil et les Rèves,”
p. 235.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[364:746](myst19.htm#fr_745.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p31"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap.
iii.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[364:747](myst19.htm#fr_746.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p32"></span> *Vide* *supra,* p. 181.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[364:748](myst19.htm#fr_747.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p33"></span> D. A. Mougel, “Denys le Chartreux,” p.
32.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[365:749](myst19.htm#fr_748.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p35"></span> E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena,”
p. 50.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[366:750](myst19.htm#fr_749.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p38"></span> Dialogo, cap. lxxix.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[367:751](myst19.htm#fr_750.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p43"></span> In the case of Dante, for instance, we
do not know whether his absorption in the Eternal light did or did not
entail the condition of trance.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[368:752](myst19.htm#fr_751.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p44"></span> <span id="an_iv.viii-p44.1"></span>[2
Cor. xii. 1-6](../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001.md)<span
id="an_iv.viii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_752"></span>[368:753](myst19.htm#fr_752.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p46"></span> Vida, cap. xx. §§ 1 and 3.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[369:754](myst19.htm#fr_753.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p50"></span> Compare Dante, Letter to Can Grande,
sect. 28, where he adduces this fact of “the ravishing of sinners for
their correction,” in support of his claim that the “Divine Comedy” is
the fruit of experience, and that he had indeed “navigated the great Sea
of Being” of which he writes.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[369:755](myst19.htm#fr_754.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p51"></span> Richard Rolle, “The Fire of Love,” bk.
ii. cap. vii.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[369:756](myst19.htm#fr_755.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p54"></span> Dante, *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_756"></span>[370:757](myst19.htm#fr_756.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p55"></span> Eckhart, “On the Steps of the Soul”
(Pfeiffer, p. 153).

<span id="fn_757"></span>[370:758](myst19.htm#fr_757.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p57"></span> Compare Par. xxxiii. 85 ( *vide supra*
, p. 135).

<span id="fn_758"></span>[370:759](myst19.htm#fr_758.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p58"></span> Jundt, “Rulman Merswin,” p. 27. Note
that this was a “good ecstasy,” involving healthful effects for life.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[370:760](myst19.htm#fr_759.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p59"></span> Jundt, “Les Amis de Dieu,” p. 39.
Given also by Rufus Jones, “Studies in Mystical Religion,” p. 271.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[370:761](myst19.htm#fr_760.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p61"></span> “Benjamin Major.”

<span id="fn_761"></span>[371:762](myst19.htm#fr_761.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p61.8"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p62"></span> St. John of the Cross, “En una Noche
Escura.”

<span id="fn_762"></span>[371:763](myst19.htm#fr_762.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p65"></span> Ribot, “Psychologie de l’Attention,”
cap. iii.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[371:764](myst19.htm#fr_763.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p66"></span> B. P. Blood. See William James, “A
Pluralistic Mystic,” in the *Hibbert Journal,* July, 1910 .

<span id="fn_764"></span>[371:765](myst19.htm#fr_764.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p66.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p67"></span> Vida, cap. xx. § 24.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[372:766](myst19.htm#fr_765.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p69"></span> Leben, cap. vl.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[372:767](myst19.htm#fr_766.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p70.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p71"></span> Ennead vi. 9

<span id="fn_767"></span>[373:768](myst19.htm#fr_767.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p73"></span> *Op. cit., loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_768"></span>[373:769](myst19.htm#fr_768.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p75"></span> Ruysbroeck, “De Calculo,” cap. xii.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[374:770](myst19.htm#fr_769.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p75.19"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p76"></span> “The activity of the mind is lulled to
rest: rapt in God, It can no longer find itself. . . . Being so deeply
engulphed in that ocean, now it can find no place to issue therefrom. Of
itself it cannot think, nor can it say what it is like: because
transformed, it hath another vesture. All its perceptions have gone
forth to gaze upon the Good, and contemplate that Beauty which has no
likeness” (Lauda xci.).

<span id="fn_770"></span>[374:771](myst19.htm#fr_770.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p78.18"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p79"></span> “The doors are flung wide: conjoined
to God, it possesses all that is in Him. It feels that which it felt
not: sees that which it knew not, possesses that which it believed not,
tastes, though it savours not. Because it is wholly lost to itself, it
possesses that height of Unmeasured Perfection. Because it has not
retained in itself the mixture of any other thing, it has received in
abundance that Imageless Good” ( *op. cit* .).

<span id="fn_771"></span>[376:772](myst19.htm#fr_771.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p85"></span> Relaccion viii. 8 and 10.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[376:773](myst19.htm#fr_772.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p87"></span> Vida, cap. xx. § 3.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[377:774](myst19.htm#fr_773.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p88"></span> St. Teresa, *op. cit., loc. cit.,* §§
7 and 9.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[377:775](myst19.htm#fr_774.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p90"></span> *Supra* , p. 186.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[377:776](myst19.htm#fr_775.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p91"></span> Dialogo, cap. lxxix.

<span id="fn_776"></span>[377:777](myst19.htm#fr_776.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p92.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p93"></span> Vida, cap, xx. § 23. At the same time
in the present state of our knowledge and in view of numerous attested
cases of levitation, it is impossible to dogmatise on this subject. The
supernaturalist view is given in its extreme form by Farges, “Mystical
Phenomena,” pp. 536 *seq.*

<span id="fn_777"></span>[377:778](myst19.htm#fr_777.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p95"></span> Teresa, *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_778"></span>[378:779](myst19.htm#fr_778.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p97"></span> St. Teresa, “El Castillo Interior,”
Moradas Sextas, cap. iv.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[378:780](myst19.htm#fr_779.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p99"></span> *Op. cit., loc. cit* .

<span id="fn_780"></span>[378:781](myst19.htm#fr_780.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p101"></span> St. Teresa, *op. cit.,* cap. vi.

<span id="fn_781"></span>[379:782](myst19.htm#fr_781.md) <span
id="an_iv.viii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.viii-p104"></span> “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae
Charitatis” (paraphrase).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. The Dark Night of the Soul](myst20.md)

</div>
