<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst06)  [Next](myst08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. The Characteristics of Mysticism

<span id="an_iii.iv"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p1"></span>The<span id="an_iii.iv-p1.1"></span>
spiritual history of man reveals two distinct and fundamental attitudes
towards the unseen; and two methods whereby he has sought to get in
touch with it. For our present purpose I will call these methods the
“way of magic” and the “way of mysticism.” Having said this, we must at
once add that although in their extreme forms these methods are sharply
contrasted, their frontiers are far from being clearly defined: that,
starting from the same point, they often confuse the inquirer by using
the same language, instruments, and methods. Hence, much which is really
magic is loosely and popularly described as mysticism. They represent as
a matter of fact the opposite poles of the same thing: the
transcendental consciousness of humanity. Between them lie the great
religions, which might be described under this metaphor as representing
the ordinarily habitable regions of that consciousness. Thus, at one end
of the scale, pure mysticism “shades off” into religion—from some points
of view seems to grow out of it. No deeply religious man is without a
touch of mysticism; and no mystic can be other than religious, in the
psychological if not in the theological sense of the word. At the other
end of the scale, as we shall see later, religion, no less surely,
shades off into magic.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p2"></span>The fundamental difference between the
two is this: magic wants to get, mysticism wants to give—immortal and
antagonistic attitudes, which turn up under one disguise or another in
<span id="page_71">p. 71</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_71"></span>
every age of thought. Both magic and mysticism in their full development
bring the whole mental machinery, conscious and unconscious, to bear on
their undertaking: both claim that they give their initiates powers
unknown to ordinary men. But the centre round which that machinery is
grouped, the reasons of that undertaking, and the ends to which those
powers are applied differ enormously. In mysticism the will is united
with the emotions in an impassioned desire to transcend the sense-world,
in order that the self may be joined by love to the one eternal and
ultimate Object of love; whose existence is intuitively perceived by
that which we used to call the soul, but now find it easier to refer to
as the “cosmic” or “transcendental” sense. This is the poetic and
religious temperament acting upon the plane of reality. In magic, the
will unites with the intellect in an impassioned desire for
supersensible knowledge. This is the intellectual, aggressive, and
scientific temperament trying to extend its field of consciousness,
until it includes the supersensual world: obviously the antithesis of
mysticism, though often adopting its title and style.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p3"></span>It will be our business later to consider
in more detail the characteristics and significance of magic. Now it is
enough to say that we may class broadly as magical all forms of
self-seeking transcendentalism. It matters little whether the apparatus
which they use be the incantations of the old magicians, the
congregational prayer for rain of orthodox Churchmen, or the consciously
self-hypnotizing devices of “New Thought”: whether the end proposed be
the evocation of an angel, the power of transcending circumstance, or
the healing of disease. The object is always the same: the deliberate
exaltation of the will, till it transcends its usual limitations and
obtains for the self or group of selves something which it or they did
not previously possess. It is an individualistic and acquisitive
science: in all its forms an activity of the intellect, seeking Reality
for its own purposes, or for those of humanity at large.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p4"></span>Mysticism, whose great name is too often
given to these supersensual activities, has nothing in common with this.
It is non-individualistic. It implies, indeed, the abolition of
individuality; of that hard separateness, that “I, Me, Mine” which makes
of man a finite isolated thing. It is essentially a movement of the
heart, seeking to transcend the limitations of the individual standpoint
and to surrender itself to ultimate Reality; for no personal gain, to
satisfy no transcendental curiosity, to obtain no other-worldly joys,
but purely from an instinct of love. By the word *heart,* of course we
here mean not merely “the seat of the affections,” “the organ of tender
emotion,” and the like: but rather the inmost sanctuary of personal
being, the deep root of <span id="page_72">p. 72</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_72"></span> its love and will, the very source of its
energy and life. The mystic is “in love with the Absolute” not in any
idle or sentimental manner, but in that vital sense which presses at all
costs and through all dangers towards union with the object beloved.
Hence, whilst the practice of magic—like the practice of science—does
not necessarily entail passionate emotion, though of course it does and
must entail interest of some kind, mysticism, like art, cannot exist
without it. We must feel, and feel acutely, before we want to act on
this hard and heroic scale.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p5"></span>We see, then, that these two activities
correspond to the two eternal passions of the self, the desire of love
and the desire of knowledge: severally representing the hunger of heart
and intellect for ultimate truth. The third attitude towards the
supersensual world, that of transcendental philosophy, hardly comes
within the scope of the present inquiry; since it is purely academic,
whilst both magic and mysticism are practical and empirical. Such
philosophy is often wrongly called mysticism, because it tries to make
maps of the countries which the mystic explores. Its performances are
useful, as diagrams are useful, so long as they do not ape finality;
remembering that the only final thing is personal experience—the
personal and costly exploration of the exalted and truth-loving soul.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p6"></span>What then do we really mean by mysticism?
A word which is impartially applied to the performances of mediums and
the ecstasies of the saints, to “menticulture” and sorcery, dreamy
poetry and mediaeval art, to prayer and palmistry, the doctrinal
excesses of Gnosticism, and the tepid speculations of the Cambridge
Platonists—even, according to William James, to the higher branches of
intoxication  <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) —soon ceases to
have any useful meaning. Its employment merely confuses the
inexperienced student, who ends with a vague idea that every kind of
supersensual theory and practice is somehow “mystical.” Hence the need
of fixing, if possible, its true characteristics: and restating the fact
that Mysticism, in its pure form, is the science of ultimates, the
science of union with the Absolute, and nothing else, and that the
mystic is the person who attains to this union, not the person who talks
about it. Not to *know about* but to *Be,* is the mark of the real
initiate.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p8"></span>The difficulty lies in determining the
point at which supersensual experience ceases to be merely a practical
and interesting extension of sensual experience—an enlarging, so to
speak, of the boundaries of existence—and passes over into that
boundless life where Subject and Object, desirous and desired, are
*one.* No <span id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_73"></span> sharp line, but rather an infinite series
of gradations separate the two states. Hence we must look carefully at
all the pilgrims on the road; discover, if we can, the motive of their
travels, the maps which they use, the luggage which they take, the end
which they attain.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p9"></span>Now we have said that the end which the
mystic sets before him is conscious union with a living Absolute. That
Divine Dark, that Abyss of the Godhead, of which he sometimes speaks as
the goal of his quest, is just this Absolute, the Uncreated Light in
which the Universe is bathed, and which—transcending, as it does, all
human powers of expression—he can only describe to us as *dark.* But
there is—must be—contact “in an intelligible where” between every
individual self and this Supreme Self, this Ultimate. In the mystic this
union is conscious, personal, and complete. “He enjoys,” says St. John
of the Cross, “a certain contact of the soul with the Divinity; and it
is God Himself who is then felt and tasted.”  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) More or less according to his measure,
he has touched—or better, been touched by—the substantial Being of
Deity, not merely its manifestation in life. This it is which
distinguishes him from the best and most brilliant of other men, and
makes his science, in Patmore’s words, “the science of self-evident
Reality.” Gazing with him into that unsearchable ground whence the World
of Becoming comes forth “eternally generated in an eternal Now,” we may
see only the icy darkness of perpetual negations: but he, beyond the
coincidence of opposites, looks upon the face of Perfect Love.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p11"></span>As genius in any of the arts is—humanly
speaking—the final term of a power of which each individual possesses
the rudiments, so mysticism may be looked upon as the final term, the
active expression, of a power latent in the whole race: the power, that
is to say, of so perceiving transcendent reality. Few people pass
through life without knowing what it is to be at least touched by this
mystical feeling. He who falls in love with a woman and perceives—as the
lover really does perceive—that the categorical term “girl” veils a
wondrous and unspeakable reality: he who, falling in love with nature,
sees the landscape “touched with light divine,”—a charming phrase to
those who have not seen it, but a scientific statement to the rest—he
who falls in love with the Holy, or as we say “undergoes conversion”:
all these have truly known for an instant something of the secret of the
world.  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md)

> <span id="an_iii.iv-p12.1"></span> “. . . Ever and anon a trumpet
> sounds  
> From the hid battlement of Eternity,  
> Those shaken mists a space unsettle, then  
> Round the half-glimpsèd turrets slowly wash again.”  

<span id="an_iii.iv-p13"></span><span id="page_74">p. 74</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_74"></span> At such moments “Transcendental Feeling,
welling up from another ‘Part of the Soul’ whispers to Understanding and
Sense that they are leaving out something. What? Nothing less than the
secret plan of the Universe. And what is that secret plan? The other
‘Part of the Soul’ indeed comprehends it in silence as it is, but can
explain it to the Understanding only in the symbolical language of the
interpreter, Imagination—in Vision.”  <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p15"></span>Here, in this spark or “part of the
soul” where the spirit, as religion says, “rests in God who made it,” is
the fountain alike of the creative imagination and the mystic life. Now
and again something stings it into consciousness, and man is caught up
to the spiritual level, catches a glimpse of the “secret plan.” Then
hints of a marvellous truth, a unity whose note is ineffable peace,
shine in created things; awakening in the self a sentiment of love,
adoration, and awe. Its life is enhanced, the barrier of personality is
broken, man escapes the sense-world, ascends to the apex of his spirit,
and enters for a brief period into the more extended life of the All.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p16"></span>This intuition of the Real lying at the
root of the visible world and sustaining its life, is present in a
modified form in the arts: perhaps it were better to say, *must* be
present if these arts are so justify themselves as heightened forms of
experience. It is this which gives to them that peculiar vitality, that
strange power of communicating a poignant emotion, half torment and half
joy, which baffle their more rational interpreters. We know that the
picture which is “like a photograph,” the building which is at once
handsome and commodious, the novel which is a perfect transcript of
life, fail to satisfy us. It is difficult to say why this should be so,
unless it were because these things have neglected their true business;
which was not to reproduce the illusions of ordinary men but to catch
and translate for us something of that “secret plan,” that reality which
the artistic consciousness is able, in a measure, to perceive. “Painting
as well as music and poetry exists and exults in immortal thoughts,”
says Blake.  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) That
“life-enhancing power” which has been recognized as the supreme quality
of good painting,  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) has its
origin in this contact of the artistic mind with the archetypal—or, if
you like, the transcendental—world: the underlying verity of things.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p19"></span>A critic, in whom poetic genius has
brought about the unusual alliance of intuition with scholarship,
testifies to this same truth when he says of the ideals which governed
early Chinese painting, “In this theory every work of art is thought of
as an incarnation <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_75"></span> of the genius of rhythm, manifesting the
living spirit of things with a clearer beauty and intenser power than
the gross impediments of complex matter allow to be transmitted to, our
senses in the visible world around us. A picture is conceived as a *sort
of apparition from a more real world of essential life.”*  <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p21"></span>That “more real world of essential life”
is the world in which the “free soul” of the great mystic dwells;
hovering like the six-winged seraph before the face of the Absolute.
 <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117.md) The artist too may cross its
boundaries in his brief moments of creation: but he cannot stay. He
comes back to us, bearing its tidings, with Dante’s cry upon his lips—

> <span id="an_iii.iv-p22.1"></span> “. . . Non eran da ciò le proprie
> penne  
> se non che la mia mente fu percossa  
> da un fulgore, in che sua voglia venne.”  <span
> id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118.md)  

<span id="an_iii.iv-p24"></span>The mystic may say—is indeed bound to
say—with St. Bernard, “My secret to myself.” Try how he will, his
stammering and awestruck reports can hardly be understood but by those
who are already in the way. But the artist cannot act thus. On him has
been laid the duty of expressing something of that which he perceives.
He is bound to tell his love. In his worship of Perfect Beauty faith
must be balanced by works. By means of veils and symbols he must
interpret his free vision, his glimpse of the burning bush, to other
men. He is the mediator between his brethren and the divine, for art is
the link between appearance and reality.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p26"></span>But we do not call every one who has
these partial and artistic intuitions of reality a mystic, any more than
we call every one a musician who has learnt to play the piano. The true
mystic is the person in whom such powers transcend the merely artistic
and visionary stage, and are exalted to the point of genius: in whom the
transcendental consciousness can dominate the normal consciousness, and
who has definitely surrendered himself to the embrace of Reality. As
artists stand in a peculiar relation to the phenomenal world, receiving
rhythms and discovering truths and beauties which are hidden from other
men, so this true mystic stands in a peculiar relation to the
transcendental world, there experiencing actual, but to us unimaginable
tension and delight. His consciousness is transfigured in a particular
way, he lives at <span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_76"></span> different levels of experience from other
people: and this of course means that he sees a different world, since
the world as we know it is the product of certain scraps or aspects of
reality acting upon a normal and untransfigured consciousness. Hence his
mysticism is no isolated vision, no fugitive glimpse of reality, but a
complete system of life carrying its own guarantees and obligations. As
other men are immersed in and react to natural or intellectual life, so
the mystic is immersed in and reacts to spiritual life. He moves towards
that utter identification with its interests which he calls “Union with
God.” He has been called a lonely soul. He might more properly be
described as a lonely body: for his soul, peculiarly responsive, sends
out and receives communications upon every side.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p27"></span>The earthly artist, because perception
brings with it the imperative longing for expression, tries to give us
in colour, sound or words a hint of his ecstasy, his glimpse of truth.
Only those who have tried, know how small a fraction of his vision he
can, under the most favourable circumstance, contrive to represent. The
mystic, too, tries very hard to tell an unwilling world his secret. But
in his case, the difficulties are enormously increased. First, there is
the huge disparity between his unspeakable experience and the language
which will most nearly suggest it. Next, there is the great gulf fixed
between his mind and the mind of the world. His audience must be
bewitched as well as addressed, caught up to something of his state,
before they can be made to understand.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p28"></span>Were he a musician, it is probable that
the mystic could give his message to other musicians in the terms of
that art, far more accurately than language will allow him to do: for we
must remember that there is no excuse but that of convenience for the
pre-eminence amongst modes of expression which we accord to words. These
correspond so well to the physical plane and its adventures, that we
forget that they have but the faintest of relations with transcendental
things. Even the artist, before he can make use of them, is bound to
re-arrange them in accordance with the laws of rhythm: obeying
unconsciously the rule by which all arts “tend to approach the condition
of music.”

<span id="an_iii.iv-p29"></span>So too the mystic. Mysticism, the most
romantic of adventures, from one point of view the art of arts, their
source and also their end, finds naturally enough its closest
correspondences in the most purely artistic and most deeply significant
of all forms of expression. The mystery of music is seldom realized by
those who so easily accept its gifts. Yet of all the arts music alone
shares with great mystical literature the power of waking in us a
response to the life-movement of the universe: brings us—we know not
how—news of its exultant passions and its incomparable peace. <span
id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_77"></span> Beethoven
heard the very voice of Reality, and little of it escaped when he
translated it for our ears.  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p31"></span>The mediaeval mind, more naturally
mystical than ours, and therefore more sharply aware of the part which
rhythmic harmony plays in the worlds of nature and of grace, gave to
music a cosmic importance, discerning its operation in many phenomena
which we now attribute to that dismal figment, Law. “There are three
kinds of music,” says Hugh of St. Victor, “the music of the worlds, the
music of humanity, the music of instruments. Of the music of the worlds,
one is of the elements, another of the planets, another of Time. Of that
which is of the elements, one is of number, another of weights, another
of measure. Of that which is of the planets, one is of place, another of
motion, another of nature. Of that which is of Time, one is of the days
and the vicissitudes of light and darkness; another of the months and
the waxing and waning of the moon; another of the years and the changes
of spring, summer, autumn and winter. Of the music of humanity, one is
of the body, another of the soul, another in the connexion that is
between them.”  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) Thus the life of
the visible and invisible universe consists in a supernal fugue.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p33"></span>One contemplative at least, Richard
Rolle of Hampole, “the father of English mysticism,” was acutely aware
of this music of the soul, discerning in it a correspondence with the
measured harmonies of the spiritual universe. In those enraptured
descriptions of his inward experience which are among the jewels of
mystical literature, nothing is more remarkable than his constant and
deliberate employment of musical imagery. This alone, it seems, could
catch and translate for him the character of his experience of Reality.
The condition of joyous and awakened love to which the mystic passes
when his purification is at an end is to him, above all else, the state
of Song. He does not “see” the spiritual world: he “hears” it. For him,
as for St. Francis of Assisi, it is a “heavenly melody, intolerably
sweet.”  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p35"></span>“Song I call,” he says, “when in a
plenteous soul the sweetness of eternal love with burning is taken, and
thought into song is turned, and the mind into full sweet sound is
changed.”  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123.md) He who <span
id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_78"></span>
experiences this joyous exaltation “says not his prayers like other
righteous men” but “is taken into marvellous mirth: and, goodly sound
being descended into him, as it were with notes his prayers he sings.”
 <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124.md) So Gertrude More—“O lett me
sitt alone, silent to all the world and it to me, that I may learn the
song of Love.”  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p39"></span>Rolle’s own experience of mystic joy
seems actually to have come to him in this form: the perceptions of his
exalted consciousness presenting themselves to his understanding under
musical conditions, as other mystics have received them in the form of
pictures or words. I give in his own words the classic description of
his passage from the first state of “burning love” to the second state
of “songful love”—from *Calor* to *Canor—* when “into song of joy
meditation is turned.” “In the night, before supper, as I my psalms
sung, as it were the sound of readers or rather singers about me I
beheld. Whilst, also praying, to heaven with all desire I took heed,
suddenly, in what manner I wot not, in me the sound of song I felt; and
likeliest heavenly melody I took, with me dwelling in mind. Forsooth my
thought continually to mirth of song was changed, and my meditation to
praise turned; and my prayers and psalm-saying, in *sound* I showed.”
 <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p41"></span>The song, however, is a mystic melody
having little in common with its clumsy image, earthly music. Bodily
song “lets it”; and “noise of janglers makes it turn again to thought,”
“for sweet ghostly song accords not with outward song, the which in
churches and elsewhere is used. It discords much: for all that is man’s
voice is formed with bodily ears to be heard; but among angels’ tunes it
has an acceptable melody, and with marvel it is commended of them that
have known it.” To others it is incommunicable. “Worldly lovers soothly
words or ditties of our song may know, for the words they read: but the
tone and sweetness of that song they may not learn.”  <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p46"></span>Such symbolism as this—a living
symbolism of experience and action, as well as of statement—seems almost
essential to mystical expression. The mind must employ some device of
the kind if its transcendental perceptions—wholly unrelated as they are
to the phenomena with which intellect is able to deal—are ever to be
grasped by the surface consciousness. Sometimes the symbol and the
perception which it represents become fused in that consciousness; and
the mystic’s experience then presents itself to <span id="page_79">p.
79</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_79"></span> him as “visions” or
“voices” which we must look upon as the garment he has himself provided
to veil that Reality upon which no man may look and live. The nature of
this garment will be largely conditioned by his temperament—as in
Rolle’s evident bias towards music, St. Catherine of Genoa’s leaning
towards the abstract conceptions of fire and light—and also by his
theological education and environment. Cases in point are the highly
dogmatic visions and auditions of St. Gertrude, Suso, St. Catherine of
Siena, the Blessed Angela of Foligno; above all of St. Teresa, whose
marvellous self-analyses provide the classic account of these attempts
of the mind to translate transcendental intuitions into concepts with
which it can deal.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p47"></span>The greatest mystics,
however—Ruysbroeck, St. John of the Cross, and St. Teresa herself in her
later stages—distinguish clearly between the ineffable Reality which
they perceive and the image under which they describe it. Again and
again they tell us with Dionysius and Eckhart, that the Object of their
contemplation “hath no image”: or with St. John of the Cross that “the
soul can never attain to the height of the divine union, so far as it is
possible in this life, through the medium of any forms or figures.”
 <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) Therefore the attempt which has
sometimes been made to identify mysticism with such forms and
figures—with visions, voices, “supernatural favours” and other abnormal
phenomena—is clearly wrong.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p49"></span>“The highest and most divine things
which it is given us to see and to know,” says Dionysius the Areopagite
plainly, “are but the symbolic language of things subordinate to Him who
Himself transcendeth them all: through which things His incomprehensible
Presence is shown, walking on those heights of His Holy Places which are
perceived by the mind.  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p51"></span>The mystic, as a rule, cannot wholly do
without symbol and image, inadequate to his vision though they must
always be: for his experience must be expressed if it is to be
communicated, and its actuality is inexpressible except in some
side-long way, some hint or parallel which will stimulate the dormant
intuition of the reader, and convey, as all poetic language does,
something beyond its surface sense. Hence the large part which is played
in all mystical writings by symbolism and imagery; and also by that
rhythmic and exalted language which induces in sensitive persons
something of the languid ecstasy of dream. The close connection between
rhythm and heightened states of consciousness is as yet little
understood. Its further investigation will probably throw much light on
ontological as well as psychological problems. <span id="page_80">p.
80</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_80"></span> Mystical, no less than
musical and poetic perception, tends naturally—we know not why—to
present itself in rhythmical periods: a feature which is also strongly
marked in writings obtained in the automatic state. So constant is this
law in some subjects that Baron von Hügel adopted the presence or
absence of rhythm as a test whereby to distinguish the genuine
utterances of St. Catherine of Genoa from those wrongly attributed to
her by successive editors of her legend.  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p53"></span>All kinds of symbolic language come
naturally to the articulate mystic, who is often a literary artist as
well: so naturally, that he sometimes forgets to explain that his
utterance is but symbolic—a desperate attempt to translate the truth of
that world into the beauty of this. It is here that mysticism joins
hands with music and poetry: had this fact always been recognized by its
critics, they would have been saved from many regrettable and some
ludicrous misconceptions. Symbol—the clothing which the spiritual
borrows from the material plane—is a form of artistic expression. That
is to say, it is not literal but suggestive: though the artist who uses
it may sometimes lose sight of this distinction. Hence the persons who
imagine that the “Spiritual Marriage” of St. Catherine or St. Teresa
veils a perverted sexuality, that the vision of the Sacred Heart
involved an incredible anatomical experience, or that the divine
inebriation of the Sufis is the apotheosis of drunkenness, do but
advertise their ignorance of the mechanism of the arts: like the lady
who thought that Blake *must* be mad because he said that he had touched
the sky with his finger.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p54"></span>Further, the study of the mystics, the
keeping company however humbly with their minds, brings with it as music
or poetry does—but in a far greater degree—a strange exhilaration, as if
we were brought near to some mighty source of Being, were at last on the
verge of the secret which all seek. The symbols displayed, the actual
words employed, when we analyse them, are not enough to account for such
effect. It is rather that these messages from the waking transcendental
self of another, stir our own deeper selves in their sleep. It were
hardly an extravagance to say, that those writings which are the outcome
of true and first-hand mystical experience may be known by this power of
imparting to the reader the sense of exalted and extended life. “All
mystics,” says Saint-Martin, “speak the same language, for they come
from the same country.” The deep undying life within us came from that
country too: and it recognizes the accents of home, though it cannot
always understand what they would say.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p55"></span>Now, returning to our original
undertaking, that of defining <span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_81"></span> if we can the characteristics of true
mysticism, I think that we have already reached a point at which William
James’s celebrated “four marks” of the mystic state, Ineffability,
Noetic Quality, Transiency, and Passivity,  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) will fail to satisfy us. In their
place I propose to set out, illustrate and, I hope, justify four other
rules or notes which may be applied as tests to any given case which
claims to take rank amongst the mystics.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p57"></span>1. True mysticism is active and
practical, not passive and theoretical. It is an organic life-process, a
something which the whole self does; not something as to which its
intellect holds an opinion.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p58"></span>2. Its aims are wholly transcendental
and spiritual. It is in no way concerned with adding to, exploring,
re-arranging, or improving anything in the visible universe. The mystic
brushes aside that universe, even in its supernormal manifestations.
Though he does not, as his enemies declare, neglect his duty to the
many, his heart is always set upon the changeless One.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p59"></span>3. This One is for the mystic, not
merely the Reality of all that is, but also a living and personal Object
of Love; never an object of exploration. It draws his whole being
homeward, but always under the guidance of the heart.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p60"></span>4. Living union with this One—which is
the term of his adventure—is a definite state or form of enhanced life.
It is obtained neither from an intellectual realization of its delights,
nor from the most acute emotional longings. Though these must be present
they are not enough. It is arrived at by an arduous psychological and
spiritual process—the so-called Mystic Way—entailing the complete
remaking of character and the liberation of a new, or rather latent,
form of consciousness; which imposes on the self the condition which is
sometimes inaccurately called “ecstasy,” but is better named the Unitive
State.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p61"></span>Mysticism, then, is not an opinion: it
is not a philosophy. It has nothing in common with the pursuit of occult
knowledge. On the one hand it is not merely the power of contemplating
Eternity: on the other, it is not to be identified with any kind of
religious queerness. It is the name of that organic process which
involves the perfect consummation of the Love of God: the achievement
here and now of the immortal heritage of man. Or, if you like it
better—for this means exactly the same thing—it is the art of
establishing his conscious relation with the Absolute.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p62"></span>The movement of the mystic consciousness
towards this consummation, is not merely the sudden admission to an
overwhelming vision of Truth: though such dazzling glimpses may from
time to time be vouchsafed to the soul. It is rather an ordered movement
<span id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_82"></span>
towards ever higher levels of reality, ever closer identification with
the Infinite. “The mystic experience,” says Récéjac, “ends with the
words, ‘I live, yet not I, but God in me.’ This feeling of
identification, which is the term of mystical activity, has a very
important significance. In its early stages the mystic consciousness
feels the Absolute in opposition to the Self . . . as mystic activity
goes on, it tends to abolish this opposition. . . . When it has reached
its term the consciousness finds itself possessed by the sense of a
Being at one and the same time greater than the Self and identical with
it: great enough to be God, intimate enough to be me.”  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p64"></span>This is that mystic union which is the
only possible fulfilment of mystic love: since

> <span id="an_iii.iv-p64.1"></span> “All that is not One must ever  
> Suffer with the wound of Absence  
> And whoever in Love’s city  
> Enters, finds but room for One  
> And but in One-ness, Union.”  <span
> id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133.md)  

<span id="an_iii.iv-p66"></span>The history of mysticism is the history
of the demonstration of this law upon the plane of reality.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p67"></span>Now, how do these statements square with
the practice of the great mystics; and with the various forms of
activity which have been classified at one time or another as mystical?

<span id="an_iii.iv-p68"></span>(1) *Mysticism is practical, not
theoretical.*

<span id="an_iii.iv-p69"></span>This statement, taken alone, is not, of
course, enough to identify mysticism; since it is equally true of magic,
which also proposes to itself something to be done rather than something
to be believed. It at once comes into collision, however, with the
opinions of those who believe mysticism to be “the reaction of the born
Platonist upon religion.”

<span id="an_iii.iv-p70"></span>The difference between such devout
philosophers and the true mystic, is the difference which George Tyrrell
held to distinguish revelation from theology.  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134.md) Mysticism, like revelation, is final
and personal. It is not merely a beautiful and suggestive diagram but
experience in its most intense form. That experience, in the words of
Plotinus, is the soul’s solitary adventure: “the flight of the Alone to
the Alone.”  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135.md) It provides the
material, the substance, upon which mystical philosophy cogitates; as
theologians cogitate upon the revelation which forms the basis of faith.
Hence those whom we are to accept as mystics must have received, and
acted upon, intuitions of a Truth which is for them absolute. If we are
<span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_83"></span> to
acknowledge that they “knew the doctrine” they must have “lived the
life”; submitted to the interior travail of the Mystic Way, not merely
have reasoned about the mystical experiences of others. We could not
well dispense with our Christian Platonists and mystical philosophers.
They are our stepping-stones to higher things; interpret to our dull
minds, entangled in the sense-world, the ardent vision of those who
speak to us from the dimension of Reality. But they are no more mystics
than the milestones on the Dover Road are travellers to Calais.
Sometimes their words—the wistful words of those who know but cannot
be—produce mystics; as the sudden sight of a signpost pointing to the
sea will rouse the spirit of adventure in a boy. Also there are many
instances of true mystics, such as Eckhart, who have philosophized upon
their own experiences, greatly to the advantage of the world; and
others—Plotinus is the most characteristic example—of Platonic
philosophers who have passed far beyond the limits of their own
philosophy, and abandoned the making of diagrams for an experience,
however imperfect, of the reality at which these diagrams hint. It were
more accurate to reverse the epigram above stated, and say, that
Platonism is the reaction of the intellectualist upon mystical truth.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p73"></span>Over and over again the great mystics
tell us, not how they speculated, but how they acted. To them, the
transition from the life of sense to the life of spirit is a formidable
undertaking, which demands effort and constancy. The paradoxical “quiet”
of the contemplative is but the outward stillness essential to inward
work. Their favourite symbols are those of action: battle, search, and
pilgrimage.

> <span id="an_iii.iv-p73.1"></span> “In an obscure night  
> Fevered with love’s anxiety  
> (O hapless, happy plight!)  
> I *went* , none seeing me  
> Forth from my house, where all things quiet be,”  <span
> id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md)  

<span id="an_iii.iv-p75"></span>said St. John of the Cross, in his poem
of the mystic quest.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p76"></span>“It became evident to me,” says Al
Ghazzali of his own search for mystic truth, “that the Sufis are men of
intuition and not men of words. I recognized that I had learnt all that
can be learnt of Sufiism by study, and that the rest could not be learnt
by study or by speech.”  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) “Let no
one suppose,” says the “Theologia Germanica,” “that we may attain to
this true light and perfect knowledge . . . by hearsay, or by reading
and study, nor yet by high skill and great learning.”  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) “It is not enough,” says Gerlac <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_84"></span> Petersen,
“to know by estimation merely: but we must know by experience.”  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) So Mechthild of Magdeburg says of her
revelations, “The writing of this book was seen, heard, and experienced
in every limb. . . . I see it with the eyes of my soul, and hear it with
the ears of my eternal spirit.”  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p81"></span>Those who suppose mystical experience to
be merely a pleasing consciousness of the Divine in the world, a sense
of the “otherness” of things, a basking in the beams of the Uncreated
Light, are only playing with Reality. True mystical achievement is the
most complete and most difficult expression of life which is as yet
possible to man. It is at once an act of love, an act of surrender, and
an act of supreme perception; a trinity of experiences which meets and
satisfies the three activities of the self. Religion might give us the
first and metaphysics the third of these processes. Only Mysticism can
offer the middle term of the series; the essential link which binds the
three in one. “Secrets,” says St. Catherine of Siena, “are revealed to a
friend who has become one thing with his friend and not to a servant.”
 <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p83"></span>(2) *Mysticism is an entirely Spiritual
Activity.*

<span id="an_iii.iv-p84"></span>This rule provides us with a further
limitation, which of course excludes all the practisers of magic and of
magical religion: even in their most exalted and least materialistic
forms. As we shall see when we come to consider these persons, their
object—not necessarily an illegitimate one—is to improve and elucidate
the visible by help of the invisible: to use the supernormal powers of
the self for the increase of power, virtue, happiness or knowledge. The
mystic never turns back on himself in this way, or tries to combine the
advantages of two worlds. At the term of his development he knows God by
communion, and this direct intuition of the Absolute kills all lesser
cravings. He possesses God, and needs nothing more. Though he will spend
himself unceasingly for other men, become “an agent of the Eternal
Goodness,” he is destitute of supersensual ambitions and craves no
occult knowledge or power. Having his eyes set on eternity, his
consciousness steeped in it, he can well afford to tolerate the
entanglements of time. “His spirit,” says Tauler, “is as it were sunk
and lost in the Abyss of the Deity, and loses the consciousness of all
creature-distinctions. All things are gathered together in one with the
divine sweetness, and the man’s being is so penetrated with the divine
substance that he loses himself therein, as a drop of water is lost in a
cask of strong wine. And thus the man’s spirit is so sunk in God in
divine union, that he loses all sense of distinction . . . <span
id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_85"></span> and there
remains a secret, still union, without cloud or colour.”  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142.md) “I wish not,” said St. Catherine of
Genoa, “for anything that comes forth from Thee, but only for Thee, oh
sweetest Love!”  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143.md) “Whatever share
of this world,” says Rabi’a, “Thou dost bestow on me, bestow it on Thine
enemies, and whatever share of the next world thou dost give me, give it
to Thy friends. Thou art enough for me!”  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) “The Soul,” says Plotinus in one of
his most profound passages, “having now arrived at the desired end, and
participating of Deity, will know that the Supplier of true life is then
present. She will likewise then require nothing farther; for, on the
contrary it will be requisite to lay aside other things, to stop in this
alone, amputating everything else with which she is surrounded.”  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p89"></span>(3) *The business and method of
Mysticism is Love.*

<span id="an_iii.iv-p90"></span>Here is one of the distinctive notes of
true mysticism; marking it off from every other kind of transcendental
theory and practice and providing the answer to the question with which
our last chapter closed. It is the eager, outgoing activity whose
driving power is generous love, not the absorbent, indrawing activity
which strives only for new knowledge, that is fruitful in the spiritual
as well as in the physical world.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p91"></span>Having said this, however, we must
add—as we did when speaking of the “heart”—that the word Love as applied
to the mystics is to be understood in its deepest, fullest sense; as the
ultimate expression of the self’s most vital tendencies, not as the
superficial affection or emotion often dignified by this name. Mystic
Love is a total dedication of the will; the deep-seated desire and
tendency of the soul towards its Source. It is a condition of humble
access, a life-movement of the self: more direct in its methods, more
valid in its results—even in the hands of the least lettered of its
adepts—than the most piercing intellectual vision of the greatest
philosophic mind. Again and again the mystics insist upon this. “For
silence is not God, nor speaking is not God; fasting is not God nor
eating is not God; onliness is not God nor company is not God; nor yet
any of all the other two such quantities, He is hid between them, and
may not be found by any work of thy soul, but all only by love of thine
heart. He may not be known by reason, He may not be gotten by thought,
nor concluded by understanding; but he may be loved and chosen with the
true lovely will of thine heart. . . . Such a blind shot with the sharp
dart of longing love may never fail of the prick, the which is God.”
 <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md) <span id="page_86">p. 86</span>
<span id="an_iii.iv-Page_86"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p93"></span>“‘Come down quickly,’” says the
Incomprehensible Godhead to the soul that has struggled like Zaccheus to
the topmost branches of the theological tree, “‘for I would dwell with
you to-day.’ And this hasty descent to which he is summoned by God is
simply a descent by love and desire in to that abyss of the Godhead
which the intellect cannot understand. But where intelligence must rest
without, love and desire can enter in.”  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p95"></span>Volumes of extracts might be compiled
from the works of the mystics illustrative of this rule, which is indeed
their central principle. “Some there are,” says Plotinus, “that for all
their effort have not attained the Vision; the soul in them has come to
no sense of the splendour there. It has not taken warmth; it has not
felt burning within itself the flame of love for what is there to know.”
 <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) “Love,” says Rolle, “truly
suffers not a loving soul to bide in itself, but ravishes it out to the
Lover, that the soul is more there where it loves, than where the body
is that lives and feels it.” “Oh singular joy of love everlasting,” he
says again, “that ravishes all his to heavens above all worlds, them
binding with bands of virtue! Oh dear charity, in earth that has thee
not is nought wrought, whatever it hath! He truly in thee that is busy,
to joy above earthly is soon lifted! Thou makest men contemplative,
heaven-gate thou openest, mouths of accusers thou dost shut, God thou
makest to be seen and multitude of sins thou hidest. We praise thee, we
preach thee, by thee the world we quickly overcome, by whom we joy and
the heavenly ladder we ascend.”  <span id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p98"></span>Love to the mystic, then, is (a) the
active, conative, expression of his will and desire for the Absolute;
(b) his innate tendency to that Absolute, his spiritual weight. He is
only thoroughly natural, thoroughly alive, when he is obeying its voice.
For him it is the source of joy, the secret of the universe, the
vivifying principle of things. In the words of Récéjac, “Mysticism
claims to be able to know the Unknowable without any help from
dialectics; and believes that, by the way of love and will it reaches a
point to which thought alone is unable to attain.” Again, “It is the
heart and never the reason which leads us to the Absolute.”  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) Hence in St. Catherine of Siena’s
exquisite allegory it is the feet of the soul’s affection which brings
it first to the Bridge, “for the feet carry the body as affection
carries the soul.”  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p101"></span>The jewels of mystical literature glow
with this intimate and impassioned love of the Absolute; which
transcends the dogmatic language in which it is clothed and becomes
applicable to mystics of every race and creed. There is little
difference in this between <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_87"></span> the extremes of Eastern and Western
thought: between A Kempis the Christian and Jalalu ‘d Din the Moslem
saint.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p102"></span>“How great a thing is Love, great above
all other goods: for alone it makes all that is heavy light, and bears
evenly all that is uneven. . . .

<span id="an_iii.iv-p103"></span>“Love would be aloft, nor will it be
kept back by any lower thing. Love would be free, and estranged from all
worldly affection, that its inward sight be not hindered: that it may
not be entangled by any temporal comfort, nor succumb to any
tribulation.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p104"></span>“Nought is sweeter than love, nought
stronger, nought higher, nought wider: there is no more joyous, fuller,
better thing in heaven or earth. For love is born of God, and cannot
rest save in God, above all created things.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p105"></span>“The lover flies, runs, and, rejoices:
he is free, and cannot be restrained. He gives all for all, and has all
in all; for he rests in One Supreme above all, from whom all good flows
and proceeds.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p106"></span>“He looks not at the gift, but above
all goods turns himself to the giver.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p107"></span>“. . . He who loves knows the cry of
this voice. For this burning affection of the soul is a loud cry in the
ears of God when it saith ‘My God, My Love, Thou art all mine, and I am
all Thine.’”  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p109"></span>So much for the Christian. Now for the
Persian mystic.

> <span id="an_iii.iv-p109.1"></span> “While the thought of the Beloved
> fills our hearts  
> All our work is to do Him service and spend life for Him.  
> Wherever He kindles His destructive torch  
> Myriads of lovers’ souls are burnt therewith.  
> The lovers who dwell within the sanctuary  
> Are moths burnt with the torch of the Beloved’s face.  
> O heart, hasten thither! for God will shine upon you,  
> And seem to you a sweet garden instead of a terror.  
> He will infuse into your soul a new soul,  
> So as to fill you, like a goblet, with wine.  
> Take up your abode in His Soul!  
> Take up your abode in heaven, oh bright full moon!  
> Like the heavenly Scribe, He will open your heart’s book  
> That he may reveal mysteries unto you.”  <span
> id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md)  

<span id="an_iii.iv-p111"></span>Well might Hilton say that “Perfect
love maketh God and the soul to be as if they both together were but one
thing,”  <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) and Tauler that “the
well of life is love, and he who dwelleth not in love is dead.”  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p114"></span>These, nevertheless, are objective and
didactic utterances; though their substance may be—probably is—personal,
their form is not. But if we want to see what it really means to be “in
love <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_88"></span> with the Absolute,”—how intensely actual
to the mystic is the Object of his passion, how far removed from the
spheres of pious duty or philosophic speculation, how concrete, positive
and dominant such a passion may be—we must study the literature of
autobiography, not that of poetry or exhortation. I choose for this
purpose, rather than the well-known self-analyses of St. Augustine, St.
Teresa or Suso, which are accessible to every one, the more private
confessions of that remarkable mystic Dame Gertrude More, contained in
her “Spiritual Exercises.”

<span id="an_iii.iv-p115"></span>This nun, great-great-granddaughter of
Sir Thomas More, and favourite pupil of the celebrated Benedictine
contemplative, the Ven. Augustine Baker, exhibits the romantic and
personal side of mysticism more perfectly than even St. Teresa, whose
works were composed for her daughters’ edification. She was an eager
student of St. Augustine, “my deere deere Saint,” as she calls him more
than once. He had evidently influenced her language; but her passion is
her own.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p116"></span>Remember that Gertrude More’s
confessions represent the most secret conversations of her soul with
God. They were not meant for publication; but, written for the most part
on blank leaves in her breviary, were discovered and published after her
death. “She called them,” says the title-page with touching simplicity,
<span id="an_iii.iv-p116.1"></span>“ *Amor ordinem nescit:* an Ideot’s
Devotions. Her only spiritual father and directour, Father Baker, styled
them *Confessiones Amantis,* A Lover’s Confessions. <span
id="an_iii.iv-p116.2"></span> *Amans Deum anima sub Deo despicit
universa.* A soul that loveth God despiseth all things that be inferiour
unto God.”  <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p118"></span>The spirit of her little book is summed
up in two epigrams: epigrams of which her contemporary, Crashaw, might
have been proud. “To give all for love is a most sweet bargain.”  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md) “O let me love, or not live!”  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) Love indeed was her life: and she
writes of it with a rapture which recalls at one moment the exuberant
poetry of Jacopene da Todi, at another the love songs of the Elizabethan
poets.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p121"></span>“Never was there or can there be
imagined such a Love, as is between an humble soul and thee. Who can
express what passeth between such a soul and thee? Verily neither man
nor Angell is able to do it sufficiently. . . . In thy prayse I am only
happy, in which, my Joy, I will exult with all that love thee. For what
can be a comfort while I live separated from thee, but only to remember
that my God, who is more myne than I am my owne, is absolutely and
infinitely happy? . . . Out of this true love between a <span
id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_89"></span> soul and
thee, there ariseth such a knowledge in the soul that it loatheth all
that is an impediment to her further proceeding in the Love of thee. O
Love, Love, even by naming thee, my soul loseth itself in thee. . . .
Nothing can Satiate a reasonable soul but only thou: and having of thee,
who art indeed all, nothing could be said to be wanting to her. . . .
*Blessed are the cleans of hart for they shall see God.* O sight to be
wished, desired, and longed for; because once to have seen thee is to
have learnt all things. Nothing can bring us to this sight but love. But
what love must it be? not a sensible love only, a childish love, a love
which seeketh itself more than the beloved. No, no, but it must be an
ardent love, a pure love, a courageous love, a love of charity, an
humble love, and a constant love, not worn out with labours, not daunted
with any difficulties. . . . For that soul that hath set her whole love
and desire on thee, can never find any true satisfaction, but only in
thee.”  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p123"></span>Who will not see that we have here no
literary exercise, but the fruits of an experience of peculiar
intensity? It answers exactly to one of the best modern definitions of
mysticism as “in essence, the concentration of all the forces of the
soul upon a supernatural Object, conceived and loved as a living
Person.“  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md) “Love and desire,”
says the same critic, “are the fundamental necessities; and where they
are absent man, even though he be a visionary, cannot be called a
mystic.”  <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md) Such a definition, of
course, is not complete. It is valuable however, because it emphasizes
the fact that all true mysticism is rooted in personality; and is
therefore fundamentally a science of the heart.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p126"></span>Attraction, desire, and union as the
fulfilment of desire; this is the way Life works, in the highest as in
the lowest things. The mystic’s outlook, indeed, is the lover’s outlook.
It has the same element of wildness, the same quality of selfless and
quixotic devotion, the same combination of rapture and humility. This
parallel is more than a pretty fancy: for mystic and lover, upon
different planes, are alike responding to the call of the Spirit of
Life. The language of human passion is tepid and insignificant beside
the language in which the mystics try to tell the splendours of their
love. They force upon the unprejudiced reader the conviction that they
are dealing with an ardour far more burning for an Object far more real.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p127"></span>“This monk can give lessons to lovers!”
exclaimed Arthur Symons in astonishment of St. John of the Cross.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md) It would be strange if he could not;
since their finite passions are but the feeble images of his infinite
one, their beloved the imperfect symbol of <span id="page_90">p.
90</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_90"></span> his First and only Fair.
“I saw Him and sought Him: I had Him and I wanted Him,” says Julian of
Norwich, in a phrase which seems to sum up all the ecstasy and longing
of man’s soul. Only this mystic passion can lead us from our prison. Its
brother, the desire of knowledge, may enlarge and improve the premises
to an extent as yet undreamed of: but it can never unlock the doors.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p129"></span>(4) *Mysticism entails a definite
Psychological Experience.*

<span id="an_iii.iv-p130"></span>That is to say, it shows itself not
merely as an attitude of mind and heart, but as a form of organic life.
It is not only a theory of the intellect or a hunger, however
passionate, of the heart. It involves the organizing of the whole self,
conscious and unconscious, under the spur of such a hunger: a remaking
of the whole character on high levels in the interests of the
transcendental life. The mystics are emphatic in their statement that
spiritual desires are useless unless they initiate this costly movement
of the whole self towards the Real.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p131"></span>Thus in the visions of Mechthild of
Magdeburg, “The soul spake thus to her Desire, ‘Fare forth and see where
my Love is. Say to him that I desire to love.’ So Desire sped forth, for
she is quick of her nature, and came to the Empyrean and cried, ‘Great
Lord, open and let me in!’ Then said the Householder of that place:
‘What means this fiery eagerness?’ Desire replied, ‘Lord I would have
thee know that my lady can no longer bear to live. If Thou wouldst flow
forth to her, then might she swim: but the fish cannot long exist that
is left stranded on the shore.’ ‘Go back,’ said the Lord, ‘I will not
let thee in unless thou bring to me that hungry soul, for it is in this
alone that I take delight.’”  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p133"></span>We have said  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) that the full mystic consciousness is
extended in two distinct directions. So too there are two distinct sides
to the full mystical experience. (A) The vision or consciousness of
Absolute Perfection. (B) The inward transmutation to which that Vision
compels the mystic, in order that he may be to some extent worthy of
that which he has beheld: may take his place within the order of
Reality. He has seen the Perfect; he wants to be perfect too. The “third
term,” the necessary bridge between the Absolute and the Self, can only,
he feels, be moral and spiritual transcendence—in a word, *Sanctity—*
for “the only means of attaining the Absolute lies in adapting ourselves
to It.”  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) The moral virtues are
for him, then, the obligatory “ornaments of the Spiritual Marriage” as
Ruysbroeck called them: though far more than their presence is needed to
bring that marriage about. Unless this impulse for moral perfection be
born in him, this travail of the inner life begun, he <span
id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_91"></span> is no
mystic: though he may well be a visionary, a prophet, a “mystical” poet.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p136"></span>Moreover, this process of
transmutation, this rebuilding of the self on higher levels, will
involve the establishment within the field of consciousness, the making
“central for life,” of those subconscious spiritual perceptions which
are the primary material of mystical experience. The end and object of
this “inward alchemy” will be the raising of the whole self to the
condition in which conscious and permanent union with the Absolute takes
place and man, ascending to the summit of his manhood, enters into that
greater life for which he was made. In its journey towards this union,
the subject commonly passes through certain well-marked phases, which
constitute what is known as the “Mystic Way.” This statement rules out
from the true mystic kingdom all merely sentimental and affective piety
and visionary poetry, no less than mystical philosophy. It brings us
back to our first proposition—the concrete and practical nature of the
mystical act.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p137"></span>More than the apprehension of God,
then, more than the passion for the Absolute, is needed to make a
mystic. These must be combined with an appropriate psychological
make-up, with a nature capable of extraordinary concentration, an
exalted moral emotion, a nervous organization of the artistic type. All
these are necessary to the successful development of the mystic life
process. In the experience of those mystics who have left us the records
of their own lives, the successive stages of this life process are
always traceable. In the second part of this book, they will be found
worked out at some length. Rolle, Suso, St. Teresa, and many others have
left us valuable self-analyses for comparison: and from them we see how
arduous, how definite, and how far removed from mere emotional or
intellectual activity, is that educational discipline by which “the eye
which looks upon Eternity” is able to come to its own. “One of the marks
of the true mystic,” says Leuba—by no means a favourable witness—“is the
tenacious and heroic energy with which he pursues a definite moral
ideal.”  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md) “He is,” says Pacheu,
“the pilgrim of an inward Odyssey.”  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) Though we may be amazed and delighted
by his adventures and discoveries on the way, to him the voyage and the
end are all. “The road on which we enter is a royal road which leads to
heaven,” says St. Teresa. “Is it strange that the conquest of such a
treasure should cost us rather dear?”  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p141"></span>It is one of the many indirect
testimonies to the objective reality of mysticism that the stages of
this road, the psychology <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_92"></span> of the spiritual ascent, as described to
us by different schools of contemplatives, always present practically
the same sequence of states. The “school for saints” has never found it
necessary to bring its curriculum up to date. The psychologist finds
little difficulty, for instance, in reconciling the “Degrees of Orison”
described by St. Teresa  <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169.md)
—Recollection, Quiet, Union, Ecstasy, Rapt, the “Pain of God,” and the
Spiritual Marriage of the soul—with the four forms of contemplation
enumerated by Hugh of St. Victor, or the Sufi’s “Seven Stages” of the
soul’s ascent to God, which begin in adoration and end in spiritual
marriage.  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170.md) Though each wayfarer
may choose different landmarks, it is clear from their comparison that
the road is one.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p144"></span>(5) As a corollary to these four rules,
it is perhaps well to reiterate the statement already made, that *True
Mysticism is never self-seeking.* It is not, as many think, the pursuit
of supernatural joys; the satisfaction of a high ambition. The mystic
does not enter on his quest because he desires the happiness of the
Beatific Vision, the ecstasy of union with the Absolute, or any other
personal reward. That noblest of all passions, the passion for
perfection for Love’s sake, far outweighs the desire for transcendental
satisfaction. “O Love,” said St. Catherine of Genoa, “I do not wish to
follow thee for sake of these delights, but solely from the motive of
true love.”  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) Those who do
otherwise are only, in the plain words of St. John of the Cross,
“spiritual gluttons”:  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) or, in
the milder metaphor here adopted, magicians of the more high-minded
sort. The true mystic claims no promises and makes no demands. He goes
because he must, as Galahad went towards the Grail: knowing that for
those who can live it, this alone is life. He never rests in that search
for God which he holds to be the fulfilment of his highest duty; yet he
seeks without any certainty of success. He holds with St. Bernard that
“He alone is God who can never be sought in vain: not even when He
cannot be found.”  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) With
Mechthild of Magdeburg, he hears the Absolute saying in his soul, “O
soul, before the world was I longed for thee: and I still long for thee,
and thou for Me. Therefore, when our two desires unite, Love shall be
fulfilled.”  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p149"></span>Like his type, the “devout lover” of
romance, then, the mystic serves without hope of reward. By one of the
many paradoxes of the spiritual life, he obtains satisfaction because he
does not seek it; completes his personality because he gives it up.
“Attainment,” <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_93"></span> says Dionysius the Areopagite in words
which are writ large on the annals of Christian ecstasy, “comes only by
means of this sincere, spontaneous, and entire surrender of yourself and
all things.”  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md) Only with the
annihilation of selfhood comes the fulfilment of love. Were the mystic
asked the cause of his often extraordinary behaviour, his austere and
steadfast quest, it is unlikely that his reply would contain any
reference to sublime illumination or unspeakable delights. It is more
probable that he would answer in some such words as those of Jacob
Boehme, “I am not come to this meaning, or to this work and knowledge
through my own reason or through my own will and purpose; neither have I
sought this knowledge, nor so much as to know anything concerning it. I
sought only for the heart of God, therein to hide myself.”  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p152"></span>“Whether we live or whether we die,”
said St. Paul, “we are the Lord’s.” The mystic is a realist, to whom
these words convey not a dogma but an invitation: an invitation to the
soul to attain that fullness of life for which she was made, to “lose
herself in That which can be neither seen nor touched; giving herself
entirely to this sovereign Object without belonging either to herself or
to others; united to the Unknown by the most noble part of herself and
because of her renouncement of knowledge; finally drawing from this
absolute ignorance a knowledge which the understanding knows not how to
attain.  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) Mysticism, then, is
seen as the “one way out” for the awakened spirit of man; healing that
human incompleteness which is the origin of our divine unrest. “I am
sure,” says Eckhart, “that if a soul knew the very least of all that
Being means, it would never turn away from it.”  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) The mystics have never turned away: to
do so would have seemed to them a self-destructive act. Here, in this
world of illusion, they say, we have no continuing city. This statement,
to you a proposition, is to us the central fact of life. “Therefore, it
is necessary to hasten our departure from hence, and detach ourselves in
so far as we may from the body to which we are fettered, in order that
with the whole of our selves, we may fold ourselves about Divinity, and
have no part void of contact with Him.”  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p156"></span>To sum up. Mysticism is seen to be a
highly specialized form of that search for reality, for heightened and
completed life, which we have found to be a constant characteristic of
human consciousness. It is largely prosecuted by that “spiritual spark,”
that transcendental faculty which, though the life of our life, remains
below the threshold in ordinary men. Emerging from its <span
id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="an_iii.iv-Page_94"></span>
hiddenness in the mystic, it gradually becomes the dominant factor in
his life; subduing to its service, and enhancing by its saving contact
with reality, those vital powers of love and will which we attribute to
the heart, rather than those of mere reason and perception, which we
attribute to the head. Under the spur of this love and will, the whole
personality rises in the acts of contemplation and ecstasy to a level of
consciousness at which it becomes aware of a new field of perception. By
this awareness, by this “loving sight,” it is stimulated to a new life
in accordance with the Reality which it has beheld. So strange and
exalted is this life, that it never fails to provoke either the anger or
the admiration of other men. “If the great Christian mystics,” says
Leuba, “could by some miracle be all brought together in the same place,
each in his habitual environment, there to live according to his manner,
the world would soon perceive that they constitute one of the most
amazing and profound variations of which the human race has yet been
witness.”  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md)

<span id="an_iii.iv-p158"></span>A discussion of mysticism, regarded as
a form of human life, will therefore include two branches. First the
life process of the mystic: the remaking of his personality; the method
by which his peculiar consciousness of the Absolute is attained, and
faculties which have been evolved to meet the requirements of the
phenomenal, are enabled to do work on the transcendental, plane. This is
the “Mystic Way” in which the self passes through the states or stages
of development which were codified by the Neoplatonists, and after them
by the mediaeval mystics, as Purgation, Illumination, and Ecstasy.
Secondly, the content of the mystical field of perception; the
revelation under which the contemplative becomes aware of the Absolute.
This will include a consideration of the so called doctrines of
mysticism: the attempts of the articulate mystic to sketch for us the
world into which he has looked, in language which is only adequate to
the world in which the rest of us dwell. Here the difficult question of
symbolism, and of symbolic theology, comes in: a point upon which many
promising expositions of the mystics have been wrecked. It will be our
business to strip off as far as may be the symbolic wrapping, and
attempt a synthesis of these doctrines; to resolve the apparent
contradictions of objective and subjective revelations, of the ways of
negation and affirmation, emanation and immanence, surrender and
deification, the Divine Dark and the Inward Light; and finally to
exhibits if we can, the essential unity of that experience in which the
human soul enters consciously into the Presence of God.

<span id="an_iii.iv-p159"></span><span id="page_95">p. 95</span> <span
id="an_iii.iv-Page_95"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_110"></span>[72:111](myst07.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p7"></span> See “Varieties of Religious Experience,”
p. 387, “The Drunken Consciousness is a bit of the Mystic
Consciousness.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[73:112](myst07.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p10"></span> Llama de Amor Viva, II. 26.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[73:113](myst07.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p12"></span> Compare above, pp. 24, 26, 57.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[74:114](myst07.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p14"></span> J. A. Stewart, “The Myths of Plato,” p.
40.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[74:115](myst07.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p17"></span> “Descriptive Catalogue.”

<span id="fn_115"></span>[74:116](myst07.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p18"></span> See T. Rolleston, “Parallel Paths.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[75:117](myst07.htm#fr_116.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p20"></span> Laurence Binyon, “Painting in the Far
East,” p. 9.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[75:118](myst07.htm#fr_117.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p22"></span> “The Mirror of Simple Souls,” Pt. III,
cap. 1.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[75:119](myst07.htm#fr_118.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p22.5"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p23"></span> Par. xxxiii. 139. “Not for this were my
wings fitted: save only that my mind was smitten by a lightning flash
wherein came to it its desire.”

<span id="fn_119"></span>[75:120](myst07.htm#fr_119.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p25"></span> In this connexion Godfernaux ( *Revue*
*Philosophique,* February, 1902) has a highly significant remark to the
effect that romanticism represents the invasion of secular literature by
mystic or religious emotion. It is, he says, the *secularization of the
inner life.* Compare also Bremond, “Prière et Poesie.”

<span id="fn_120"></span>[77:121](myst07.htm#fr_120.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p30"></span> I take from Hebert’s monograph “Le
Divin” two examples of the analogy between mystical and musical emotion.
First that of Gay, who had “the soul, the heart, and the head full of
music, of another beauty than that which is formulated by sounds.” Next
that of Ruysbroeck, who, in a passage that might have been written by
Keats, speaks of contemplation and Love as “two heavenly pipes” which,
blown upon by the Holy Spirit, play “ditties of no tone” ( *op. cit* .
p. 29).

<span id="fn_121"></span>[77:122](myst07.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p32"></span> Hugh of St. Victor, “Didascalicon de
Studio Legendi.”

<span id="fn_122"></span>[77:123](myst07.htm#fr_122.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p34"></span> “Fioretti.” Delle Istimati. (Arnold’s
translation.)

<span id="fn_123"></span>[77:124](myst07.htm#fr_123.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p36"></span> Richard Rolle, ‘The Fire of Love”
(Early English Text Society), bk. i. cap. xv. In this and subsequent
quotations from Rolle’s *Incendium Amoris* I have usually adopted
Misyn’s fifteenth-century translation; slightly modernizing the
spelling, and, where necessary, correcting from the Latin his errors and
obscurities.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[78:125](myst07.htm#fr_124.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p37"></span> *Op. cit.,* bk. i. cap. xxiii. Compare
bk. ii. caps. v. and vi.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[78:126](myst07.htm#fr_125.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p38"></span> “Spiritual Exercises,” p. 30.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[78:127](myst07.htm#fr_126.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p40"></span> *Op. cit.,* bk. i. cap. xv.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[78:128](myst07.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p42"></span> *Op. cit.,* bk. ii. caps, iii. and xii.
Shelley is of the same opinion:—

<span id="an_iii.iv-p43"></span>“The world can hear not the sweet notes
that move

<span id="an_iii.iv-p44"></span>The Sphere whose light is melody to
lovers.”

<span id="an_iii.iv-p45"></span>(“The Triumph of Life “)

<span id="fn_128"></span>[79:129](myst07.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p48"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. ii. cap.
xv.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[79:130](myst07.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p50"></span> “De Mystica Theologia,” i. 3.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[80:131](myst07.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p52"></span> Von Hügel, “The Mystical Element of
Religion,” vol. i. p. 189.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[81:132](myst07.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p56"></span> “Varieties of Religious Experience,” p.
380.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[82:133](myst07.htm#fr_132.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p63"></span> “Les Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique,” p. 45.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[82:134](myst07.htm#fr_133.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p64.7"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p65"></span> Jámí. Quoted in “Jalalu ‘d Din” (Wisdom
of the East Series), p. 25.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[82:135](myst07.htm#fr_134.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p70.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p71"></span> “Through Scylla and Charybdis,” p. 264.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[82:136](myst07.htm#fr_135.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p71.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p72"></span> Ennead vi. 9.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[83:137](myst07.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p73.7"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p74"></span> “En una Noche Escura,” Stanza 1. I
quote from Arthur Symons’s beautiful translation, which will be found in
vol. ii. of his Collected Poems.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[83:138](myst07.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p76.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p77"></span> Schmölders, “Les Écoles Philosophiques
chez les Arabes,” p. 55.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[83:139](myst07.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p77.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p78"></span> Cap. xix.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[84:140](myst07.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p78.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p79"></span> “Ignitum cum Deo Soliloquium,” cap. xi.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[84:141](myst07.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p79.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p80"></span> “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit,”
pt. iv. cap, 13.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[84:142](myst07.htm#fr_141.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p82"></span> Dialogo, cap. lx.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[85:143](myst07.htm#fr_142.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p85"></span> Tauler, Sermon for Septuagesima Sunday
(Winkworth’s translation, p. 253).

<span id="fn_143"></span>[85:144](myst07.htm#fr_143.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p85.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p86"></span> Vita e Dottrina, cap. vi.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[85:145](myst07.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p86.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p87"></span> M. Smith, “Rabi’a the Mystic,” p. 30.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[85:146](myst07.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p87.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p88"></span> Ennead vi. 9.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[85:147](myst07.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p91.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p92"></span> “An Epistle of Discretion.” This
beautiful old English tract, probably by the author of “The Cloud of
Unknowing,” is printed by E. Gardner, ‘ The Cell of Self Knowledge,” p.
108.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[86:148](myst07.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p94"></span> Ruysbroeck, “De Ornatu Spiritalium
Nuptiarum,” I. i. cap. xxvi.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[86:149](myst07.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p95.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p96"></span> Ennead, vi. 9.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[86:150](myst07.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p96.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p97"></span> “The Mending of Life,” cap. xi.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[86:151](myst07.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p98.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p99"></span> “Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique,” p. 7.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[86:152](myst07.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p99.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p100"></span> Dialogo, cap. xxvi.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[87:153](myst07.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p107.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p108"></span> “De Imitatione Christi,” I. ii. cap.
v.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[87:154](myst07.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p109.16"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p110"></span> Jalalu ‘d Din (Wisdom of the East
Series), p. 79.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[87:155](myst07.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p111.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p112"></span> Treatise to a Devout Man, cap. viii.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[87:156](myst07.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p112.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p113"></span> Sermon for Thursday in Easter Week
(Winkworth’s translation, p. 294).

<span id="fn_156"></span>[88:157](myst07.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p116.3"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p117"></span> They were printed in 1658, “At Paris
by Lewis de la Fosse in the Carme Street at the Signe of the Looking
Glass,” and have lately been republished. I quote from the original
edition.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[88:158](myst07.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p118.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p119"></span> P. 138.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[88:159](myst07.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p119.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p120"></span> P. 181.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[89:160](myst07.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p121.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p122"></span> *Op. cit.* pp. 9, 16, 25, 35, 138,
175.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[89:161](myst07.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p123.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p124"></span> Berger, “William Blake,” p. 72.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[89:162](myst07.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p124.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p125"></span> *Ibid* ., p. 74.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[89:163](myst07.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p127.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p128"></span> *Contemporary Review,* April, 1899.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[90:164](myst07.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p131.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p132"></span> “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit,”
pt. iii. cap. 1.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[90:165](myst07.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p133.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p134"></span> Supra. p. 35.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[90:166](myst07.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p134.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p135"></span> Récéjac, *op. cit* ., p. 35.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[91:167](myst07.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p137.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p138"></span> *Revue Philosophique,* July, 1902.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[91:168](myst07.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p138.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p139"></span> “Psychologie des Mystiques Chrétiens,”
p 14.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[91:169](myst07.htm#fr_168.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p139.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p140"></span> “Camino de Perfeccion,” cap. xxiii.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[92:170](myst07.htm#fr_169.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p141.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p142"></span> In “El Castillo Interior.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[92:171](myst07.htm#fr_170.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p142.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p143"></span> See Palmer, “Oriental Mysticism,” pt.
v. ch. v.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[92:172](myst07.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p144.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p145"></span> Vita, p. 8.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[92:173](myst07.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p145.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p146"></span> “Subida del Monte Carmelo,” I. ii.
cap. vii.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[92:174](myst07.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p146.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p147"></span> “De Consideratione,” I. v. cap. xi.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[92:175](myst07.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p147.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p148"></span> “Das Fliessende Light der Gottheit,”
pt. vii. cap. 16.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[93:176](myst07.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p149.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p150"></span> “De Mystica Theologia,” i. 1.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[93:177](myst07.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p150.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p151"></span> “Aurora,” English translation, 1764,
p. 237.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[93:178](myst07.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p152.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p153"></span> Dionysius the Areopagite. “De Mystica
Theologia,” i. 3.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[93:179](myst07.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p153.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p154"></span> “Mystische Schriften,” p. 137.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[93:180](myst07.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p154.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p155"></span> Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[94:181](myst07.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="an_iii.iv-p156.1"></span>

<span id="an_iii.iv-p157"></span> *Op. cit.*

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Mysticism and Theology](myst08.md)

</div>
