<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst14)  [Next](myst16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. The Illumination of the Self

<span id="an_iv.iv"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p1"></span>In<span id="an_iv.iv-p1.1"></span>
illumination we come to that state of consciousness which is popularly
supposed to be peculiar to the mystic: a form of mental life, a kind of
perception, radically different from that of “normal” men. His preceding
adventures and experiences cannot be allowed this quality. His awakening
to consciousness of the Absolute—though often marked by a splendour and
intensity which seem to distinguish it from other psychic upheavals of
that kind—does but reproduce upon higher levels those characteristic
processes of conversion and falling in love which give depth and
actuality to the religious and passional life. The purification to which
he then sets himself—though this possesses as a rule certain features
peculiar to mystical development—is again closely related to the
disciplines and mortifications of ascetic, but not necessarily mystical,
piety. It is the most exalted form with which we are acquainted of that
*catharsis—* that pruning and training of the human plant—which is the
essence of all education, and a necessary stage in every kind of
transcendence. Here, the mystic does but adopt in a more drastic form
the principles which all who would live with an intense life, all
seekers after freedom, all true lovers must accept: though he may justly
claim with Ophelia that these wear their rue with a difference.  <span
id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476.md) <span id="page_233">p. 233</span>
<span id="an_iv.iv-Page_233"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p3"></span>But in the great swing back into sunshine
which is the reward of that painful descent into the “cell of
self-knowledge,” he parts company with these other pilgrims. Those who
still go with him a little way—certain prophets, poets, artists,
dreamers do so in virtue of that mystical genius, that instinct for
transcendental reality, of which all seers and creators have some trace.
The initiates of beauty or of wisdom, as the great mystic is the
initiate of love, they share in some degree the experiences of the way
of illumination. But the mystic has now a veritable foothold in that
transcendental world into which they penetrate now and again: enjoys a
certain fellowship—not yet union—with the “great life of the All,” and
thence draws strength and peace. Really and actually, as one whose
noviciate is finished, he has “entered the Inner Choir, where the Soul
joineth hands and danceth with Sophia, the Divine Wisdom”: and, keeping
time with the great rhythms of the spiritual universe, feels that he has
found his place.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p4"></span>This change of consciousness, however
abrupt and amazing it may seem to the self which experiences it, seems
to the psychologist a normal phase in that organic process of
development which was initiated by the awakening of the transcendental
sense. Responding to the intimations received in that awakening,
ordering itself in their interest, concentrating its scattered energies
on this one thing, the self emerges from long and varied acts of
purification to find that it is able to apprehend another order of
reality. It has achieved consciousness of a world that was always there,
and wherein its substantial being—that Ground which is of God—has always
stood. Such a consciousness is “Transcendental Feeling” <span
id="an_iv.iv-p4.1"></span> *in excelsis* *:* a deep, intuitional
knowledge of the “secret plan.”

<span id="an_iv.iv-p5"></span>“We are like a choir who stand round the
conductor,” says Plotinus, “but do not always sing in tune, because
their attention is diverted by looking at external things. So we always
move round the One—if we did not, we should dissolve and cease to
exist—but we do not always look towards the One.” Hence, instead of that
free and conscious co-operation in the great life of the All which alone
can make personal life worth living, we move like slaves or marionettes,
and, oblivious of the whole to which our little steps contribute, fail
to observe the measure “whereto the worlds keep time.” Our minds being
distracted from the Corypheus in the midst the “energetic Word” who sets
the rhythm, we do not behold Him. We are absorbed in the illusions of
sense; the “eye which looks on Eternity” is idle. “But when we *do*
behold Him,” says Plotinus again, “we attain the end of our existence
and our rest. Then we no longer sing out of tune, but form a truly
divine chorus about Him; in the which chorus dance the soul beholds the
Fountain of life <span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_234"></span> the Fountain of intellect, the Principle
of Being, the cause of good the root of soul.”  <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477.md) Such a beholding, such a lifting of
consciousness from a self-centred to a God-centred world, is of the
essence of illumination.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p7"></span>It will be observed that in these passages
the claim of the mystic is not yet to supreme communion; the “Spiritual
Marriage” of the Christian mystic, or that “flight of the Alone to the
Alone” which is the Plotinian image for the utmost bliss of the
emancipated soul. He has now got through preliminaries; detached himself
from his chief entanglements; re-orientated his instinctive life. The
result is a new and solid certitude about God, and his own soul’s
relation to God: an “enlightenment” in which he is adjusted to new
standards of conduct and thought. In the traditional language of
asceticism he is “proficient” but not yet perfect. He achieves a real
vision and knowledge, a conscious harmony with the divine World of
Becoming: not yet self-loss in the Principle of Life, but rather a
willing and harmonious revolution about Him, that “in dancing he may
know what is done.” This character distinguishes almost every first-hand
description of illumination: and it is this which marks it off from
mystic union in all its forms. All pleasurable and exalted states of
mystic consciousness in which the sense of I-hood persists, in which
there is a loving and joyous relation between the Absolute as object and
the self as subject, fall under the head of Illumination: which is
really an enormous development of the intuitional life at high levels.
All veritable and first-hand apprehensions of the Divine obtained by the
use of symbols, as in the religious life; all the degrees of prayer
lying between meditation and the prayer of union; many phases of poetic
inspiration and “glimpses of truth,” are activities of the illuminated
mind.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p8"></span>To “see God in nature,” to attain a
radiant consciousness of the “otherness” of natural things, is the
simplest and commonest form of illumination. Most people, under the
spell of emotion or of beauty, have known flashes of rudimentary vision
of this kind. Where such a consciousness is recurrent, as it is in many
poets,  <span id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478.md) there results that
partial yet often overpowering apprehension of the Infinite Life
immanent in all living things, which some modern writers have dignified
by the name of “nature-mysticism.” <span id="page_235">p. 235</span>
<span id="an_iv.iv-Page_235"></span> Where it is raised to its highest
denomination, till the veil is obliterated by the light behind, and
“faith has vanished into sight,” as sometimes happened to Blake, we
reach the point at which the mystic swallows up the poet.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p10"></span>“Dear Sir,” says that great genius in one
of his most characteristic letters, written immediately after an onset
of the illuminated vision which he had lost for many years, “excuse my
enthusiasm, or rather madness, for I am really drunk with intellectual
vision whenever I take a pencil or graver into my hand.”  <span
id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479.md) Many a great painter, philosopher, or
poet, perhaps every inspired musician, has known this indescribable
inebriation of Reality in those moments of transcendence in which his
masterpieces were conceived. This is the “saving madness” of which Plato
speaks in the “Phaedrus”; the ecstasy of the “God-intoxicated man,” the
lover, the prophet, and the poet “drunk with life.” When the Christian
mystic, eager for his birthright, says <span
id="an_iv.iv-p11.1"></span>“Sanguis Christi, inebria me!” he is asking
for just such a gift of supernal vitality, a draught of that Wine of
Absolute Life which runs in the arteries of the world. Those to whom
that cup is given attain to an intenser degree of vitality, hence to a
more acute degree of perception, a more vivid consciousness, than that
which is enjoyed by other men. For though, as Ruysbroeck warns us, this
“is not God,” yet it is for many selves “the Light in which we see Him.”
 <span id="fr_480"></span>[481](#fn_480.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p13"></span>Blake conceived that it was his vocation
to bring this mystical illumination, this heightened vision of reality,
within the range of ordinary men: to “cleanse the doors of perception”
of the race. They thought him a madman for his pains.

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p13.1"></span> “. . . I rest not upon my great
> task  
> To open the Eternal Worlds, to open the immortal Eyes  
> Of Man inwards into the Worlds of Thought: into Eternity  
> Ever expanding in the Bosom of God, the Human Imagination.  
> O Saviour, pour upon me thy Spirit of meekness and love,  
> Annihilate the Selfhood in me: be thou all my life.”  <span
> id="fr_481"></span>[482](#fn_481.md)  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p15"></span>The Mysteries of the antique world appear
to have been attempts—often by way of a merely magical initiation—to
“open the immortal eyes of man inwards”: exalt his powers of perception
until they could receive the messages of a higher degree of reality. In
spite of much eager theorizing, it is impossible to tell how far they
succeeded in this task. To those who had a natural genius for the
Infinite, symbols and rituals which were doubtless charged with ecstatic
suggestions, and often dramatized the actual course of <span
id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_236"></span> the
Mystic Way, may well have brought some enhancement of consciousness:
 <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482.md) though hardly that complete
rearrangement of character which is an essential of the mystic’s
entrance on the true Illuminated State. Hence Plato only claims that “he
whose initiation is recent” can see Immortal Beauty under mortal veils.

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p16.1"></span> “O blessèd he in all wise,  
> Who hath drunk the Living Fountain  
> Whose life no folly staineth  
> And whose soul is near to God:  
> Whose sins are lifted pall-wise  
> As he worships on the Mountain.”  <span
> id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483.md)  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p18"></span>Thus sang the initiates of Dionysus; that
mystery-cult in which the Greeks seem to have expressed all they knew of
the possible movement of consciousness through rites of purification to
the ecstasy of the Illuminated Life. The mere crude rapture of
illumination has seldom been more vividly expressed. With its
half-Oriental fervours, its self-regarding glory in personal
purification achieved, and the spiritual superiority conferred by
adeptship, may be compared the deeper and lovelier experience of the
Catholic poet and saint, who represents the spirit of Western mysticism
at its best. His sins, too, had been “lifted pall-wise” as a cloud melts
in the sunshine of Divine Love: but here the centre of interest is not
the little self which has been exalted, but the greater Self which
deigns thus to exalt.

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p18.1"></span> “O burn that burns to heal!  
> O more than pleasant wound!  
> And O soft hand, O touch most delicate  
> That dost new life reveal  
> That dost in grace abound  
> And, slaying, dost from death to life translate.”  <span
> id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484.md)  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p20"></span>Here the joy is as passionate, the
consciousness of an exalted life as intense: but it is dominated by the
distinctive Christian concepts of humility, surrender, and intimate
love.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p21"></span>We have seen that all real artists, as
well as all pure mystics, are sharers to some degree in the Illuminated
Life. They have drunk, with Blake, from that cup of intellectual vision
which is the chalice of the Spirit of Life: know something of its divine
inebriation whenever Beauty inspires them to create. Some have only
sipped <span id="page_237">p. 237</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_237"></span> it. Some, like John of Parma, have drunk
deep, accepting in that act the mystic heritage with all its
obligations. But to all who have seen Beauty face to face, the Grail has
been administered; and through that sacramental communion they are made
participants in the mystery of the world.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p22"></span>In one of the most beautiful passages of
the “Fioretti” it is told how Brother Jacques of la Massa, “unto whom
God opened the door of His secrets,” saw in a vision this Chalice of the
Spirit of Life delivered by Christ into the hands of St. Francis, that
he might give his brothers to drink thereof.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p23"></span>“Then came St. Francis to give the
chalice of life to his brothers. And he gave it first to Brother John of
Parma: who, taking it drank it all in haste, devoutly; and straightway
he became all shining like the sun. And after him St. Francis gave it to
all the other brothers in order: and there were but few among them that
took it with due reverence and devotion and drank it all. Those that
took it devoutly and drank it all, became straightway shining like the
sun; but those that spilled it all and took it not devoutly, became
black, and dark, and misshapen and horrible to see; but those that drank
part and spilled part, became partly shining and partly dark, and more
so or less according to the measure of their drinking or spilling
thereof. But the aforesaid Brother John was resplendent above all the
rest; the which had more completely drunk the chalice of life, *whereby
he had the more deeply gazed into the abyss of the infinite light
divine* .”  <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p25"></span>No image, perhaps, could suggest so
accurately as this divine picture the conditions of perfect
illumination: the drinking deeply, devoutly, and in haste—that is,
without prudent and self-regarding hesitation—of the heavenly Wine of
Life; that wine of which Rolle says that it “fulfils the soul with a
great gladness through a sweet contemplation.”  <span
id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486.md) John of Parma, the hero of those
Spiritual Franciscans in whose interest this exquisite allegory was
composed, stands for all the mystics, who, “having completely drunk,”
have attained the power of gazing into the abyss of the infinite light
divine. In those imperfect brothers who dared not drink the cup of
sacrifice to the dregs, but took part and spilled part, so that they
became partly shining and partly dark, “according to the measure of
their drinking or spilling thereof,” we may see an image of the artist,
musician, prophet, poet, dreamer, more or less illuminated according to
the measure of courage and self-abandonment in which he has drunk the
cup of ecstasy: but always in comparison with the radiance of the pure
contemplative, “partly shining and partly dark.” “Hinder me not,” says
the soul to the <span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_238"></span> senses in Mechthild of Magdeburg’s
vision, “I would drink for a space of the unmingled wine.”  <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487.md) In the artist, the senses have
somewhat hindered the perfect inebriation of the soul.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p28"></span>We have seen that a vast tract of
experience—all the experience which results from contact between a
purged and heightened consciousness and the World of Becoming in which
it is immersed; and much, too, of that which results from contact set up
between such a consciousness and the Absolute Itself—is included in that
stage of growth which the mystics call the Illuminative Way. This is the
largest and most densely populated province of the mystic kingdom. Such
different visionaries as Suso and Blake, Boehme and Angela of Foligno,
Mechthild of Magdeburg, Fox, Rolle, St. Teresa, and countless others
have left us the record of their sojourn therein. Amongst those who
cannot be called pure mystics we can detect in the works of Plato and
Heracleitus, Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Walt Whitman indications that
they too were acquainted, beyond most poets and seers, with the
phenomena of the illuminated life. In studying it then, we shall be
confronted by a mass of apparently irreconcilable material: the results
of the relation set up between every degree of lucidity, every kind of
character, and the suprasensible world.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p29"></span>To say that God is Infinite is to say
that He may be apprehended and described in an infinity of ways. That
Circle whose centre is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere,
may be approached from every angle with a certainty of being found.
Mystical history, particularly that which deals with the Illuminative
Way, is a demonstration of this fact. Here, in the establishment of the
“first mystic life,” of conscious correspondence with Reality, the self
which has oscillated between two forms of consciousness, has alternately
opposed and embraced its growing intuitions of the Absolute, comes for a
time to rest. To a large extent, the discordant elements of character
have been purged away. Temporally at least the mind has “unified itself”
upon high levels, and attained, as it believes, a genuine consciousness
of the divine and veritable world. The depth and richness of its own
nature will determine how intense that consciousness shall be.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p30"></span>Whatever its scope, however, this new
apprehension of reality generally appears to the illuminated Self as
final and complete. As the true lover is always convinced that he has
found in his bride the one Rose of the World, so the mystic, in the
first glow of his initiation, is sure that his quest is now fulfilled.
Ignorant as yet of that consummation of love which overpasses the
proceedings of the inward eye and ear, he exclaims with entire assurance
<span id="an_iv.iv-p30.1"></span>“Beati oculi qui exterioribus clausi,
interioribus autem sunt <span id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_239"></span> intenti,”  <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md) and, absorbed in this new blissful act
of vision, forgets that it belongs to those who are still <span
id="an_iv.iv-p31.1"></span> *in via* . He has yet to pass through that
“night of the senses” in which he learns to distinguish the substance of
Reality from the accidents under which it is perceived; to discover that
the heavenly food here given cannot satisfy his “hunger for the
Absolute.”  <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489.md) His true goal lies
far beyond this joyful basking in the sunbeams of the Uncreated Light.
Only the greatest souls learn this lesson, and tread the whole of that
“King’s Highway” which leads man back to his Source. “For the many that
come to Bethlehem, there be few that will go on to Calvary.” The rest
stay here, in this Earthly Paradise, these flowery fields; where the
liberated self wanders at will, describing to us as well as it can now
this corner, now that of the Country of the Soul.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p33"></span>It is in these descriptions of the joy of
illumination—in the outpourings of love and rapture belonging to this
state—that we find the most lyrical passages of mystical literature.
Here poet, mystic, and musician are on common ground: for it is only by
the oblique methods of the artist, by the use of aesthetic suggestion
and musical rhythm, that the wonder of that vision can be expressed.
When essential goodness, truth, and beauty—Light, Life, and Love—are
apprehended by the heart, whether the heart be that of poet, painter,
lover, or saint, that apprehension can only be communicated in a living,
that is to say, an artistic form. The natural mind is conscious only of
succession: the special *differentia* of the mystic is the power of
apprehending simultaneity. In the peculiarities of the illuminated
consciousness we recognize the effort of the mind to bridge the gap
between Simultaneity and Succession: the characters of Creator and
Creation. Here the successive is called upon to carry the values of the
Eternal.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p34"></span>Here, then, genius and sanctity kiss one
another; and each, in that sublime encounter, looks for an instant
through the other’s eyes. Hence it is natural and inevitable that the
mystic should here call into play all the resources of artistic
expression: the lovely imagery of Julian and Mechthild of Magdeburg,
Suso’s poetic visions, St. Augustine’s fire and light, the heavenly
harmonies of St. Francis and Richard Rolle. Symbols, too, play a major
part, not only in the description, but also in the machinery of
illumination: the intuitions of many mystics presenting themselves
directly to the surface-mind in a symbolic form. We must therefore be
prepared for a great variety and fluidity of expression, a constant and
not always conscious recourse to symbol and image, in those <span
id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_240"></span> who try
to communicate the secret of this state of consciousness. We must
examine, and even classify so far as possible, a wide variety of
experience—some which is recognized by friends and foes alike as purely
“mystical,” some in which the operation of poetic imagination is clearly
discernible, some which involves “psychic phenomena” and other abnormal
activities of the mind—refusing to be frightened away from investigation
by the strange, and apparently irreconcilable character of our material.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p35"></span>There are three main types of experience
which appear again and again in the history of mysticism; nearly always
in connection with illumination, rather than any other phase of mystical
development. I think that they may fairly be regarded as its main
characteristics, though the discussion of them cannot cover all the
ground. In few forms of spiritual life is the spontaneity of the
individual so clearly seen as here: and in few is the ever-deadly
process of classification attended with so many risks.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p36"></span>These three characteristics are:—

<span id="an_iv.iv-p37"></span>1. A joyous apprehension of the Absolute:
that which many ascetic writers call “the practice of the Presence of
God.” This, however, is not to be confused with that unique
consciousness of union with the divine which is peculiar to a later
stage of mystical development. The self, though purified, still realizes
itself as a separate entity over against God. It is not immersed in its
Origin, but contemplates it. This is the “betrothal” rather than the
“marriage” of the soul.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p38"></span>2. This clarity of vision may also be
enjoyed in regard to the phenomenal world. The actual physical
perceptions seem to be strangely heightened, so that the self perceives
an added significance and reality in all natural things: is often
convinced that it knows at last “the secret of the world.” In Blake’s
words “the doors of perception are cleansed” so that “everything appears
to man as it *is* , infinite.”  <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p40"></span>In these two forms of perception we see
the growing consciousness of the mystic stretching in two directions,
until it includes in its span both the World of Being and the World of
Becoming;  <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491.md) that dual
apprehension of reality as transcendent yet immanent which we found to
be one of the distinguishing marks of the mystic type.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p42"></span>3. Along with this two-fold extension of
consciousness, the energy of the intuitional or transcendental self may
be enormously increased. The psychic upheavals of the Purgative Way have
tended to make it central for life: to eliminate from the character all
those elements which checked its activity. Now it seizes upon <span
id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_241"></span> the
ordinary channels of expression; and may show itself in such forms as
(a) auditions, (b) dialogues between the surface consciousness and
another intelligence which purports to be divine, (c) visions, and
sometimes (d) in automatic writings. In many selves this automatic
activity of those growing but still largely subconscious powers which
constitute the “New Man,” increases steadily during the whole of the
mystic life.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p43"></span>Illumination, then, tends to appear
mainly under one or all of these three forms. Often all are present;
though, as a rule, one is dominant. The balance of characteristics will
be conditioned in each case by the self’s psychic make-up; its
temperamental leaning towards “pure contemplation,” “lucid vision,” or
automatic expression; emanation or immanence, the metaphysical,
artistic, or intimate aspects of truth. The possible combinations
between these various factors are as innumerable as the possible
creations of Life itself.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p44"></span>In the wonderful rhapsodies of St.
Augustine, in St. Bernard’s converse with the Word, in Angela of
Foligno’s apprehensions of Deity, in Richard Rolle’s “state of song,”
when “sweetest heavenly melody he took, with him dwelling in mind,” or
in Brother Lawrence’s “practice of the Presence of God,” we may see
varied expressions of the first type of illuminated consciousness. Jacob
Boehme is rightly looked upon as a classic example of the second; which
is also found in one of its most attractive forms in St. Francis of
Assisi. Suso and St. Teresa, perhaps, may stand for the third, since in
them the visionary and auditory phenomena were peculiarly well marked. A
further study of each characteristic in order, will help us to
disentangle the many threads which go to the psychical make-up of these
great and complex mystic types. The rest of this chapter will, then, be
given to the analysis of the two chief forms of illuminated
consciousness: the self’s perception of Reality in the eternal and
temporal worlds. The important subject of voices and visions demands a
division to itself.

#### <span id="an_iv.iv-p44.1"></span>I. The Consciousness of the Absolute, or “Sense of the Presence of God”

<span id="an_iv.iv-p45"></span>This consciousness, in its various forms
and degrees, is perhaps the most constant characteristic of
Illumination; and makes it, for the mystic soul, a pleasure-state of the
intensest kind. I do not mean by this that the subject passes months or
years in a continuous ecstasy of communion with the Divine. Intermittent
periods of spiritual fatigue or “aridity”—renewals of the temperamental
conflicts experienced in purgation—the oncoming gloom of the Dark
Night—all these may be, and often are, experienced <span
id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_242"></span> at
intervals during the Illuminated Life; as flashes of insight,
indistinguishable from illumination, constantly break the monotony of
the Purgative Way. But a deep certitude of the Personal Life omnipresent
in the universe has been achieved; and this can never be forgotten, even
though it be withdrawn. The “spirit stretching towards God” declares
that it has touched Him; and its normal condition henceforth is joyous
consciousness of His Presence with “many privy touchings of sweet
spiritual sights and feeling, measured to us as our simpleness may bear
it.”  <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492.md) Where he prefers less
definite or more pantheistic language, the mystic’s perceptions may take
the form of “harmony with the Infinite”—the same divine music transposed
to a lower key.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p47"></span>This “sense of God” is not a metaphor.
Innumerable declarations prove it to be a consciousness as sharp as that
which other men have, or think they have, of colour, heat, or light. It
is a well-known though usually transitory experience in the religious
life: like the homing instinct of birds, a fact which can neither be
denied nor explained. “How that presence is felt, it may better be known
by experience than by any writing,” says Hilton, “for it is the life and
the love, the might and the light, the joy and the rest of a chosen
soul. And therefore he that hath soothfastly once felt it he may not
forbear it without pain; he may not undesire it, it is so good in itself
and so comfortable. . . . He cometh privily sometimes when thou art
least aware of Him, but thou shalt well know Him or He go; for
wonderfully He stirreth and mightily He turneth thy heart into beholding
of His goodness, and doth thine heart melt delectably as wax against the
fire into softness of His love.”  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p49"></span>Modern psychologists have struggled hard
to discredit this “sense of the presence”; sometimes attributing it to
the psychic mechanism of projection, sometimes to “wish-fulfilments” of
a more unpleasant origin.  <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494.md) The
mystics, however, who discriminate so much more delicately than their
critics between true and false transcendental experience, never feel any
doubt about its validity. Even when their experience seems inconsistent
with their theology, they refuse to be disturbed.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p51"></span>Thus St. Teresa writes of her own
experience, with her usual simplicity and directness, “In the beginning
it happened to me that I was ignorant of one thing—I did not know that
God was in all things: and when He seemed to me to be so near, I thought
it impossible. Not to believe that He was present was not in my <span
id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_243"></span> power;
for it seemed to me, as it were, evident that I felt there His very
presence. Some unlearned men used to say to me, that He was present only
by His grace. *I* *could not believe that,* because, as I am saying, He
seemed to me to be present Himself: so I was distressed. A most learned
man, of the Order of the glorious Patriarch St. Dominic, delivered me
from this doubt, for he told me that He was present, and how He communed
with us: this was a great comfort to me.”  <span
id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p53"></span>Again, “An interior peace, and the little
strength which either pleasures or displeasures have to remove this
presence (during the time it lasts) of the Three Persons, and that
without power to doubt of it, continue in such a manner that I clearly
seem to experience what St. John says, *That He will dwell in the soul,*
and this not only by grace, but that He will also make her perceive this
presence.”  <span id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496.md) St. Teresa’s strong
“immanental” bent comes out well in this passage.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p55"></span>Such a sense of the divine presence may
go side by side with the daily life and normal mental activities of its
possessor; who is not necessarily an ecstatic or an abstracted
visionary, remote from the work of the world. It is true that the
transcendental consciousness has now become, once for all, his centre of
interest, its perceptions and admonitions dominate and light up his
daily life. The object of education, in the Platonic sense, has been
achieved: his soul has “wheeled round from the perishing world” to “the
contemplation of the real world and the brightest part thereof.”  <span
id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497.md) But where vocation and circumstances
require it, the duties of a busy outward life continue to be fulfilled
with steadiness and success: and this without detriment to the soul’s
contemplation of the Real.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p57"></span>In many temperaments of the unstable or
artistic type, however, this intuitional consciousness of the Absolute
becomes ungovernable: it constantly breaks through, obtaining forcible
possession of the mental field and expressing itself in the “psychic”
phenomena of ecstasy and rapture. In others, less mobile, it wells up
into an impassioned apprehension, a “flame of love” in which the self
seems to “meet God in the ground of the soul.” This is “pure
contemplation”: that state of deep orison in which the subject seems to
be “seeing, feeling and thinking all at once.” By this spontaneous
exercise of all his powers under the dominion of love, the mystic
attains that “Vision of the Heart” which, “more interior, perhaps, than
the visions of dream or ecstasy,”  <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498.md) stretches <span id="page_244">p.
244</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_244"></span> to the full those very
faculties which it seems to be holding in suspense; as a top “sleeps”
when it is spinning fast. <span id="an_iv.iv-p58.1"></span> *Ego dormio
et cor meum vigilat* . This act of contemplation, this glad surrender to
an overwhelming consciousness of the Presence of God, leaves no sharp
image on the mind: only a knowledge that we have been lifted up, to a
veritable gazing upon That which eye hath not seen.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p59"></span>St. Bernard gives in one of his sermons a
simple, ingenuous and obviously personal account of such “privy
touchings,” such convincing but elusive contacts of the soul with the
Absolute. “Now bear with my foolishness for a little,” he says, “for I
wish to tell you, as I have promised, how such events have taken place
in me. It is, indeed, a matter of no importance. But I put myself
forward only that I may be of service to you; and if you derive any
benefit I am consoled for my egotism. If not, I shall but have displayed
my foolishness. I confess, then, though I say it in my foolishness, that
the Word has visited me, and even very often. But, though He has
frequently entered into my soul, I have never at any time been sensible
of the precise moment of His coming. I have felt that He was present, I
remember that He has been with me; I have sometimes been able even to
have a presentiment that He would come: but never to feel His coming nor
His departure. For whence He came to enter my soul, or whither He went
on quitting it, by what means He has made entrance or departure, I
confess that I know not even to this day; according to that which is
said, <span id="an_iv.iv-p59.1"></span> *Nescis unde veniat aut quo
vadat* . Nor is this strange, because it is to Him that the psalmist has
said in another place, <span id="an_iv.iv-p59.2"></span> *Vestigia tua
non cognoscentur* .

<span id="an_iv.iv-p60"></span>“It is not by the eyes that He enters,
for He is without form or colour that they can discern; nor by the ears,
for His coming is without sound; nor by the nostrils, for it is not with
the air but with the mind that He is blended. . . . By what avenue then
has He entered? Or perhaps the fact may be that He has not entered at
all, nor indeed come at all from outside: for not one of these things
belongs to outside. Yet it has not come from within me, for it is good,
and I know that in me dwelleth no good thing. I have ascended higher
than myself, and lo! I have found the Word above me still. My curiosity
has led me to descend below myself also, and yet I have found Him still
at a lower depth. If I have looked without myself, I have found that He
is beyond that which is outside of me, and if within, He was at an inner
depth still. And thus have I learned the truth of the words I have read,
<span id="an_iv.iv-p60.1"></span> *In* *ipso enim vivimus et movemur et
sumus* .”  <span id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499.md) <span
id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_245"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p62"></span>Such a lifting up, such a condition of
consciousness as that which St. Bernard is here trying to describe,
seems to snatch the spirit for a moment into a state which it is hard to
distinguish from that of true “union.” This is what the contemplatives
call passive or infused contemplation, or sometimes the “orison of
union”: a brief foretaste of the Unitive State, often enjoyed for short
periods in the Illuminative Way, which reinforces their conviction that
they have now truly attained the Absolute. It is but a foretaste,
however, of that attainment: the precocious effort of a soul still in
that stage of “Enlightening” which the “Theologia Germanica” declares to
be “belonging to such as are growing.”  <span
id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p64"></span>This distinction between the temporary
experience of union and the achievement of the Unitive Life is well
brought out in a fragment of dialogue between Soul and Self in Hugh of
St. Victor’s mystical tract, “De Arrha Animae.”

<span id="an_iv.iv-p65"></span> *The Soul says,* “Tell me, what can be
this thing of delight that merely by its memory touches and moves me
with such sweetness and violence that I am drawn out of myself and
carried away, I know not how? I am suddenly renewed: I am changed: I am
plunged into an ineffable peace. My mind is full of gladness, all my
past wretchedness and pain is forgot. My soul exults: my intellect is
illuminated: my heart is afire: my desires have become kindly and
gentle: I know not where I am, because my Love has embraced me. Also,
because my Love has embraced me I seem to have become possessed of
something, and I know not what it is; but I try to keep it, that I may
never lose it. My soul strives in gladness that she may not be separated
from That which she desires to hold fast for ever: as if she had found
in it the goal of all her desires. She exults in a sovereign and
ineffable manner, seeking nought, desiring nought, but to rest in this.
Is *this,* then, my Beloved? Tell me that I may know Him, and that if He
come again I may entreat Him to leave me not, but to stay with me for
ever.”

<span id="an_iv.iv-p66"></span> *Man says,* “It is indeed thy Beloved
who visits thee; but He comes in an invisible shape, He comes disguised,
He comes incomprehensibly. He comes to touch thee, not to be seen of
thee: to arouse thee, not to be comprehended of thee. He comes not to
give Himself wholly, but to be tasted by thee: not to fulfil thy desire,
but to lead upwards thy affection. He gives a foretaste of His delights,
brings not the plenitude of a perfect satisfaction: and the earnest of
thy betrothal consists chiefly in this, that He who shall afterwards
give Himself to be seen and possessed by thee perpetually, now permits
Himself to be sometimes tasted, that thou mayest learn how sweet He is.
This shall console thee <span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_246"></span> for His absence: and the savour of this
gift shall keep thee from all despair.”  <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p68"></span>The real distinction between the
Illuminative and the Unitive Life is that in Illumination the
individuality of the subject—however profound his spiritual
consciousness, however close his apparent communion with the
Infinite—remains separate and intact. His heightened apprehension of
reality lights up rather than obliterates the rest of his life: and may
even increase his power of dealing adequately with the accidents of
normal existence. Thus Brother Lawrence found that his acute sense of
reality, his apprehension of the Presence of God, and the resulting
detachment and consciousness of liberty in regard to mundane things,
upheld and assisted him in the most unlikely tasks; as, for instance,
when he was sent into Burgundy to buy wine for his convent, “which was a
very unwelcome task to him, because he had no turn for business, and
because he was lame, and could not go about the boat but by rolling
himself over the casks. That, however, he gave himself no uneasiness
about it, nor about the purchase of the wine. That he said to God, *It*
*was His business he was about:* and that he afterwards found it very
well performed. . . . So likewise in his business in the kitchen, to
which he had naturally a great aversion.”  <span
id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p70"></span>The mind, concentrated upon a higher
object of interest, is undistracted by its own anxieties, likes, or
dislikes; and hence performs the more efficiently the work that is given
it to do. Where it does not do so, then the normal make-up or imperfect
discipline of the subject, rather than its mystical proclivities, must
be blamed. St. Catherine of Genoa found in this divine companionship the
power which made her hospital a success. St. Teresa was an administrator
of genius and an admirable housewife, and declared that she found her
God very easily amongst the pots and pans.  <span
id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503.md) Appearances notwithstanding, Mary
would probably have been a better cook than Martha, had circumstances
required of her this form of activity.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p72"></span>In persons of feeble or diffuse
intelligence, however, and above all in victims of a self-regarding
spirituality, this deep absorption in the sense of Divine Reality may
easily degenerate into monoideism. Then the “shady side” of
Illumination, a selfish preoccupation with transcendental joys, the
“spiritual gluttony” condemned by St. John of the Cross, comes out. “I
made many mistakes,” says Madame Guyon pathetically, “through allowing
myself to <span id="page_247">p. 247</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_247"></span> be too much taken up by my interior joys.
. . . I used to sit in a corner and work, but I could hardly do
anything, because the strength of this attraction made me let the work
fall out of my hands. I spent hours in this way without being able to
open my eyes or to know what was happening to me: so simply, so
peacefully, so gently that sometimes I said to myself, ‘Can heaven
itself be more peaceful than I?’”  <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p74"></span>Here we see Madame Guyon basking like a
pious tabby cat in the beams of the Uncreated Light, and already leaning
to the extravagances of Quietism, with its dangerous “double character
of passivity and beatitude.” The heroic aspect of the mystic vocation is
in abeyance. Those mystical impressions which her peculiar psychic
make-up permitted her to receive, have been treated as a source of
personal and placid satisfactions; not as a well-spring, whence new
vitality might be drawn for great and self-giving activities.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p75"></span>It has been claimed by the early
biographers of St. Catherine of Genoa, that she passed in the crisis of
her conversion directly through the Purgative to the Unitive Life; and
never exhibited the characteristics of the Illuminative Way. This has
been effectually disproved by Baron von Hügel,  <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505.md) though he too is inclined in her case
to reject the usual sequence of the mystic states. Yet the description
of Catherine’s condition after her four great penitential years were
ended, as given in cap. vi. of the “Vita e Dottrina,” is an almost
perfect picture of healthy illumination of the inward or “immanental”
type; and makes an effective foil to the passage which I have quoted
from Madame Guyon’s life.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p77"></span>No doubt there were hours in which St.
Catherine’s experience, as it were, ran ahead; and she felt herself not
merely lit up by the Indwelling Light, but temporally merged in it.
These moments are responsible for such passages as the beautiful
fragment in cap. v.; which does, when taken alone, seem to describe the
true unitive state. “Sometimes,” she said, “I do not see or feel myself
to have either soul, body, heart, will or taste, or any other thing
except Pure Love.”  <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506.md) Her normal
condition of consciousness, however, was clearly not yet that which
Julian of Norwich calls being “oned with bliss”; but rather an intense
and continuous communion with an objective Reality which was clearly
realized as distinct from herself. “After the aforesaid four years,”
says the next chapter of the “Vita,” “there was given unto her a
purified mind, free, and filled with God: insomuch that no other thing
<span id="page_248">p. 248</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_248"></span>
could enter into it. Thus, when she heard sermons or Mass, so much was
she absorbed in her interior feelings, that she neither heard nor saw
that which was said or done without. But within, in the sweet divine
light, she saw and heard other things, being wholly absorbed by that
interior light: and it was not in her power to act otherwise.” St.
Catherine, then, is still a spectator of the Absolute, does not feel
herself to be *one* with it. “And it is a marvellous thing that with so
great an interior recollection, the Lord never permitted her to go
beyond control. But when she was needed, she always came to herself: so
that she was able to reply to that which was asked of her: and the Lord
so guided her, that none could complain of her. And she had her mind so
filled by Love Divine, that conversation became hard to her: and by this
continuous taste and sense of God, several times she was so greatly
transported, that she was forced to hide herself, that she might not be
seen.” It is clear, however, that Catherine herself was aware of the
transitory and imperfect nature of this intensely joyous state. Her
growing transcendental self, unsatisfied with the sunshine of the
Illuminative Way, the enjoyment of the riches of God, already aspired to
union with the Divine. With her, as with all truly heroic souls, it was
love for love, not love for joy. “She cried to God because He gave her
so many consolations, <span id="an_iv.iv-p78.1"></span> *‘Non voglio
quello che esce da te, ma sol voglio te, O dolce Amore* !’”  <span
id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p80"></span><span id="an_iv.iv-p80.1"></span> *“Non
voglio quello che esce da te.”* When the growing soul has reached this
level of desire, the Illuminative Way is nearly at an end. It has seen
the goal, “that Country which is no mere vision, but a home,”  <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508.md) and is set upon the forward march. So
Rabia, the Moslem saint: “O my God, my concern and my desire in this
world, is that I should remember thee above all the things of this
world, and in the next that out of all who are in that world, I should
meet with thee alone.”  <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509.md) So
Gertrude More: “No knowledge which we can here have of thee can satisfy
my soul seeking and longing without ceasing after thee. . . . Alas, my
Lord God, what is all thou canst give to a loving soul which sigheth and
panteth after thee alone, and esteemeth all things as dung that she may
gain thee? What is all I say, whilst thou givest not thyself, who art
that one thing which is only necessary and which alone can satisfy <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_249"></span> our
souls? Was it any comfort to St. Mary Magdalen, when she sought thee, to
find two angels which presented themselves instead of thee? verily I
cannot think it was any joy unto her. For that soul that hath set her
whole love and desire on thee can never find any true satisfaction but
only in thee.”  <span id="fr_510"></span>[511](#fn_510.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p84"></span>What is the nature of this mysterious
mystic illumination? Apart from the certitude it imparts, what is the
form which it most usually assumes in the consciousness of the self? The
illuminatives seem to assure us that its apparently symbolic name is
really descriptive; that they do experience a kind of radiance, a
flooding of the personality with new light. A new sun rises above the
horizon, and transfigures their twilit world. Over and over again they
return to light-imagery in this connection. Frequently, as in their
first conversion, they report an actual and overpowering consciousness
of radiant light, ineffable in its splendour, as an accompaniment of
their inward adjustment.

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p84.1"></span> “Sopr’ onne lengua amore,  
> bontá senza figura,  
> lume fuor di mesura  
> resplende nel mio core,”  <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511.md)  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p86"></span>sang Jacopone da Todi. “Light rare,
untellable!” said Whitman. “The flowing light of the Godhead,” said
Mechthild of Magdeburg, trying to describe *what* it was that made the
difference between her universe and that of normal men. <span
id="an_iv.iv-p86.1"></span> *“Lux vixens dicit,”* said St. Hildegarde of
her revelations, which she described as appearing in a special light,
more brilliant than the brightness round the sun.  <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512.md) It is an “infused brightness,” says
St. Teresa, “a light which knows no night; but rather, as it is always
light, nothing ever disturbs it.”  <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513.md)

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p88.1"></span> “De subito parve giorno a giorno  
> essere aggiunto!”  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p89"></span>exclaims Dante, initiated into the
atmosphere of heaven; <span id="an_iv.iv-p89.1"></span>“Lume è lassù”is
his constant declaration:

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p89.2"></span> <span
> id="an_iv.iv-p89.4"></span>“Cio ch’ io dico è un semplice lume,”  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p90"></span>his last word, in the effort to describe
the soul’s apprehension of the Being of God.  <span
id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p92"></span>It really seems as though the mystics’
attainment of new levels of consciousness did bring with it the power of
perceiving a splendour always there, but beyond the narrow range of our
poor sight; to which it is only a “luminous darkness” at the best. <span
id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_250"></span> “In
Eternal Nature, or the kingdom of Heaven,” said Law, “materiality stands
in life and light.”  <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515.md) The
cumulative testimony on this point is such as would be held to prove, in
any other department of knowledge, that there is indeed an actual light,
“lighting the very light” and awaiting the recognition of men.  <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p95"></span>Consider the accent of realism with which
St. Augustine speaks of his own experience of Platonic contemplation; a
passage in which we seem to see a born psychologist desperately
struggling by means of negations to describe an intensely positive
state. “I entered into the secret closet of my soul, led by Thee; and
this I could do because Thou wast my helper. I entered, and beheld with
the mysterious eye of my soul the Light that never changes, above the
eye of my soul, above my intelligence. It was not the common light which
all flesh can see, nor was it greater yet of the same kind, as if the
light of day were to grow brighter and brighter and flood all space. It
was not like this, but different: altogether different from all such
things. Nor was it above my intelligence in the same way as oil is above
water, or heaven above earth; but it was higher because it made me, and
I was lower because made by it. He who knoweth the truth knoweth that
Light: and who knoweth it, knoweth eternity. Love knoweth it.”  <span
id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p97"></span>Here, as in the cases of St. Teresa, St.
Catherine of Genoa, and Jacopone da Todi, we have a characteristically
“immanental” description of the illuminated state. The self, by the
process which mystics call “introversion,” the deliberate turning
inwards of its attention, its conative powers, discerns Reality within
the heart: “the rippling tide of love which flows secretly from God into
the soul, and draws it mightily back into its source.”  <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518.md) But the opposite or transcendental
tendency is not less frequent. The cosmic vision of Infinity, exterior
to the subject—the expansive, outgoing movement towards a Divine Light,

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p98.1"></span> “Che visible face  
> lo Creatore a quella creatura,  
> che solo in lui vedere ha la sua pace,” <span
> id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519.md)  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p100"></span><span id="page_251">p. 251</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_251"></span> wholly other than anything the earth-born
creature can conceive—the strange, formless absorption in the Divine
Dark to which the soul is destined to ascend—all these modes of
perception are equally characteristic of the Illuminative Way. As in
conversion, so here Reality may be apprehended in either transcendent or
immanent, positive or negative terms. It is both near and far; “closer
to us than our most inward part, and higher than our highest”;  <span
id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520.md) and for some selves that which is far
is easiest to find. To a certain type of mind, the veritable practice of
the Presence of God is not the intimate and adorable companionship of
the personal Comrade or the Inward Light, but the awestruck
contemplation of the Absolute, the “naked Godhead,” source and origin of
all that Is. It is an ascent to the supernal plane of perception, where
“the simple, absolute and unchangeable mysteries of heavenly Truth lie
hidden in the dazzling obscurity of the secret Silence, outshining all
brilliance with the intensity of their darkness, and surcharging our
blinded intellects with the utterly impalpable and invisible fairness of
glories which exceed all beauty.”  <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p103"></span>With such an experience of eternity,
such a vision of the triune all-including Absolute which “binds the
Universe with love,” Dante ends his “Divine Comedy”: and the mystic joy
with which its memory fills him is his guarantee that he has really seen
the Inviolate Rose, the flaming heart of things.

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p103.1"></span> “O abbondante grazia, ond’ io
> presunsi  
> ficcar lo viso per la luce eterna  
> tanto che la veduta vi consunsi!  
> Nel suo profondo vidi che s’ interna,  
> legato con amore in un volume,  
> ciò che per l’universo si squaderna;  
> Sustanzia ed accidenti, e lor costume,  
> quasi conflati insieme per tal modo  
> che ciò ch’ io dico è un semplice lume.  
> La forma universal di questo nodo  
> credo ch’ io vidi, perchè più di largo,  
> dicendo questo, mi sento ch’ io godo.  
> . . . . .  
> O, quanto è corto il dire, e come fioco  
> al mio concetto! e questo, a quel ch’ io vidi,  
> è tanto che non basta a dicer poco.  
> O luce eterna, che sola in te sidi,  
> sola t’ intendi, e, da te intelletta  
> ed intendente te, ami ed arridi!” <span
> id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522.md)  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p111"></span><span id="page_252">p. 252</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_252"></span> In Dante, the transcendent and impersonal
aspect of illumination is seen in its most exalted form. It seems at
first sight almost impossible to find room within the same system for
this expansive vision of the Undifferentiated Light and such intimate
and personal apprehensions of Deity as Lady Julian’s conversations with
her “courteous and dearworthy Lord,” or St. Catherine’s companionship
with Love Divine. Yet all these are really reports of the same
psychological state: describe the attainment by selves of different
types, of the same stage in the soul’s progressive apprehension of
reality.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p112"></span>In a wonderful passage, unique in the
literature of mysticism, Angela of Foligno has reported the lucid vision
in which she perceived this truth: the twofold revelation of an Absolute
at once humble and omnipotent, personal and transcendent—the
unimaginable synthesis of “unspeakable power” and “deep humility.”

<span id="an_iv.iv-p113"></span>“The eyes of my soul were opened, and I
beheld the plenitude of God, wherein I did comprehend the whole world,
both here and beyond the sea, and the abyss and ocean and all things. In
all these things I beheld naught save the divine power, in a manner
assuredly indescribable; so that through excess of marvelling the soul
cried with a loud voice, saying ‘This whole world is full of God!’
 <span id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523.md) Wherefore I now comprehended
how small a thing is the whole world, that is to say both here and
beyond the seas, the abyss, the ocean, and all things; and that the
Power of God exceeds and fills all. Then He said unto me: ‘I have shown
thee something of My Power,’ and I understood, that after this I should
better understand the rest. He then said ‘Behold now My humility.’ Then
was I given an insight into the deep humility of God towards man. And
comprehending that unspeakable power and beholding that deep humility,
my soul marvelled greatly, and did esteem itself to be nothing at all.”
 <span id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p116"></span>It must never be forgotten that all
apparently one-sided descriptions of illumination—more, all experiences
of it—are governed by temperament. “That Light whose smile kindles the
Universe” is ever the same; but the self through whom it passes, <span
id="page_253">p. 253</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_253"></span> and by
whom we must receive its report, has already submitted to the moulding
influences of environment and heredity, Church and State. The very
language of which that self avails itself in its struggle for
expression, links it with half a hundred philosophies and creeds. The
response which it makes to Divine Love will be the same in type as the
response which its nature would make to earthly love: but raised to the
*n* th degree. We, receiving the revelation, receive with it all those
elements which the subject has contributed in spite of itself. Hence the
soul’s apprehension of Divine Reality may take almost any form, from the
metaphysical ecstasies which we find in Dionysius, and to a less degree
in St. Augustine, to the simple, almost “common-sense” statements of
Brother Lawrence, the emotional ardours of St. Gertrude, or the lovely
intimacies of Julian or Mechthild.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p117"></span>Sometimes—so rich and varied does the
nature of the great mystic tend to be—the exalted and impersonal
language of the Dionysian theology goes, with no sense of incongruity,
side by side with homely parallels drawn from the most sweet and common
incidents of daily life. Suso, in whom illumination and purgation
existed side by side for sixteen years, alternately obtaining possession
of the mental field, and whose oscillations between the harshest
mortification and the most ecstatic pleasure-states were exceptionally
violent and swift, is a characteristic instance of such an attitude of
mind. His illumination was largely of the intimate and immanental type;
but, as we might expect in a pupil of Eckhart, it was not without
touches of mystical transcendence, which break out with sudden splendour
side by side with those tender and charming passages in which the
Servitor of the Eternal Wisdom tries to tell his love.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p118"></span>Thus, he describes in one of the earlier
chapters of his life how “whilst he was thinking, according to his
custom, of the most lovable Wisdom, he questioned himself, and
interrogated his heart, which sought persistently for love, saying, ‘O
my heart, whence comes this love and grace, whence comes this gentleness
and beauty, this joy and sweetness of the heart? Does not all this flow
forth from the Godhead, as from its origin? Come! let my heart, my
senses and my soul immerse themselves in the deep Abyss whence come
these adorable things. What shall keep me back? To-day I will embrace
you, even as my burning heart desires to do.’ And at this moment there
was within his heart as it were an emanation of all good, all that is
beautiful, all that is lovable and desirable was there spiritually
present, and this in a manner which cannot be expressed. Whence came the
habit that every time he heard God’s praises sung or said, he
recollected himself in the depths of his heart and soul, and thought on
that Beloved Object, <span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_254"></span> whence comes all love. It is impossible
to tell how often, with eyes filled with tears and open heart, he has
embraced his sweet Friend, and pressed Him to a heart overflowing with
love. He was like a baby which a mother holds upright on her knees,
supporting it with her hands beneath its arms. The baby, by the
movements of its little head, and all its little body, tries to get
closer and closer to its dear mother, and shows by its little laughing
gestures the gladness in its heart. Thus did the heart of the Servitor
ever seek the sweet neighbourhood of the Divine Wisdom, and thus he was
as it were altogether filled with delight.”  <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525.md)

#### <span id="an_iv.iv-p119.1"></span>2. The Illuminated Vision of the World

<span id="an_iv.iv-p120"></span>Closely connected with the sense of the
“Presence of God,” or power of perceiving the Absolute, is the
complementary mark of the illuminated consciousness; the vision of “a
new heaven and a new earth,” or an added significance and reality in the
phenomenal world. Such words as those of Julian, “God is all thing that
is good as to my sight, and the goodness that all thing hath, it is He,”
 <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526.md) seem to supply the link between
the two. Here again we must distinguish carefully between vaguely poetic
language—“the light that never was,” “every common bush afire with
God”—and descriptions which can be referred to a concrete and definite
psychological experience. This experience, at its best, balances and
completes the experience of the Presence of God at its best. That is to
say, its “note” is sacramental, not ascetic. It entails the expansion
rather than the concentration of consciousness; the discovery of the
Perfect One self-revealed in the Many, not the forsaking of the Many in
order to find the One. Its characteristic expression is—

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p121.1"></span> “The World is charged with the
> grandeur of God;  
> It will flame out, like shining from shook foil,”  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p122"></span>not “turn thy thoughts into thy own
soul, where He is hid.” It takes, as a rule, the form of an enhanced
mental lucidity—an abnormal sharpening of the senses—whereby an
ineffable radiance, a beauty and a reality never before suspected, are
perceived by a sort of clairvoyance shining in the meanest things.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p123"></span>“From the moment in which the soul has
received the impression of Deity in infused orison,” says Malaval, “she
sees Him everywhere, by one of love’s secrets which is only known of
those who have experienced it. The simple vision of pure love, which is
<span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_255"></span>
marvellously penetrating, does not stop at the outer husk of creation:
it penetrates to the divinity which is hidden within.”  <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p125"></span>Thus Browning makes David declare—

> <span id="an_iv.iv-p125.1"></span> “I but open my eyes,—and
> perfection, no more and no less  
> In the kind I imagined full-fronts me, and God is seen God  
> In the star, in the stone, in the flesh, in the soul and the clod.”
>  <span id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528.md)  

<span id="an_iv.iv-p127"></span>Blake’s “To see a world in a grain of
sand,” Tennyson’s “Flower in the crannied wall,” Vaughan’s “Each bush
and oak doth know I AM,” and the like, are exact though over-quoted
reports of “things seen” in this state of consciousness, this “simple
vision of pure love”: the value of which is summed up in Eckhart’s
profound saying, “The meanest thing that one knows in God—for instance
if one could understand a flower as it has its Being in God—this would
be a higher thing than the whole world!”  <span
id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529.md) Mystical poets of the type of
Wordsworth and Walt Whitman seem to possess in a certain degree this
form of illumination. It is this which Bucke, the American psychologist,
analysed under the name of “Cosmic Consciousness.”  <span
id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530.md) It is seen at its full development in
the mystical experiences of Boehme, Fox, and Blake.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p130"></span>We will take first the experience of
Jacob Boehme, a mystic who owed little or nothing to the influence of
tradition, and who furnishes one of the best recorded all-round examples
of mystical illumination; exhibiting, along with an acute consciousness
of divine companionship, all those phenomena of visual lucidity,
automatism, and enhanced intellectual powers which properly belong to
it, but are seldom developed simultaneously in the same individual.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p131"></span>In Boehme’s life, as described in the
Introduction to the English translation of his collected works,  <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531.md) there were three distinct onsets of
illumination; all of the pantheistic and external type. In the first,
which seems to have happened whilst he was very young, we are told that
“he was surrounded by a divine Light for seven days, and stood in the
highest contemplation and Kingdom of Joy.” This we may perhaps identify
with mystical awakening, of the kind experienced by Suso. About the year
1600 occurred the second illumination, initiated by a trance-like state
of consciousness, the result of gazing at a polished disc. To this I
have already referred.  <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532.md) This
experience brought with it that peculiar and lucid <span
id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_256"></span> vision
of the inner reality of the phenomenal world in which, as he says, “he
looked into the deepest foundations of things.” “He believed that it was
only a fancy, and in order to banish it from his mind he went out upon
the green. But here he remarked that he gazed into the very heart of
things, the very herbs and grass, and that actual Nature harmonized with
what he had inwardly seen.”  <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533.md) Of
this same experience and the clairvoyance which accompanied it, another
biographer says, “Going abroad in the fields to a green before Neys
Gate, at Görlitz, he there sat down, and, viewing the herbs and grass of
the field in his inward light, he saw into their essences, use and
properties, which were discovered to him by their lineaments, figures
and signatures. . . . In the unfolding of these mysteries before his
understanding, he had a great measure of joy, yet returned home and took
care of his family and lived in great peace and silence, scarce
intimating to any these wonderful things that had befallen him.”  <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p136"></span>So far as we can tell from his own
scattered statements, from this time onwards Boehme must have enjoyed a
frequent and growing consciousness of the transcendental world: though
there is evidence that he, like all other mystics, knew seasons of
darkness, “many a shrewd Repulse,” and times of struggle with that
“powerful contrarium” the lower consciousness. In 1610—perhaps as the
result of such intermittent struggles—the vivid illumination of ten
years before was repeated in an enhanced form: and it was in consequence
of this, and in order that there might be some record of the mysteries
upon which he had gazed, that he wrote his first and most difficult
book, the “Aurora,” or “Morning Redness.” The passage in which the
“inspired shoemaker” has tried to tell us what his vision of Reality was
like, to communicate something of the grave and enthusiastic travail of
his being, the unspeakable knowledge of things which he attained, is one
of those which arouse in all who have even the rudiments of mystical
perception the sorrow and excitement of exiles who suddenly hear the
accents of home. Like absolute music, it addresses itself to the whole
being, not merely to the intellect. Those who will listen and be
receptive will find themselves repaid by a strange sense of extended
life, an exhilarating consciousness of truth. Here, if ever, is a man
who is struggling to “speak as he saw”: and it is plain that he saw
much—as much, perhaps, as Dante, though he lacked the poetic genius
which was needed to give his vision an intelligible form. The very
strangeness of the phrasing, the unexpected harmonies and dissonances
which worry polite <span id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_257"></span> and well-regulated minds, are earnests of
the Spirit of Life crying out for expression from within. Boehme, like
Blake, seems “drunk with intellectual vision”—“a God-intoxicated man.”

<span id="an_iv.iv-p137"></span>“In this my earnest and Christian
Seeking and Desire,” he says, “(wherein I suffered many a shrewd
Repulse, but at last resolved rather to put myself in Hazard, than give
over and leave off) the Gate was opened to me, that in one Quarter of an
Hour I saw and knew more than if I had been many years together at an
University, at which I exceedingly admired, and thereupon turned my
Praise to God for it. For I saw and knew the Being of all Beings, the
Byss and the Abyss, and the Eternal Generation of the *Holy Trinity,*
the Descent and Original of the World, and of all creatures through the
Divine Wisdom: knew and saw in myself all the three Worlds, namely, *The
Divine,* angelical and paradisical; and the *dark World,* the Original
of the Nature to the Fire; and then, thirdly, the *external;* and
*visible World,* being a Procreation or external Birth from both the
internal and spiritual Worlds. And I saw and knew the whole working
Essence in the Evil and the Good, and the Original and Existence of each
of them; and likewise how the fruitful bearing Womb of Eternity brought
forth. . . . Yet however I must begin to labour in these great
mysteries, as a Child that goes to School. I saw it as in a great Deep
in the Internal. For I had a thorough view of the Universe, as in a
Chaos, wherein all things are couched and wrapped up, but it was
impossible for me to explain the same. Yet it opened itself to me, from
Time to Time, as in a Young Plant; though the same was with me for the
space of twelve years, and as it was as it were breeding, and I found a
powerful Instigation within me, before I could bring it forth into
external Form of Writing: and whatever I could apprehend with the
external Principle of my mind, that I wrote down.”  <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p139"></span>Close to this lucid vision of the
reality of things—this sudden glimpse of the phenomenal in the light of
the intelligible world—is George Fox’s experience at the age of
twenty-four, as recorded in his Journal.  <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536.md) Here, as in Boehme’s case, it is clear
that a previous and regrettable acquaintance with the “doctrine of
signatures” has to some extent determined the language and symbols under
which he describes his intuitive vision of actuality as it exists in the
Divine Mind.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p141"></span>“Now was I come up in spirit through the
flaming sword into the Paradise of God. All things were new: and all the
creation gave another smell unto me than before, beyond what words can
utter. . . . The creation was opened to me; and it was showed me how all
things had their names given them, according to their <span
id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_258"></span> nature
and virtue. And I was at a stand in my mind whether I should practise
physic for the good of mankind, seeing the nature and virtue of the
creatures were so opened to me by the Lord. . . . Great things did the
Lord lead me unto, and wonderful depths were opened unto me beyond what
can by words be declared; but as people come into subjection to the
Spirit of God, and grow up in the image and power of the Almighty, they
may receive the word of wisdom that opens all things, and come to know
the *hidden unity in the Eternal Being.”*

<span id="an_iv.iv-p142"></span>“To know the hidden unity in the Eternal
Being”—know it with an invulnerable certainty, in the all-embracing act
of consciousness with which we are aware of the personality of those we
truly love—is to live at its fullest the Illuminated Life, enjoying “all
creatures in God and God in all creatures.” Lucidity of this sort seemes
to be an enormously enhanced form of the poetic consciousness of
“otherness” in natural things—the sense of a unity in separateness, a
mighty and actual Life beyond that which eye can see, a glorious reality
shining through the phenomenal veil—frequent in those temperaments which
are at one with life. The self then becomes conscious of the living
reality of that World of Becoming, the vast arena of the Divine
creativity, in which the little individual life is immersed. Alike in
howling gale and singing cricket it hears the crying aloud of that “Word
which is through all things everlastingly.” It participates, actively
and open-eyed, in the mighty journey of the Son towards the Father’s
heart: and seeing with purged sight all things and creatures as they are
in that transcendent order, detects in them too that striving of
Creation to return to its centre which is the secret of the Universe.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p143"></span>A harmony is thus set up between the
mystic and Life in all its forms. Undistracted by appearance, he sees,
feels, and knows it in one piercing act of loving comprehension. “And
the bodily sight stinted,” says Julian, “but the spiritual sight dwelled
in mine understanding, and I abode with reverent dread joying in that I
saw.”  <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537.md) The heart outstrips the
clumsy senses, and sees—perhaps for an instant, perhaps for long periods
of bliss—an undistorted and more veritable world. All things are
perceived in the light of charity, and hence under the aspect of beauty:
for beauty is simply Reality seen with the eyes of love. As in the case
of another and more beatific Vision, *essere in caritate è* *qui
necesse* <span id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538.md) For such a reverent and
joyous sight the meanest accidents of life are radiant. The London
streets are paths of loveliness; the very omnibuses look like coloured
archangels, their laps filled full of little trustful souls. <span
id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_259"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p146"></span>Often when we blame our artists for
painting ugly things, they are but striving to show us a beauty to which
we are blind. They have gone on ahead of us, and attained that state of
“fourfold vision to which Blake laid claim; in which the visionary sees
the whole visible universe transfigured, because he has “put off the
rotten rags of sense and memory,” and “put on Imagination uncorrupt.”
 <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) In this state of lucidity
symbol and reality, Nature and Imagination, are seen to be *One:* and in
it are produced all the more sublime works of art, since these owe their
greatness to the impact of Reality upon the artistic mind. “I know,”
says Blake again, “that this world is a world of imagination and vision.
I see everything I paint in this world, but everybody does not see
alike. To the eye of a miser a guinea is far more beautiful than the sun
and a bag worn with the use of money has more beautiful proportions than
a vine filled with grapes. The tree which moves some to tears of joy is
in the eyes of others only a green thing which stands in the way. Some
see Nature all ridicule and deformity, and by these I shall not regulate
my proportions; and some scarce see Nature at all. But to the eyes of
the man of imagination Nature is Imagination itself. As a man is, so he
sees. As the eye is formed, such are its powers. You certainly mistake,
when you say that the visions of fancy are not to be found in this
world. To me this world is all one continued vision of fancy or
imagination, and I feel flattered when I am told so.”  <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p149"></span>If the Mystic Way be considered as an
organic process of transcendence, this illuminated apprehension of
things, this cleansing of the doors of perception, is surely what we
might expect to occur as man moves towards higher centres of
consciousness. It marks the self’s growth towards free and conscious
participation in the Absolute Life; its progressive appropriation of
that life by means of the contact which exists in the deeps of man’s
being—the ground or spark of the soul—between the subject and the
transcendental world. The surface intelligence, purified from the
domination of the senses, is invaded more and more by the transcendent
personality; the “New Man” who is by nature a denizen of the independent
spiritual world, and whose destiny, in mystical language, is a “return
to his Origin.” Hence an inflow of new vitality, a deeper and wider
apprehension of the mysterious world in which man finds himself, an
exaltation of his intuitive powers.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p150"></span>In such moments of clear sight and
enhanced perception as that which Blake and Boehme describe, the mystic
and the artist do really see <span id="an_iv.iv-p150.1"></span> *sub
specie aeternitatis* the Four-fold River of Life—that World of Becoming
in which, as Erigena says, “Every visible and invisible creature is a
theophany or appearance of God”— <span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_260"></span> as all perhaps might see it, if
prejudice, selfhood, or other illusion did not distort our sight. From
this loving vision there comes very often that beautiful sympathy with,
that abnormal power over, all living natural things, which crops up
again and again in the lives of the mystical saints; to amaze the
sluggish minds of common men, barred by “the torrent of Use and Wont”
 <span id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md) from all free and deep
communion alike with their natural and supernatural origin.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p152"></span>Yet it is surely not very amazing that
St. Francis of Assisi, feeling and knowing—not merely “believing”—that
every living creature was veritably and actually a “theophany or
appearance of God,” should have been acutely conscious that he shared
with these brothers and sisters of his the great and lovely life of the
All. Nor, this being so, can we justly regard him as eccentric because
he acted in accordance with his convictions, preached to his little
sisters the birds,  <span id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) availed
himself of the kindly offices of the falcon,  <span
id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543.md) enjoyed the friendship of the
pheasant,  <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) soothed the captured
turtledoves, his “simple-minded sisters, innocent and chaste,”  <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md) or persuaded his Brother Wolf to a
better life.  <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p158"></span>The true mystic, so often taunted with
“a denial of the world,” does but deny the narrow and artificial world
of self: and finds in exchange the secrets of that mighty universe which
he shares with Nature and with God. Strange contacts, unknown to those
who only lead the life of sense, are set up between his being and the
being of all other things. In that remaking of his consciousness which
follows upon the “mystical awakening,” the deep and primal life which he
shares with all creation has been roused from its sleep. Hence the
barrier between human and non-human life, which makes man a stranger on
earth as well as in heaven, is done away. Life now whispers to his life:
all things are his intimates, and respond to his fraternal sympathy.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p159"></span>Thus it seems quite a simple and natural
thing to the Little Poor Man of Assisi, whose friend the pheasant
preferred his cell to “the haunts more natural to its state,” that he
should be ambassador from the terrified folk of Gubbio to his formidable
brother the Wolf. The result of the interview, reduced to ordinary
language, could be paralleled in the experience of many persons who have
possessed this strange and incommunicable power over animal life.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p160"></span>“O wondrous thing! whereas St. Francis
had made the sign of the Cross, right so the terrible wolf shut his jaws
and stayed his running: and when he was bid, came gently as a lamb and
laid <span id="page_261">p. 261</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_261"></span> him down at the feet of St. Francis. . .
. And St. Francis stretching forth his hand to take pledge of his troth,
the wolf lifted up his right paw before him and laid it gently on the
hand of St. Francis, giving thereby such sign of good faith as he was
able. Then quoth St. Francis, ‘Brother Wolf, I bid thee in the name of
Jesu Christ come now with me, nothing doubting, and let us go stablish
this peace in God’s name.’ And the wolf obedient set forth with him, in
fashion as a gentle lamb; whereat the townsfolk made mighty marvel,
beholding. . . . And thereafter this same wolf lived two years in
Agobio; and went like a tame beast in and out the houses from door to
door, without doing hurt to any, or any doing hurt to him, and was
courteously nourished by the people; and as he passed thus wise through
the country and the houses, never did any dog bark behind him. At length
after a two years space, brother wolf died of old age: whereat the
townsfolk sorely grieved, sith marking him pass so gently through the
city, they minded them the better of the virtue and the sanctity of St.
Francis.”  <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p162"></span>In another mystic, less familiar than
St. Francis to English readers—Rose of Lima, the Peruvian saint—this
deep sympathy with natural things assumed a particularly lovely form. To
St. Rose the whole world was a holy fairyland, in which it seemed to her
that every living thing turned its face towards Eternity and joined in
her adoration of God. It is said in her biography that “when at sunrise,
she passed through the garden to go to her retreat, she called upon
nature to praise with her the Author of all things. Then the trees were
seen to bow as she passed by, and clasp their leaves together, making a
harmonious sound. The flowers swayed upon their stalks, and opened their
blossoms that they might scent the air; thus according to their manner
praising God. At the same time the birds began to sing, and came and
perched upon the hands and shoulders of Rose. The insects greeted her
with a joyous murmur, and all which had life and movement joined in the
concert of praise she addressed to the Lord.”  <span
id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p164"></span>Again—and here we catch an echo of the
pure Franciscan spirit, the gaiety of the Troubadours of God—during her
last Lent, “each evening at sunset a little bird with an enchanting
voice came and perched upon a tree beside her window, and waited till
she gave the sign to him to sing. Rose, as soon as she saw her little
feathered chorister, made herself ready to sing the praises of God, and
challenged the bird to this musical duel in a song which she had <span
id="page_262">p. 262</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_262"></span>
composed for this purpose. ‘Begin, dear little bird,’ she said, ‘begin
thy lovely song! Let thy little throat, so full of sweet melodies, pour
them forth: that together we may praise the Lord. Thou dost praise thy
Creator, I my sweet Saviour: thus we together bless the Deity. Open thy
little beak, begin and I will follow thee: and our voices shall blend in
a song of holy joy.’

<span id="an_iv.iv-p165"></span>“At once the little bird began to sing,
running through his scale to the highest note. Then he ceased, that the
saint might sing in her turn . . . thus did they celebrate the greatness
of God, turn by turn, for a whole hour: and with such perfect order,
that when the bird sang Rose said nothing, and when she sang in her turn
the bird was silent, and listened to her with a marvellous attention. At
last, towards the sixth hour, the saint dismissed him, saying, ‘Go, my
little chorister, go, fly far away. But blessed be my God who never
leaves me!’’’  <span id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p167"></span>The mystic whose illumination takes such
forms as these, who feels with this intensity and closeness the bond of
love which “binds in one book the scattered leaves of all the universe,”
dwells in a world unknown to other men. He pierces the veil of
imperfection, and beholds Creation with the Creator’s eye. The “Pattern
is shown him in the Mount.” “The whole consciousness,” says Récéjac, “is
flooded with light to unknown depths, under the gaze of love, from which
nothing escapes. In this stage, intensity of vision and sureness of
judgment are equal: and the things which the seer brings back with him
when he returns to common life are not merely partial impressions, or
the separate knowledge of ‘science’ or ‘poetry.’ They are rather truths
which embrace the world, life and conduct: in a word, *the whole
consciousness* .”  <span id="fr_550"></span>[551](#fn_550.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p169"></span>It is curious to note in those diagrams
of experience which we have inherited from the more clear-sighted
philosophers and seers, indications that they have enjoyed prolonged or
transitory periods of this higher consciousness; described by Récéjac as
the marriage of imaginative vision with moral transcendence. I think it
at least a reasonable supposition that Plato’s doctrine of Ideas owed
something to an intuition of this kind; for a philosophy, though it may
claim to be the child of pure reason, is usually found to owe its
distinctive character to the philosopher’s psychological experience. The
Platonic statements as to the veritable existence of the Idea of a
house, a table, or a bed, and other such concrete and practical
applications of the doctrine of the ideal, which have annoyed many
metaphysicians, become explicable on such a psychological basis. That
illuminated vision in which “all things are made new” can afford to
embrace the homeliest as well as the sublimest things; <span
id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_263"></span> and, as
a matter of experience, it does do this, seeing all objects, as Monet
saw the hayrick, as “modes of light.” Blake said that his cottage at
Felpham was a shadow of the angels’ houses,  <span
id="fr_551"></span>[552](#fn_551.md) and I have already referred to the
converted Methodist who saw his horses and hogs on the ideal plane.
 <span id="fr_552"></span>[553](#fn_552.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p172"></span>Again, when Plotinus, who is known to
have experienced ecstatic states, speaks with the assurance of an
explorer of an “intelligible world,” and asks us, “What other fire could
be a better image of the fire which is there, than the fire which is
here? Or what other earth than this, of the earth which is there?”
 <span id="fr_553"></span>[554](#fn_553.md) we seem to detect behind the
language of Neoplatonic philosophy a hint of the same type of first-hand
experience. The minds to whom we owe the Hebrew Kabalah found room for
it too in their diagram of the soul’s ascent towards Reality. The first
“Sephira” above Malkuth, the World of Matter, or lowest plane upon that
Tree of Life which is formed by the ten emanations of the Godhead is,
they say, “Yesod,” the “archetypal universe.” In this are contained the
realities, patterns, or Ideas, whose shadows constitute the world of
appearance in which we dwell. The path of the ascending soul upon the
Tree of Life leads him first from Malkuth to Yesod: *i.e.* , human
consciousness in the course of its transcendence passes from the normal
illusions of men to a deeper perception of its environment—a perception
which is symbolized by the “archetypal plane” or world of Platonic
Ideas. “Everything in temporal nature,” says William Law, “is descended
out of that which is eternal, and stands as a palpable visible outbirth
of it, so when we know how to separate the grossness, death, and
darkness of time from it, we find what it is in its eternal state. . . .
In Eternal Nature, or the Kingdom of Heaven, materiality stands in life
and light; it is the light’s glorious Body, or that garment wherewith
light is clothed, and therefore has all the properties of light in it,
and only differs from light as it is its brightness and beauty, as the
holder and displayer of all its colours, powers, and virtues.”  <span
id="fr_554"></span>[555](#fn_554.md) When Law wrote this, he may have
believed that he was interpreting to English readers the unique message
of his master, Jacob Boehme. As a matter of fact he was reiterating
truths which a long line of practical mystics had been crying for
centuries into the deaf ears of mankind. He was saying in the eighteenth
century what Gregory of Nyssa had said in the fourth and Erigena in the
ninth; telling the secret of that “Inviolate Rose” which can never be
profaned because it can only be seen with the eyes of love. <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span id="an_iv.iv-Page_264"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p175"></span>That serene and illuminated
consciousness of the relation of things inward and outward—of the Hidden
Treasure and its Casket, the energizing Absolute and its expression in
Time and Space—which we have been studying in this chapter, is at its
best a state of fine equilibrium; a sane adjustment of the inner and
outer life. By that synthesis of love and will which is the secret of
the heart, the mystic achieves a level of perception in which the whole
world is seen and known in God, and God is seen and known in the whole
world. It is a state of exalted emotion: being produced by love, of
necessity it produces love in its turn. The sharp division between its
inlooking and outlooking forms which I have adopted for convenience of
description, is seldom present to the minds which achieve it. They,
“cleansed, fed, and sanctified,” are initiated into a spiritual universe
where such clumsy distinctions have little meaning. All is alike part of
the “new life” of peaceful charity: and that progressive abolition of
selfhood which is of the essence of mystical development, is alone
enough to prevent them from drawing a line between the inward personal
companionship and outward impersonal apprehension of the Real. True
Illumination, like all real and vital experience, consists rather in the
breathing of a certain atmosphere, the living at certain levels of
consciousness, than in the acquirement of specific information. It is,
as it were, a resting-place upon “the steep stairway of love”; where the
self turns and sees all about it a transfigured universe, radiant with
that same Light Divine which nests in its own heart and leads it on.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p176"></span>“When man’s desires are fixed immovably
on his Maker as far as for deadliness and corruption of the flesh he is
let,” says Rolle of the purified soul which has attained the illuminated
state, “then it is no marvel that his strength manly using, first as it
were heaven being opened, with his understanding he beholds high
heavenly citizens; and afterwards sweetest heat, as it were burning
fire, he feels. Then with marvellous sweetness he is taught, and so
forth in songful noise he is joyed. This, therefore, is perfect charity,
which no man knows but he that hath it took. And he that it has taken,
it never leaves: sweetly he lives and sickerly he shall die.”  <span
id="fr_555"></span>[556](#fn_555.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p178"></span>Sweetly, it is true, the illuminated
mystic may live; but not, as some think, placidly. Enlightenment is a
symptom of growth: and growth is a living process, which knows no rest.
The spirit, indeed, is invaded by a heavenly peace; but it is the peace,
not of idleness, but of ordered activity. “A rest most busy,” in
Hilton’s words: a progressive appropriation of the Divine. The urgent
push of an indwelling spirit, aspiring to its home in the heart of
Reality, is felt more and more, as the invasion of the normal
consciousnesss <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_265"></span> by the transcendental personality—the
growth of the New Man—proceeds towards its term.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p179"></span>Therefore the great seekers for reality
are not as a rule long delayed by the exalted joys of Illumination.
Intensely aware now of the Absolute Whom they adore, they are aware too
that though known He is unachieved. Even whilst they enjoy the rapture
of the Divine Presence—of life in a divine, ideal world—something, they
feel, makes default. *Sol voglio Te, O dolce Amore*. Hence for them that
which they now enjoy, and which passes the understanding of other men,
is not a static condition; often it coexists with that travail of the
heart which Tauler has called “stormy love.” The greater the mystic, the
sooner he realizes that the Heavenly Manna which has been administered
to him is not yet That with which the angels are full fed. Nothing less
will do: and for him the progress of illumination is a progressive
consciousness that he is destined not for the sunny shores of the
spiritual universe, but for “the vast and stormy sea of the divine.”

<span id="an_iv.iv-p180"></span>“Here,” says Ruysbroeck of the soul
which has been lit by the Uncreated Light, “there begins an eternal
hunger, which shall never more be satisfied. It is the inward craving
and hankering of the affective power and created spirit after an
Uncreated Good. And as the spirit longs for fruition, and is invited and
urged thereto by God, she must always desire to attain it. Behold! here
begin an eternal craving and continual yearning in eternal
insatiableness! These men are poor indeed: for they are hungry and
greedy, and their hunger is insatiable! Whatsoever they eat and drink
they shall never be satisfied, for this hunger is eternal. . . . Here
are great dishes of food and drink, of which none know but those who
taste them; but full satisfaction in fruition is the one dish that lacks
them, and this is why their hunger is ever renewed. Nevertheless in this
contact rivers of honey full of all delight flow forth; for the spirit
tastes these riches under every mode that it can conceive or apprehend.
But all this is according to the manner of the creatures, and is below
God: and hence there remains an eternal hunger and impatience. If God
gave to such a man all the gifts which all the saints possess, and all
that He is able to give, but without giving Himself, the craving desire
of the spirit would remain hungry and unsatisfied.”  <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556.md)

<span id="an_iv.iv-p182"></span><span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="an_iv.iv-Page_266"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_476"></span>[232:477](myst15.htm#fr_476.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p2"></span> For the relation between *catharsis* and
poetic and mystical knowledge, see Bremond, “Prière et Poesie,” caps
xvi. and xvii.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[234:478](myst15.htm#fr_477.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p6"></span> Plotinus, Ennead vi. 9. Compare with this
image of the rhythmic dance of things about a divine Corypheus in the
midst, those passages in the Apocryphal “Hymn of Jesus” where the Logos
or Christ, standing within the circle of disciples, says, “I am the Word
who did play and dance all things,” “Now answer to My dancing,”
“Understand by dancing what I do.” Again, “Who danceth not knoweth not
what is being done.” “I would pipe, dance ye all!” and presently the
rubric declares, “All whose Nature is to dance, doth dance!” (See Dr. M.
R. James, “Apocrypha Anecdota,” series *2;* and G. R. S. Mead, “Echoes
from the Gnosis: the Dance of Jesus.” Compare *supra,* p. 134.)

<span id="fn_478"></span>[234:479](myst15.htm#fr_478.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p9"></span> For instance, Keats Shelley, Wordsworth,
Tennyson, Browning, Whitman.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[235:480](myst15.htm#fr_479.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p11"></span> “Letters of William Blake,” p. 171.

<span id="fn_480"></span>[235:481](myst15.htm#fr_480.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p12"></span> Ruysbroeck, “De vera Contemplatione,”
cap. xi.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[235:482](myst15.htm#fr_481.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p13.8"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p14"></span> “Jerusalem,” cap. i.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[236:483](myst15.htm#fr_482.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p16"></span> Compare E. Rhode, “Psyche,” and J. E.
Harrison, “Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion,” caps, ix., x.,
and xi.; a work which puts the most favourable construction possible on
the meaning of Orphic initiation.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[236:484](myst15.htm#fr_483.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p16.8"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p17"></span> The “Bacchae” of Euripides (translated
by Gilbert Murray), p. 83.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[236:485](myst15.htm#fr_484.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p18.8"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p19"></span> St. John of the Cross, “Llama de Amor
Viva” (translated by Arthur Symons).

<span id="fn_485"></span>[237:486](myst15.htm#fr_485.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p24"></span> “Fioretti,” cap. xlviii. (Arnold’s
translation).

<span id="fn_486"></span>[237:487](myst15.htm#fr_486.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p26"></span> Horstman, “Richard Rolle of Hampole,”
vol. ii. p. 79.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[238:488](myst15.htm#fr_487.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p27"></span> “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit,” pt.
i. cap. 43.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[239:489](myst15.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p31"></span> “De Imitatione Christi,” I. iii. cap. i.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[239:490](myst15.htm#fr_489.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p32"></span> For the decisive character of this
“night of the senses,” see St. John of the Cross, “Noche escura del
Alma,” I. i.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[240:491](myst15.htm#fr_490.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p39"></span> “The Marriage of Heaven and Hell,” xxii.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[240:492](myst15.htm#fr_491.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p41"></span> *Vide supra,* pp. 42-50 .

<span id="fn_492"></span>[242:493](myst15.htm#fr_492.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p45.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p46"></span> Julian of Norwich, “Revelations,” cap.
xliii.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[242:494](myst15.htm#fr_493.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p48"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii. cap.
xli.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[242:495](myst15.htm#fr_494.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p50"></span> See Delacroix, “Études sur le
Mysticisme,” Appendix I. “Sentiment de Présence.” For a balanced view,
Maréchal, “Studies in the Psychology of the Mystics,” p. 55. See also
Poulain, “Les Grâces d’Oraison,” cap. v.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[243:496](myst15.htm#fr_495.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p52"></span> Vida, cap. xviii. § 20.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[243:497](myst15.htm#fr_496.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p54"></span> “Letters of St. Teresa” (1581), Dalton’s
translation, No. VII.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[243:498](myst15.htm#fr_497.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p55.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p56"></span> “Republic,” vii. 518.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[243:499](myst15.htm#fr_498.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p58"></span> Récéjac, “Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique,” p. 151.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[244:500](myst15.htm#fr_499.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p60.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p61"></span> St. Bernard, “Cantica Canticorum,”
Sermon lxxiv.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[245:501](myst15.htm#fr_500.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p62.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p63"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[246:502](myst15.htm#fr_501.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p66.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p67"></span> Hugh of St. Victor, “De Arrha Animae”
(Migne, Patrologia Latina, vol. clxxvi.).

<span id="fn_502"></span>[246:503](myst15.htm#fr_502.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p69"></span> “The Practice of the Presence of God,”
Second Conversation.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[246:504](myst15.htm#fr_503.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p70.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p71"></span> St. Teresa, “Las Fundaciones,” cap, v.
p. 8.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[247:505](myst15.htm#fr_504.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p72.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p73"></span> Vie, pt. i. cap. xvii.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[247:506](myst15.htm#fr_505.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p75.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p76"></span> “Mystical Element of Religion,” vol. i.
p. 105.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[247:507](myst15.htm#fr_506.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p77.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p78"></span> “Vita e Dottrina” *loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_507"></span>[248:508](myst15.htm#fr_507.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p78.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p79"></span> “I desire not that which comes forth
from Thee; but only I desire Thee, O sweetest Love!” (“Vita e Dottrina,”
cap. vi ).

<span id="fn_508"></span>[248:509](myst15.htm#fr_508.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p80.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p81"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xx. Compare
St. Teresa: “Rapture is a great help to recognize our true home and to
see that we are pilgrims here; it is a great thing to see what is going
on there, and to know where we have to live, for if a person has to go
and settle in another country, it is a great help to him in undergoing
the fatigues of his journey that he has discovered it to be a country
where he may live in the most perfect peace” (Vida, cap. xxxviii., § 8).

<span id="fn_509"></span>[248:510](myst15.htm#fr_509.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p82"></span> M. Smith, “Rabia the Mystic,” p. 30.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[249:511](myst15.htm#fr_510.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p83"></span> “Spiritual Exercises,” pp. 26 and 174.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[249:512](myst15.htm#fr_511.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p84.6"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p85"></span> “Love above all language, goodness
unimagined, light without measure shines in my heart” (Jacopone da Todi.
Lauda xci.).

<span id="fn_512"></span>[249:513](myst15.htm#fr_512.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p86.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p87"></span> Pitra, “Analecta S. Hildegardis opera,”
p. 332.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[249:514](myst15.htm#fr_513.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p87.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p88"></span> St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xxviii. §§ 7, 8.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[249:515](myst15.htm#fr_514.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p90.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p91"></span> Par. i. 61, xxx. 100, xxxiii. 90.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[250:516](myst15.htm#fr_515.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p92.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p93"></span> “An Appeal to All who Doubt.” I give the
whole passage below, p. 263.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[250:517](myst15.htm#fr_516.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p93.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p94"></span> It is, of course, arguable that the
whole of this light-imagery is ultimately derived from the Prologue of
the Fourth Gospel: as the imagery of the Spiritual Marriage is supposed
to be derived from the Song of Songs. Some hardy commentators have even
found in it evidence of the descent of Christian Mysticism from
sun-worship. (See H. F. Dunbar, “Symbolism in Mediaeval Thought”.) But
it must be remembered that mystics are essentially realists, always
seeking for language adequate to their vision of truth: hence their
adoption of this imagery is most simply explained by the fact that it
represent something which they know and are struggling to describe.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[250:518](myst15.htm#fr_517.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p95.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p96"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[250:519](myst15.htm#fr_518.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p97.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p98"></span> Mechthild of Magdeburg, *op. cit* ., pt.
vii. 45.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[250:520](myst15.htm#fr_519.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p98.5"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p99"></span> Par. xxx. 100, “Which makes visible the
creator to that creature who only in beholding Him finds its peace.”

<span id="fn_520"></span>[251:521](myst15.htm#fr_520.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p100.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p101"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. iii. cap. 6.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[251:522](myst15.htm#fr_521.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p101.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p102"></span> Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Mystica
Theologia,” i. 1. (Rolt’s translation.)

<span id="fn_522"></span>[251:523](myst15.htm#fr_522.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p103.21"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p104"></span> Par. xxxiii. 82, 121:—

<span id="an_iv.iv-p105"></span>“O grace abounding! wherein I presumed
to fix my gaze on the eternal light so long that I consumed my sight
thereon!

<span id="an_iv.iv-p106"></span>In its depths I saw ingathered the
scattered leaves of the universe, bound into one book by love.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p107"></span>Substance and accident and their
relations: as if fused together in such a manner that what I tell of is
a simple light.

<span id="an_iv.iv-p108"></span>And I believe that I saw the universal
form of this complexity; because, as I say this, I feel that I rejoice
more deeply. . . .

<span id="an_iv.iv-p109"></span>Oh, but how scant the speech and how
faint to my concept! and that to what I saw is such, that it suffices
not to call it ‘little.’

<span id="an_iv.iv-p110"></span>O Light Eternal, Who only in Thyself
abidest, only Thyself dost comprehend, and, of Thyself comprehended and
Thyself comprehending, dost love and smile!”

<span id="fn_523"></span>[252:524](myst15.htm#fr_523.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p113.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p114"></span> The Latin is more vivid: “Est iste
mundus pregnans de Deo.”

<span id="fn_524"></span>[252:525](myst15.htm#fr_524.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p114.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p115"></span> Ste. Angèle de Foligno, “Le Livre de
l’Expérience des Vrais Fidèles,” p. 124 (English translation, p. 172).

<span id="fn_525"></span>[254:526](myst15.htm#fr_525.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p118.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p119"></span> Suso, Leben, cap. iv.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[254:527](myst15.htm#fr_526.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p120.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p121"></span> “Revelations,” cap. viii.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[255:528](myst15.htm#fr_527.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p123.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p124"></span> Malaval, “De l’Oraison Ordinaire” (“La
Pratique de la Vraye Theologie Mystique,” vol. i. p. 342).

<span id="fn_528"></span>[255:529](myst15.htm#fr_528.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p125.5"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p126"></span> ”Saul,” xvii.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[255:530](myst15.htm#fr_529.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p127.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p128"></span> Meister Eckhart (“Mystische Schriften,”
p. 137).

<span id="fn_530"></span>[255:531](myst15.htm#fr_530.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p128.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p129"></span> *Vide* *supra,* pt. II. Cap. II., the
cases of Richard Jefferies, Brother Lawrence, and others.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[255:532](myst15.htm#fr_531.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p131.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p132"></span> The Works of Jacob Boehme, 4 vols.,
1764, vol. i. pp. xii., etc.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[255:533](myst15.htm#fr_532.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p132.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p133"></span> *Supra* , p. 58.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[256:534](myst15.htm#fr_533.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p133.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p134"></span> Martensen, “Jacob Boehme,” p. 7.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[256:535](myst15.htm#fr_534.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p134.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p135"></span> “Life of Jacob Boehme,” pp. xiii. and
xiv. in vol. i. of his Collected Works, English translation.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[257:536](myst15.htm#fr_535.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p137.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p138"></span> *Op. cit* ., p. xv.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[257:537](myst15.htm#fr_536.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p139.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p140"></span> Vol. I. cap. ii.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[258:538](myst15.htm#fr_537.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p143.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p144"></span> “Revelations,” cap. viii.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[258:539](myst15.htm#fr_538.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p144.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p145"></span> Par. iii. 77.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[259:540](myst15.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p146.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p147"></span> “Letters of William Blake,” p. 111.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[259:541](myst15.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p147.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p148"></span> *Op. cit.,* p. 62.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[260:542](myst15.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p150.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p151"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. I. cap. xvi.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[260:543](myst15.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p152.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p153"></span> “Fioretti,” cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[260:544](myst15.htm#fr_543.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p153.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p154"></span> *Ibid.,* “Delle Istimate,” 2, and
Thomas of Celano, Vita Secunda, cap, xccvii.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[260:545](myst15.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p154.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p155"></span> Thomas of Celano, *op. cit.,* cap.
cxxix.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[260:546](myst15.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p155.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p156"></span> “Fioretti,” cap. xxii.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[260:547](myst15.htm#fr_546.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p156.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p157"></span> *Ibid.,* cap. xxi.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[261:548](myst15.htm#fr_547.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p160.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p161"></span> Fioretti,” cap. xxi (Arnold’s
translation). Perhaps I may be allowed to remind the incredulous reader
that the discovery of a large wolf’s scull in Gubbio close to the spot
in which Brother Wolf is said to have lived in a cave for two years
after his taming by the Saint, has done something to vindicate the truth
of this beautiful story.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[261:549](myst15.htm#fr_548.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p162.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p163"></span> De Bussierre, “Le Pérou et Ste. Rose de
Lime,” p. 256.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[262:550](myst15.htm#fr_549.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p165.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p166"></span> De Bussierre, “Le Pérou et Ste. Rose de
Lime,” p. 415.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[262:551](myst15.htm#fr_550.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p167.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p168"></span> “Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique,” p. 113.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[263:552](myst15.htm#fr_551.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p169.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p170"></span> Letters, p. 75.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[263:553](myst15.htm#fr_552.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p170.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p171"></span> *Vide supra,* p. 192.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[263:554](myst15.htm#fr_553.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p172.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p173"></span> Ennead ii. 9. 4.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[263:555](myst15.htm#fr_554.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p173.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p174"></span> “An Appeal to All who Doubt” (Liberal
and Mystical Writings of William Law, p. 52).

<span id="fn_555"></span>[264:556](myst15.htm#fr_555.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p176.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p177"></span> Rolle, “The Fire of love,” bk. i. cap.
xix.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[265:557](myst15.htm#fr_556.md) <span
id="an_iv.iv-p180.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.iv-p181"></span> “De Ornatu Spiritalium Nuptiarum,” I.
ii. cap, liii.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Voices and Visions](myst16.md)

</div>
