<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst20)  [Next](myst22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X. The Unitive Life

<span id="an_iv.x"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p1"></span>What<span id="an_iv.x-p1.1"></span> is the
Unitive Life? We have referred to it often enough in the course of this
inquiry. At last we are face to face with the necessity of defining its
nature if we can. Since the normal man knows little about his own true
personality and nothing at all about that of Deity, the orthodox
description of it as “the life in which man’s will is united with God,”
does but echo the question in an ampler form, and conveys no real
meaning to the student’s mind.

<span id="an_iv.x-p2"></span>That we should know, by instinct, its
character from within—as we know, if we cannot express, the character of
our own normal human lives—is of course impossible. We deal here with
the final triumph of the spirit, the flower of mysticism, humanity’s top
note: the consummation towards which the contemplative life, with its
long slow growth and costly training, has moved from the first. We look
at a small but ever-growing group of heroic figures, living at
transcendent levels of reality which we immersed in the poor life of
illusion, cannot attain: breathing an atmosphere whose true quality we
cannot even conceive. Here, then, as at so many other points in our
study of the spiritual consciousness, we must rely for the greater part
of our knowledge upon the direct testimony of the mystics; who alone can
tell the character of that “more abundant life” which they enjoy. <span
id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_414"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p3"></span>Yet we are not wholly dependent on this
source of information. It is the peculiarity of the Unitive Life that it
is often lived, in its highest and most perfect forms, in the world; and
exhibits its works before the eyes of men. As the law of our bodies is
“earth to earth” so, strangely enough, is the law of our souls. The
spirit of man having at last come to full consciousness of reality,
completes the circle of Being; and returns to fertilize those levels of
existence from which it sprang. Hence, the enemies of mysticism, who
have easily drawn a congenial moral from the “morbid and solitary” lives
of contemplatives in the earlier and educative stages of the Mystic Way,
are here confronted very often by the disagreeable spectacle of the
mystic as a pioneer of humanity, a sharply intuitive and painfully
practical person: an artist, a discoverer, a religious or social
reformer, a national hero, a “great active” amongst the saints. By the
superhuman nature of that which these persons accomplish, we can gauge
something of the super-normal vitality of which they partake. The things
done, the victories gained over circumstances by St. Bernard or St. Joan
of Arc, by St. Catherine of Siena, St. Ignatius Loyola, St. Teresa,
George Fox, are hardly to be explained unless these great spirits had
indeed a closer, more intimate, more bracing contact than their fellows
with that Life “which is the light of men.”

<span id="an_iv.x-p4"></span>Use have, then, these two lines of
investigation open to us: first, the comparison and elucidation of that
which the mystics tell us concerning their transcendent experience,
secondly, the testimony which is borne by their lives to the existence
within them of supernal springs of action, contact set up with deep
levels of vital power. In the third place, we have such critical
machinery as psychology has placed at our disposal; but this, in dealing
with these giants of the spirit, must be used with peculiar caution and
humility.

<span id="an_iv.x-p5"></span>The Unitive Life, though so often lived in
the world, is never of it. It belongs to another plane of being, moves
securely upon levels unrelated to our speech; and hence eludes the
measuring powers of humanity. We, from the valley, can only catch a
glimpse of the true life of these elect spirits, transfigured upon the
mountain. They are far away, breathing another air: we cannot reach
them. Yet it is impossible to over-estimate their importance for the
race. They are our ambassadors to the Absolute. They vindicate
humanity’s claim to the possible and permanent attainment of Reality;
bear witness to the practical qualities of the transcendental life. In
Eucken’s words, they testify to “the advent of a triumphing Spiritual
Power, as distinguished from a spirituality which merely lays the
foundations of life or struggles to maintain <span id="page_415">p.
415</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_415"></span> them”:  <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) to the actually life-enhancing power
of the Love of God, once the human soul is freely opened to receive it.

<span id="an_iv.x-p7"></span>Coming first to the evidence of the mystics
themselves, we find that in their attempts towards describing the
Unitive Life they have recourse to two main forms of symbolic
expression, both very dangerous, and liable to be misunderstood, both
offering ample opportunity for harsh criticism to hostile investigators
of the mystic type. We find also, as we might expect from our previous
encounters with the symbols used by contemplatives and ecstatics, that
these two forms of expression belong respectively to mystics of the
transcendent-metaphysical and of the intimate-personal type: and that
their formulae if taken alone, appear to contradict one another.

<span id="an_iv.x-p8"></span>(1) The metaphysical mystic, for whom the
Absolute is impersonal and transcendent, describes his final attainment
of that Absolute as *deification,* or the utter transmutation of the
self in God. (2) The mystic for whom intimate and personal communion has
been the mode under which he best apprehended Reality speaks of the
consummation of this communion, its perfect and permanent form, as the
*Spiritual Marriage* of his soul with God. Obviously, both these terms
are but the self’s guesses concerning the intrinsic character of a state
which it has felt in its wholeness rather than analysed: and bear the
same relation to the ineffable realities of that state, as our clever
theories concerning the nature and meaning of life bear to the vital
processes of men. It is worth while to examine them but we shall not
understand them till we have also examined the life which they profess
to explain.

<span id="an_iv.x-p9"></span>The language of “deification” and of
“spiritual marriage,” then, is temperamental language: and is related to
subjective experience rather than to objective fact. It describes on the
one hand the mystic’s astonished recognition of a profound change
effected in his own personality  <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842)
—the transmutation of his salt, sulphur, and mercury into Spiritual
Gold—on the other, the rapturous consummation of his love. Hence by a
comparison of these symbolic reconstructions, by the discovery and
isolation of the common factor latent in each, we may perhaps learn
something of the fundamental fact which each is trying to portray.

<span id="an_iv.x-p15"></span>Again, the mystics describe certain
symptoms either as the <span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_416"></span> necessary preliminaries or as the marks
and fruits of the Unitive State: and these too may help us to fix its
character.

<span id="an_iv.x-p16"></span>The chief, in fact the one essential,
preliminary is that pure surrender of selfhood, or “self-naughting,”
which the trials of the Dark Night tended to produce. “This,” says
Julian of Norwich, “is the cause why that no soul is rested till it is
naughted of all things that are made. When it is willingly made naught
for love to have Him that is all, then is it able to receive spiritual
rest.”  <span id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) Only the thoroughly
detached, “naughted soul” is “free,” says “The Mirror of Simple Souls,”
and the Unitive State is essentially a state of free and filial
participation in Eternal Life. The capital marks of the state itself are
(1) a complete absorption in the interests of the Infinite, under
whatever mode It is apprehended by the self; (2) a consciousness of
sharing Its strength, acting by Its authority, which results in a
complete sense of freedom, an invulnerable serenity, and usually urges
the self to some form of heroic effort or creative activity; (3) the
establishment of the self as a “power for life,” a centre of energy, an
actual parent of spiritual vitality in other men. By assembling these
symptoms and examining them, and the lives of those who exhibit them, in
the light of psychology, we can surely get some news—however
fragmentary—concerning the transcendent condition of being which
involves these characteristic states and acts. Beyond this even Dante
himself could not go:

> <span id="an_iv.x-p17.1"></span> ‘Transumanar significar *per verba*  
> non si poria.”  <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844)  

<span id="an_iv.x-p19"></span>We will then consider the Unitive Life (1)
As it appears from the standpoint of the psychologist. (2) As it is
described to us by those mystics who use (a) the language of
Deification, (b) that of Spiritual Marriage. (3) Finally, we will turn
to those who have lived it; and try, if we can, to realize it as an
organic whole.

<span id="an_iv.x-p20"></span>(1) From the point of view of the pure
psychologist, what do the varied phenomena of the Unitive Life, taken
together, seem to represent? He would probably say that they indicate
the final and successful establishment of that higher form of
consciousness which has been struggling for supremacy during the whole
of the Mystic Way. The deepest, richest levels of human personality have
now attained to light and freedom. The self is remade, transformed, has
at last unified itself; and with the cessation of stress, power has been
liberated for new purposes.

<span id="an_iv.x-p21"></span>“The beginning of the mystic life,” says
Delacroix, “introduced into the personal life of the subject a group of
states which are distinguished by certain characteristics, and which
form, so to <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_417"></span> speak, a special psychological system. At
its term, it has, as it were, suppressed the ordinary self, and by the
development of this system has established a new personality with a new
method of feeling and of action. Its growth results in the
transformation of personality: it abolishes the primitive consciousness
of selfhood, and substitutes for it a wider consciousness, the total
disappearance of selfhood in the divine, the substitution of a Divine
Self for the primitive self.”  <span id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845)
We give a philosophic content to this conception if we say further that
man, in this Unitive State, by this substitution of the divine for the
“primitive” self, has at last risen to true freedom; “entered on the
fruition of reality.”  <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) Hence he
has opened up new paths for the inflow of that Triumphing Power which is
the very substance of the Real; has remade his consciousness, and in
virtue of this total regeneration is “transplanted into that Universal
Life, which is yet not alien but our own.”  <span
id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) From contact set up with this
Universal Life, this “Energetic Word of God, which nothing can
contain”—from those deep levels of Being to which his shifting, growing
personality is fully adapted at last—he draws that amazing strength,
that immovable peace, that power of dealing with circumstance, which is
one of the most marked characteristics of the Unitive Life. “That secret
and permanent personality of a superior type”  <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) which gave to the surface-self
constant and ever more insistent intimations of its existence at every
stage of the mystic’s growth—his real, eternal self—has now consciously
realized its destiny: and begins at last fully to *be.* In the travail
of the Dark Night it has conquered and invaded the last recalcitrant
elements of character. It is no more limited to acts of profound
perception, overpowering intuitions of the Absolute: no more dependent
for its emergence on the psychic states of contemplation and ecstasy.
*Anima* and *Animus* are united. The mystic has at last resolved the
Stevensonian paradox; and is not truly two, but truly *one.*

<span id="an_iv.x-p26"></span>(2) The mystic, I think, would acquiesce
in these descriptions, so far as they go: but he would probably
translate them into his own words and gloss them with an explanation
which is beyond the power and province of psychology. He would say that
his long-sought correspondence with Transcendental Reality, his union
with God, has now been finally established: that his self, though
intact, is wholly penetrated—as a sponge by the sea—by the Ocean of Life
and Love to which he has attained. “I live, yet not I but God in me.” He
is conscious that he is now at length cleansed <span id="page_418">p.
418</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_418"></span> of the last stains of
separation, and has become, in a mysterious manner, “that which he
beholds.”

<span id="an_iv.x-p27"></span>In the words of the Sufi poet, the
mystic’s journey is now prosecuted not only *to* God but *in* God. He
has entered the Eternal Order, attained here and now the state to which
the Magnet of the Universe draws every living thing. Moving through
periods of alternate joy and anguish, as his spiritual self woke,
stretched, and was tested in the complementary fires of love and pain,
he was inwardly conscious that he moved towards a definite objective. In
so far as he was a great mystic, he was also conscious that this
objective was no mere act of knowing, however intense, exultant, and
sublime, but a condition of being, fulfilment of that love which
impelled him, steadily and inexorably, to his own place. In the image of
the alchemists, the Fire of Love has done its work: the mystic Mercury
of the Wise—that little hidden treasure, that scrap of Reality within
him—has utterly transmuted the salt and sulphur of his mind and his
sense. Even the white stone of illumination, once so dearly cherished,
he has resigned to the crucible. Now, the great work is accomplished,
the last imperfection is gone, and he finds within himself the “Noble
Tincture”—the gold of spiritual humanity.

<span id="an_iv.x-p28"></span>(A) We have said that the mystic of the
impersonal type—the seeker of a Transcendent Absolute—tends to describe
the consummation of his quest in the language of *deification.* The
Unitive Life necessarily means for him, as for all who attain it,
something which infinitely transcends the sum total of its symptoms:
something which normal men cannot hope to understand. In it he declares
that he “partakes directly of the Divine Nature,” enjoys the fruition of
reality. Since we “only behold that which we are,” the doctrine of
deification results naturally and logically from this claim.

<span id="an_iv.x-p29"></span>“Some may ask,” says the author of the
“Theologia Germanica” “what is it to be a partaker of the Divine Nature,
or a Godlike \[<span id="an_iv.x-p29.1"></span> *vergottet* *,*
literally deified\] man? Answer: he who is imbued with or illuminated by
the Eternal or Divine Light and inflamed or consumed with Eternal or
Divine Love, he is a deified man and a partaker of the Divine Nature.”
 <span id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849)

<span id="an_iv.x-p31"></span>Such a word as “deification” is not, of
course, a scientific term. It is a metaphor, an artistic expression
which tries to hint at a transcendent fact utterly beyond the powers of
human understanding, and therefore without equivalent in human speech:
that fact of which Dante perceived the “shadowy preface” when he saw the
saints as petals of the Sempiternal Rose.  <span
id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) Since we know not <span
id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_419"></span> the
Being of God, the mere statement that a soul is transformed in Him may
convey to us an ecstatic suggestion, but will never give exact
information: except of course to those rare selves who have experienced
these supernal states. Such selves, however—or a large proportion of
them—accept this statement as approximately true. Whilst the more
clear-sighted are careful to qualify it in a sense which excludes
pantheistic interpretations, and rebuts the accusation that extreme
mystics preach the annihilation of the self and regard themselves as
co-equal with the Deity, they leave us in no doubt that it answers to a
definite and normal experience of many souls who attain high levels of
spiritual vitality. Its terms are chiefly used by those mystics by whom
Reality is apprehended as a state or place rather than a Person:  <span
id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) and who have adopted, in describing
the earlier stages of their journey to God, such symbols as those of
rebirth or transmutation.

<span id="an_iv.x-p34"></span>The blunt and positive language of these
contemplatives concerning deification has aroused more enmity amongst
the unmystical than any other of their doctrines or practices. It is of
course easy, by confining oneself to its surface sense, to call such
language blasphemous: and the temptation to do so has seldom been
resisted. Yet, rightly understood, this doctrine lies at the heart, not
only of all mysticism, but also of much philosophy and most religion. It
pushes their first principles to a logical end. Christian mysticism,
says Delacroix with justice, springs from “that spontaneous and
half-savage longing for deification which all religion contains.”  <span
id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) Eastern Christianity has always
accepted it and expressed it in her rites. “The Body of God deifies me
and feeds me,” says Simeon Metaphrastes, “it deifies my spirit and it
feeds my soul in an incomprehensible manner.”  <span
id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853)

<span id="an_iv.x-p37"></span>The Christian mystics justify this dogma
of the deifying of man, by exhibiting it as the necessary corollary of
the Incarnation—the humanizing of God. They can quote the authority of
the Fathers in support of this argument. “He became man that we might be
made God,” says St. Athanasius.  <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854)
“I heard,” says St. Augustine, speaking of his pre-converted period,
“Thy voice from on high crying unto me, ‘I am the Food of the fullgrown:
grow, and then thou shalt feed on Me. Nor shalt thou change Me into thy
substance as thou changest the food of thy flesh, but thou shalt be
changed into Mine.’”  <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855) Eckhart
therefore did no more than expand the patristic view when he wrote, “Our
Lord says to every living <span id="page_420">p. 420</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_420"></span> soul, ‘I became man for you. If you do not
become God for me, you do me wrong.’”  <span
id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856)

<span id="an_iv.x-p41"></span>If we are to allow that the mystics have
ever attained the object of their quest, I think we must also allow that
such attainment involves the transmutation of the self to that state
which they call, for want of exact language, “deified.” The necessity of
such transmutation is an implicit of their first position: the law that
“we behold that which we are, and are that which we behold.” Eckhart, in
whom the language of deification assumes its most extreme form,
justifies it upon this necessity. “If,” he says, “I am to know God
directly, I must become completely He and He I: so that this He and this
I become and are one I.”  <span id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857)

<span id="an_iv.x-p43"></span>God, said St. Augustine, is the Country of
the soul: its Home, says Ruysbroeck. The mystic in the unitive state is
living in and of his native land; no exploring alien, but a returned
exile, now wholly identified with it, part of it, yet retaining his
personality intact. As none know the spirit of England but the English;
and they know it by intuitive participation, by mergence, not by
thought; so none but the “deified” know the secret life of God. This,
too, is a knowledge conferred only by participation: by living a life,
breathing an atmosphere, “union with that same Light by which they see,
and which they see.”  <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) It is one
of those rights of citizenship which cannot be artificially conferred.
Thus it becomes important to ask the mystics what they have to tell us
of their life lived upon the bosom of Reality: and to receive their
reports without prejudice, however hard the sayings they contain.

<span id="an_iv.x-p45"></span>The first thing which emerges from these
reports, and from the choice of symbols which we find in them, is that
the great mystics are anxious above all things to establish and force on
us the truth that by *deification* they intend no arrogant claim to
identification with God, but as it were a transfusion of their selves by
His Self: an entrance upon a new order of life, so high and so
harmonious with Reality that it can only be called divine. Over and over
again they assure us that personality is not lost, but made more real.
“When,” says St. Augustine, “I shall cleave to Thee with all my being,
then shall I in nothing have pain and labour; and my *life shall be a
real life,* being wholly full of Thee.”  <span
id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) “My life shall be a real life” because
it is “full of Thee.” The achievement of reality, and deification, are
then one and the same thing: necessarily so, since we know that only the
divine is the real.  <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860)

<span id="an_iv.x-p48"></span>Mechthild of Magdeburg, and after her
Dante, saw Deity as a <span id="page_421">p. 421</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_421"></span> flame or river of fire that filled the
Universe, and the “deified” souls of the saints as ardent sparks
therein, ablaze with that fire, one thing with it, yet distinct.  <span
id="fr_861"></span>[862](#fn_861) Ruysbroeck, too, saw “Every soul like
a live coal, burned up by God on the heart of His Infinite Love.”  <span
id="fr_862"></span>[863](#fn_862) Such fire imagery has seemed to many
of the mystics a peculiarly exact and suggestive symbol of the
transcendent state which they are struggling to describe. No longer
confused by the dim Cloud of Unknowing, they have pierced to its heart,
and there found their goal: that uncreated and energizing Fire which
guided the children of Israel through the night. By a deliberate appeal
to the parallel of such great impersonal forces—to Fire and Heat, Light,
Water, Air—mystic writers seem able to bring out a perceived aspect of
the Godhead, and of the transfigured soul’s participation therein, which
no merely personal language, taken alone, can touch. Thus Boehme, trying
to describe the union between the Word and the soul, says, “I give you
an earthly similitude of this. Behold a bright flaming piece of iron,
which of itself is dark and black, and the fire so penetrateth and
shineth through the iron, that it giveth light. Now, the iron doth not
*cease to be,* it is iron still: and the source (or property) of the
fire retaineth its own propriety: it doth not take the iron into it, but
it penetrateth (and shineth) through the iron; and it is iron then as
well as before, *free* in itself: and so also is the source or property
of the *fire.* In such a manner is the soul set in the Deity; the Deity
penetrateth through the soul, and dwelleth in the soul, yet the soul
doth not comprehend the Deity, but the Deity comprehendeth the soul, but
doth not alter it (from being a soul) but only giveth it the divine
source (or property) of the Majesty.”  <span
id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863)

<span id="an_iv.x-p52"></span>Almost exactly the same image of
deification was used, five hundred years before Boehme’s day, by Richard
of St. Victor; a mystic whom he is hardly likely to have read. “When the
soul is plunged in the fire of divine love,” he says, “like iron, it
first loses its blackness, and then growing to white heat, it becomes
like unto the fire itself. And lastly, it grows liquid, and losing its
nature is transmuted into an utterly different quality of being.” “As
the difference between iron that is cold and iron that is hot,” he says
again, “so is the difference between soul and soul: between the tepid
soul and the soul made incandescent by divine love.”  <span
id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864) Other contemplatives say that the
deified soul is transfigured by the inundations of the Uncreated Light:
that it is like a brand blazing in the furnace, transformed to the
likeness of the fire. “These souls,” says the Divine voice to St.
Catherine of Siena, <span id="page_422">p. 422</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_422"></span> “thrown into the furnace of My charity, no
part of their will remaining outside but the whole of them being
inflamed in Me, are like a brand, wholly consumed in the furnace, so
that no one can take hold of it to extinguish it, because it has become
fire. In the same way no one can seize these souls, or draw them outside
of Me, because they are made *one thing* with Me through grace, and I
never withdraw Myself from them by sentiment, as in the case of those
whom I am leading on to perfection.”  <span
id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865)

<span id="an_iv.x-p55"></span>For the most subtle and delicate
descriptions of the Unitive or Deified State, understood as self-loss in
the “Ocean Pacific” of God, we must go to the great genius of
Ruysbroeck. He alone, whilst avoiding all its pitfalls, has conveyed the
suggestion of its ineffable joys in a measure which seems, as we read,
to be beyond all that we had supposed possible to human utterance. Awe
and rapture, theological profundity, keen psychological insight, are
here tempered by a touching simplicity. We listen to the report of one
who has indeed heard “the invitation of love” which “draws interior
souls towards the One” and says “Come home.” A humble receptivity, a
meek self-naughting is with Ruysbroeck, as with all great mystics, the
gate of the City of God. “Because they have abandoned themselves to God
in doing, in leaving undone, and in suffering,” he says of the deified
souls, “they have steadfast peace and inward joy, consolation and
savour, of which the world cannot partake; neither any dissembler, nor
the man who seeks and means himself more than the glory of God.
Moreover, those same inward and enlightened men have before them in
their inward seeing, whenever they will, the Love of God as something
drawing or urging them into the Unity; for they see and feel that the
Father with the Son through the Holy Ghost, embrace Each Other and all
the chosen, and draw themselves back with eternal love into the unity of
Their Nature. Thus the Unity is ever drawing to itself and inviting to
itself everything that has been born of It, either by nature or by
grace. And therefore, too, such enlightened men are, with a free spirit,
lifted up above reason into a bare and imageless vision, wherein lives
the eternal indrawing summons of the Divine Unity; and, with an
imageless and bare understanding, they pass through all works, and all
exercises, and all things, until they reach the summit of their spirits.
There, their bare understanding is drenched through by the Eternal
Brightness, even as the air is drenched through by the sunshine. And the
bare, uplifted will is transformed and drenched through by abysmal love,
even as iron is by fire. And the bare, uplifted memory feels itself
enwrapped and established in an abysmal Absence of Image. And thereby
the created image <span id="page_423">p. 423</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_423"></span> is united above reason in a threefold way
with its Eternal Image, which is the origin of its being and its life. .
. . Yet the creature does not become God, for the union takes place in
God through grace and our homeward-turning love: and therefore the
creature in its inward contemplation feels a distinction and an
otherness between itself and God. And though the union is without means,
yet the manifold works which God works in heaven and on earth are
nevertheless hidden from the spirit. For though God gives Himself as He
is, with clear discernment, He gives Himself in the essence of the soul,
where the powers of the soul are simplified above reason, and where, in
simplicity, they suffer the transformation of God. There all is full and
overflowing, for the spirit feels itself to be one truth and one
richness and one unity with God. Yet even here there is an essential
tending forward, and therein is an essential distinction between the
being of the soul and the Being of God; and this is the highest and
finest distinction which we are able to feel.”  <span
id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866)

<span id="an_iv.x-p57"></span>“When love has carried us above and beyond
all things,” he says in another place, “above the light, into the Divine
Dark, there we are wrought and transformed by the Eternal Word Who is
the image of the Father; and as the air is penetrated by the sun, thus
we receive in idleness of spirit the Incomprehensible Light, enfolding
us and penetrating us. And this flight is nothing else but an infinite
gazing and seeing. We behold that which we are, and we are that which be
behold; because our thought, life and being are uplifted in simplicity
and made one with the Truth which is God.”  <span
id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867)

<span id="an_iv.x-p59"></span>Here the personal aspect of the Absolute
seems to be reduced to a minimum: yet all that we value in
personality—love, action, will—remains unimpaired. We seem caught up to
a plane of vision beyond the categories of the human mind: to the
contemplation of a Something Other—our home, our hope, and our passion,
the completion of our personality, and the Substance of all that Is.
Such an endless contemplation, such a dwelling within the substance of
Goodness, Truth and, Beauty, is the essence of that Beatific Vision,
that participation of Eternity, “of all things most delightful and
desired, of all things most loved by them who have it,”  <span
id="fr_868"></span>[869](#fn_868) which theology presents to us as the
objective of the soul.

<span id="an_iv.x-p61"></span>Those mystics of the metaphysical type who
tend to use these impersonal symbols of Place and Thing often see in the
Unitive Life a foretaste of the Beatific Vision: an entrance here and
now <span id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_424"></span> into that absolute life within the Divine
Being, which shall be lived by all perfect spirits when they have cast
off the limitations of the flesh and re-entered the eternal order for
which they were made. For them, in fact, the “deified man,” in virtue of
his genius for transcendental reality, has run ahead of human history:
and attained a form of consciousness which other men will only know when
earthly life is past.

<span id="an_iv.x-p62"></span>In the “Book of Truth” Suso has a
beautiful and poetic comparison between the life of the blessed spirits
dwelling within the Ocean of Divine Love, and that approximate life
which is lived on earth by the mystic who has renounced all selfhood and
merged his will in that of the Eternal Truth. Here we find one of the
best of many answers to the ancient but apparently immortal accusation
that the mystics teach the total annihilation of personality as the end
and object of their quest. “Lord, tell me,” says the Servitor, “what
remains to a blessed soul which has wholly renounced itself.” Truth
says, “When the good and faithful servant enters into the joy of his
Lord, he is inebriated by the riches of the house of God; for he feels,
in an ineffable degree, that which is felt by an inebriated man. He
forgets himself, he is no longer conscious of his selfhood; he
disappears and loses himself in God, and becomes one spirit with Him, as
a drop of water which is drowned in a great quantity of wine. For even
as such a drop disappears, taking the colour and the taste of wine, so
it is with those who are in full possession of blessedness. All human
desires are taken from them in an indescribable manner, they are rapt
from themselves, and are immersed in the Divine Will. If it were
otherwise, if there remained in the man some human thing that was not
absorbed, those words of Scripture which say that God must be all in all
would be false. *His being remains, but in another form, in another
glory, and in another power.* And all this is the result of entire and
complete renunciation. . . . Herein thou shalt find an answer to thy
question; for the true renunciation and veritable abandonment of a man
to the Divine Will in the temporal world is an imitation and reduction
of that self-abandonment of the blessed, of which Scripture speaks: and
this imitation approaches its model more or less, according as men are
more or less united with God and become more or less one with God.
Remark well that which is said of the blessed: they are stripped of
their personal initiative, and changed into another form, another glory,
another power. What then is this other form, if it be not the Divine
Nature and the Divine Being whereinto they pour themselves, and which
pours Itself into them, and becomes one thing with them? And what is
that other glory, if it be not to be illuminated and made shining in the
Inaccessible Light? What is <span id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_425"></span> that other power, if it be not that by
means of his union with the Divine Personality, there is given to man a
divine strength and a divine power, that he may accomplish all which
pertains to his blessedness and omit all which is contrary thereto? And
thus it is that, as has been said, a man comes forth from his selfhood.”
 <span id="fr_869"></span>[870](#fn_869)

<span id="an_iv.x-p64"></span>All the mystics agree that the stripping
off of the I, the Me, the Mine, utter renouncement, or
“self-naughting”—self-abandonment to the direction of a larger Will—is
an imperative condition of the attainment of the unitive life. The
temporary denudation of the mind, whereby the contemplative made space
for the vision of God, must now be applied to the whole life. Here, they
say, there is a final swallowing up of that wilful I-hood, that surface
individuality which we ordinarily recognize as ourselves. It goes for
ever, and something new is established in its room. The self is made
part of the mystical Body of God; and, humbly taking its place in the
corporate life of Reality, would “fain be to the Eternal Goodness what
his own hand is to a man.”  <span id="fr_870"></span>[871](#fn_870) That
strange “hunger and thirst of God for the soul,” “at once avid and
generous,” of which they speak in their profoundest passages, here makes
its final demand and receives its satisfaction. “All that He has, all
that He is He gives: all that we have, all that we are, He takes.”
 <span id="fr_871"></span>[872](#fn_871) The self, they declare, is
devoured, immersed in the Abyss; “sinks into God, Who is the deep of
deeps.” In their efforts towards describing to us this, the supreme
mystic act, and the new life to which it gives birth, they are often
driven to the use of images which must seem to us grotesque, were it not
for the flame which burns behind: as when Ruysbroeck cries, “To eat and
be eaten! this is Union! . . . Since His desire is without measure, to
be devour of of Him does not greatly amaze me.”  <span
id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872)

<span id="an_iv.x-p68"></span>(B) At this point we begin to see that the
language of deification, taken alone, will not suffice to describe the
soul’s final experience of Reality. The personal and emotional aspect of
man’s relation with his Source is also needed if that which he means by
“union with God” is to be even partially expressed. Hence, even the most
“transcendental” mystic is constantly compelled to fall back on the
language of love in the endeavour to express the content of his
metaphysical raptures: and forced in the end to acknowledge that the
perfect union of Lover and Beloved cannot be suggested in the precise
and arid terms of religious philosophy. Such arid language eludes the
most dangerous aspects of “divine union,” the pantheistic on one hand,
the “amoristic” on the other; but it also fails to express the most
splendid side of that amazing <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_426"></span> experience. It needs some other, more
personal and intimate vision to complete it: and this we shall find in
the reports of those mystics of the “intimate” type to whom the Unitive
Life has meant not self-loss in an Essence, but self-fulfilment in the
union of heart and will.

<span id="an_iv.x-p69"></span>The extreme form of this kind of
apprehension of course finds expression in the well-known and heartily
abused symbolism of the Spiritual Marriage between God and the Soul: a
symbolism which goes back to the Orphic Mysteries, and thence descended
via the Neoplatonists into the stream of Christian tradition. But there
are other and less concrete embodiments of it, wholly free from the
dangers which are supposed to lurk in “erotic” imagery of this kind.
Thus Jalalu ‘d Din, by the use of metaphors which are hardly human yet
charged with passionate feeling, tells, no less successfully than the
writer of the Song of Songs, the secret of “his union in which “heart
speaks to heart.”

> <span id="an_iv.x-p69.1"></span> With Thy Sweet Soul, this soul of
> mine  
> Hath mixed as Water doth with Wine.  
> Who can the Wine and Water part,  
> Or me and Thee when we combine?  
> Thou art become my greater self;  
> Small bounds no more can me confine.  
> Thou hast my being taken on,  
> And shall not I now take on Thine?  
> Me Thou for ever hast affirmed  
> That I may ever know Thee mine  
> Thy Love has pierced me through and through,  
> Its thrill with Bone and Nerve entwine.  
> I rest a Flute laid on Thy lips;  
> A lute, I on Thy breast recline.  
> Breathe deep in me that I may sigh;  
> Yet strike my strings, and tears shall shine.”  <span
> id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873)  

<span id="an_iv.x-p71"></span>What the mystic here desires to tell us
is, that his new life is not only a free and conscious participation in
the life of Eternity—a fully-established existence on real and
transcendental levels—but also the conscious sharing of an inflowing
*personal life* greater than his own; a tightening of the bonds of that
companionship which has been growing in intimacy and splendour during
the course of the Mystic Way. This companionship, at once the most
actual and most elusive fact of human experience, is utterly beyond the
resources of speech. So too are those mysteries of the communion of
love, whereby the soul’s humble, active and ever-renewed self-donation
becomes the occasion of her glory: and “by her love she is made the
equal of Love”—the beggar maid sharing Cophetua’s throne.

<span id="an_iv.x-p72"></span>Thus the anonymous author of the “Mirror”
writes, in one of <span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_427"></span> his most daring passages, “‘I am God,’
says Love, ‘for Love is God, and God is Love. And this soul is God by
condition of love: but I am God by Nature Divine. And this \[state\] is
hers by righteousness of love, so that this precious beloved of me is
learned, and led of Me without her \[working\]. . . . This \[soul\] is
the eagle that flies high, so right high and yet more high than doth any
other bird; for she is feathered with fine love.’”  <span
id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874)

<span id="an_iv.x-p74"></span>The simplest expression of the Unitive
Life, the simplest interpretation which we can put on its declarations,
is that it is the complete and conscious fulfilment here and now of this
Perfect Love. In it certain elect spirits, still in the flesh, “fly high
and yet more high,” till “taught and led out of themselves,” they
become, in the exaggerated language of the “Mirror,” “God by condition
of love.” Home-grown English mysticism tried as a rule to express the
inexpressible in homelier, more temperate terms than this. “I would that
thou knew,” says the unknown author of the “Epistle of Prayer,” “what
manner of working it is that knitteth man’s soul to God, and that maketh
it one with Him in love and accordance of will after the word of St.
Paul, saying thus: <span id="an_iv.x-p74.1"></span>‘ *Qui* *adhaeret
Deo, unus spiritus est cum illo* ’ *;* that is to say: ‘Whoso draweth
near to God as it is by such a reverent affection touched before, he is
one spirit with God.’ That is, though all that God and he be two and
sere in kind, nevertheless yet in grace they are so knit together that
they are but one in spirit; and all this is one for onehead of love and
accordance of will; and in this onehead is the marriage made between God
and the soul the which shall never be broken, though all that the heat
and the fervour of this work cease for a time, but by a deadly sin. In
the ghostly feeling of this onehead may a loving soul both say and sing
(if it list) this holy word that is written in the Book of Songs in the
Bible, <span id="an_iv.x-p74.2"></span> *‘Dilectus meus mihi et ego
illi,* *’* that is, My loved unto me, and I unto Him; understanding that
God shall be knitted with the ghostly glue of grace on His party, and
the lovely consent in gladness of spirit on thy party.”  <span
id="fr_875"></span>[876](#fn_875)

<span id="an_iv.x-p76"></span>I think no one can deny that the
comparison of the bond between the soul and the Absolute to “ghostly
glue,” though crude, is wholly innocent. Its appearance in this passage
as an alternative to the symbol of wedlock may well check the uncritical
enthusiasm of those who hurry to condemn at sight all “sexual” imagery.
That it has seemed to the mystics appropriate and exact is proved by its
reappearance in the next century in the work of a greater contemplative.
“Thou givest me,” says Petersen, <span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_428"></span> “Thy whole Self to be mine whole and
undivided, if at least I shall be Thine whole and undivided. And when I
shall be thus all Thine, even as from everlasting Thou hast loved
Thyself, so from everlasting Thou hast loved me: for this means nothing
more than that Thou enjoyest Thyself in me, and that I by Thy grace
enjoy Thee in myself and myself in Thee. And when in Thee I shall love
myself, nothing else but Thee do I love, because *Thou art in me and I
in Thee, glued together as one and the selfsame thing,* which henceforth
and forever cannot be divided.”  <span id="fr_876"></span>[877](#fn_876)

<span id="an_iv.x-p78"></span>From this kind of language to that of the
Spiritual Marriage, as understood by the pure minds of the mystics, is
but a step.  <span id="fr_877"></span>[878](#fn_877) They mean by it no
rapturous satisfactions, no dubious spiritualizing of earthly ecstasies,
but a life-long bond “that shall never be lost or broken,” a close
personal union of will and of heart between the free self and that
“Fairest in Beauty” Whom it has known in the act of contemplation.

<span id="an_iv.x-p80"></span>The Mystic Way has been a progress, a
growth in love: a deliberate fostering of the inward tendency of the
soul towards its source, an eradication of its disorderly tendencies to
“temporal goods.” But the only proper end of love is union: “a perfect
uniting and coupling together of the lover and the loved into one.”
 <span id="fr_878"></span>[879](#fn_878) It is “a unifying principle,”
the philosophers say:  <span id="fr_879"></span>[880](#fn_879) life’s
mightiest agent upon every plane. Moreover, just as earthly marriage is
understood by the moral sense less as a satisfaction of personal desire,
than as a part of the great process of life—the fusion of two selves for
new purposes—so such spiritual marriage brings with it duties and
obligations. With the attainment of a new order, the new infusion of
vitality, comes a new responsibility, the call to effort and endurance
on a new and mighty scale. It is not an act but a state. Fresh life is
imparted, by which our lives are made complete: new creative powers are
conferred. The self, lifted to the divine order, is to be an agent of
the divine fecundity: an energizing centre, a parent of transcendental
life. “The last perfection,” says Aquinas, “to supervene upon a thing,
is its becoming the cause of other things. While then a creature tends
by many ways to the likeness of God, the last way left open to it is to
seek the divine likeness by being the cause of other things, according
to what the Apostle says, <span id="an_iv.x-p82.1"></span> *Dei enim
sumus adjutores* *.”*  <span id="fr_880"></span>[881](#fn_880) <span
id="page_429">p. 429</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_429"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p84"></span>We find as a matter of fact, when we come
to study the history of the mystics, that the permanent Unitive State,
or spiritual marriage, does mean for those who attain to it, above all
else such an access of creative vitality. It means man’s small
derivative life invaded and enhanced by the Absolute Life: the
appearance in human history of personalities and careers which seem
superhuman when judged by the surface mind. Such activity, such a
bringing forth of “the fruits of the Spirit,” may take many forms: but
where it is absent, where we meet with personal satisfactions, personal
visions or raptures—however sublime and spiritualized—presented as marks
of the Unitive Way, ends or objects of the quest of Reality, we may be
sure that we have wandered from the “strait and narrow road” which
leads, not to eternal rest, but to Eternal Life. “The fourth degree of
love is spiritually fruitful,”  <span id="fr_881"></span>[882](#fn_881)
said Richard of St. Victor. Wherever we find a sterile love, a “holy
passivity,” we are in the presence of quietistic heresy; not of the
Unitive Life. “I hold it for a certain truth,” says St. Teresa, “that in
giving these graces our Lord intends, as I have often told you, to
strengthen our weakness so that we may imitate Him by suffering much. .
. . Whence did St. Paul draw strength to support his immense labours? We
see clearly in him the effects of visions and contemplations which come
indeed from our Lord, and not from our own imagination or the devil’s
fraud. Do you suppose St. Paul hid himself in order to enjoy in peace
these spiritual consolations, and did nothing else? You know that on the
contrary he never took a day’s rest so far as we can learn, and worked
at night in order to earn his bread. . . . Oh my sisters! how forgetful
of her own ease, how careless of honours, should she be whose soul God
thus chooses for His special dwelling place! For if her mind is fixed on
Him, as it ought to be, she must needs forget herself; all her thoughts
are bent on how to please Him better, and when and how she may show Him
her love. *This* is the end and aim of prayer, my daughters; *this* is
the object of that spiritual marriage whose children are always good
works. *Works* are the best proof that the favours which we receive have
come from God.”  <span id="fr_882"></span>[883](#fn_882) “To give our
Lord a perfect hospitality” she says in the same chapter, “Mary and
Martha must combine.”

<span id="an_iv.x-p87"></span>When we look at the lives of the great
theopathetic mystics, the true initiates of Eternity—inarticulate as
these mystics often are—we find ourselves in the presence of an amazing,
a superabundant vitality: of a “triumphing force” over which
circumstance has no power. The incessant production of good works seems
indeed <span id="page_430">p. 430</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_430"></span> to be the object of that Spirit, by Whose
presence their interior castle is now filled.

<span id="an_iv.x-p88"></span>We see St. Paul, abruptly enslaved by the
First and Only Fair, not hiding himself to enjoy the vision of Reality,
but going out single-handed to organize the Catholic Church. We ask how
it was possible for an obscure Roman citizen, without money, influence,
or good health, to lay these colossal foundations: and he answers “Not
I, but Christ in me.”

<span id="an_iv.x-p89"></span>We see St. Joan of Arc, a child of the
peasant class, leaving the sheepfold to lead the armies of France. We
ask how this incredible thing can be: and are told “Her Voices bade
her.” A message, an overpowering impulse, came from the supra-sensible:
vitality flowed in on her, she knew not how or why. She was united with
the Infinite Life, and became Its agent, the medium of Its strength,
“what his own hand is to a man.”

<span id="an_iv.x-p90"></span>We see St. Francis, “God’s troubadour,”
marked with His wounds, inflamed with His joy—obverse and reverse of the
earnest-money of eternity—or St. Ignatius Loyola, our Lady’s knight, a
figure at once militant and romantic, go out to change the spiritual
history of Europe. Where did they find—born and bred to the most
ordinary of careers, in the least spiritual of atmospheres—that
superabundant energy, that genius for success which triumphed best in
the most hopeless situations? Francis found it before the crucifix in
St. Damiano, and renewed it in the ineffable experience of La Verna;
when “by mental possession and rapture he was transfigured of God.”
Ignatius found it in the long contemplations and hard discipline of the
cave of Manresa, after the act of surrender in which he dedicated his
knighthood to the service of the Mother of God.

<span id="an_iv.x-p91"></span>We see St. Teresa, another born romantic,
pass to the Unitive State after long and bitter struggles between her
lower and higher personality. A chronic invalid over fifty years of age,
weakened by long ill-health and the mortifications of the Purgative Way
she deliberately breaks with her old career in obedience to the inward
Voice, leaves her convent, and starts a new life: coursing through
Spain, and reforming a great religious order in the teeth of the
ecclesiastical world. Yet more amazing, St. Catherine of Siena, an
illiterate daughter of the people, after a three years’ retreat
consummates the mystic marriage, and emerges from the cell of
self-knowledge to dominate the politics of Italy. How came it that these
apparently unsuitable men and women, checked on every side by inimical
environment, ill-health, custom, or poverty achieved these stupendous
destinies? The explanation can only lie in the fact that all these
persons were great mystics, living upon high levels the theopathetic
life. In each a character of the <span id="page_431">p. 431</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_431"></span> heroic type, of great vitality, deep
enthusiasms, unconquerable will, was raised to the spiritual plane,
remade on higher levels of consciousness. Each by surrender of selfhood,
by acquiescence in the large destinies of life, had so furthered that
self’s natural genius for the Infinite that their human limitations were
overpassed. Hence they rose to freedom and attained to the one ambition
of the “naughted soul,” “I would fain be to the Eternal Goodness what
his own hand is to a man.”

<span id="an_iv.x-p92"></span>Even Madame Guyon’s natural tendency to
passive states breaks down with her entrance on the Unitive Way. Though
she cannot be classed amongst the greatest of its initiates, she too
felt its fertilizing power, was stung from her “holy indifference” to
become, as it were, involuntarily true to type.

<span id="an_iv.x-p93"></span>“The soul,” she says of the self entering
upon Union—and we cannot doubt that as usual she is describing her own
carefully docketed “states”—“feels a secret vigour taking more and more
strongly possession of all her being: and little by little she receives
a new life, never again to be lost, at least so far as one can be
assured of anything in this life. . . . This new life is not like that
which she had before. It is a life in God. It is a perfect life. She no
longer lives or works of herself: but God lives, acts and works in her,
and this grows little by little till she becomes perfect with God’s
perfection, is rich with His riches, and loves with His love.” . . .
 <span id="fr_883"></span>[884](#fn_883)

<span id="an_iv.x-p95"></span>This new, intense, and veritable life has
other and even more vital characteristics than those which lead to “the
performance of acts” or “the incessant production of good works.” It is,
in an actual sense, as Richard of St. Victor reminded us, fertile,
creative, as well as merely active. In the fourth degree of love, the
soul brings forth its children. It is the agent of a fresh outbirth of
spiritual vitality into the world; the helpmate of the Transcendent
Order, the mother of a spiritual progeny. The great unitive mystics are
each of them the founders of spiritual families, centres wherefrom
radiates new transcendental life. The “flowing light of the Godhead” is
focussed in them, as in a lens, only that it may pass through them to
spread out on every side. So, too, the great creative seers and artists
are the parents, not merely of their own immediate works, but also of
whole schools of art, whole groups of persons who acquire or inherit
their vision of beauty or truth. Thus within the area of influence of a
Paul, a Francis, an Ignatius, a Teresa, an atmosphere of reality is
created; and new and vital spiritual personalities gradually appear,
meet for the work which these great founders set in hand. The real
witness to St. Paul’s ecstatic life in God, is the train of Christian
churches by which his journeyings are marked. Wherever Francis passed,
he left <span id="page_432">p. 432</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_432"></span> Franciscans, “fragrant with a wondrous
aspect,” where none had been before.  <span
id="fr_884"></span>[885](#fn_884) The Friends of God spring up,
individual mystics, here and there through the Rhineland and Bavaria.
Each becomes the centre of an ever widening circle of transcendent life,
the parent of a spiritual family. They are come like their Master, that
men may have life more abundantly: from them new mystic energy is
actually born into the world. Again, Ignatius leaves Manresa a solitary:
maimed, ignorant, and poor. He comes to Rome with his company already
formed, and ablaze with his spirit; veritably his children, begotten of
him, part and parcel of his life.

<span id="an_iv.x-p97"></span>Teresa finds the order of Mount Carmel
hopelessly corrupt: its friars and nuns blind to reality, indifferent to
the obligations of the cloistered life. She is moved by the Spirit to
leave her convent and begin, in abject poverty, the foundation of new
houses, where the most austere and exalted life of contemplation shall
be led. She enters upon this task to the accompaniment of an almost
universal mockery. Mysteriously, as she proceeds, novices of the
spiritual life appear and cluster around her. They come into existence,
one knows not how, in the least favourable of atmospheres: but one and
all are salted with the Teresian salt. They receive the infection of her
abundant vitality: embrace eagerly and joyously the heroic life of the
Reform. In the end, every city in Spain has within it Teresa’s spiritual
children: a whole order of contemplatives, as truly born of her as if
they were indeed her sons and daughters in the flesh. Well might the
Spiritual Alchemists say that the true <span
id="an_iv.x-p97.1"></span>“Lapis Philosophorum” is a *tinging stone:*
which imparts its goldness to the base metals brought within its sphere
of influence.

<span id="an_iv.x-p98"></span>This reproductive power is one of the
greatest marks of the theopathetic life: the true “mystic marriage” of
the individual soul with its Source. Those rare personalities in whom it
is found are the *media* through which that Triumphing Spiritual Life
which is the essence of reality forces an entrance into the temporal
order and begets children; heirs of the superabundant vitality of the
transcendental universe.

<span id="an_iv.x-p99"></span>But the Unitive Life is more than the sum
total of its symptoms: more than the heroic and apostolic life of the
“great active”: more than the divine motherhood of new “sons and
daughters of the Absolute.” These are only its outward signs, its
expression in time and space. I have first laid stress upon that
expression, because it is the side which all critics and some friends of
the mystics persistently ignore. The contemplative’s power of living
this intense and creative life within the temporal order, however, is
tightly bound up with that other life in which he attains to <span
id="page_433">p. 433</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_433"></span> complete
communion with the Absolute Order, and submits to the inflow of its
supernal vitality. In discussing the relation of the mystical experience
to philosophy,  <span id="fr_885"></span>[886](#fn_885) we saw that the
complete mystic consciousness, and therefore, of course, the complete
mystic world, had a twofold character which could hardly be reconciled
with the requirements of monism. It embraced a Reality which seems from
the human standpoint at once static and dynamic, transcendent and
immanent, eternal and temporal: accepted both the absolute World of Pure
Being and the unresting World of Becoming as integral parts of its
vision of Truth, demanding on its side a dual response. All through the
Mystic Way we caught glimpses of the growth and exercise of this dual
intuition of the Real. Now, the mature mystic, having come to his full
stature, passed through the purifications of sense and of spirit and
entered on his heritage, must and does take up as a part of that
heritage not merely ( *a* ) a fruition of the Divine Goodness, Truth,
and Beauty, his place within the Sempiternal Rose, nor ( *b* ) the
creative activity of an agent of the Eternal Wisdom, still immersed in
the River of Life: but both together—the twofold destiny of the
spiritual man, called to “incarnate the Eternal in time.” To use the old
scholastic language, he is at once patient and agent: patient as regards
God, agent as regards the world.

<span id="an_iv.x-p101"></span>In a deep sense it may be said of him
that he now participates according to his measure in that divine-human
life which mediates between man and the Eternal, and constitutes the
“salvation of the world.” Therefore, though his outward heroic life of
action, his divine fecundity, may seem to us the best evidence of his
state, it is the inner knowledge of his mystical sonship whereby “we
feel eternal life in us above all other thing,”  <span
id="fr_886"></span>[887](#fn_886) which is for him the guarantee of
absolute life. He has many ways of describing this central fact; this
peculiar consciousness of his own transcendence, which coexists with,
and depends on, a complete humility. Sometimes he says that whereas in
the best moments of his natural life he was but the “faithful servant”
of the eternal order, and in the illuminated way became its “secret
friend,” he is now advanced to the final, most mysterious state of
“hidden child.” “How great,” says Ruysbroeck, “is the difference between
the secret friend and the hidden child! For the friend makes only
loving, living, but measured ascents towards God. But the child presses
on to lose his own life upon the summits, in that simplicity which
knoweth not itself. . . . When we transcend ourselves and become in our
ascent towards God so simple that the bare supreme Love can lay hold of
us, then we cease, and we and all our selfhood <span id="page_434">p.
434</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_434"></span> die in God. And in this
death we become the hidden children of God, and find a new life within
us.”  <span id="fr_887"></span>[888](#fn_887)

<span id="an_iv.x-p104"></span>Though the outer career of the great
mystic, then, be one of superhuman industry, a long fight with evil and
adversity, his real and inner life dwells securely upon the heights; in
the perfect fruition which he can only suggest to us by the paradoxical
symbols of ignorance and emptiness. He dominates existence because he
thus transcends it: is a son of God, a member of the eternal order,
shares its substantial life. “Tranquillity according to His essence,
activity according to His Nature: absolute repose, absolute fecundity”:
this, says Ruysbroeck again, is the twofold property of Godhead: and the
secret child of the Absolute participates in this dual character of
Reality—“for this dignity has man been made.”  <span
id="fr_888"></span>[889](#fn_888)

<span id="an_iv.x-p106"></span>Those two aspects of truth which he has
so clumsily classified as static and dynamic, as Being and Becoming, now
find their final reconciliation within his own nature: for that nature
has become conscious in all its parts, has unified itself about its
highest elements. That strange, tormenting vision of a perfect peace, a
joyous self-loss, annihilation in some mighty Life that overpassed his
own, which haunts man throughout the whole course of his history, and
finds a more or less distorted expression in all his creeds, a
justification in all his ecstasies, is now traced to its source: and
found to be the inevitable expression of an instinct by which he
recognized, though he could not attain, the noblest part of his
inheritance. This recognition of his has of necessity been imperfect and
oblique. It has taken in many temperaments an exaggerated form, and has
been further disguised by the symbolic language used to describe it. The
tendency of Indian mysticism to regard the Unitive Life wholly in its
passive aspect, as a total self-annihilation, a disappearance into the
substance of the Godhead, results, I believe, from such a distortion of
truth. The Oriental mystic “presses on to lose his life upon the
heights”; but he does not come back and bring to his fellow-men the
life-giving news that he has transcended mortality in the interests of
the race. The temperamental bias of Western mystics towards activity has
saved them as a rule from such one-sided achievement as this; and hence
it is in them that the Unitive Life, with its “dual character of
activity and rest,” has assumed its richest and noblest forms.

<span id="an_iv.x-p107"></span>Of these Western mystics none has
expressed more lucidly or splendidly than Ruysbroeck the double nature
of man’s reaction to Reality. It is the heart of his vision of truth. In
all his books he returns to it again and again: speaking, as none
familiar with his <span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_435"></span> writings can doubt, the ardent, joyous,
vital language of firsthand experience, not the platitudes of
philosophy. He might say with Dante, his forerunner into the Empyrean:—

> <span id="an_iv.x-p107.1"></span> “La forma universal di questo nodo  
> credo ch’ io vidi, perchè più di largo  
> dicendo questo, mi sento ch’ io godo.”  <span
> id="fr_889"></span>[890](#fn_889)  

<span id="an_iv.x-p109"></span>It is then from Ruysbroeck that I shall
make my quotations: and if they be found somewhat long and difficult of
comprehension, their unique importance for the study of man’s spiritual
abilities must be my excuse.

<span id="an_iv.x-p110"></span>First, his vision of God:—

<span id="an_iv.x-p111"></span>“The Divine Persons,” he says, “Who form
one sole God, are in the fecundity of their nature ever active: and in
the simplicity of their essence they form the Godhead and eternal
blessedness. Thus God according to the Persons is Eternal Work: but
according to the essence and Its perpetual stillness, He is Eternal
Rest. Now love and fruition live between this activity and this rest.
Love would ever be active: for its nature is eternal working with God.
Fruition is ever at rest, for it consists above all will and all desire,
in the embrace of the well-beloved by the well-beloved in a simple and
imageless love; wherein the Father, together with the Son, enfolds His
beloved ones in the fruitive unity of His Spirit, above the fecundity of
nature. And that same Father says to each soul in His infinite loving
kindness, ‘Thou art Mine and I am thine: I am thine and thou art Mine,
for I have chosen thee from all eternity.’”  <span
id="fr_890"></span>[891](#fn_890)

<span id="an_iv.x-p113"></span>Next the vision of the self’s destiny:
“Our activity consists in loving God and our fruition in enduring God
and being penetrated by His love. There is a distinction between love
and fruition, as there is between God and His Grace. When we unite
ourselves to God by love, then we are spirit: but when we are caught up
and transformed by His Spirit, then we are led into fruition. And the
spirit of God Himself breathes us out from Himself that we may love, and
may do good works; and again He draws us into Himself, that we may rest
in fruition. And this is Eternal Life; even as our mortal life subsists
in the indrawing and outgoing of our breath.”  <span
id="fr_891"></span>[892](#fn_891)

<span id="an_iv.x-p115"></span>“Understand,” he says again, “God comes
to us incessantly, both with means and without means; and He demands of
us both action and fruition, in such away that the action never hinders
the fruition, nor the fruition the action, but they strengthen one <span
id="page_436">p. 436</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_436"></span> another.
And this is why the interior man \[ *i.e.,* the contemplative\] lives
his life according to these two ways; that is to say, in rest and in
work. And in each of them he is wholly and undividedly; for he dwells
wholly in God in virtue of his restful fruition and wholly in himself in
virtue of his active love. And God, in His communications, perpetually
calls and urges him to renew both this rest and this work. And because
the soul is just, it desires to pay at every instant that which God
demands of it; and this is why each time it is irradiated of Him, the
soul turns inward in a manner that is both active and fruitive, and thus
it is renewed in all virtues and ever more profoundly immersed in
fruitive rest. . . . It is active in all loving work, for it sees its
rest. It is a pilgrim, for it sees its country. For love’s sake it
strives for victory, for it sees its crown. Consolation, peace, joy,
beauty and riches, all that can give delight, all this is shown to the
mind illuminated in God, in spiritual similitudes and without measure.
And through this vision and touch of God, love continues active. For
such a just man has built up in his own soul, in rest and in work, a
veritable life which shall endure for ever, but which shall be
transformed after this present life to a state still more sublime. Thus
this man is just, and he goes *towards* God by inward love, in eternal
work, and he goes in God by his fruitive inclination in eternal rest.
And he dwells in God; and yet he goes out towards all creatures, in a
spirit of love towards all things, in virtue and in works of
righteousness. *And this is she supreme summit of the inner life* .”
 <span id="fr_892"></span>[893](#fn_892)

<span id="an_iv.x-p117"></span>Compare this description with the careers
of the theopathetic mystics, in whom, indeed, “action has not injured
fruition, nor fruition action,” who have by some secret adjustment
contrived to “possess their lives in rest and in work” without detriment
to inward joy or outward industry. Bear in mind as you read these
words—Ruysbroeck’s supreme effort to tell the true relation between
man’s created spirit and his God—the great public ministry of St.
Catherine of Siena, which ranged from the tending of the plague-stricken
to the reforming of the Papacy; and was accompanied by the inward
fruitive consciousness of the companionship of Christ. Remember the
humbler but not less beautiful and significant achievement of her
Genoese namesake: the strenuous lives of St. Francis of Assisi, St.
Ignatius, St. Teresa, outwardly cumbered with much serving, observant of
an infinitude of tiresome details, composing rules, setting up
foundations, neglecting no aspect of their business which could conduce
to its practical success, yet “altogether dwelling in God in restful
fruition.” Are not all these supreme examples of the state in which the
self, at last fully conscious, knowing Reality because she is wholly
real, <span id="page_437">p. 437</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_437"></span> pays her debt? Unable to rest entirely
either in work or in fruition, she seizes on this twofold expression of
the superabundant life by which she is possessed: and, on the double
wings of eagerness and effort, takes flight towards her Home.

<span id="an_iv.x-p118"></span>In dwelling, as we have done, on the ways
in which the great mystic makes actual to himself the circumstances of
the Unitive State, we must not forget that this state is, in essence, a
fulfilment of love; the attainment of a “heart’s desire.” By this
attainment, this lifting of the self to free union with the Real—as by
the earthly marriage which dimly prefigures it—a new life is entered
upon, new powers, new responsibilities are conferred. But this is not
all. The three prime activities of the normal self, feeling, intellect,
and will, though they seem to be fused, are really carried up to a
higher term. They are unified, it is true, but still present in their
integrity; and each demands and receives full satisfaction in the
attainment of this fillal “honour for which man has been made.” The
intellect is immersed in that mighty vision of truth, known now not as a
vision but as a home; where St. Paul saw things which might not be
uttered, St. Teresa found the “perpetual companionship of the Blessed
Trinity,” and Dante, caught to its heart for one brief moment, his mind
smitten by the blinding flash of the Uncreated light, knew that he had
resolved Reality’s last paradox: the unity of <span
id="an_iv.x-p118.1"></span> *“cerchio”* and <span
id="an_iv.x-p118.2"></span> *“imago”* *—* the infinite and personal
aspects of God.  <span id="fr_893"></span>[894](#fn_893) The enhanced
will, made over to the interests of the Transcendent, receives new
worlds to conquer, new strength to match its exalted destiny. But the
heart too here enters on a new order, begins to live upon high levels of
joy. “This soul, says Love, swims in the sea of joy: that is, in the sea
of delight, the stream of divine influences.”  <span
id="fr_894"></span>[895](#fn_894)

<span id="an_iv.x-p121"></span><span id="an_iv.x-p121.1"></span> *“Amans
volat, currit et laetatur: liber est et non tenetur* ,”  <span
id="fr_895"></span>[896](#fn_895) said à Kempis: classic words, which
put before us once and for ever the inward joyousness and liberty of the
saints. They “fly, run, and rejoice”—those great, laborious souls, often
spent with amazing mortifications, vowed to hard and never-ending tasks.
They are “free, and nothing can hold them,” though they seem to the
world fenced in by absurd renunciations and restrictions, deprived of
that cheap licence which it knows as liberty.

<span id="an_iv.x-p123"></span>That fruition of joy of which Ruysbroeck
speaks in majestic phrases, as constituting the interior life of mystic
souls immersed in the Absolute—the translation of the Beatific Vision
into the terms of a supernal feeling-state—is often realized in the
secret experience of those same mystics, as the perennial possession of
a childlike gaiety, an inextinguishable gladness of heart. The <span
id="page_438">p. 438</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_438"></span>
transfigured souls move to the measures of a “love dance” which persists
in mirth without comparison, through every outward hardship and
tribulation. They enjoy the high spirits peculiar to high spirituality:
and shock the world by a delicate playfulness, instead of exhibiting the
morose resignation which it feels to be proper to the “spiritual life.”
Thus St. Catherine of Siena, though constantly suffering, “was always
jocund and of a happy spirit.” When prostrate with illness she
overflowed with gaiety and gladness, and “was full of laughter in the
Lord, exultant and rejoicing. “  <span id="fr_896"></span>[897](#fn_896)

<span id="an_iv.x-p125"></span>Moreover, the most clear-sighted amongst
the mystics declare such joy to be an implicit of Reality. Thus Dante,
initiated into Paradise, sees the whole Universe laugh with delight as
it glorifies God:  <span id="fr_897"></span>[898](#fn_897) and the awful
countenance of Perfect Love adorned with smiles.  <span
id="fr_898"></span>[899](#fn_898) Thus the souls of the great
theologians dance to music and laughter in the Heaven of the Sun;  <span
id="fr_899"></span>[900](#fn_899) the loving seraphs, in their ecstatic
joy, whirl about the Being of God.  <span
id="fr_900"></span>[901](#fn_900) <span id="an_iv.x-p129.1"></span>“O
*luce sterna che . . . ami ed arridi,* ” exclaims the pilgrim, as the
Divine Essence is at last revealed to him,  <span
id="fr_901"></span>[902](#fn_901) and he perceives love and joy as the
final attributes of the Triune God. Thus Beatrice with *“suoi occhi
ridenti”*— so different from the world’s idea of a suitable demeanour
for the soul’s supreme instructress—laughs as she mounts with him the
ladder to the stars. So, if the deified soul has indeed run ahead of
humanity and “according to his fruition dwells in heaven,” he too, like
Francis, will run, rejoice and make merry: join the eager dance of the
Universe about the One. “If,” says Patmore, “we may credit certain hints
contained in the lives of the saints, love raises the spirit above the
sphere of reverence and worship into one of laughter and dalliance: a
sphere in which the soul says:—

> <span id="an_iv.x-p130.1"></span> “‘Shall I, a gnat which dances in
> Thy ray,  
> *Dare* to be reverent?’”  <span id="fr_902"></span>[903](#fn_902)  

<span id="an_iv.x-p132"></span>Richard Rolle has expressed this exultant
“spirit of dalliance” with peculiar insight and delicacy. “Among the
delights which he tastes in so sweet love burning,” he says of the true
lover who “in the bond of the lovers’ will stably is confirmed,” “a
heavenly privity inshed he feels, that no man can know but he that has
received it, and in himself bears the electuary that anoints and makes
happy all joyful lovers in Jesu; so that they cease not to hie in
heavenly seats to sit, endlessly their Maker to enjoy. Hereto truly they
yearn in heavenly sights abiding; and inwardly set <span
id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_439"></span> afire,
all their inward parts are glad with pleasant shining in light. And
themselves they feel gladdened with merriest love, and in joyful song
wonderfully melted. . . . But this grace generally and to all is not
given, but to the holy soul imbued with the holiest is taught; in whom
the excellence of love shines, and songs of lovely loving, Christ
inspiring, commonly burst up, and being made as it were a pipe of love,
in sight of God more goodly than can be said, joying sounds. The which
(soul) the mystery of love knowing, with great cry to its Love ascends,
in wit sharpest, and in knowledge and in feeling subtle; not spread in
things of this world but into God all gathered and set, that in
cleanness of conscience and shining of soul to Him it may serve Whom it
has purposed to love, and itself to Him to give. Surely the clearer the
love of the lover is, the nearer to him and the more present God is. And
thereby more clearly in God he joys, and of the sweet Goodness the more
he feels, that to lovers is wont Itself to inshed, and to mirth without
comparison the hearts of the meek to turn.”  <span
id="fr_903"></span>[904](#fn_903)

<span id="an_iv.x-p134"></span>The state of burning love, said Rolle,
than which he could conceive no closer reaction to Reality, was the
state of Sweetness and Song: the welling up of glad music in the simple
soul, man’s natural expression of a joy which overpasses the descriptive
powers of our untuneful speech. In the gay rhythms of that primordial
art he may say something of the secret which the more decorous periods
of religion and philosophy will never let him tell: something, too,
which in its very childishness, its freedom from the taint of solemnity
and self-importance, expresses the quality of that inward life, that
perpetual youth, which the “secret child” of the Transcendent Order
enjoys. “As it were a pipe of love” in the sight of God he “joying
sounds.” The music of the spheres is all about him: he is a part of the
great melody of the Divine. “Sweetest forsooth,” says Rolle again, “is
the rest which the spirit takes whilst sweet goodly sound comes down, in
which it is delighted: and in most sweet song and playful the mind is
ravished to sing likings of love everlasting.”  <span
id="fr_904"></span>[905](#fn_904)

<span id="an_iv.x-p136"></span>When we come to look at the lives of the
mystics, we find it literally true that such “songs of lovely loving
commonly burst up” whenever we can catch them unawares; see behind the
formidable and heroic activities of reformer, teacher, or leader of men
the <span id="an_iv.x-p136.1"></span> *vie intime* which is lived at the
hearth of Love. “What are the servants of the Lord but His minstrels?”
said St. Francis,  <span id="fr_905"></span>[906](#fn_905) who saw
nothing inconsistent between the Celestial Melodies and the Stigmata of
Christ. Moreover the songs of such troubadours, as <span
id="page_440">p. 440</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_440"></span> the
hermit of Hampole learned in his wilderness, are not only sweet but
playful. Dwelling always in a light of which we hardly dare to think,
save in the extreme terms of reverence and awe, they are not afraid with
any amazement: they are at home.

<span id="an_iv.x-p138"></span>The whole life of St. Francis of Assisi,
that spirit transfigured in God, who “loved above all other birds a
certain little bird which is called the lark,”  <span
id="fr_906"></span>[907](#fn_906) was one long march to music through
the world. To sing seemed to him a primary spiritual function: he taught
his friars in their preaching to urge all men to this.  <span
id="fr_907"></span>[908](#fn_907) It appeared to him appropriate and
just to use the romantic language of the troubadours in praise of the
perfect Love which had marked him as Its own. “Drunken with the love and
compassion of Christ, blessed Francis on a time did things such as
these. For the most sweet melody of spirit boiling up within him,
frequently broke out in French speech, and the veins of murmuring which
he heard secretly with his ears broke forth into French-like rejoicing.
And sometimes he picked up a branch from the earth, and laying it on his
left arm, he drew in his right hand another stick like a bow over it, as
if on a viol or other instrument, and, making fitting gestures, sang
with it in French unto the Lord Jesus Christ.”  <span
id="fr_908"></span>[909](#fn_908)

<span id="an_iv.x-p142"></span>Many a time has the romantic quality of
the Unitive Life—its gaiety, freedom, assurance, and joy—broken out in
“French-like rejoicings”; which have a terribly frivolous sound for
worldly ears, and seem the more preposterous as coming from people whose
outward circumstances are of the most uncomfortable kind. St. John of
the Cross wrote love songs to his Love. St. Rose of Lima sang duets with
the birds. St. Teresa, in the austere and poverty-stricken seclusion of
her first foundation, did not disdain to make rustic hymns and carols
for her daughters’ use in the dialect of Old Castile. Like St. Francis,
she had a horror of solemnity. It was only fit for hypocrites, thought
these rejuvenators of the Church. The hard life of prayer and penance on
Mount Carmel was undertaken in a joyous spirit to the sound of many
songs. Its great Reformer was quick to snub the too-spiritual sister who
“thought it better to contemplate than to sing”: and was herself heard,
as she swept the convent corridor, to sing a little ditty about the most
exalted of her own mystical experiences: that ineffable
transverberation, in which the fiery arrow of the seraph pierced her
heart.  <span id="fr_909"></span>[910](#fn_909)

<span id="an_iv.x-p144"></span>But the most lovely and real, most human
and near to us, of all these descriptions of the celestial exhilaration
which mystic surrender brings in its train, is the artless,
unintentional self-revelation <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_441"></span> of St. Catherine of Genoa, whose inner and
outer lives in their balanced wholeness provide us with one of our best
standards by which to judge the right proportions of the Mystic Way.
Here the whole essence of the Unitive Life is summed up and presented to
us by one who lived it upon heroic levels: and who was, in fruition and
activity, in rest and in work, not only a great active and a great
ecstatic, but one of the deepest gazers into the secrets of Eternal Love
that the history of Christian mysticism contains. Yet perhaps there is
no passage in the works of these same mystics which comes to so
unexpected, so startling a conclusion as this; in which St. Catherine,
with a fearless simplicity, shows to her fellow-men the nature of the
path that she has trodden and the place that she has reached.

<span id="an_iv.x-p145"></span>“When,” she says, in one of her reported
dialogues—and though the tone be impersonal it is clearly personal
experience which speaks—“the loving kindness of God calls a soul from
the world, He finds it full of vices and sins; and first He gives it an
instinct for virtue, and then urges it to perfection, and then by
infused grace leads it to true self-naughting, and at last to true
transformation. And this noteworthy order serves God to lead the soul
along the Way: but when the soul is naughted and transformed, then of
herself she neither works nor speaks nor wills, nor feels nor hears nor
understands, neither has she of herself the feeling of outward or
inward, where she may move. And in all things it is God Who rules and
guides her, without the mediation of any creature. And the state of this
soul is then a feeling of such utter peace and tranquillity that it
seems to her that her heart, and her bodily being, and all both within
and without is immersed in an ocean of utmost peace; from when she shall
never come forth for anything that can befall her in this life. And she
stays immovable, imperturbable, impassible. So much so, that it seems to
her in her human and her spiritual nature, both within and without, she
can feel no other thing than sweetest peace. And she is so full of peace
that though she press her flesh, her nerves, her bones, no other thing
comes forth from them than peace. Then says she all day for joy such
rhymes as these, making them according to her manner:—

> <span id="an_iv.x-p145.2"></span> “‘Vuoi tu che tu mostr’io  
> Presto che cosa è Dio?  
> Pace non trova chi da lui si partiò.’” <span
> id="fr_910"></span>[911](#fn_910)  

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_442"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p151"></span>“Then says she all day for joy such
rhymes as these”—nursery rhymes, one might almost call them: so
infantile, so naive is their rhythm. Who would have suspected this to be
the secret manner of communion between the exalted soul of Catherine and
her Love? How many of those who actually saw that great and able woman
labouring in the administration of her hospital—who heard that profound
and instinctive Christian Platonist instructing her disciples, and
declaring the law of universal and heroic love—how many of these divined
that “questa santa benedetta” who seemed to them already something more
than earthly, a matter of solemn congratulation and reverential
approach, went about her work with a heart engaged in no lofty
speculations on Eternity; no outpourings of mystic passion for the
Absolute; but “saying all day for joy,” in a spirit of childlike
happiness, gay and foolish little songs about her Love?

<span id="an_iv.x-p152"></span>Standing at the highest point of the
mystic ladder which can be reached by human spirits in this world of
time and space, looking back upon the course of that slow interior
alchemy, that “noteworthy order” of organic transformation, by which her
selfhood had been purged of imperfection, raised to higher levels,
compelled at last to surrender itself to the all-embracing,
all-demanding life of the Real; this is St. Catherine’s deliberate
judgment on the relative and absolute aspects of the mystic life. The
“noteworthy order” which we have patiently followed, the psychic growth
and rearrangement of character, the visions and ecstasies, the joyous
illumination and bitter pain—these but “served to lead the soul along
the way.” In the mighty transvaluation of values which takes place when
that way has at last been trod, these “abnormal events” sink to
insignificance. For us, looking out wistfully along the pathway to
reality, they stand out, it is true, as supreme landmarks, by which we
may trace the homeward course of pilgrim man. Their importance cannot be
overrated for those who would study the way to that world from this. But
the mystic, safe in that silence where lovers lose themselves, “his
cheek on Him Who for his coming came,” remembers them no more. In the
midst of his active work, his incessant spiritual creation, joy and
peace enfold him. He needs no stretched and sharpened intuition now: for
he dwells in that “most perfect form of contemplation” which “consists
in simple and perceived contact of the substance of the soul with that
of the divine.”  <span id="fr_911"></span>[912](#fn_911) <span
id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span id="an_iv.x-Page_443"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p154"></span>The wheel of life has made its circle.
Here, at the last point of its revolution, the extremes of sublimity and
simplicity are seen to meet. It has swept the soul of the mystic through
periods of alternate stress and glory; tending ever to greater
transcendence, greater freedom, closer contact with “the Supplier of
true life.” He emerges from that long and wondrous journey to find
himself in rest and in work, a little child upon the bosom of the
Father. In that most dear relation all feeling, will, and thought attain
their end. Here all the teasing complications of our separated selfhood
are transcended. Hence the eager striving, the sharp vision, are not
wanted any more. In that mysterious death of selfhood on the summits
which is the medium of Eternal Life, heights meet the deeps: supreme
achievement and complete humility are one.

<span id="an_iv.x-p155"></span>In a last brief vision, a glimpse as
overpowering to our common minds as Dante’s final intuition of reality
to his exalted and courageous soul, we see the triumphing spirit, sent
out before us the best that earth can offer, stoop and strip herself of
the insignia of wisdom and power. Achieving the highest, she takes the
lowest place. Initiated into the atmosphere of Eternity, united with the
Absolute, possessed at last of the fullness of Its life, the soul,
self-naughted becomes as a little child: for of such is the kingdom of
heaven.

<span id="an_iv.x-p156"></span><span id="page_444">p. 444</span> <span
id="an_iv.x-Page_444"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_841"></span>[415:842](myst21.htm#fr_841) <span
id="an_iv.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p6"></span> Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens,” p. 140.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[415:843](myst21.htm#fr_842) <span
id="an_iv.x-p9.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p10"></span> Compare Dante’s sense of a transmuted
personality when he first breathed the air of Paradise:—

<span id="an_iv.x-p11"></span>“S’ io era sol di me quel che creasti

<span id="an_iv.x-p12"></span>novellamente, Amor che il ciel governi

<span id="an_iv.x-p13"></span>tu il sai, che cot tuo lume mi levasti”
(Par. i. 73).

<span id="an_iv.x-p14"></span>“If I were only that of me which thou
didst new create, oh Love who rulest heaven, thou knowest who with thy
light didst lift me up.”

<span id="fn_843"></span>[416:844](myst21.htm#fr_843) <span
id="an_iv.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p17"></span> “Revelations of Divine Love,” cap. v.

<span id="fn_844"></span>[416:845](myst21.htm#fr_844) <span
id="an_iv.x-p17.4"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p18"></span> Par. I. 70.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[417:846](myst21.htm#fr_845) <span
id="an_iv.x-p21.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p22"></span> Delacroix. “Études sur le Mysticism,” p.
197.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[417:847](myst21.htm#fr_846) <span
id="an_iv.x-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p23"></span> Eucken, “Der Sinn und Wert des Lebens,”
p. 12.

<span id="fn_847"></span>[417:848](myst21.htm#fr_847) <span
id="an_iv.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p24"></span> *Ibid.* , p. 96.

<span id="fn_848"></span>[417:849](myst21.htm#fr_848) <span
id="an_iv.x-p24.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p25"></span> Delacroix, *op. cit* ., p. 114 ( *vide*
*supra* , p . 273).

<span id="fn_849"></span>[418:850](myst21.htm#fr_849) <span
id="an_iv.x-p29.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p30"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. xli.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[418:851](myst21.htm#fr_850) <span
id="an_iv.x-p31.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p32"></span> Par. xxx. 115-130 and xxxi. 1-12.

<span id="fn_851"></span>[419:852](myst21.htm#fr_851) <span
id="an_iv.x-p32.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p33"></span> Compare, p. 128.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[419:853](myst21.htm#fr_852) <span
id="an_iv.x-p34.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p35"></span> *Op. cit* ., ix. But it is difficult to
see why we need stigmatize as “half-savage” man’s primordial instinct
for his destiny.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[419:854](myst21.htm#fr_853) <span
id="an_iv.x-p35.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p36"></span> Divine Liturgy of the Orthodox Eastern
Church. Prayers before Communion.

<span id="fn_854"></span>[419:855](myst21.htm#fr_854) <span
id="an_iv.x-p37.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p38"></span> Athanasius, De Incarn. Verbi, i. 108.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[419:856](myst21.htm#fr_855) <span
id="an_iv.x-p38.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p39"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. x.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[420:857](myst21.htm#fr_856) <span
id="an_iv.x-p39.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p40"></span> Pred. lvii.

<span id="fn_857"></span>[420:858](myst21.htm#fr_857) <span
id="an_iv.x-p41.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p42"></span> Pred. xcix. (“Mystische Schriften,” p.
122).

<span id="fn_858"></span>[420:859](myst21.htm#fr_858) <span
id="an_iv.x-p43.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p44"></span> Ruysbroeck, “De Ornatu Spiritalium
Nuptiarum,” I. iii. cap. iii.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[420:860](myst21.htm#fr_859) <span
id="an_iv.x-p45.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p46"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. x. cap. xxviii.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[420:861](myst21.htm#fr_860) <span
id="an_iv.x-p46.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p47"></span> Cf. Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root,
and the Flower,” “Magna Moralia,” xxii.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[421:862](myst21.htm#fr_861) <span
id="an_iv.x-p48.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p49"></span> Par. xxx. 64.

<span id="fn_862"></span>[421:863](myst21.htm#fr_862) <span
id="an_iv.x-p49.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p50"></span> “De Septem Gradibus Amoris,” cap. xiv.

<span id="fn_863"></span>[421:864](myst21.htm#fr_863) <span
id="an_iv.x-p50.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p51"></span> “The Threefold Life of Man,” cap. vi. 88.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[421:865](myst21.htm#fr_864) <span
id="an_iv.x-p52.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p53"></span> “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae
Charitatis” (Migne, Patrologia Latina cxcvi.)

<span id="fn_865"></span>[422:866](myst21.htm#fr_865) <span
id="an_iv.x-p53.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p54"></span> Dialogo, cap. lxxviii.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[423:867](myst21.htm#fr_866) <span
id="an_iv.x-p55.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p56"></span> Ruysbroeck. “Samuel,” cap. xi. (English
translation: “The Book of Truth.”)

<span id="fn_867"></span>[423:868](myst21.htm#fr_867) <span
id="an_iv.x-p57.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p58"></span> *Ibid* ., “De Calculo,” cap. ix.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[423:869](myst21.htm#fr_868) <span
id="an_iv.x-p59.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p60"></span> St. Thomas Aquinas, “Summa Contra
Gentiles,” bk. iii. cap. lxii.

<span id="fn_869"></span>[425:870](myst21.htm#fr_869) <span
id="an_iv.x-p62.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p63"></span> Suso, “Buchlein von der Wahrheit,” cap.
iv.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[425:871](myst21.htm#fr_870) <span
id="an_iv.x-p64.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p65"></span> “Theologia Germanica,” cap. x.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[425:872](myst21.htm#fr_871) <span
id="an_iv.x-p65.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p66"></span> Ruysbroeck, “Speculum Aeternae e
Salutis,” cap. vii.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[425:873](myst21.htm#fr_872) <span
id="an_iv.x-p66.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p67"></span> “Regnum Deum Amantium,” cap xxii.

<span id="fn_873"></span>[426:874](myst21.htm#fr_873) <span
id="an_iv.x-p69.18"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p70"></span> Jalalu ‘d Din, “The Festival of Spring”
(Hastie’s translation p. 10).

<span id="fn_874"></span>[427:875](myst21.htm#fr_874) <span
id="an_iv.x-p72.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p73"></span> “The Mirror of Simple Souls,” Div. iv.
cap. i.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[427:876](myst21.htm#fr_875) <span
id="an_iv.x-p74.3"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p75"></span> “The Epistle of Prayer.” Printed from
Pepwell’s edition in “The Cell of Self-knowledge,” edited by Edmund
Gardner, p. 88.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[428:877](myst21.htm#fr_876) <span
id="an_iv.x-p76.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p77"></span> Gerlac Petersen, “Ignitum cum Deo
Soliloqium,” cap. xv.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[428:878](myst21.htm#fr_877) <span
id="an_iv.x-p78.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p79"></span> Compare Pt. i. Cap. vi. It seems needless
to repeat here the examples there given.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[428:879](myst21.htm#fr_878) <span
id="an_iv.x-p80.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p81"></span> Hilton, “The Treatise written to a Devout
Man,” cap. viii.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[428:880](myst21.htm#fr_879) <span
id="an_iv.x-p81.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p82"></span> Cf. Ormond, “Foundations of Knowledge,”
p. 442. “When we love any being, we desire either the unification of its
life with our own or our own unification with its life. Love in its
innermost motive is a unifying principle.”

<span id="fn_880"></span>[428:881](myst21.htm#fr_880) <span
id="an_iv.x-p82.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p83"></span> “Summa Contra Gentiles,” bk. ii. cap.
xxi.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[429:882](myst21.htm#fr_881) <span
id="an_iv.x-p84.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p85"></span> “De Quatuor Gradibus Violentae
Charitatis” (Migne, Patrologia Latina cxcvi. col. 1216 D).

<span id="fn_882"></span>[429:883](myst21.htm#fr_882) <span
id="an_iv.x-p85.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p86"></span> “El Castillo Interior,” Moradas Sétimas,
cap. iv.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[431:884](myst21.htm#fr_883) <span
id="an_iv.x-p93.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p94"></span> “Les Torrents,” pt. i. cap. ix.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[432:885](myst21.htm#fr_884) <span
id="an_iv.x-p95.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p96"></span> Thomas of Celano, Legenda Secunda, cap.
xii.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[433:886](myst21.htm#fr_885) <span
id="an_iv.x-p99.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p100"></span> *Supra* , Pt. I. Cap. II.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[433:887](myst21.htm#fr_886) <span
id="an_iv.x-p101.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p102"></span> Ruysbroeck, “De Calculo,” cap. ix.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[434:888](myst21.htm#fr_887) <span
id="an_iv.x-p102.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p103"></span> *Op. cit* ., cap viii. and ix.
(condensed).

<span id="fn_888"></span>[434:889](myst21.htm#fr_888) <span
id="an_iv.x-p104.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p105"></span> *Vide supra* p. 35.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[435:890](myst21.htm#fr_889) <span
id="an_iv.x-p107.5"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p108"></span> Par. xxxiii. 91. “I believe that I
beheld the universal form of this knot: because in saying this I feel my
joy increased.”

<span id="fn_890"></span>[435:891](myst21.htm#fr_890) <span
id="an_iv.x-p111.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p112"></span> “De Septem Gradibus Amoris,” Cap. xiv .

<span id="fn_891"></span>[435:892](myst21.htm#fr_891) <span
id="an_iv.x-p113.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p114"></span> *Ibid., loc. cit.*

<span id="fn_892"></span>[436:893](myst21.htm#fr_892) <span
id="an_iv.x-p115.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p116"></span> Ruysbroeck “Do Ornatu Spiritalium
Nuptiarum,”” I. ii cap. lxv.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[437:894](myst21.htm#fr_893) <span
id="an_iv.x-p118.3"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p119"></span> Par. xxxiii. 137.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[437:895](myst21.htm#fr_894) <span
id="an_iv.x-p119.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p120"></span> “The Mirror of Simple Souls.” p. 161.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[437:896](myst21.htm#fr_895) <span
id="an_iv.x-p121.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p122"></span> “De Imitatione Christi,” I. iii. cap. v.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[438:897](myst21.htm#fr_896) <span
id="an_iv.x-p123.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p124"></span> Contestatio Fr. Thomae Caffarina,
Processus, col. 1258 (E. Gardner, “St. Catherine of Siena,” p. 48).

<span id="fn_897"></span>[438:898](myst21.htm#fr_897) <span
id="an_iv.x-p125.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p126"></span> Par. xxvii. 4.

<span id="fn_898"></span>[438:899](myst21.htm#fr_898) <span
id="an_iv.x-p126.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p127"></span> *Ibid* ., xx. 13.

<span id="fn_899"></span>[438:900](myst21.htm#fr_899) <span
id="an_iv.x-p127.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p128"></span> *Ibid* ., x. 76, 118.

<span id="fn_900"></span>[438:901](myst21.htm#fr_900) <span
id="an_iv.x-p128.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p129"></span> *Ibid.*, xxviii. 100.

<span id="fn_901"></span>[438:902](myst21.htm#fr_901) <span
id="an_iv.x-p129.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p130"></span> *Ibid*., xxxiii. 124-26.

<span id="fn_902"></span>[438:903](myst21.htm#fr_902) <span
id="an_iv.x-p130.4"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p131"></span> Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root,
and the Flower,” “Aurea Dicta.”

<span id="fn_903"></span>[439:904](myst21.htm#fr_903) <span
id="an_iv.x-p132.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p133"></span> Richard Rolle, “The Fire of Love,” bk.
ii. cap. vii.

<span id="fn_904"></span>[439:905](myst21.htm#fr_904) <span
id="an_iv.x-p134.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p135"></span> *Op. cit* ., bk. i. cap. xi.

<span id="fn_905"></span>[439:906](myst21.htm#fr_905) <span
id="an_iv.x-p136.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p137"></span> “Speculum Perfectionis,” cap, c.
(Steele’s translation).

<span id="fn_906"></span>[440:907](myst21.htm#fr_906) <span
id="an_iv.x-p138.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p139"></span> “Speculum,” cap. cxiii.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[440:908](myst21.htm#fr_907) <span
id="an_iv.x-p139.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p140"></span> *Ibid.* , cap. c.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[440:909](myst21.htm#fr_908) <span
id="an_iv.x-p140.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p141"></span> *Ibid.* , cap. xciii., also Thomas of
Celano, Vita Secunda, cap. xc.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[440:910](myst21.htm#fr_909) <span
id="an_iv.x-p142.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p143"></span> *Cf* . G. Cunninghame Graham, “Santa
Teresa,” vol. i. pp. 180, 300, 304.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[441:911](myst21.htm#fr_910) <span
id="an_iv.x-p145.6"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p146"></span> “Dost thou wish that I should show

<span id="an_iv.x-p147"></span>All God’s Being thou mayst know?

<span id="an_iv.x-p148"></span>Peace is not found of those who do not
with Him go.”

<span id="an_iv.x-p149"></span>(Vita e Dottrina, cap. xviii.)

<span id="an_iv.x-p150"></span>Here, in spite of the many revisions to
which the Vita has been subjected, I cannot but see an authentic report
of St. Catherine’s inner mind; highly characteristic of the personality
which “came joyous and rosy-faced” from its ecstatic encounters with
Love. The very unexpectedness of its conclusion, so unlike the
expressions supposed to be proper to the saints, is a guarantee of its
authenticity. On the text of the “Vita” see Von Hügel, “The Mystical
Element of Religion,” vol. i., Appendix.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[442:912](myst21.htm#fr_911) <span
id="an_iv.x-p152.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.x-p153"></span> Coventry Patmore, “The Rod, the Root,
and the Flower,” “Magna Moralia,” xv.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](myst22)

</div>
