<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Mysticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](myst17)  [Next](myst19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KU/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysticism*, by Evelyn Underhill, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII. Introversion. Part II: Contemplation

<span id="an_iv.vii"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p1"></span>We<span id="an_iv.vii-p1.1"></span> must
now consider under the general name of Contemplation those developed
states of introversion in which the mystic attains somewhat: the results
and rewards of the discipline of Recollection and Quiet. If this course
of spiritual athletics has done its work, he has now brought to the
surface, trained and made efficient for life, a form of consciousness—a
medium of communication with reality—which remains undeveloped in
ordinary men. Thanks to this faculty, he is now capable of the
characteristic mystic experience: temporary union with “that spiritual
fount closed to all reactions from the world of sense, where, without
witnesses of any kind, God and our Freedom meet.”  <span
id="fr_680"></span>[681](#fn_680.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p3"></span>The degrees of Recollection trained the
self in spiritual attention: and at the same time lifted it to a new
level of perception where, by means of the symbol which formed the
gathering-point of its powers, it received a new inflow of life. In the
degrees of Quiet it passed on to a state characterized by a tense
stillness, in which it rested in that Reality at which, as yet, it dared
not look. Now, in Contemplation, it is to transcend alike the stages of
symbol and of silence; and “energize enthusiastically” on those high
levels which are dark to the intellect but radiant <span
id="page_329">p. 329</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_329"></span> to the
heart. We must expect this contemplative activity to show itself in many
different ways and take many different names since its character will be
largely governed by individual temperament. It appears under the forms
which ascetic writers call “ordinary” and “extraordinary,” “infused” or
“passive” Contemplation; and as that “orison of union” which we have
already discussed.  <span id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681.md) Sometimes,
too, it shows itself under those abnormal psycho-physical conditions in
which the intense concentration of the self upon its transcendental
perceptions results in the narrowing of the field of consciousness to a
point at which all knowledge of the external world is lost, all the
messages of the senses are utterly ignored. The subject then appears to
be in a state of trance, characterized by physical rigidity and more or
less complete anaesthesia. These are the conditions of Rapture or
Ecstasy: conditions of which the physical resemblances to certain
symptoms of hysteria have so greatly reassured the enemies of mysticism.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p5"></span>Rapture and Ecstasy differ from
Contemplation proper in being wholly involuntary states. Rapture, says
St. Teresa who frequently experienced it, is absolutely irresistible; we
cannot hinder it. Whereas the orison of union, which is one of the forms
in which pure Contemplation appears at its highest point of development,
is still controlled to a large extent by the will of the subject, and
“may be hindered, although that resistance be painful and violent.”
 <span id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682.md) There is thus a sharp
distinction—a distinction both physical and psychical—between the
contemplative and the ecstatic states: and we shall do well to avail
ourselves of it in examining their character.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p7"></span>First, then, as to Contemplation proper:
what is it? It is a supreme manifestation of that indivisible “power of
knowing” which lies at the root of all our artistic and spiritual
satisfactions. In it, man’s “made Trinity” of thought, love, and will,
becomes a Unity: and feeling and perception are fused, as they are in
all our apprehensions of beauty, our best contacts with life. It is an
act, not of the Reason, but of the whole personality working under the
stimulus of mystic love. Hence, its results feed every aspect of that
personality: minister to its instinct for the Good the Beautiful, and
the True. Psychologically it is an induced state, in which the field of
consciousness is greatly contracted: the whole of the self, its conative
powers, being sharply focussed, concentrated upon one thing. We pour
ourselves out or, as it sometimes seems to us, *in* towards this
over-powering interest: seem to ourselves to reach it and be merged with
it. Whatever <span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_330"></span> the thing may be, in this act it is
given to us and we *know* it, as we cannot know it by the ordinary
devices of thought.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p8"></span>The turning of our attention from that
crisp and definite world of multiplicity, that cinematograph-show, with
which intelligence is accustomed and able to deal, has loosed new powers
of perception which we never knew that we possessed. Instead of sharply
perceiving the fragment, we apprehend, yet how we know not, the solemn
presence of the whole. Deeper levels of personality are opened up, and
go gladly to the encounter of the universe. That universe, or some
Reality hid between it and ourselves, responds to “the true lovely will
of our heart.” Our ingoing concentration is balanced by a great outgoing
sense of expansion, of new worlds made ours, as we receive the inflow of
its life. So complete is the self’s absorption that it is for the time
unconscious of any acts of mind or will; in technical language, its
“faculties are suspended.” This is the “ligature” frequently mentioned
by teachers of contemplative prayer, and often regarded as an essential
character of mystical states.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p9"></span>Delacroix has described with great
subtlety the psychological character of pure contemplation.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p10"></span>“When contemplation appears,” he says:
“( *a* ) It produces a general condition of indifference, liberty, and
peace, an elevation above the world, a sense of beatitude. The Subject
ceases to perceive himself in the multiplicity and division of his
general consciousness. He is raised above himself. A deeper and a purer
soul substitutes itself for the normal self. ( *b* ) In this state, in
which consciousness of I-hood and consciousness of the world disappear,
the mystic is conscious of being in immediate relation with God Himself;
of participating in Divinity. Contemplation installs a method of being
and of knowing. Moreover, these two things tend at bottom to become one.
The mystic has more and more the impression of being that which he
knows, and of knowing that which he is.”  <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683.md) Temporally rising, in fact, to levels
of freedom, he knows himself real, and therefore knows Reality.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p12"></span>Now, the object of the mystic’s
contemplation is always some aspect of the Infinite Life: of “God, the
one Reality.” Hence, that enhancement of vitality which artists or other
unselfconscious observers may receive from their communion with
scattered manifestations of Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, is in him
infinitely increased. His uniformly rapturous language is alone enough
to prove this. In the contemplative act, his whole personality, directed
by love and will, transcends the sense-world, casts off its fetters, and
rises to freedom: becoming operative on those high levels where, says
Tauler, “reason cannot <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_331"></span> come.” There it apprehends the
supra-sensible by immediate contact, and knows itself to be in the
presence of the “Supplier of true Life.” Such Contemplation—such
positive attainment of the Absolute—is the *whole act* of which the
visions of poets, the intuition of philosophers, give us hints.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p13"></span>It is a brief act. The greatest of the
contemplatives have been unable to sustain the brilliance of this awful
vision for more than a little while. “A flash,” “an instant,” “the space
of an Ave Maria,” they say. “My mind,” says St. Augustine, in his
account of his first purely contemplative glimpse of the One Reality,
“withdrew its thoughts from experience, extracting itself from the
contradictory throng of sensuous images, that it might find out what
that light was wherein it was bathed. . . . And thus with the flash of
one hurried glance, it attained to the vision of *That Which Is.* And
then at last I saw Thy invisible things understood by means of the
things that are made, but I could not sustain my gaze: my weakness was
dashed back, and I was relegated to my ordinary experience, bearing with
me only a loving memory, and as it were the fragrance of those desirable
meats on the which as yet I was not able to feed.”  <span
id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p15"></span>This fragrance, as St. Augustine calls
it, remains for ever with those who have thus been initiated, if only
for a moment, into the atmosphere of the Real: and this—the immortal and
indescribable memory of their communion with That Which Is—gives to
their work the perfume of the “Inviolate Rose,” and is the secret of its
magic power. But they can never tell us in exact and human language
*what* it was that they attained in their ecstatic flights towards the
thought of God: their momentary mergence in the Absolute Life.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p16"></span>“That Which Is,” says St. Augustine;
“The One,” “the Supplier of true Life,” says Plotinus; “the energetic
Word,” says St. Bernard; “Eternal Light,” says Dante; “the Abyss,” says
Ruysbroeck; “Pure Love,” says St. Catherine of Genoa—Poor symbols of
Perfection at the best. But, through and by these oblique utterances,
they give us the assurance that the Object of their discovery is one
with the object of our quest.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p17"></span>William James considered “ineffability”
and “noetic quality” to be the constant characteristics of the
contemplative experience.  <span id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685.md) Those
who have seen are quite convinced: those who have not seen, can never be
told. There is no certitude to equal the mystic’s certitude: no
impotence more complete than that which falls on those who try to
communicate it. “Of these most excellent and divine workings in the
soul, when God doth manifest Himself,” <span id="page_332">p. 332</span>
<span id="an_iv.vii-Page_332"></span> says Angela of Foligno, “we can in
no wise speak, or even stammer.”  <span
id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686.md) Nevertheless, the greater part of
mystical literature is concerned with the attempts of the mystics to
share their discoveries. Under a variety of images, by a deliberate
exploitation of the musical and suggestive qualities of words—often,
too, by the help of desperate paradoxes, those unfailing stimulants of
man’s intuitive power—they try to tell others somewhat of that veritable
country which “eye hath not seen.” Their success—partial though it
be—can only be accounted for upon the supposition that somewhere within
us lurks a faculty, a spark, a “fine point of spirit” which has known
this country from its birth; which dwells in it, partakes of Pure Being,
and can under certain conditions be stung to consciousness. Then
“transcendental feeling,” waking from its sleep, acknowledges that these
explorers of the Infinite have really gazed upon the secret plan.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p20"></span>Contemplation is not, like meditation,
one simple state, governed by one set of psychic conditions. It is a
general name for a large group of states, partly governed—like all other
forms of mystical activity—by the temperament of the subject, and
accompanied by feeling-states which vary from the extreme of quietude or
“peace in life naughted” to the rapturous and active love in which
“thought into song is turned.” Some kinds of Contemplation are
inextricably entwined with the phenomena of “intellectual vision” and
“inward voices.” In others we find what seems to be a development of the
“Quiet”: a state which the subject describes as a blank absorption, a
darkness, or “contemplation *in* *caligine*.” <span
id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687.md) Sometimes the contemplative tells us
that he passes through this darkness to the light:  <span
id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688.md) sometimes it seems to him that he
stays for ever in the “beneficent dark.”  <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689.md) In some cases the soul says that even
in the depths of her absorption, she “knows her own bliss”: in others
she only becomes aware of it when contemplation is over and the
surface-intelligence reassumes the reins.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p24"></span>In this welter of personal experiences,
it becomes necessary to adopt some basis of classification, some rule by
which to distinguish true Contemplation from other introversive states.
Such a basis is not easy to find. I think, however, that there are two
marks of the real condition: (A) The Totality and Givenness of the
Object. (B) Self-Mergence of the subject. These we may safely use in our
attempt to determine its character. <span id="page_333">p. 333</span>
<span id="an_iv.vii-Page_333"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p25"></span>(A) Whatever terms he may employ to
describe it, and however faint or confused his perceptions may be, the
mystic’s experience in Contemplation is the experience of the All, and
this experience seems to him to be *given* rather than attained. It is
indeed the Absolute which is revealed to him: not, as in meditation or
vision, some partial symbol or aspect thereof.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p26"></span>(B) This revealed Reality is apprehended
by way of participation, not by way of observation. The passive
receptivity of the Quiet is here developed into an active, outgoing
self-donation, which is the self’s response to the Divine initiative. By
a free act, independent of man’s effort, God is self-disclosed to the
soul; and that soul rushes out willingly to lose itself in Him. Thus a
“give and take”—a divine osmosis—is set up between the finite and the
Infinite life. That dreadful consciousness of a narrow and limiting
I-hood which dogs our search for freedom and full life, is done away.
For a moment, at least, the independent spiritual life is achieved. The
contemplative is merged in it “like a bird in the air, like a fish in
the sea”: loses to find and dies to live.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p27"></span>“We must,” says Dionysius the
Areopagite, “be transported wholly out of ourselves and given unto God.”
 <span id="fr_690"></span>[691](#fn_690.md) This is the “passive union” of
Contemplation: a temporary condition in which the subject receives a
double conviction of ineffable happiness and ultimate reality. He may
try to translate this conviction into “something said” or “something
seen”: but in the end he will be found to confess that he can tell
nothing, save by implication. The essential fact is that he was *there:*
as the essential fact for the returning exile is neither landscape nor
language, but the homely spirit of place.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p29"></span>“To see and to have seen that Vision,”
says Plotinus in one of his finest passages, “is reason no longer. It is
more than reason, before reason, and after reason, as also is the vision
which is seen. . . . And perhaps we should not here speak of *sight:*
for that which is seen is not discerned by the seer—if indeed it is
possible here to distinguish seer and seen as separate things. . .
.Therefore this vision is hard to tell of: for how can a man describe as
other than himself that which, when he discerned it, seemed not other,
but one with himself indeed?”  <span id="fr_691"></span>[692](#fn_691.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p31"></span>Ruysbroeck, who continued in the
mediaeval world the best traditions of Neoplatonic mysticism, also
describes a condition of supreme insight, a vision of Truth, which is
closely related to the Plotinian ecstasy. “Contemplation,” he says,
“places us in a purity and a radiance which is far above our
understanding . . . and none can attain to it by knowledge, by subtlety,
or by any exercise whatsoever: but he whom God chooses to unite to <span
id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_334"></span>
Himself, and to illuminate by Himself, he and no other can contemplate
God. . . . But few men attain to this divine contemplation, because of
our incapacity and of the hiddenness of that light in which one sees.
And this is why none by his own knowledge, or by subtle consideration,
will ever really understand these things. For all words and all that one
can learn or understand in a creaturely way, are foreign to the truth
that I mean and far below it. But he who is united to God, and illumined
by this truth—he can understand Truth by Truth.  <span
id="fr_692"></span>[693](#fn_692.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p33"></span>This final, satisfying knowledge of
reality—this understanding of Truth by Truth—is, at bottom, that which
all men desire. The saint’s thirst for God, the philosopher’s passion
for the Absolute; these are nothing else than the crying need of the
spirit, variously expressed by the intellect and by the heart. The
guesses of science, the diagrams of metaphysics, the intuitions of
artists; all are pressing towards this. “Adam sinned when he fell from
Contemplation. Since then, there has been division in man.”  <span
id="fr_693"></span>[694](#fn_693.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p35"></span>Man’s soul, says Hilton, “Feeleth well
that there is somewhat above itself that it knoweth not nor hath not
yet, but it would have it, and burningly yearneth for it. And that is
nought else but the sight of Jerusalem without-forth, the which is like
to a city that the prophet Ezechiel saw in his visions.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p36"></span>“He saith that he saw a city set upon an
hill sloping to the south, that to his sight when it was measured was no
more of length and of breadth than a rood, that was six cubits and a
palm of length; but as soon as he was brought into the city and looked
about him, then thought him that it was wonder mickle, for he saw many
halls and chambers both open and privy, he saw gates and porches,
outward and inward, and mickle more building than I say now, on length
and on breadth many hundred cubits. Then was this wonder to him, how
this city within was so long and so large, that was so little to his
sight when he was without. This city betokeneth the perfect love of God,
set in the hill of contemplation; the which unto the sight of a soul
that is without the feeling of it and travaileth in desire toward,
seemeth somewhat, but it seemeth but a little thing, no more than a
rood, that is six cubits and a palm in length. By six cubits is
understood the perfection of man’s work, by the palm a little touching
of contemplation. He seeth well that there is such a thing, that passeth
the desert of all working of man a little, as the palm passeth over the
six cubits, but he seeth not within what that is. Nevertheless, <span
id="page_335">p. 335</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_335"></span> if he
may come within the city of contemplation, then seeth he mickle more
than he saw first.”  <span id="fr_694"></span>[695](#fn_694.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p38"></span>As in the case of vision, so here, all
that we who “without the feeling travail in desire” can really know
concerning Contemplation—its value for life, the knowledge it
confers—must come from those who have “come within the city”: have, in
the metaphor of Plotinus, “taken flight towards the Thought of God.”
What, in effect, can they tell us about the knowledge of reality which
they attained in that brief communion with the Absolute?

<span id="an_iv.vii-p39"></span>They tell us chiefly, when we come to
collate their evidence, two apparently contradictory things. They speak,
almost in the Same breath, of an exceeding joy, a Beatific Vision, an
intense communion, and a “loving sight”: and of an exceeding emptiness,
a barren desert, an unfathomable Abyss, a nescience, a Divine Dark.
Again and again these pairs of opposites occur in all first-hand
descriptions of pure contemplation: Remoteness and Intimacy, Darkness
and Light. Bearing in mind that these four metaphors all describe the
same process seen “through a temperament,” and represent the reaction of
that temperament upon Absolute Reality, we may perhaps by their
comparison obtain some faint idea of the totality of that indescribable
experience at which they hint.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p40"></span>Note first that the emotional
accompaniments of his perceptions will always and necessarily be the
stuff from which the mystic draws suggestive language, by which to hint
at his experience of supernal things. His descriptions will always lean
to the impressionistic rather than to the scientific side. The “deep yet
dazzling darkness,” the “unfathomable abyss,” the Cloud of Unknowing,
the “embrace of the Beloved,” all represent, not the Transcendent but
his relation with the Transcendent; not an object observed, but an
overwhelming impression felt, by the totality of his being during his
communion with a Reality which is One.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p41"></span>It is not fair, however, to regard
Contemplation on this account as pre-eminently a “feeling state”; and
hence attribute to it, as many modern writers do, a merely subjective
validity. It is of course accompanied, as all humanity’s supreme and
vital acts are accompanied, by feeling of an exalted kind: and since
such emotions are the least abnormal part of it, they are the part which
the subject finds easiest to describe. These elusive combinations of
Fear, Amazement, Desire, and Joy are more or less familiar to him. The
accidents of sensual life have developed them. His language contains
words which are capable of <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_336"></span> suggesting them to other men. But his
total experience transcends mere feeling, just as it transcends mere
intellect. It is a complete act of perception, inexpressible by these
departmental words: and its agent is the *whole man,* the indivisible
personality whose powers and nature are only partially hinted at in such
words as Love, Thought, or Will.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p42"></span>The plane of consciousness, however—the
objective somewhat—of which this personality becomes aware in
contemplation, is not familiar to it; neither is it related to its
systems of thought. Man, accustomed to dwell amongst spatial images
adapted to the needs of daily life, has no language that will fit it.
So, a person hearing for the first time some masterpiece of classical
music, would have no language in which to describe it objectively; but
could only tell us how it made him *feel.* This is one reason why
feeling-states seem to preponderate in all descriptions of the mystic
act. Earthly emotions provide a parallel which enables the subject to
tell us by implication something of that which he felt: but he cannot
describe to us—for want of standards of comparison—that Wholly Other
which induced him thus to feel. His best efforts to fit words to this
elusive but objective experience generally result in the evaporation
alike of its fragrance and of its truth. As St. Augustine said of Time,
he knows what it is until he is asked to define it.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p43"></span>How symbolic and temperamental is all
verbal description of mystical activity, may be seen by the aspect which
contemplation took in the music-loving soul of Richard Rolle; who always
found his closest parallels with Reality, not in the concepts of
intimate union, or of self-loss in the Divine Abyss, but in the idea of
the soul’s participation in a supernal harmony—that sweet minstrelsy of
God in which “thought into song is turned.” “To me,” he says, “it seems
that contemplation is joyful song of God’s love taken in mind, with
sweetness of angels’ praise. This is jubilation, that is the end of
perfect prayer and high devotion in this life. This is that mirth in
mind, had ghostily by the lover everlastingly, with great voice
outbreaking. . . . Contemplative sweetness not without full great labour
is gotten, and with joy untold it is possessed. Forsooth, it is not
man’s merit but God’s gift; and yet from the beginning to this day never
might man be ravished in contemplation of Love Everlasting, but if he
before parfitely all the world’s vanity had forsaken.”  <span
id="fr_695"></span>[696](#fn_695.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p45"></span>We must, then, be prepared to accept,
sift, and use many different descriptions of evoked emotion in the
course of our inquiry into the nature of the contemplative’s perceptions
of the <span id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_337"></span> Absolute. We find on analysis that these
evoked emotions separate themselves easily into two groups. Further,
these two groups answer to the two directions in which the mystic
consciousness of Reality is extended, and to the pairs of descriptions
of the Godhead which we have found to be characteristic of mystical
literature: *i.e.* , the personal and spatial, immanental and
transcendental, indwelling Life and Unconditioned Source; ( *a* ) the
strange, dark, unfathomable Abyss of Pure Being always dwelt upon by
mystics of the metaphysical type, and ( *b* ) the divine and loved
Companion of the soul, whose presence is so sharply felt by those selves
which lean to the concept of Divine Personality.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p46"></span> *A. The Contemplation of
Transcendence.—* The first group of feeling-states, allied to those
which emphasize the theological idea of Divine Transcendence, is born of
the mystic’s sense of his own littleness, unworthiness, and incurable
ignorance in comparison with the ineffable greatness of the Absolute
Godhead which he has perceived, and in which he desires to lose himself;
of the total and incommunicable difference *in kind* between the Divine
and everything else. Awe and self-abasement, and the paradoxical passion
for self-loss in the All, here govern his emotional state. All
affirmative statements seem to him blasphemous, so far are they from an
ineffable truth which is “more than reason, before reason, and after
reason.” To this group of feelings, which usually go with an instinctive
taste for Neoplatonism, an iconoclastic distrust of personal imagery, we
owe all negative descriptions of supreme Reality. For this type of self,
God is the Unconditioned, the Wholly Other for whom we have no words,
and whom all our poor symbols insult. To see Him is to enter the
Darkness, the “Cloud of Unknowing,” and “know only that we know nought.”
Nothing else can satisfy this extreme spiritual humility; which easily
degenerates into that subtle form of pride which refuses to acquiesce in
the limitations of its own creaturely state.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p47"></span>“There is none other God but He that
none may know, which may not be known,” says this contemplative soul.
“No, soothly no! Without fail, No, says she. He only is my God that none
can one word of say, nor all they of Paradise one only point attain nor
understand, for all the knowing that they have of Him.”  <span
id="fr_696"></span>[697](#fn_696.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p49"></span>When they try to be geographically
exact, to define and describe their apprehension of, and contact with,
the Unconditioned One who is the only Country of the Soul,
contemplatives of this type become, like their great master the
Areopagite, <span id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_338"></span> impersonal and remote. They seem to have
been caught up to some measureless height, where the air is too rarefied
for the lungs of common men. When we ask them the nature of the life on
these summits, they are compelled as a rule to adopt the Dionysian
concept of Divine Darkness, or the parallel idea of the fathomless
Abyss, the Desert of the Godhead, the Eckhartian “still wilderness where
no one is at home.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p50"></span>Oddly enough, it is in their language
concerning this place or plane of reality, in which union with the
Super-essential Godhead takes place—this “lightsome darkness and rich
nought”—that they come nearer to distinct affirmation, and consequently
offer more surprises to sentimental and anthropomorphic piety, than in
any other department of their work. Unquestionably this language, with
its constant reference to a “still desert,” a “vast sea,” an “unplumbed
abyss” in which the “emptiness,” the “nothing,” the “Dark” on which the
self entered in the Orison of Quiet is infinitely increased, yet
positive satisfaction is at last attained, does correspond with a
definite psychological experience. It is not merely the convention of a
school. These descriptions, incoherent as they are, have a strange note
of certainty, a stranger note of passion, an odd realism of their own:
which mean, wherever we meet them, that experience not tradition is
their source. Driven of necessity to a negation of all that their
surface-minds have ever known—with language, strained to the uttermost,
failing them at every turn—these contemplatives are still able to
communicate to us a definite somewhat; news as to a given and actual
Reality, an unchanging Absolute, and a beatific union with it, most
veritably attained. They agree in their accounts of it, in a way which
makes it obvious that all these reporters have sojourned in the same
land, and experienced the same spiritual state. Moreover, our inmost
minds bear witness for them. We meet them half-way. We know
instinctively and irrefutably that they tell true; and they rouse in us
a passionate nostalgia, a bitter sense of exile and of loss.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p51"></span>One and all, these explorers of the
Infinite fly to language expressive of great and boundless spaces. In
their withdrawal from the busy, fretful sense-world they have sunk down
to the “ground” of the soul and of the apparent universe: Being, the
Substance of all that Is. Multiplicity is resolved into Unity: a unity
with which the perceiving self is merged. Thus the mystic, for the time
of this “union with the Divine,” does find himself, in Tauler’s words,
to be “simply in God.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p52"></span>“The great wastes to be found in this
divine ground,” says that great master, “have neither image nor form nor
condition, for they are neither here nor there. They are like unto a
fathomless <span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_339"></span> Abyss, bottomless and floating in
itself. Even as water ebbs and flows, up and down; now sinking into a
hollow, so that it looks as if there were no water there, and then again
in a little while rushing forth as if it would engulf everything, so
does it come to pass in this Abyss. This, truly, is much more God’s
Dwelling-place than heaven or man. A man who verily desires to enter
will surely find God here, and himself simply in God; for God never
separates Himself from this ground. God will be present with him, and he
will find and enjoy Eternity here. There is no past nor present here,
and no created light can reach unto or shine into this divine Ground;
for here only is the dwelling-place of God and His sanctuary.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p53"></span>“Now this Divine Abyss can be fathomed
by no creatures; it can be filled by none, and it satisfies none, God
only can fill it in His Infinity. For this abyss belongs only to the
Divine Abyss of which it is written: <span id="an_iv.vii-p53.1"></span>
*Abysses abyssum invocal* . He who is truly conscious of this ground,
which shone into the powers of his soul, and lighted and inclined its
lowest and highest powers to turn to their pure Source and true Origin,
must diligently examine himself, and remain alone, listening to the
voice which cries in the wilderness of this ground. This ground is so
desert and bare that no thought has ever entered there. None of all the
thoughts of man which, with the help of reason, have been devoted to
meditation on the Holy Trinity (and some men have occupied themselves
much with these thoughts) have ever entered this ground. For it is so
close and yet so far off, and so far beyond all things, that it has
neither time nor place. It is a simple and unchanging condition. A man
who really and truly enters, feels as though he had been here throughout
eternity, and as though he were one therewith.”  <span
id="fr_697"></span>[698](#fn_697.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p55"></span>Many other mystics have written to the
same effect: have described with splendour the ineffable joys and
terrors of the Abyss of Being “where man existed in God from all
Eternity,” the soul’s adventures when, “stripped of its very life,” it
“sails the wild billows of the sea divine.” But their words merely amaze
the outsider and give him little information. The contemplative self who
has attained this strange country can only tell an astonished and
incredulous world that here his greatest deprivation is also his
greatest joy; that here the extremes of possession and surrender are the
same, that ignorance and knowledge, light and dark, are *One.* Love has
led him into that timeless, spaceless world of Being which is the
peaceful ground, not only of the individual striving spirit, but also of
the striving universe; and he can but cry with Philip, “ *It is*
*enough.”* <span id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_340"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p56"></span>“Here,” says Maeterlinck, “we stand
suddenly at the confines of human thought, and far beyond the Polar
circle of the mind. It is intensely cold here; it is intensely dark, and
yet you will find nothing but flames and light. But to those who come
without having trained their souls to these new perceptions, this light
and these flames are as dark and as cold as if they were painted. Here
we are concerned with the most exact of sciences: with the exploration
of the harshest and most uninhabitable headlands of the divine ‘Know
thyself’: and the midnight sun reigns over that rolling sea where the
psychology of man mingles with the psychology of God.”  <span
id="fr_698"></span>[699](#fn_698.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p58"></span>On one hand “flames and light”—the flame
of living and creative love which fills the universe—on the other the
“quiet desert of Godhead,” transcending all succession and dark to the
single sight of earth-born men. Under these two metaphors, one
affirmative, one negative, resumed in his most daring paradox nearly the
whole of man’s contemplative experience of the Absolute can be and is
expressed. We have considered his negative description of Utmost
Transcendence: that confession of “divine ignorance” which is a higher
form of knowledge. But this is balanced, in a few elect spirits, by a
positive contemplation of truth; an ecstatic apprehension of the “secret
plan.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p59"></span>Certain rare mystics seem able to
describe to us a Beatific Vision experienced here and now: a knowledge
by contact of the flaming heart of Reality, which includes in one great
whole the planes of Being and Becoming, the Simultaneous and the
Successive, the Eternal Father, and His manifestation in the “energetic
Word.” We saw something of this power, which is characteristic of
mystical genius of a high order, in studying the characteristics of
Illumination. Its finest literary expression is found in that passage of
the “Paradiso” where Dante tells us how he pierced, for an instant, the
secret of the Empyrean. Already he had enjoyed a symbolic vision of
two-fold Reality as the moving River of Light and the still white Rose.
 <span id="fr_699"></span>[700](#fn_699.md) Now these two aspects vanished,
and he saw the One.

> <span id="an_iv.vii-p60.1"></span> “. . . la mia vista, venendo
> sincera  
> e più e più entrava per lo raggio  
> dell’ alta luce, che da sè è vera.  
> Da quinci innanzi il mio veder fu maggio  
> che il parlar nostro ch’ a tal vista cede,  
> e cede la memoria a tanto oltraggio. <span id="page_341">p. 341</span>
> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_341"></span>  
> Qual è colui che somniando vede,  
> chè dopo il sogno la passione impressa  
> rimane, e l’ altro alla mente non riede;  
> cotal son io, che quasi tutta cessa  
> mia visione, ed ancor mi distilla  
> nel cor lo dolce che nacque da essa.  
> . . . .  
> Io credo, per l’ acume ch’ io soffersi  
> del vivo raggio, ch’ io sarei smarrito,  
> se gli occhi miei da lui fossero aversi.  
> E mi ricorda ch’ io fui più ardito  
> per questo a sostener tanto ch’ io giunsi  
> l’ aspetto mio col valor infinito.  
> Così la mente mia, tutta sospesa,  
> mirava fissa, immobile ed attenta,  
> e sempre del mirar faceasi accesa.  
> A quella luce cotal si diventa,  
> che volgersi da lei per altro aspetto  
> è impossibil che mai si consenta.  
> Però che il Ben, ch’ è del volere obbietto,  
> tutto s’accoglie in lei, e fuor di quella  
> è difettivo cio che lì è perfetto.” <span
> id="fr_700"></span>[701](#fn_700.md)  

<span id="an_iv.vii-p62"></span>Intermediate between the Dantesque
apprehension of Eternal Reality and the contemplative communion with
Divine Personality, is the type of mystic whose perceptions of the
suprasensible are neither wholly personal nor wholly cosmic and
transcendental in type. To him, God is pre-eminently the
Perfect—Goodness, Truth, and Beauty, Light, Life, and Love—discovered in
a moment of lucidity at the very door of the seeking self. Here the
symbols under which He is perceived are still the abstractions of
philosophy; but in the hands of the mystic these terms cease to be
abstract, are stung to life. Such contemplatives preserve the imageless
and ineffable character of the Absolute, but are moved by its
contemplation to a joyous and personal love.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p63"></span>Thus, in a striking passage of her
revelations, Angela of Foligno <span id="page_342">p. 342</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_342"></span> suddenly exclaims, “I saw God!” “And I,
the writing brother,” says her secretary, “asked her what she saw, how
she saw, and if she saw any bodily thing. She replied thus: ‘I beheld a
fullness and a clearness, and felt them within me so abundantly that I
cannot describe it, or give any likeness thereof. I cannot say I saw
anything corporeal. It was as though it were in heaven: a beauty so
great that I can say nought concerning it, save that it was supreme
Beauty and sovereign Good.’” Again, “I beheld the ineffable fullness of
God: but I can relate nothing of it, save that I have seen in it the
Sovereign Good.”  <span id="fr_701"></span>[702](#fn_701.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p65"></span> *B. The Contemplation of Immanence.—*
The second group of contemplatives is governed by that “Love which
casteth out fear”: by a predominating sense of the nearness, intimacy,
and sweetness, rather than the strangeness and unattainable
transcendence, of that same Infinite Life at whose being the first group
could only hint by amazing images which seem to be borrowed from the
poetry of metaphysics. These are, says Hilton, in a lovely image,
“Feelingly fed with the savour of His invisible blessed Face.”  <span
id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702.md) All the feelings which flow from joy,
confidence, and affection, rather than those which are grouped about
rapture and awe—though awe is always present in some measure, as it is
always present in all perfect love—here contribute towards a description
of the Truth.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p67"></span>These contemplatives tell us of their
attainment of That which Is, as the closest and most joyous of all
communions; a coming of the Bridegroom; a rapturous immersion in the
Uncreated Light. “Nothing more profitable, nothing merrier than grace of
contemplation!” cries Rolle, “that lifts us from this low and offers to
God. What is grace of contemplation but beginning of joy? what is
parfiteness of joy but grace confirmed?  <span
id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703.md) In such “bright contemplation” as
this, says “The Mirror of Simple Souls,” “the soul is full gladsome and
jolly.” Utter peace and wild delight, every pleasure-state known to
man’s normal consciousness, are inadequate to the description of her
joy. She has participated for an instant in the Divine Life; knows all,
and knows nought. She has learnt the world’s secret, not by knowing, but
by being: the only way of really knowing anything.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p69"></span>Where the dominant emotion is that of
intimate affection, and where the training or disposition of the mystic
inclines him to emphasize the personal and Incarnational rather than the
abstract and Trinitarian side of Christianity, the contemplative of this
type will always tend to describe his secret to us as above <span
id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_343"></span> all
things an experience of adorable Friendship. Reality is for him a
Person, not a State. In the “orison of union” it seems to him that an
actual communion, a merging of his self with this other and strictly
personal Self takes place. “God,” he says, then “meets the soul in her
Ground”: *i.e.* , in that secret depth of personality where she
participates in the Absolute Life. Clearly, the “degree of
contemplation,” the psychological state, is here the same as that in
which the mystic of the impersonal type attained the “Abyss.” But from
the point of view of the subject, this joyful and personal encounter of
Lover and Beloved will be a very different experience from the soul’s
immersion in that “desert of Deity,” as described by Eckhart and his
school. “In this oning,” says Hilton, “is the marriage made betwixt God
and the soul, that shall never be broken.”  <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p71"></span>St. Teresa is the classic example of
this intimate and affective type of contemplation: but St. Gertrude,
Suso, Julian, Mechthild of Magdeburg, and countless others, provide
instances of its operation. We owe to it all the most beautiful and
touching expressions of mystic love. Julian’s “I saw Him and sought Him:
and I had Him, I wanted Him” expresses in epigram its combination of
rapturous attainment and insatiable desire: its apprehension of a
Presence at once friendly and divine. So too does her description of the
Tenth Revelation of Love, when “with this sweet enjoying He showed unto
mine understanding in part *the blessed Godhead,* stirring then the poor
soul to understand, as it may be said; that is, to think on the endless
Love that was without beginning, and is, and shall be ever. And with
this our good Lord said full blissfully, *Lo, how that I loved thee,* as
if He had said, My *darling, behold and see thy Lord, thy God that is
thy Matter, and thine endless joy.”*  <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p73"></span>“The eyes of her soul were opened,” says
the scribe to whom Angela of Foligno dictated her revelations. “And she
saw Love advancing gently towards her; and she saw the beginning, but
not the end, for it was continuous. And there was no colour to which she
could compare this Love; but directly it reached her she beheld it with
the eyes of the soul, more clearly than she might do with the eyes of
the body, take as towards her the semblance of a sickle. Not that there
was any actual and measurable likeness, but this love took on the
semblance of a sickle, because it first withdrew itself, not giving
itself so fully as it had allowed itself to be understood and she had
understood it; the which caused her to yearn for it the more.”  <span
id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706.md) <span id="page_344">p. 344</span>
<span id="an_iv.vii-Page_344"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p75"></span>It is to Mechthild of Magdeburg, whose
contemplation was emphatically of the intimate type, that we owe the
most perfect definition of this communion of the mystic with his Friend.
“Orison,” she says, “draws the great God down into the small heart: it
drives the hungry soul out to the full God. It brings together the two
lovers, God and the soul, into a joyful room where they speak much of
love.”  <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p77"></span>We have already seen that the doctrine
of the Trinity makes it possible for Christian mystics, and, still more,
for Christian mysticism as a whole, to reconcile this way of
apprehending Reality with the “negative” and impersonal perception of
the ineffable One; the Absolute which “hath no image.” Though they seem
in their extreme forms to be so sharply opposed as to justify Eckhart’s
celebrated distinction between the unknowable totality of the Godhead
and the knowable personality of God, the “image” and the “circle” yet
represent diverse apprehensions of one whole. All the mystics feel—and
the German school in particular have expressed—Dante’s conviction that
these two aspects of reality, these two planes of being, however widely
they seem to differ, are *One* .  <span
id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708.md) Both are ways of describing man’s
partial contacts with that Absolute Truth, “present yet absent, near,
yet far,” that Triune Fact, <span id="an_iv.vii-p78.1"></span> *di* *tre
colori e d’ una continenza* *,* which is God. Both are necessary if we
are to form any idea of that complete Reality, imperfect as any such
idea must be: as, when two men go together to some undiscovered country,
one will bring home news of its great spaces, its beauty of landscape,
another of its geological formation, or the flora and fauna that express
its life, and both must be taken into account before any just estimate
of the real country can be made.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p79"></span>Since it is of the essence of the
Christian religion to combine personal and metaphysical truth, a
transcendent and an incarnate God,  <span
id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709.md) it is not surprising that we should
find in Christianity a philosophic and theological basis for this
paradox of the contemplative experience. Most often, though not always,
the Christian mystic identifies the personal and intimate Lover of the
soul, of whose elusive presence he is so sharply aware, with the person
of Christ; the unknowable and transcendent Godhead with that <span
id="an_iv.vii-p80.1"></span>*eterna luce*, the Undifferentiated One in
Whom the Trinity of Persons is resumed. Temperamentally, most practical
contemplatives lean to either one or other of these apprehensions of
Reality: to a personal and immanental meeting in the “ground of the
soul,” or to the austere joys of the “naughted soul” abased before an
impersonal Transcendence which no language but <span id="page_345">p.
345</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_345"></span> that of negation can
define. In some, however, both types of perception seem to exist
together: and they speak alternately of light and darkness, of the
rapturous encounter with Love and of supreme self-loss in the naked
Abyss, the desert of the Essence of God. Ruysbroeck is the perfect
example of this type of contemplative; and his works contain numerous
and valuable passages descriptive of that synthetic experience which
resumes the personal and transcendental aspects of the mystic fact.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p81"></span>“When we have become seeing,” he
says—that is to say, when we have attained to spiritual lucidity—“we are
able to contemplate in joy the eternal coming of the Bridegroom; and
this is the second point on which I would speak. What, then, is this
eternal coming of our Bridegroom? It is a perpetual new birth and a
perpetual new illumination: for the ground whence the Light shines and
which is Itself the Light, is life-giving and fruitful: and hence the
manifestation of the Eternal Light is renewed without interruption in
the hiddenness of the spirit. Behold! here all human works and active
virtues must cease; for here God works alone at the apex of the soul.
Here there is nought else but an eternal seeing and staring at that
Light, by the Light and in the Light. And the coming of the Bridegroom
is so swift, that He comes perpetually, and He dwells within us with His
abysmal riches, and He returns to us anew in His Person without
interruption; with such new radiance, that He seems never to have come
to us before. For His coming consists, outside all Time, in an *Eternal
Now,* always welcomed with new longing and new joy. Behold! the delights
and the joys which this Bridegroom brings in His coming are fathomless
and limitless, for they are Himself: and this is why the eyes by which
the spirit contemplates the Bridegroom, are opened so widely that they
can never close again. . . . Now this active meeting, and this loving
embrace, are in their essence fruitive and unconditioned; for the
infinite Undifferentiation of the Godhead is so dark and so naked of all
image, that it conceals within itself all the divine qualities and
works, all the attributes of the Persons, in the all-enfolding richness
of the Essential Unity, and brings about a divine fruition in the Abyss
of the Ineffable. And here there is a death in fruition, and a melting
and dying into the nudity of Pure Being; where all the Names of God, and
all conditions, and all the living images which are reflected in the
mirror of divine truth, are absorbed into the Ineffable Simplicity, the
Absence of image and of knowledge. For in this limitless Abyss of
Simplicity, all things are embraced in the bliss of fruition; but the
Abyss itself remains uncomprehended, except by the Essential Unity. The
Persons and all that which lives <span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_346"></span> in God, must give place to this. For
there is nought else here but an eternal rest in the fruitive embrace of
an outpouring love: and this is the wayless Being that all interior
souls have chosen above all other things. This is the dim silence where
all lovers lose themselves.”  <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p83"></span>Here Ruysbroeck, beginning with a symbol
of the Divine Personality as Bridegroom of the Soul, which would have
been congenial to the mind of St. Catherine of Siena, ends upon the
summits of Christian metaphysics; with a description of the loving
immersion of the self in that Unconditioned One who transcends the
Persons of theology and beggars human speech. We seem to see him
desperately clutching at words and similes which may, he hopes, give
some hint of the soul’s fruition of Reality: its immeasurable difference
in kind from the dreams and diagrams of anthropomorphic religion. His
strange statements in respect of this Divine Abyss are on a par with
those which I have already quoted from the works of other
contemplatives, who, refusing to be led away by the emotional aspect of
their experience, have striven to tell us—as they thought—not merely
what they felt but what they beheld. Ruysbroeck’s mystical genius,
however, the depth and wholeness of his intuition of Reality, does not
allow him to be satisfied with a merely spatial or metaphysical
description of the Godhead. The “active meeting” and the “loving
embrace” are, he sees, an integral part of the true contemplative act.
In “the dim silence where lovers lose themselves,” a Person meets a
person: and *this* it is, not the philosophic Absolute, which “all
interior souls have chosen above all other thing.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p84"></span>We must now look more closely at the
method by which the contemplative attains to his unique communion with
the Absolute Life: the kind of activity which seems to him to
characterize his mergence with Reality. As we might expect, that
activity, like its result, is of two kinds; personal and affirmative,
impersonal and negative. It is obvious that where Divine Perfection is
conceived as the soul’s companion, the Bridegroom, the Beloved, the
method of approach will be very different from that which ends in the
self’s immersion in the paradoxical splendour of the Abyss, the “still
wilderness where no one is at home.” It is all the difference between
the preparations for a wedding and for an expedition to the Arctic Seas.
Hence we find, at one end of the scale, that extreme form of personal
and intimate communion—the going forth of lover to beloved—which the
mystics call “the orison of union”: and at the other end, the “dark
contemplation,” by which alone selves of the transcendent and <span
id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_347"></span>
impersonal type claim that they draw near to the Unconditioned One.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p85"></span>Of the dim and ineffable contemplation
of Unnameable Transcendence, the imageless absorption in the Absolute,
Dionysius the Areopagite of course provides the classic example. It was
he who gave to it the name of Divine Darkness: and all later mystics of
this type borrow their language from him. His directions upon the
subject are singularly explicit: his descriptions, like those of St.
Augustine, glow with an exultant sense of a Reality attained, and which
others may attain if they will but follow where he leads.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p86"></span>“As for thee, dear Timothy,” he says, “I
counsel that in the earnest exercise of mystical contemplation thou
leave the senses and the operations of the intellect and all things that
the senses or the intellect can perceive, and all things in this world
of nothingness or that world of being; and that, thine understanding
being laid to rest, thou ascend (so far as thou mayest) towards union
with Him whom neither being nor understanding can contain. For by the
unceasing and absolute renunciation of thyself and all things, thou
shalt in pureness cast all things aside, and be released from all, and
so shalt be led upwards to the Ray of that Divine Darkness which
exceetedth all existence.”  <span id="fr_711"></span>[712](#fn_711.md)
Again, “The Divine Dark is nought else but that inaccessible light
wherein the Lord is said to dwell. Although it is invisible because of
its dazzling splendours and unsearchable because of the abundance of its
supernatural brightness, nevertheless, whosoever deserves to see and
know God rests therein; and, by the very fact that he neither sees nor
knows, is truly in that which surpasses all truth and all knowledge.”
 <span id="fr_712"></span>[713](#fn_712.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p95"></span>It has become a commonplace with writers
on mysticism to say, that all subsequent contemplatives took from
Dionysius this idea of “Divine Darkness,” and entrance therein as the
soul’s highest privilege: took it, so to speak, ready-made and on faith,
and incorporated it in their tradition. To argue thus is to forget that
mystics are above all things practical people. They do not write for the
purpose of handing on a philosophical scheme, but in order to describe
something which they have themselves <span id="page_348">p. 348</span>
<span id="an_iv.vii-Page_348"></span> experienced; something which they
feel to be of transcendent importance for humanity. If, therefore, they
persist—and they do persist—in using this simile of “darkness” to
describe their experience in contemplation, it can only be because it
fits the facts. No Hegelian needs to be told that we shall need the
addition of its opposite before we can hope to approach the truth: and
it is exactly the opposite of this “dim ignorance” which is offered us
by mystics of the “joyous” or “intimate” type, who find their supreme
satisfaction in the positive experience of “union,” the “mystical
marriage of the soul.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p96"></span>What, then, do those who use this image
of the “dark” really mean by it? They mean this: that God in His
absolute Reality is unknowable—is dark—to man’s intellect: which is, as
Bergson has reminded us, adapted to other purposes than those of divine
intuition. When, under the spur of mystic love, the whole personality of
man comes into contact with that Reality, it enters a plane of
experience to which none of the categories of the intellect apply.
Reason finds itself, in a most actual sense, “in the dark”—immersed in
the Cloud of Unknowing. This dimness and lostness of the mind, then, is
a necessary part of the mystic’s ascent to the Absolute. That
Absolute—the <span id="an_iv.vii-p96.1"></span> *Mysterium tremendum et
fascinans*  <span id="fr_713"></span>[714](#fn_713.md) —willnot be “known
of the heart” until we acknowledge that It is “unknown of the
intellect”; and obey the Dionysian injunction to leave “the operations
of the understanding” on one side. The movement of the contemplative
must be a movement of the whole man: he is to “precipitate himself, free
and unfettered,” into the bosom of Reality. Only when he has thus
transcended sight and knowledge, can he be sure that he has also
transcended the world with which these faculties are competent to deal;
and is *in* that Wholly Other which surpasses all image and all idea.

> <span id="an_iv.vii-p97.1"></span> “This is Love: to fly heavenward,  
> To rend, every instant, a hundred veils,  
> The first moment, to renounce life;  
> The last step, to fare without feet.  
> To regard this world as invisible,  
> Not to see what appears to oneself.”  <span
> id="fr_714"></span>[715](#fn_714.md)  

<span id="an_iv.vii-p99"></span>This acknowledgment of our intellectual
ignorance, this humble surrender, is the entrance into the “Cloud of
Unknowing”: the first step towards mystical knowledge of the Absolute.
“For Truth and Humility are full true sisters,” says Hilton, <span
id="page_349">p. 349</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_349"></span>
“fastened together in love and charity, and there is no distance of
counsel betwixt them two.”  <span id="fr_715"></span>[716](#fn_715.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p101"></span>“Thou askest me and sayest,” says the
author of “The Cloud of Unknowing,” “How shall I think on Himself and
what is He? and to this I cannot answer thee but thus: I wot not.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p102"></span>“For thou hast brought me with thy
question, into that same darkness and into that same cloud of unknowing
that I would thou wert in thyself. For of all other creatures and their
works, yea and of the works of God’s self may a man through grace have
fulhead of knowledge, and well he can think of them; but of God Himself
can no man think. And therefore I will leave all that thing that I can
think, and choose to my love that thing that I cannot think. For why; He
may well be loved, but not thought. By love may He be gotten and holden,
but by thought never. . . . Smite upon that thick cloud of unknowing
with a sharp dart of longing love; and go not thence for thing that
befalleth.”  <span id="fr_716"></span>[717](#fn_716.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p104"></span>So long, therefore, as the object of
the mystic’s contemplation is amenable to thought, is something which he
can “know,” he may be quite sure that it is not the Absolute; but only a
partial image or symbol of the Absolute. To find that final Reality, he
must enter into the “cloud of unknowing”—must pass beyond the plane on
which the intellect can work.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p105"></span>“When I say darkness,” says the same
great mystic, “I mean thereby a lack of knowing. . . . And for this
reason it is not called a cloud of the air, but a cloud of unknowing,
that is between thee and thy God.”  <span
id="fr_717"></span>[718](#fn_717.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p107"></span>The business of the contemplative,
then, is to enter this cloud: the “good dark,” as Hilton calls it. The
deliberate inhibition of discursive thought and rejection of images,
which takes place in the “orison of quiet,” is one of the ways in which
this entrance is effected: personal surrender, or “self-naughting,” is
another. He who, by dint of detachment and introversion, enters the
“nothingness” or “ground of the soul,” enters also into the “Dark”: a
statement which seems simple enough until we try to realize what it
means.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p108"></span>“O where,” says the bewildered disciple
in one of Boehme’s dialogues, “is this naked Ground of the Soul void of
all Self? And how shall I come at the hidden centre, where God dwelleth
and not man? Tell me plainly, loving Sir, where it is, and how it is to
be found of me, and entered into?

<span id="an_iv.vii-p109"></span> *“Master.* There where the soul hath
slain its own Will and willeth no more any Thing as from itself. . . .
<span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_350"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p110"></span> *“Disciple.* But how shall I
comprehend it?

<span id="an_iv.vii-p111"></span> *“Master.* If thou goest about to
comprehend it, then it will fly away from thee, but if thou dost
surrender thyself wholly up to it, then it will abide with thee, and
become the Life of thy Life, and be natural to thee.”  <span
id="fr_718"></span>[719](#fn_718.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p113"></span>The author of “The Cloud of Unknowing”
is particularly explicit as to the sense of dimness and confusion which
overwhelms the self when it first enters this Dark; a proceeding which
is analogous to that annihilation of thought in the interests of passive
receptivity which we have studied in the “Quiet.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p114"></span>“At the first time when thou dost it,”
he says of the neophyte’s first vague steps in contemplation, “thou
findest but a darkness, and as it were a cloud of unknowing thou knowest
not what, saving that thou feelest in thy will a naked intent unto God.
This darkness and this cloud is, howsoever thou dost, betwixt thee and
thy God, and letteth thee, that thou mayest neither see Him clearly by
light of understanding in thy reason, nor feel Him in sweetness of love
in thine affection. And therefore shape thee to bide in this darkness as
long as thou mayest, evermore crying after Him that thou lovest. For if
ever thou shalt feel Him or see Him as it may be here, it behoveth
always to be in this cloud and this darkness.”  <span
id="fr_719"></span>[720](#fn_719.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p116"></span>From the same century, but from a very
different country and temperament, comes another testimony as to the
supreme value of this dark contemplation of the Divine: this absorption,
beyond the span of thought or emotion, in the “substance of all that
Is.” It is one of the most vivid and detailed accounts of this strange
form of consciousness which we possess; and deserves to be compared
carefully with the statements of “The Cloud of Unknowing,” and of St.
John of the Cross. We owe it to that remarkable personality, the Blessed
Angela of Foligno, who was converted from a life of worldliness to
become not only a Franciscan, but also a Platonic mystic. In it we seem
to hear the voice of Plotinus speaking from the Vale of Spoleto.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p117"></span>“Whilst I was questioning her,” says
her secretary, “Christ’s faithful one was suddenly rapt in spirit and
seemed not to understand my words. And then was given her a wondrous
grace. After a short time . . . she began to tell me what follows. ‘My
soul has just been rapt to a state in which I tasted unspeakable joy. I
knew all I longed to know, possessed all I longed to possess. I saw all
Good.’ She said further: ‘In this state the soul cannot believe that
this Good will ever depart from her, or that she will depart from it, or
that she will again be separated from it. But <span id="page_351">p.
351</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_351"></span> she delights herself in
that Sovereign Good. My soul sees nothing whatever that can be told of
the lips or the heart, she sees nothing, and she sees All . . . No good
that can be described or conceived is now the object of my hope; for I
have put all my hope in a secret Good, most hid and secret, which I
apprehend in great darkness.’ And as I, the brother, could not receive
or understand this dark, Christ’s faithful one wishing to explain said:
‘If I see it in the dark, it is because it surpasses all good. All, all
the rest is but darkness. All which the soul or heart can reach is
inferior to this Good. That which I have told hitherto, namely, all the
soul grasps when she sees all creatures filled with God, when she sees
the divine power, and when she sees the divine will, is inferior to this
most secret Good; because this Good which I see in the darkness is the
All, and all other things are but parts.’ And she added, ‘Though
inexpressible, these other things bring delight; but this vision of God
in darkness brings no smile to the lips, no devotion or fervour of love
to the soul. . . . All the countless and unspeakable favours God has
done to me, all the words He has said to me, all you have written are, I
know, so far below the Good I see in that great darkness that I do not
put in them my hope’ . . . Christ’s faithful one told me that her mind
had been uplifted but three times to this most high and ineffable mode
of beholding God in great darkness, and in a vision so marvellous and
complete. Certainly she had seen the Sovereign Good countless times and
always darkly; yet never in such a high manner and through such great
dark.”  <span id="fr_720"></span>[721](#fn_720.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p119"></span>These words, and indeed the whole idea
which lies at the bottom of “dark contemplation,” will perhaps be better
understood in the light of Baron von Hügel’s deeply significant saying
“Souls loving God in His Infinite Individuality will necessarily love
Him beyond their intellectual comprehension of Him; the element of
devoted trust, of free self-donation to One fully known *only through
and in such an act,* will thus remain to man for ever.”  <span
id="fr_721"></span>[722](#fn_721.md) Hence, the contemplative act, which is
an act of loving and self-forgetting concentration upon the Divine—the
outpouring of man’s little and finite personality towards the Absolute
Personality of God—will, in so far as it transcends thought, mean
darkness for the intellect; but it may mean radiance for the heart.
Psychologically, it will mean the necessary depletion of the
surface-consciousness, the stilling of the mechanism of thought, in the
interests of another centre of consciousness. Since this new centre
makes enormous demands on the self’s stock of vitality its establishment
must involve, for the time that it is active, the withdrawal <span
id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_352"></span> of
energy from other centres. Thus the “night of thought” becomes the
strictly logical corollary of the “light of perception.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p121"></span>No one has expressed this double
character of the Divine Dark—its “nothingness” for the dissecting knife
of reason, its supreme fruitfulness for expansive, active love—with so
delicate an insight as St. John of the Cross. In his work the Christian
touch of personal rapture vivifies the exact and sometimes arid
descriptions of the Neoplatonic mystics. A great poet as well as a great
mystic, in his poem on the “Obscure Night,” he brings to bear on the
actual and ineffable experience of the introverted soul all the highest
powers of artistic expression, all the resources of musical rhythm, the
suggestive qualities of metaphor.

> <span id="an_iv.vii-p121.1"></span> “Upon an obscure night  
> Fevered with Love’s anxiety  
> (O hapless, happy plight!)  
> I went, none seeing me,  
> Forth from my house, where all things quiet be.  
> By night, secure from sight  
> And by a secret stair, disguisedly,  
> (O hapless, happy plight!)  
> By night, and privily  
> Forth from my house, where all things quiet be.  
> Blest night of wandering  
> In secret, when by none might I be spied,  
> Nor I see anything:  
> Without a light to guide  
> Save that which in my heart burnt in my side.  
> That light did lead me on,  
> More surely than the shining of noontide  
> Where well I knew that One  
> Did for my coming bide;  
> Where He abode might none but He abide.  
> O night that didst lead thus  
> O night more lovely than the dawn of light;  
> O night that broughtest us,  
> Lover to lover’s sight,  
> Lover to loved, in marriage of delight!  
> Upon my flowery breast  
> Wholly for Him and save Himself for none,  
> There did I give sweet rest  
> To my beloved one:  
> The fanning of the cedars breathed thereon.”  <span
> id="fr_722"></span>[723](#fn_722.md) <span id="page_353">p. 353</span>
> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_353"></span>  

<span id="an_iv.vii-p123"></span>Observe in these verses the perfect
fusion of personal and metaphysical imagery; each contributing by its
suggestive qualities to a total effect which conveys to us, we hardly
know how, the obscure yet flaming rapture of the mystic, the affirmation
of his burning love and the accompanying negation of his mental darkness
and quiet—that “hapless, happy plight.” All is here: the secrecy of the
contemplative’s true life, unseen of other men his deliberate and active
abandonment of the comfortable house of the senses, the dim, unknown
plane of being into which his ardent spirit must plunge—a “night more
lovely than the dawn of light”—the Inward Light, the fire of mystic
love, which guides his footsteps “more surely than the shining of
noon-tide”: the self-giving ecstasy of the consummation “wholly for Him,
and save Himself for none,” in which lover attains communion with
Beloved “in marriage of delight.”

<span id="an_iv.vii-p124"></span>In his book, “The Dark Night of the
Soul,” St. John has commented upon the opening lines of this poem; and
the passages in which he does this are amongst the finest and most
subtle descriptions of the psychology of contemplation which we possess.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p125"></span>“The soul,” he says, “calls the dim
contemplation, by which it ascends to the union of love, a secret stair;
and that because of two properties of this contemplation which I shall
explain separately. First, this dark contemplation is called secret,
because it is, as I have said before, the mystical theology which
theologians call secret wisdom, and which according to St. Thomas is
infused into the soul more especially by love. This happens in a secret
hidden way, in which the natural operations of the understanding and the
other powers have no share. . . . The soul can neither discern nor give
it a name, neither desires so to do; and besides, it can discover no way
nor apt comparison by which to make known a knowledge so high, a
*spiritual impression so delicate and infused.* Sothat even if the soul
felt the most lively desire to explain itself, and heaped up
explanations, the secret would remain a secret still. Because this
interior wisdom is so simply, general, and spiritual, that it enters not
into the understanding under the guise of any form or image perceptible
to sense. Therefore the senses and the imagination—which have not served
as intermediaries, and have perceived no sensible form or colour—cannot
account for it, nor form any conception of it, so as to speak about it;
though the soul be distinctly aware that it feels and tastes this
strange wisdom. The soul is like a man who sees an object for the first
time, the like of which he has never seen before; he perceives it and
likes it, yet he cannot say what it is, nor give it a name, do what he
will, though it be even an object cognisable by the senses. How much
less, then can that <span id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_354"></span> be described which does not enter in by
the senses. . . . Inexpressible in its natures as we have said, it is
rightly called secret. And for yet another reason it is so called; for
this mystical wisdom has the property of hiding the soul within itself.
For beside its ordinary operation, it sometimes happens that this wisdom
absorbs the soul and plunges it in a secret abyss wherein it sees itself
distinctly as far away, and separated from, all created things; it looks
upon itself as one that is placed in a profound and vast solitude
whither no creature can come, and which seems an immense Wilderness
without limits. And this solitude is the more delicious, sweet, and
lovely, the more it is deep, vast, and empty. There the soul is the more
hidden, the more it is raised up above all created things.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p126"></span>“This abyss of wisdom now lifts up and
enlarges the soul, giving it to drink at the very sources of the science
of love. Thereby it perceives how lowly is the condition of all
creatures in respect to the supreme knowledge and sense of the Divine.
It also understands how low, defective, and, in a certain sense,
improper, are all the words and phrases by which in this life we discuss
divine things; that they escape the best efforts of human art and
science, and that only the mystical theology can know and taste what
these things are in their reality.”  <span
id="fr_723"></span>[724](#fn_723.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p128"></span>In this important passage we have a
reconciliation of the four chief images under which contemplation has
been described: the darkness and the light, the wilderness and the union
of love. That is to say, the self’s paradoxical sense of an ignorance
which is supreme knowledge, and of a solitude which is intimate
companionship. On the last of these antitheses, the “wilderness that is
more delicious, sweet, and lovely, the more it is wide, vast, and
empty,” I cannot resist quoting, as a gloss upon the dignified language
of the Spanish mystic, the quaint and simple words of Richard Rolle.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p129"></span>“In the wilderness . . . speaks the
loved to the heart of the lover, as it were a bashful lover, that his
sweetheart before men entreats not, nor friendly-wise but commonly and
as a stranger he kisses. A devout soul safely from worldly business in
mind and body departed . . . anon comes heavenly joy, and it
marvellously making merry melody, to her springs; whose token she takes,
that now forward worldly sound gladly she suffers not. <span
id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_355"></span> This
is ghostly music, that is unknown to all that with worldly business
lawful or unlawful are occupied. No man there is that this has known,
but he that has studied to God only to take heed.”  <span
id="fr_724"></span>[725](#fn_724.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p131"></span>Doubtless the “dark transcendence”
reported and dwelt upon by all mystics of the Dionysian type, is nearest
the truth of all our apprehensions of God:  <span
id="fr_725"></span>[726](#fn_725.md) though it can be true only in the
paradoxical sense that it uses the suggestive qualities of negation—the
Dark whose very existence involves that of Light—to hint at the infinite
Affirmation of All that Is. But the nearer this language is to the
Absolute, the further it is from ourselves. Unless care be taken in the
use of it, the elimination of falsehood may easily involve for us the
elimination of everything else. Man is not yet pure spirit, has not
attained the Eternal. He is in via and will never arrive if impatient
amateurs of Reality insist on cutting the ground from under his feet.
Like Dante, he needs a ladder to the stars, a ladder which goes the
whole way from the human to the divine. Therefore the philosophic
exactitude of these descriptions of the dark must be balanced, as they
are in St. John of the Cross, by the personal, human, and symbolic
affirmations of Love, if we would avoid a distorted notion of the
Reality which the contemplative attains in his supreme “flights towards
God.” Consciousness has got to be helped across the gap which separates
it from its Home.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p133"></span>The “wilderness,” the dread Abyss, must
be made homely by the voice of “the lover that His sweetheart before men
entreats not.” Approximate as we know such an image of our communion
with the Absolute to be, it represents a real aspect of the
contemplative experience which eludes the rule and compass of
metaphysical thought. Blake, with true mystic insight, summed up the
situation as between the two extreme forms of contemplation when he
wrote:—  <span id="fr_726"></span>[727](#fn_726.md)

> <span id="an_iv.vii-p134.1"></span> “God appears, and God is Light  
> To those poor souls who dwell in night:  
> But doth a human form display  
> To those who dwell in realms of day.”  

<span id="an_iv.vii-p135"></span>In the “orison of union” and the
“Spiritual Marriage,” those contemplatives whose temperament inclines
them to “dwell in realms of day” receive just such a revelation of the
“human form”—a revelation which the Christian dogma of the Incarnation
brings to a point. They apprehend the personal and passionate aspect of
the Infinite Life; and the love, at once intimate and expansive,
all-demanding and all-renouncing, which plays like <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span id="an_iv.vii-Page_356"></span>
lightning between it and the desirous soul. “Thou saidst to me, my only
Love, that Thou didst will to make me Thyself; and that Thou wast all
mine, with all that Thou hadst and with all Paradise, and that I was all
Thine. That I should leave all, or rather the nothing; and that (then)
thou wouldst give me the all. And that Thou hadst given me this name—at
which words I heard within me <span id="an_iv.vii-p135.1"></span>‘dedi
te in lucem gentium’—not without good reason. And it seemed then, as
though I had an inclination for nothing except the purest Union, without
any means, in accordance with that detailed sight which Thou hadst given
me. So then I said to Thee: These other things, give them to whom Thou
wilt; give me but this most pure Union with Thee, free from every
means.”  <span id="fr_727"></span>[728](#fn_727.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p137"></span>“Our work is the love of God,” cries
Ruysbroeck. “Our satisfaction lies in submission to the Divine Embrace.”
This utter and abrupt submission to the Divine Embrace is the essence of
that form of contemplation which is called the Orison of Union.
“Surrender” is its secret: a personal surrender, not only of finite to
Infinite, but of bride to Bridegroom, heart to Heart. This surrender, in
contemplatives of an appropriate temperament, is of so complete and
ecstatic a type that it involves a more or less complete suspension of
normal consciousness, an entrancement; and often crosses the boundary
which separates contemplation from true ecstasy, producing in its
subject physical as well as psychical effects. In this state, says St.
Teresa, “There is no sense of anything: only fruition, without
understanding what that may be the fruition of which is granted. It is
understood that the fruition is of a certain good, containing in itself
all good together at once; but this good is not comprehended. The senses
are all occupied in this fruition in such a way, that not one of them is
at liberty so as to be able to attend to anything else, whether outward
or inward. . . . But this state of complete absorption, together with
the utter rest of the imagination—for I believe that the imagination is
then wholly at rest—lasts only for a short time; though the faculties do
not so completely recover themselves as not to be for some hours
afterwards as if in disorder. . . . He who has had experience of this
will understand it in some measure, for it cannot be more clearly
described, because what then takes place is so obscure. All I am able to
say is, that the soul is represented as being close to God; and that
there abides a conviction thereof so certain and strong that it cannot
possibly help believing so. All the faculties fail now, and are
suspended in such a way that, as I said before, their operations cannot
be <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_357"></span> traced. . . . The will must be fully
occupied in loving, but it understands not how it loves; the
understanding, if it understands, does not understand how it
understands. It does not understand, as it seems to me, because, as I
said just now, this is a matter which cannot be understood.”  <span
id="fr_728"></span>[729](#fn_728.md) Clearly, the psychological situation
here is the same as that in which mystics of the impersonal type feel
themselves to be involved in the Cloud of Unknowing, or Divine Dark.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p139"></span>“Do not imagine,” says St. Teresa in
another place, “that this orison, like that which went before \[ *i.e.*
, the quiet\] is a sort of drowsiness: (I call it drowsiness, because
the soul seems to slumber being neither thoroughly asleep, nor
thoroughly awake). In the prayer of union the soul is asleep; fast
asleep as regards herself and earthly things. In fact, during the short
time that this state lasts she is deprived of all feeling, and though
she wishes it, she can think of nothing. Thus she needs no effort in
order to suspend her thoughts; if the soul can love—she knows not how or
when she loves, nor what she desires . . . she is, as it were, entirely
dead to the world, the better to live in God.”  <span
id="fr_729"></span>[730](#fn_729.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p141"></span>It may be asked, in what way does such
contemplation as this differ from unconsciousness. The difference,
according to St. Teresa, consists in the definite *somewhat* which takes
place during this inhibition of the surface-consciousness: a “somewhat”
of which that surface-consciousness becomes aware when it awakes. True
contemplation, as the mystics are constantly assuring us, must always be
judged by its fruits. If it be genuine, work has been done during the
period of apparent passivity. The deeper self has escaped, has risen to
freedom, and returns other than it was before. We must remember that
Teresa is speaking from experience, and that her temperamental
peculiarities will modify the form which this experience takes. “The
soul,” she says, “neither sees, hears, nor understands anything while
this state lasts; but this is usually a very short time, and seems to
the soul even shorter than it really is. God visits the soul in a way
that prevents it doubting when it comes to itself *that is has been in
God and God in it;* and so firmly is it convinced of this truth that,
though years may pass before this state recurs, the soul can never
forget it nor doubt its reality. . . . But you will say, how can the
soul see and comprehend that she is in God and God in her, if during
this union she is not able either to see or understand? I reply, that
she does not see it at the time, but that afterwards she perceives it
clearly: not by a vision, but by a certitude which remains in the heart
which God alone can give.”  <span id="fr_730"></span>[731](#fn_730.md)

<span id="an_iv.vii-p143"></span><span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="an_iv.vii-Page_358"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_680"></span>[328:681](myst18.htm#fr_680.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p2"></span> Récéjac, “Fondements de la Connaissance
Mystique,” p. 176.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[329:682](myst18.htm#fr_681.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p4"></span> *Supra* , p. 245.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[329:683](myst18.htm#fr_682.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p6"></span> St. Teresa, Vida, cap. xx. § 1 and 3.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[330:684](myst18.htm#fr_683.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p11"></span> “Études sur le Mysticisme,” p. 370.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[331:685](myst18.htm#fr_684.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p14"></span> Aug. Conf., bk. vii. cap. xvii.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[331:686](myst18.htm#fr_685.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p18"></span> “Varieties of Religious Experience,” p.
380.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[332:687](myst18.htm#fr_686.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p19"></span> St. Angèle de Foligno, “Le Livre de
l’Expérience des Vrais Fidèles,” p. 238 (English translation, p. 189).

<span id="fn_687"></span>[332:688](myst18.htm#fr_687.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p21"></span> Compare Baker, “Holy Wisdom,” Treatise
iii. § iv. cap. iv.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[332:689](myst18.htm#fr_688.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p22"></span> See Hilton, “The Scale of Perfection,”
bk. ii. cap. xxv.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[332:690](myst18.htm#fr_689.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p23"></span> *Vide infra* , p. 347.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[333:691](myst18.htm#fr_690.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p28"></span> “De Divinis Nominibus,” vii. 1.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[333:692](myst18.htm#fr_691.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p30"></span> Ennead vi. 9, 10.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[334:693](myst18.htm#fr_692.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p32"></span> Ruysbroeck, “De Ornatu Spiritalium
Nuptiarum,” I. iii. cap. i.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[334:694](myst18.htm#fr_693.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p34"></span> J. Maritain, “Art et Scholastique,” p.
141.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[335:695](myst18.htm#fr_694.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p37"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii. cap.
xxv.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[336:696](myst18.htm#fr_695.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p44"></span> Richard Rolle, “The Mending of Life,”
cap. xii.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[337:697](myst18.htm#fr_696.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p48"></span> “The Mirror of Simple Souls,” Div. iii.
cap. xiii.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[339:698](myst18.htm#fr_697.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p54"></span> Tauler, Sermon on St. John the Baptist
(“The Inner Way,” pp. 97-99).

<span id="fn_698"></span>[340:699](myst18.htm#fr_698.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p57"></span> Maeterlinck, Introduction to
Ruysbroeck’s “L’Ornement des Noces Spirituelles,” p. v. Theologians will
recognize here a poetic account of the soul’s contact with that aspect
of Divine Reality emphasized in the work of Rudolf Otto and of Karl
Barth.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[340:700](myst18.htm#fr_699.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p60"></span> Par. xxx. 61-128. Compare p. 286.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[341:701](myst18.htm#fr_700.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p60.30"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p61"></span> Par. xxxiii. 52-63, 76-81, 97-105. “My
vision, becoming purified, entered deeper and deeper into the ray of
that Supernal Light which in itself is true. Thenceforth my vision was
greater than our language, which fails such a sight; and memory too
fails before such excess. As he who sees in a dream, and after the dream
is gone the impression or emotion remains, but the rest returns not to
the mind, such am I for nearly the whole of my vision fades, and yet
there still wells within my heart the sweetness born therefrom. . . . I
think that by the keenness of the living ray which I endured I had been
lost, had I once turned my eyes aside. And I remember that for this I
was the bolder so long to sustain my gaze, as to unite it with the Power
Infinite. . . . Thus did my mind, wholly in suspense, gaze fixedly,
immovable and intent, ever enkindled by its gazing. In the presence of
that Light one becomes such, that never could one consent to turn from
it to any other sight. Because the Good, which is the object of the
will, is therein wholly gathered; and outside of this, that is defective
which therein is perfect.”

<span id="fn_701"></span>[342:702](myst18.htm#fr_701.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p64"></span> St. Angèle de Foligno, “Le Livre de
l’Expérience des Vrais Fidèles,” pp. 78 and 116 (English translation,
here very imperfect, pp. 169, 174).

<span id="fn_702"></span>[342:703](myst18.htm#fr_702.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p66"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii. cap.
xli.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[342:704](myst18.htm#fr_703.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p68"></span> “The Mending of Life,” cap. xii.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[343:705](myst18.htm#fr_704.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p69.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p70"></span> Scale of Perfection,” bk. i. cap. viii.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[343:706](myst18.htm#fr_705.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p72"></span> “Fevelations of Divine Love,” cap.
xxiv.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[343:707](myst18.htm#fr_706.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p74"></span> St. Angèle, *op. cit* ., p. 156
(English translations p. 178).

<span id="fn_707"></span>[344:708](myst18.htm#fr_707.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p76"></span> “Das Fliessende Licht der Gottheit,”
pt. v. cap. 13.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[344:709](myst18.htm#fr_708.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p78"></span> Par. xxxiii. 137.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[344:710](myst18.htm#fr_709.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p80"></span> Compare *supra* , Pt. I. Cap. V.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[346:711](myst18.htm#fr_710.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p81.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p82"></span> Ruysbroeck, “De Ornatu Spiritalium
Nuptiarum,” bk. iii. caps. ii. and iv.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[347:712](myst18.htm#fr_711.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p87"></span> Dionysius the Areopagite, “De Mystica
Theologia,” i. 1.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[347:713](myst18.htm#fr_712.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p88"></span> *Ibid.,* Letter to Dorothy the Deacon.
This passage seems to be the source of Vaughan’s celebrated verse in
“The Night”—

<span id="an_iv.vii-p89"></span>“There is in God, some say

<span id="an_iv.vii-p90"></span>A deep but dazzling darkness, as men
here

<span id="an_iv.vii-p91"></span>Say it is late and dusky because they

<span id="an_iv.vii-p92"></span>See not all clear.

<span id="an_iv.vii-p93"></span>O for that Night! where I in Him

<span id="an_iv.vii-p94"></span>Might live invisible and dim.”

<span id="fn_713"></span>[348:714](myst18.htm#fr_713.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p96.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p97"></span> R. Otto, “The Idea of the Holy,” caps.
iii. and iv. The whole of this work should be studied in its bearing on
the contemplation of supra-rational Reality.

<span id="fn_714"></span>[348:715](myst18.htm#fr_714.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p97.8"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p98"></span> Jalalu ‘d Din, “Selected Poems from the
Divan,” p. 137.

<span id="fn_715"></span>[349:716](myst18.htm#fr_715.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p99.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p100"></span> “The Scale of Perfection,” bk. ii.
cap. xiii.

<span id="fn_716"></span>[349:717](myst18.htm#fr_716.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p103"></span> “The Cloud of Unknowing,” cap. vi.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[349:718](myst18.htm#fr_717.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p105.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p106"></span> *Ibid* ., cap. iv.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[350:719](myst18.htm#fr_718.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p112"></span> Boehme, “Three Dialogues of the
Supersensual Life,” p. 71.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[350:720](myst18.htm#fr_719.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p115"></span> “The Cloud of Unknowing,” cap. iii.

<span id="fn_720"></span>[351:721](myst18.htm#fr_720.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p118"></span> St. Angèle, *loc. cit* ., pp. 210-12
(English translation, p. 181).

<span id="fn_721"></span>[351:722](myst18.htm#fr_721.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p119.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p120"></span> “The Mystical Element of Religion,”
vol. ii. p. 257.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[352:723](myst18.htm#fr_722.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p121.32"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p122"></span> “En una Noche Escura.” This
translation, by Mr. Arthur Symons, will be found in vol. ii. of his
Collected Poems.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[354:724](myst18.htm#fr_723.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p127"></span> St. John of the Cross, “Noche Escura
del Alma,” I. ii. cap. xvii. It is perhaps advisable to warn the reader
that in this work St. John applies the image of “darkness” to three
absolutely different things: *i.e* ., to a purgation of mind which he
calls the “night of sense”, to dim contemplation, or the Dionysian
“Divine Dark”, and to the true “dark night of the soul,” which he calls
the “night of the spirit.” The result has been a good deal of confusion,
in modern writers on mysticism upon the subject of the “Dark Night.”

<span id="fn_724"></span>[355:725](myst18.htm#fr_724.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p129.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p130"></span> “The Fire of Love,” bk. ii. cap. vii.

<span id="fn_725"></span>[355:726](myst18.htm#fr_725.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p131.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p132"></span> Compare Baker, “Holy Wisdom,” Treatise
iii. § iv. cap iv.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[355:727](myst18.htm#fr_726.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p133.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p134"></span> “Auguries of Innocence.”

<span id="fn_727"></span>[356:728](myst18.htm#fr_727.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p135.2"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p136"></span> Colloquies of Battista Vernazza:
quoted by Von Hügel, “The Mystical Element of Religion,” vol. i. p. 350.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[357:729](myst18.htm#fr_728.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p137.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p138"></span> Vida, cap. xviii. §§ 2, 17, 19.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[357:730](myst18.htm#fr_729.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p139.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p140"></span> “El Castillo Interior,” Moradas
Quintas, cap. i.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[357:731](myst18.htm#fr_730.md) <span
id="an_iv.vii-p141.1"></span>

<span id="an_iv.vii-p142"></span> *Op. cit., loc. cit.*

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Ecstasy and Rapture](myst19.md)

</div>
