[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg04)  [Next](leg06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II.

### THE LEGEND OF THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND.

THE text containing the Legend of the Destruction of Mankind is written
in hieroglyphs, and is found on the four walls of a small chamber which
is entered from the "hall of columns" in the tomb of Seti I., which is
situated on the west bank of the Nile at Thebes. On the wall facing the
door of this chamber is painted in red the figure of the large "Cow of
Heaven." The lower part of her belly is decorated with a series of
thirteen stars, and immediately beneath it are the two Boats of Ra,
called Semketet and Mantchet, or Sektet and Matet. Each of her four legs
is held in position by two gods, and the god Shu, with outstretched
uplifted arms, supports her body. The Cow was published by
Champollion, <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) without the

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

text. This most important mythological text was first published and
translated by Professor E. Naville in 1874. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) It was republished by Bergmann <span
id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6.md) and Brugsch, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7.md) who gave a transcription of the text, with a
German translation. Other German versions by Lauth, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[4](#fn_8) Brugsch, <span id="fr_9"></span>[5](#fn_9.md)
and Wiedemann <span id="fr_10"></span>[6](#fn_10.md) have appeared, and a
part of the text was translated into French by Lefébure. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[7](#fn_11.md) The latest edition of the text was
published by Lefébure, <span id="fr_12"></span>[8](#fn_12.md) and text of a
second copy, very much mutilated, was published by Professor Naville,
with a French translation in 1885. <span id="fr_13"></span>[9](#fn_13.md)
The text printed in this volume is that of M. Lefébure.

The legend takes us back to the time when the gods of Egypt went about
in the country, and mingled with men and were thoroughly acquainted with
their desires and needs. The king who reigned over Egypt was Ra, the
Sun-god, who was not, however, the first of the Dynasty of Gods who
ruled the land. His predecessor on the throne was Hephaistos, who,
according to Manetho, reigned 9000 years, whilst Ra reigned only 992
years; Panodorus makes his reign to have lasted

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

less than 100 years. Be this as it may, it seems that the "self-created
and self-begotten" god Ra had been ruling over mankind for a very long
time, for his subjects were murmuring against him, and they were
complaining that he was old, that his bones were like silver, his body
like gold, and his hair like lapis-lazuli. When Ra heard these
murmurings he ordered his bodyguard to summon all the gods who had been
with him in the primeval World-ocean, and to bid them privately to
assemble in the Great House, which can be no other than the famous
temple of Heliopolis. This statement is interesting, for it proves that
the legend is of Heliopolitan origin, like the cult of Ra itself, and
that it does not belong, at least in so far as it applies to Ra, to the
Predynastic Period.

When Ra entered the Great Temple, the gods made obeisance to him, and
took up their positions on each side of him, and informed him that they
awaited his words. Addressing Nu, the personification of the
World-ocean, Ra bade them to take notice of the fact that the men and
women whom his Eye had created were murmuring against him. He then asked
them to consider the matter and to devise a plan of action for him, for
he was unwilling to slay the rebels without hearing what his gods had to
say. In reply the gods advised Ra to send forth his Eye to destroy the
blasphemers, for there was no eye on earth that could resist it,
especially when it took the form of the goddess Hathor. Ra accepted
their advice and sent forth his Eye in the form of

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hathor to destroy them, and, though the rebels
had fled to the mountains in fear, the Eye pursued them and overtook
them and destroyed them. Hathor rejoiced in her work of destruction, and
on her return was praised by Ra, for what she had done. The slaughter of
men began at Suten-henen (Herakleopolis), and during the night Hathor
waded about in the blood of men. Ra asserted his intention of being
master of the rebels, and this is probably referred to in the Book of
the Dead, Chapter XVII., in which it is said that Ra rose as king for
the first time in Suten-henen. Osiris also was crowned at Suten-henen,
and in this city lived the great Bennu bird, or Phoenix, and the
"Crusher of Bones" mentioned in the Negative Confession.

The legend now goes on to describe an act of Ra, the significance of
which it is difficult to explain. The god ordered messengers to be
brought to him, and when they arrived, he commanded them to run like the
wind to Abu, or the city of Elephantine, and to bring him large
quantities of the fruit called *tataat*. What kind of fruit this was is
not clear, but Brugsch thought they were "mandrakes," the so-called
"love-apples," and this translation of *tataat* may be used
provisionally. The mandrakes were given to Sekti, a goddess of
Heliopolis, to crush and grind up, and when this was done they were
mixed with human blood, and put in a large brewing of beer which the

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

women slaves had made from wheat. In all they made 7,000 vessels of
beer. When Ra saw the beer he approved of it, and ordered it to be
carried up the river to where the goddess Hathor was still, it seems,
engaged in slaughtering men. During the night he caused this beer to be
poured out into the meadows of the Four Heavens, and when Hathor came
she saw the beer with human blood and mandrakes in it, and drank of it
and became drunk, and paid no further attention to men and women. In
welcoming the goddess, Ra, called her "Amit," i.e., "beautiful one," and
from this time onward "beautiful women were found in the city of Amit,"
which was situated in the Western Delta, near Lake Mareotis. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) Ra also ordered that in future at every
one of his festivals vessels of "sleep-producing beer" should be made,
and that their number should be the same as the number of the
handmaidens of Ra. Those who took part in these festivals of Hathor and
Ra drank beer in very large quantities, and under the influence of the
"beautiful women," i.e., the priestesses, who were supposed to resemble
Hathor in their physical attractions, the festal celebrations
degenerated into drunken and licentious orgies.

Soon after this Ra complained that he was smitten

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

with pain, and that he was weary of the, children of men. He thought
them a worthless remnant, and wished that more of them had been slain.
The gods about him begged him to endure, and reminded him that his power
was in proportion to his will. Ra was, however, unconsoled, and he
complained that his limbs were weak for the first time in his life.
Thereupon the god Nu told Shu to help Ra, and he ordered Nut to take the
great god Ra on her back. Nut changed herself into a cow, and with the
help of Shu. Ra got on her back. As soon as men saw that Ra was on the
back of the Cow of Heaven, and was about to leave them, they became
filled with fear and repentance, and cried out to Ra to remain with them
and to slay all those who had blasphemed against him. But the Cow moved
on her way, and carried Ra to Het-Ahet, a town of the nome of Mareotis,
where in later days the right leg of Osiris was said to be preserved.
Meanwhile darkness covered the land. When day broke the men who had
repented of their blasphemies appeared with their bows, and slew the
enemies of Ra. At this result Ra was pleased, and he forgave those who
had repented because of their righteous slaughter of his enemies. From
this time onwards human sacrifices were offered up at the festivals of
Ra celebrated in this place, and at Heliopolis and in other parts of
Egypt.

After these things Ra declared to Nut that he

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

intended to leave this world, and to ascend into heaven, and that all
those who would see his face must follow him thither. Then he went up
into heaven and prepared a place to which all might come. Then he said,
"Hetep sekhet aa," i.e., "Let a great field be produced," and
straightway "Sekhet-hetep," or the "Field of peace," came into being. He
next said, "Let there be reeds (*aaru*) in it," and straightway "Sekhet
Aaru," or the "Field of Reeds," came into being. Sekhet-hetep was the
Elysian Fields of the Egyptians, and the Field of Reeds was a well-known
section of it. Another command of the god Ra resulted in the creation of
the stars, which the legend compares to flowers. Then the goddess Nut
trembled in all her body, and Ra, fearing that she might fall, caused to
come into being the Four Pillars on which the heavens are supported.
Turning to Shu, Ra entreated him to protect these supports, and to place
himself under Nut, and to hold her up in position with his hands. Thus
Shu became the new Sun-god in the place of Ra, and the heavens in which
Ra lived were supported and placed beyond the risk of falling, and
mankind would live and rejoice in the light of the new sun.

At this place in the legend a text is inserted called the "Chapter of
the Cow." It describes how the Cow of Heaven and the two Boats of the
Sun shall be painted, and gives the positions of the gods who stand by
the legs of the Cow, and a number of short magical names, or formulae,
which are inexplicable. The

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

general meaning of the picture of the Cow is quite clear. The Cow
represents the sky in which the Boats of Ra, sail, and her four legs are
the four cardinal points which cannot be changed. The region above her
back is the heaven in which Ra reigns over the beings who pass thereto
from this earth when they die, and here was situated the home of the
gods and the celestial spirits who govern this world.

When Ra had made a heaven for himself, and had arranged for a
continuance of life on the earth, and the welfare of human beings, he
remembered that at one time when reigning on earth he had been bitten by
a serpent, and had nearly lost his life through the bite. Fearing that
the same calamity might befall his successor, he determined to take
steps to destroy the power of all noxious reptiles that dwelt on the
earth. With this object in view he told Thoth to summon Keb, the
Earth-god, to his presence, and this god having arrived, Ra told him
that war must be made against the serpents that dwelt in his dominions.
He further commanded him to go to the god Nu, and to tell him to set a
watch over all the reptiles that were in the earth and in water, and to
draw up a writing for every place in which serpents are known to be,
containing strict orders that they are to bite, no one. Though these
serpents knew that Ra was retiring from the earth, they were never to
forget that his rays would fall upon them. In his place their father Keb
was to keep watch over them, and he was their father for ever.

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

As a further protection against them Ra promised to impart to magicians
and snake-charmers the particular word of power, *hekau*, with which he
guarded himself against the attacks of serpents, and also to transmit it
to his son Osiris. Thus those who are ready to listen to the formulae of
the snake-charmers shall always be immune from the bites of serpents,
and their children also. From this we may gather that the profession of
the snake-charmer is very ancient, and that this class of magicians were
supposed to owe the foundation of their craft to a decree of Ra himself.

Ra next sent for the god Thoth, and when he came into the presence of
Ra, he invited him to go with him to a distance, to a place called
"Tuat," i.e., hell, or the Other World, in which region he had
determined to make his light to shine. When they arrived there he told
Thoth, the Scribe of Truth, to write down on his tablets the names of
all who were therein, and to punish those among them who had sinned
against him, and he deputed to Thoth the power to deal absolutely as he
pleased with all the beings in the Tuat. Ra loathed the wicked, and
wished them to be kept at a distance from him. Thoth was to be his
vicar, to fill his place, and "Place of Ra," was to be his name. He gave
him power to send out a messenger (*hab*), so the Ibis (*habi*) came
into being. All that Thoth would do would be good (*khen*), therefore
the

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Tekni bird of Thoth came into being. He gave
Thoth power to embrace (*anh*) the heavens, therefore the Moon-god
(*Aah*) came into being. He gave Thoth power to turn back (*anan*) the
Northern peoples, therefore the dog-headed ape of Thoth came into being:
Finally Ra told Thoth that he would take his place in the sight of all
those who were wont to worship Ra, and that all should praise him as
God. Thus the abdication of Ra was complete.

In the fragmentary texts which follow we are told how a man may benefit
by the recital of this legend. He must proclaim that the soul which
animated Ra was the soul of the Aged One, and that of Shu, Khnemu (?),
Heh, &c., and then he must proclaim that he is Ra himself, and his word
of power Heka. If he recites the Chapter correctly he shall have life in
the Other World, and he will be held in greater fear there than here. A
rubric adds that he must be dressed in new linen garments, and be well
washed with Nile water; he must wear white sandals, and his body must be
anointed with holy oil. He must burn incense in a censer, and a figure
of Maat (Truth) must be painted on his tongue with green paint. These
regulations applied to the laity as well as to the clergy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxiii:1](leg05.htm#fr_4.md) *Monuments*, tom. iii.,
p. 245.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxiv:1](leg05.htm#fr_5.md) *Trans. Soc. Bibl.
Arch.*, vol. iv., p. 1 ff.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xxiv:2](leg05.htm#fr_6.md) *Hieroglyphische
Inschriften*, Bl. 85 fl.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxiv:3](leg05.htm#fr_7.md) *Die neue Weltordnung
nach Vernichtung des sündigen Menschengeschlechtes*, Berlin, 1881.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxiv:4](leg05.htm#fr_8.md) *Aus Aegyptens Vorzeit*,
p. 71.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxiv:5](leg05.htm#fr_9.md) *Religion der alten
Aegypter*, p. 436.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xxiv:6](leg05.htm#fr_10.md) *Die Religion*, p. 32.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxiv:7](leg05.htm#fr_11.md) *Ä. Z.*, 1883, p. 32.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxiv:8](leg05.htm#fr_12.md) *Tombeau de Seti I.*,
Part IV., plates 15-18.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxiv:9](leg05.htm#fr_13.md) *Trans. Soc. Bibl.
Arch.*, vol. viii., p. 412 ft.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xxvii:1](leg05.htm#fr_14.md) It was also called
the "City of Apis," (Brugsch, *Dict. Geog.*, p. 491), and is the Apis
city of classical writers. It is, perhaps, represented by the modern Kom
al-Hisn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Summary: III. The Legend Of Ra and Isis.](leg06.md)
