[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg18)  [Next](leg20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LEGEND OF THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND

### CHAPTER V.

V. WHOSOEVER SHALL RECITE the words of this composition over himself
shall anoint himself with olive oil and with thick unguent, and he shall
have propitiatory offerings on both his hands of incense, and behind his
two ears shall be pure natron, and sweet-smelling salve shall be on his
lips.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He shall be arrayed in a new double tunic, and
his body shall be purified with the water of the nile-flood, and he
shall have upon his feet a pair of sandals made of white \[leather\],
and a figure of the goddess Maat shall be drawn upon his tongue with
green-coloured ochre. Whensoever Thoth shall wish to recite this
composition on behalf of Ra, he must perform a sevenfold (?)
purification for three days, and priests and \[ordinary\] men shall do
likewise. Whosoever shall recite the above words shall perform the
ceremonies which are to be performed when this book is being read. And
he shall make his place of standing (?) in a circle (or, at an angle) .
. . . . which is beyond \[him\], and his two eyes shall be fixed upon
himself, all his members shall be \[composed\], and his steps shall not
carry him away \[from the place\]. Whosoever among men shall recite
\[these\] words shall be like Ra on the day of his birth; and his
possessions shall not become fewer, and his house shall never fall into
decay, but shall endure for a million eternities.

Then the Aged One himself (i.e., Ra) embraced (?) the god Nu, and spake
unto the gods who came forth in the east of the sky, "Ascribe ye praise
to the god, the Aged One, from whom I have come into being. I am he who
made the heavens, and I (set in order \[the earth, and created the gods,
and\] I was with them for an exceedingly long period; then was born the
year and . . . . . . but my soul is older than it (i.e., time). It is
the Soul of

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Shu, it is the Soul of Khnemu (?), <span
id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64.md) it is the Soul of Heh, it is the Soul of
Kek and Kerh (i.e., Night and Darkness), it is the Soul of Nu and of Ra,
it is the Soul of Osiris, the lord of Tettu, it is the Soul of the Sebak
Crocodile-gods and of the Crocodiles, it is the Soul of every god \[who
dwelleth\] in the divine Snakes, it is the Soul of Apep in Mount Bakhau
(i.e., the Mount of Sunrise), and it is the Soul of Ra which pervadeth
the whole world."

Whosoever sayeth \[these words\] worketh his own protection by means of
the words of power, "I am the god Hekau (i.e., the divine Word of
power), and \[I am\] pure in my mouth, and \[in\] my belly; \[I am\] Ra
from whom the gods proceeded. I am Ra, the Light-god (Khu)." When thou
sayest \[this\], stop forth in the evening and in the morning on thine
own behalf if thou wouldst make to fall the enemies of Ra. I am his
Soul, and I am Heka.

Hail, thou lord of eternity, thou creator of everlastingness, who
bringest to nought the gods who came forth from Ra, thou lord of thy
god, thou prince who didst make what made thee, who art beloved by the
fathers of the gods, on whose head are the pure words of power, who
didst create the woman (*erpit*) that standeth on the south side of
thee, who didst create the goddess who hath her face on her breast, and
the serpent which standeth

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

on his tail, with her eye on his belly, and with his tail on the earth,
to whom Thoth giveth praises, and upon whom the heavens rest, and to
whom Shu stretcheth out his two hands, deliver thou me from those two
great gods who sit in the east of the sky, who act as wardens of heaven
and as wardens of earth, and who make firm the secret places, and who
are called "Aaiu-su," and "Per-f-er-maa-Nu." Moreover \[there shall be)
a purifying on the . . . . . day of the month . . . . . . .. even
according to the performance of the ceremonies in the oldest time.

Whosoever shall recite this Chapter shall have life in Neter-kher (i.e.,
Underworld), and the fear of him shall be much greater than it was
formerly \[upon earth\] . . . . . . . and they shall say, "Thy names are
'Eternity' and 'Everlastingness.'" They are called, they are called,
"Au-peh-nef-n-aa-em-ta-uat-apu," and "Rekh-kua-\[tut\]-en-neter-pui-. .
. . . . en en-hra-f-Her-shefu." I am he who hath strengthened the boat
with the company of the gods, and his Shenit, and his Gods, by means of
words of power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[39:1](leg19.htm#fr_65.md) There are mistakes in
the text here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of Ra And Isis.](leg20.md)
