[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg12)  [Next](leg14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

# THE HISTORY OF CREATION--A.

THE BOOK OF KNOWING THE EVOLUTIONS <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_48.md)
OF RA, AND OF OVERTHROWING APEP. \[These are\] the; words which the god
Neb-er-tcher spake after he had, come into being:--"I am he who came
into being in the form of the god Khepera, and I am the creator of that
which came into being, that is to say, I am the creator of everything
which came into being: now the things which I created, and which came
forth out of my month after that I had come into being myself were
exceedingly many. The sky (or heaven) had not come into being, the earth
did not exist, and the children of the earth <span
id="fr_50"></span>[2](#fn_49.md), and the creeping, things, had not been
made at that time. I myself raised them up from out of Nu <span
id="fr_51"></span>[3](#fn_50.md), from a state of helpless inertness. I
found no place whereon I could stand. I worked a charm <span
id="fr_52"></span>[4](#fn_51) upon my own heart (or, will.md), I laid the
foundation \[of things\] by Maat, <span id="fr_53"></span>[5](#fn_52.md)
and I made everything which had form. I was \[then\] one by myself, for
I had not emitted from myself the god Shu, and I had not spit out from
myself the goddess Tefnut; and there existed no

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

other who could work with me. I laid the foundations \[of things\] in my
own heart, and there came into being multitudes of created things, which
came into being from the created things which were born from the created
things which arose from what they brought forth. I had union with my
closed hand, and I embraced my shadow as a wife, and I poured seed into
my own mouth, and I sent forth from myself issue in the form of the gods
Shu and Tefnut. Saith my father Nu:--My Eye was covered up behind them
(i.e., Shu. and Tefnut), but after two *hen* periods had passed from the
time when they departed from me, from being one god I became three gods,
and I came into being in the earth. Then Shu and Tefnut rejoiced from
out of the inert watery mass wherein they I were, and they brought to me
my Eye (i.e., the Sun). Now after these things I gathered together my
members, and I wept over them, and men and women sprang into being from
the tears which came forth from my Eye. And when my Eye came to me, and
found that I had made another \[Eye\] in place where it was (i.e., the
Moon), it was wroth with (or, raged at) me, whereupon I endowed it
(i.e., the (second Eye) with \[some of\] the splendour which I had made
for the first \[Eye\], and I made it to occupy its place in my Face, and
henceforth

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

it ruled throughout all this earth.

When there fell on them their moment <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_53.md)
through plant-like clouds, I restored what had been taken away from
them, and I appeared from out of the plant-like clouds. I created
creeping things of every kind, and everything which came into being from
them. Shu and Tefnut brought forth \[Seb and\] Nut; and Seb and Nut
brought forth Osiris, and Heru-khent-an-maati, <span
id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_54.md) and Set, and Isis, and Nephthys <span
id="fr_56"></span>[3](#fn_55.md) at one birth, one after the other, and
they produced their multitudinous offspring in this earth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[3:1](leg13.htm#fr_49.md) *Kheperu*. The verb
KHEPER means "to make, to form, to produce, to become, and to roll;
*kheperu* here means "the things which come into being through the
rollings of the ball of the god Kheper (the roller)," i.e., the Sun.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[3:2](leg13.htm#fr_50.md) I.e., serpents and
snakes, or perhaps plants.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[3:3](leg13.htm#fr_51.md) The primeval watery mass
which was the source and origin of all beings and things.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[3:4](leg13.htm#fr_52.md) I.e., he uttered a
magical formula.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[3:5](leg13.htm#fr_53.md) I.e., by exact and
definite rules.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[7:1](leg13.htm#fr_54.md) I.e., the period of
calamity wherein their light was veiled through plant-like clouds.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[7:2](leg13.htm#fr_55.md) I.e., the Blind Horus.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[7:3](leg13.htm#fr_56.md) I.e., these five gods
were all born at one time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The History of Creation--B.](leg14.md)
