[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg09)  [Next](leg11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII.

### A LEGEND OF KHNEMU AND OF A SEVEN YEARS' FAMINE.

THE text of this most interesting legend is found in hieroglyphics on
one side of a large rounded block of granite some eight or nine feet
high, which stands on the south-east portion of Sahal, a little island
lying in the First Cataract, two or three miles to the south of
Elephantine Island and the modern town of Aswan. The inscription is not
cut into the rock in the ordinary way, but was "stunned" on it with a
blunted chisel, and is, in some lights, quite invisible to anyone

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

standing near the rock, unless he is aware of its existence. It is in
full view of the river-path which leads from Mahallah to Philae, and yet
it escaped the notice of scores of travellers who have searched the
rocks and islands in the Cataract for graffiti and inscriptions. The
inscription, which covers a space six feet by five feet, was discovered
accidentally on February 6th, 1889, by the late Mr. C. E. Wilbour, a
distinguished American gentleman who spent many years in research in
Egypt. He first copied the text, discovering in the course of his work
the remarkable nature of its contents and then his friend Mr. Maudslay
photographed it. The following year he sent prints from Mr. Maudslay's
negatives to Dr. Brugsch, who in the course of 1891 published a
transcript of the text with a German translation and notes in a work
entitled *Die biblischen sieben Jahre der Hungersnoth*, Leipzig, 8vo.

The legend contained in this remarkable text describes a terrible famine
which took place in the reign of Tcheser, a king of the IIIrd Dynasty,
and lasted for seven years. Insufficient Nile-floods were, of course,
the physical cause of the famine, but the legend shows that the "low
Niles" were brought about by the neglect of the Egyptians in respect of
the worship of the god of the First Cataract, the great god Khnemu.
When, according to the legend, king Tcheser had been made to believe
that the famine took place because men had ceased to worship Khnemu in a
manner appropriate to his greatness, and when he

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

had taken steps to remove the ground of complaint, the Nile rose to its
accustomed height, the crops became abundant once more, and all misery
caused by scarcity of provisions ceased. In other words, when Tcheser
restored the offerings of Khnemu, and re-endowed his sanctuary and his
priesthood, the god allowed Hapi to pour forth his streams from the
caverns in the Cataract, and to flood the land with abundance. The
general character of the legend, as we have it here, makes it quite
certain that it belongs to a late period, and the forms of the
hieroglyphics and the spellings of the words indicate that the text was
"stunned" on the rock in the reign of one of the Ptolemies, probably at
a time when it was to the interest of some men to restore the worship of
Khnemu, god of the First Cataract. These interested people could only
have been the priests of Khnemu, and the probability that this was so
becomes almost a certainty when we read in the latter part of the text
the list of the tolls and taxes which they were empowered to levy on the
merchants, farmers, miners, etc., whose goods passed down the Cataract
into Egypt. Why, if this be the case, they should have chosen to connect
the famine with the reign of Tcheser is not clear. They may have wished
to prove the great antiquity of the worship of Khnemu, but it would have
been quite easy to select the name of some king of the Ist Dynasty, and
had they done this, they would have made the authority of Khnemu over
the Nile coaeval with Dynastic

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

civilization. It is impossible to assume that no great famine took place
in Egypt between the reign of Tcheser and the period when the
inscription was made, and when we consider this fact the choice by the
editor of the legend of a famine which took place under the IIIrd
Dynasty to illustrate the power of Khnemu seems inexplicable.

Of the famines which must have taken place in the Dynastic period the
inscriptions tell us nothing, but the story of the seven years' famine
mentioned in the Book of Genesis shows that there is nothing improbable
in a famine lasting so long in Egypt. Arab historians also mention
several famines which lasted for seven years. That which took place in
the years 1066-1072 nearly ruined the whole country. A cake of bread was
sold for 15 *dinanir*, (the *dinar* = 10*s*.), a horse was sold for 20,
a dog for 5, a cat for 3, and an egg for 1 *dinar*. When all the animals
were eaten men began to eat each other, and human flesh was sold in
public. "Passengers were caught in the streets by hooks let down from
the windows, drawn up, killed, and cooked." <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_44) During the famine which began in 1201
people ate human flesh habitually. Parents killed and cooked their own
children, and a, wife was found eating her husband raw. Baby fricassee
and haggis of children's heads were ordinary articles of diet. The
graves even were ransacked for food. An ox sold for 70 *dinanir*. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_45)

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

The legend begins with the statement that in the 18th year of the reign
of King Tcheser, when Matar, the Erpa Prince and <u>H</u>â, was the
Governor of the temple properties of the South and North, and was also
the Director of the Khenti men at Elephantine (Aswan), a royal despatch
was delivered to him, in which the king said: "I am in misery on my
throne. My heart is very sore because of the calamity which hath
happened, for the Nile hath not come forth <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_46) for seven years. There is no grain, there
are no vegetables, there is no food, and every man is robbing his
neighbour. Men wish to walk, but they are unable to move; the young man
drags along his limbs, the hearts of the aged are crushed with despair,
their legs fail them, they sink to the ground, and they clutch their
bodies with their hands in pain. The councillors are dumb, and nothing
but wind comes out of the granaries when they are opened. Everything is
in a state of ruin." A more graphic picture of the misery caused by the
famine could hardly be imagined. The king then goes on to ask Matar
where the Nile is born? what god or goddess presides over it? and what
is his \[or her\] form? He says he would like to go to the temple of
Thoth to enquire of that god, to go to the College of the Magicians, and
search through the sacred books in order to find out these things.

When Matar had read the despatch, he set out to go to the king, and
explained to him the things which

<span id="page_lxv">p. lxv</span>

he wished to know. He told him that, the Nile rose near the city of
Elephantine, that it flowed out of two caverns, which were the breasts
of the Nile-god, that it rose to a height of twenty-eight cubits at
Elephantine, and to the height of seven cubits at Sma-Behutet, or,
Diospolis Parva in the Delta. He who controlled the Nile was Khnemu, and
when this god drew the bolt of the doors which shut in the stream, and
smote the earth with his sandals, the river rushed forth. Matar also
described to the king the form of Khnemu, which was that of Shu, and the
work which he did, and the wooden house in which he lived, and its exact
position, which was near the famous granite quarries. The gods who dwelt
with Khnemu were the goddess Sept (Sothis, or the Dog-star), the goddess
Anqet, Hap (or Hep), the Nile-god, Shu, Keb, Nut, Osiris, Isis,
Nephthys, and Horus. Thus we see that the priests of Khnemu made him to
be the head of a Company of Gods. Finally Matar gave the king a list of
all the stones, precious and otherwise, which were found in and about
Elephantine.

When the king, who had, it seems, come to Elephantine, heard these
things he rejoiced greatly, and he went into the temple of Khnemu. The
priests drew back the curtains and sprinkled him with holy water, and
then he passed into the shrine and offered up a great sacrifice of
bread-cakes, beer, geese, oxen, and all kinds of good things, to the
gods and goddesses who dwelt at Elephantine, in the place called "Couch
of the

<span id="page_lxvi">p. lxvi</span>

heart in life and power," Suddenly he found himself standing face to
face with the god Khnemu, whom he placated with a peace-offering and
with prayer. Then the god opened his eyes, and bent his body towards the
king, and spake to him mighty words, saying, "I am Khnemu, who made
thee. My hands knitted together thy body and made it sound, and I gave
thee thy heart." Khnemu then went on to complain that, although the
ground under the king's feet was filled with stones and metal, men were
too inert to work them and to employ them in repairing or rebuilding of
the shrines of the gods, or in doing what they ought to do for him,
their Lord and Creator. These words were, of course, meant as a rebuke
for the king, who evidently, though it is not so stated in the text, was
intended by Khnemu to undertake the rebuilding of his shrine without
delay. The god then went on to proclaim his majesty and power, and
declared himself to be Nu, the Celestial Ocean, and the Nile-god, "who
came into being at the beginning, and riseth at his will to give health
to him that laboureth for Khnemu." He described himself as the Father of
the gods, the Governor of the earth and of men, and then he promised the
king to make the Nile rise yearly, regularly, and unceasingly, to give
abundant harvests, to give all people their heart's desire, to make
misery to pass away, to fill the granaries, and to make the whole land
of Egypt yellow with waving fields of full ripe grain. When the king,
who had been in a dream, heard the

<span id="page_lxvii">p. lxvii</span>

god mention crops, he woke up, and his courage returned to him, and
having cast away despair from his heart he issued a decree by which he
made ample provision for the maintenance of the worship of the god in a
fitting state. In this decree, the first copy of which was cut upon
wood, the king endowed Khnemu with 20 schoinoi of land on each side of
the river, with gardens, etc. It was further enacted that every man who
drew water from the Nile for his land should contribute a portion of his
crops to the god. Fishermen, fowlers, and hunters were to pay an octroi
duty of one-tenth of the value of their catches when they brought them
into the city, and a tithe of the cattle was to be set apart for the
daily sacrifice. The masters of caravans coming from the Sudan were to
pay a tithe also, but they were not liable to any further tax in the
country northwards. Every metal-worker, ore-crusher, miner, mason, and
handicraftsman of every kind, was to pay to the temple of the god
one-tenth of the value of the material produced or worked by his labour.
The decree provided also for the appointment of an inspector whose duty
it would be to weigh the gold, silver and copper which came into the
town of Elephantine, and to assess the value both of these metals and of
the precious stones, etc., which were to be devoted to the service of
Khnemu. All materials employed in making the images of the gods, and all
handicraftsmen employed in the work were exempted from tithing. In
short, the worship of the god and his company was

<span id="page_lxviii">p. lxviii</span>

to be maintained according to ancient use and wont, and the people were
to supply the temple with everything necessary in a generous spirit and
with a liberal hand. He who failed in any way to comply with the
enactments was to be beaten with the rope, and the name of Tcheser was
to be perpetuated in the temple.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[lxiii:1](leg10.htm#fr_45) Lane Poole, *Middle
Ages*, p. 146.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[lxiii:2](leg10.htm#fr_46) *Ibid.*, p. 216.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[lxiv:1](leg10.htm#fr_47) I.e., there have been
insufficient Nile-floods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Summary: VIII. The Legend of the Death and Resurrection of Horus,
and Other Magical Texts](leg11)
