[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg15)  [Next](leg17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

### THE LEGEND OF THE DESTRUCTION OF MANKIND

### CHAPTER II.

II\. THIS CHAPTER SHALL BE SAID OVER \[A FIGURE OF\] THE COW.--The
supporters \[called\] Heh-enti shall be by her shoulder. The supporters
\[called\] Heh-enti shall be at her side, and one cubit and four spans
of hers shall be in colours, and nine stars shall be on her belly, and
Set shall be by her two thighs and shall keep watch before her two legs,
and before her two legs shall be Shu, under her belly, and he shall be
made (i.e., painted) in green *qenat* colour. His two arms shall be
under the stars, and his name shall be made (i.e., written) in the
middle of them, namely, Shu himself." A boat with a rudder and a double
shrine shall be therein, and Aten (i.e., the Disk) shall be above it,
and Ra shall be in it, in front of Shu, near his hand, or, as another
reading hath, behind him, near his hand. And the udders of the Cow shall
be made to be between her legs, towards the left side. And on the two
flanks, towards the middle of the legs, shall be done in writing \[the
words\], "The exterior heaven," and "I am what is in me," and "I will
not permit them to make her to turn." That which is \[written\] under
the boat which is in front shall read, "Thou shalt not be motionless, my
son;" and the words which are written in an opposite direction shall
read, "Thy support is like life," and "The word is as the word there,"
and "Thy son is with me," and "Life, strength, and health be to thy
nostrils!" And that which is behind Shu, near his shoulder,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

shall read, "They keep ward," and that which is behind him, written
close to his feet in an opposite direction, shall read, "Maat," and
"They come in," and "I protect daily." And that which is under the
shoulder of the divine figure which is under the left leg, and is behind
it shall read, "He who sealeth all things." That which is over his head,
under the thighs of the Cow, and that which is by her legs shall read,
"Guardian of his exit." That which is behind the two figures which are
by her two legs, that is to say, over their heads, shall read, "The Aged
One who is adored as he goeth forth," and The Aged One to whom praise is
given when he goeth in." That which is over the head of the two figures,
and is between the two thighs of the Cow, shall read, "Listener,"
"Hearer," "Sceptre of the Upper Heaven," and "Star" (?).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of The Destruction Of Mankind, Chapter III.](leg17)
