[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg19)  [Next](leg21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

# THE LEGEND OF RA AND ISIS.

THE CHAPTER of the divine (or, mighty) god, who created himself, who
made the heavens and the earth, and the breath of life, and fire, and
the gods, and men, and beasts, and cattle, and reptiles, and the fowl of
the air, and the fish, who is the king of men and gods, \[who existeth\]
in one Form, \[to whom\] periods of one hundred and twenty years axe as
single years, whose names by reason of their multitude are unknowable,
for \[even\] the gods know them not. Behold, the goddess Isis lived in
the form, of a woman, who had the knowledge of words \[of power\]. Her
heart turned away in disgust from the millions of men, and she chose for
herself the millions of the gods, but esteemed more highly the millions
of the spirits. Was it not possible to become even as was Ra in heaven
and upon earth, and to make \[herself\] mistress of the earth, and a
\[mighty\] goddess--thus she meditated in her heart--by the knowledge of
the Name of the holy god? Behold, Ra entered \[heaven\] each day at the
head of his mariners, establishing himself upon the double throne of the
two horizons. Now the divine one had become old, he dribbled at

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

the mouth, and he let his emissions go forth from him upon the earth,
and his spittle fell upon the ground. This Isis kneaded in her
hand, <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_65) with \[some\] dust, and she
fashioned it in the form of a sacred serpent, and made it to have the
form of a dart, so that none might be able to escape alive from it, and
she left it lying upon the road whereon the great god travelled,
according to his desire, about the two lands. Then the holy god rose up
in the tabernacle of the gods in the great double house (life, strength,
health!) among those who were in his train, and \[as\] he journeyed on
his way according to his daily wont, the holy serpent shot its fang into
him, and the living fire was departing from the god's own body, and the
reptile destroyed the dweller among the cedars. And the mighty god
opened his mouth, and the cry of His Majesty (life, strength, health!)
reached unto the heavens, and the company of the gods said, "What is
it?" and his gods said, "What is the matter?" And the god found \[no
words\] wherewith to answer concerning himself. His jaws shook, his lips
trembled, and the poison took possession of all his flesh just as Hapi
(i.e., the Nile) taketh possession of the land

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

through which he floweth. Then the great god made firm his heart (i.e.,
took courage) and he cried out to those who were in his
following:--"Come ye unto me, O ye who have come into being from my
members, <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_66) ye gods who have proceeded
from me, for I would make you to know what hath happened. I have been
smitten by some deadly thing, of which my heart hath no knowledge, and
which I have neither seen with my eyes nor made with my hand; and I have
no knowledge at all who hath done this to me. I have never before felt
any pain like unto it, and no pain can be worse than this \[is\]. I am a
Prince, the son of a Prince, and the divine emanation which was produced
from a god. I am a Great One, the son of a Great One, and my father hath
determined for me my name. I have multitudes of names, and I have
multitudes of forms, and my being existeth in every god. I have been
invoked (or, proclaimed?) by Temu and Heru-Hekennu. My father and my
mother uttered my name, and \[they\] hid it in my body at my birth so
that none of those who would use against me words of power might succeed
in making their enchantments have dominion over me. <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_67) I had come forth from my tabernacle to
look upon that which I

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span> <span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

had made, and was making my way through the two lands which I had made,
when a blow was aimed at me, but I know not of what kind. Behold, is it
fire? Behold, is it water? My heart is full of burning fire, my limbs
are shivering, and my members have darting pains in them. Let there be
brought unto me my children the gods, who possess words of magic, whose
mouths are cunning \[in uttering them\], and whose powers reach up to
heaven." Then his children came unto him, and every god was there with
his cry of lamentation; and Isis <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68)
came with her words of magic, and the place of her mouth \[was filled
with\] the breath of life, for the words which she putteth together
destroy diseases, and her words make to live those whose throats are
choked (i.e., the dead). And she said, "What is this, O divine father?
What is it? Hath a serpent shot his venom into thee? Hath a thing which
thou hast fashioned lifted up its head against thee? Verily it shall be
overthrown by beneficent words of power, and I will make it to retreat
in the sight of thy rays." The holy god opened his mouth, \[saying\], I
was going along the road and passing through the two lands of my
country, for my heart wished to look upon what I had made, when I was

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

bitten by a serpent which I did not see; behold, is it fire? Behold, is
it water? I am colder than water, I am hotter than fire, all my members
sweat, I myself quake, mine eye is unsteady. I cannot look at the
heavens, and water forceth itself on my face as in the time of the
Inundation." <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_69) And Isis said unto Ra,
"O my divine father, tell me thy name, for he who is able to pronounce
his name liveth." \[And Ra said\], "I am the maker of the heavens and
the earth, I have knit together the mountains, and I have created
everything which existeth upon them. I am the maker of the Waters, and I
have made Meht-ur to come into being; I have made the Bull of his
Mother, and I have made the joys of love to exist. I am the maker of
heaven, and I have made to be hidden the two gods of the horizon, and I
have placed the souls of the gods within them. I am the Being who
openeth his eyes and the light cometh; I am the Being who shutteth his
eyes and there is darkness. I am the Being who giveth the command, and
the waters of Hapi (the Nile) burst forth, I am the Being whose name the
gods know not. I am the maker of the hours and the creator of the days.
I am the opener (i.e., inaugurator) of the festivals, and the maker of
the floods of water. I am the creator of the fire of life

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

whereby the works of the houses are caused to come into being. I am
Khepera in the morning, and Ra (at the time of his culmination (i.e.,
noon), and Temu in the evening." <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_70)
Nevertheless the poison was not driven from its course, and the great
god felt no better. Then Isis said unto Ra, "Among the things which thou
hast said unto me thy name hath not been mentioned. O declare thou it
unto me, and the poison shall come forth; for the person who hath
declared his name shall live." Meanwhile the poison burned with blazing
fire and the heat thereof was stronger than that of a blazing flame.
Then. the Majesty of Ra, said, "I will allow myself to be searched
through by Isis, and my name shall come forth from my body and go into
hers." Then the divine one hid himself from the gods, and the throne in
the Boat of Millions of Years <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_71) was
empty. And it came to pass that when it was the time for the heart to
come forth \[from the god\], she said unto her son Horus, "The great god
shall bind himself by an oath to give his two eyes." <span
id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_72) Thus was the great god made to yield up
his name, and

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Isis, the great lady of enchantments, said, "Flow on, poison, and come
forth from Ra; let the Eye of Horus come forth from the god and shine(?)
outside his mouth. I have worked, and I make the poison to fall on the
ground, for the venom hath been mastered. Verily the name hath been
taken away from the great god. Let Ra live, and let the poison die; and
if the poison live then Ra shall die. And similarly, a certain man, the
son of a certain man, shall live and the poison shall die." These were
the words which spake Isis, the great lady, the mistress of the gods,
and she had knowledge of Ra in his own name. The above words shall be
said over an image of Temu and an image of Heru-Hekennu, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_73) and over an image of Isis and an image of
Horus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[45:1](leg20.htm#fr_66) Here we have another
instance of the important part which the spittle played in magical
ceremonies that were intended to produce evil effects. The act of
spitting, however, was intended sometimes to carry a curse with it, and
sometimes a blessing, for a man spat in the face of his enemy in order
to lay the curse of impurity upon him, and at the present time, men spit
upon money to keep the devils away from it.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[47:1](leg20.htm#fr_67) The gods were, according
to one belief, nothing more than the various names of Ra, who had taken
the forms of the various members of his body.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[47:2](leg20.htm#fr_68) Thus the god's own name
became his most important talisman.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[49:1](leg20.htm#fr_69) The position of Isis as
the "great enchantress" is well defined, and several instances of her
magical powers are recorded. By the utterance of her words of power she
succeeded in raising her dead husband Osiris to life, and she enabled
him by their means to beget Horus of her. Nothing could withstand them,
because they were of divine origin, and she had learned them from Thoth,
the intelligence of the greatest of the gods.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[51:1](leg20.htm#fr_70) Or, "the period of the
summer." The season Shemmu, began soon after the beginning of April and
lasted until nearly the end of July.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[53:1](leg20.htm#fr_71) Khepera, Rd, and Temu
were the three principal forms of the Sun-god according to the
theological system of the priests of Heliopolis.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[53:2](leg20.htm#fr_72) The name by which the
Boat of Ra is generally known in Egyptian texts. It was this boat which
was stopped in its course when Thoth descended from the sky to impart to
Isis the words of power that were to raise her dead child Horus to life.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[53:3](leg20.htm#fr_73) I.e., the <span
id="img_05300"></span> ![](img/05300.jpg) of the sun, and the <span
id="img_05300"></span> ![](img/05300.jpg) of the moon. The sun and the
moon were the visible, material symbols of the Sun god.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[55:1](leg20.htm#fr_74) The attributes of this
god are not well defined. He was a god of the Eastern Delta, and was
associated with the cities where Temu was worshipped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Legend Of Horus Of Behutet And The Winged Disk.](leg21)
