[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg23)  [Next](leg25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

### A LEGEND OF THE GOD KHNEMU AND OF A SEVEN YEARS' FAMINE.

1\. In the eighteenth year of the Horus, Neter-Khat, of the King of the
South and North, Neter-Khat, of the Lord of the Shrines of Uatchit and
Nekhebit, Neter-Khat, of the Golden Horus Tcheser, <span
id="fr_166"></span>[1](#fn_165) when Matar was <u>H</u>â Prince, and
Erpa, and Governor of the temple-cities in the Land of the South, and
director of the Khenti <span id="fr_167"></span>[2](#fn_166) folk in
Abtu, <span id="fr_168"></span>[3](#fn_167) there was brought unto him
the following royal despatch: "This is to inform thee that misery hath
laid hold upon me

"**2** \[as I sit\] upon the great throne by reason of those who dwell
in the Great House. <span id="fr_169"></span>[4](#fn_168) My heart is
grievously afflicted by reason of the exceedingly great evil \[which
hath happened\] because Hapi (i.e., the Nile) hath not come forth <span
id="fr_170"></span>[5](#fn_169) in my time to the \[proper\] height for
seven years. Grain is very scarce, vegetables are lacking altogether,
every kind of thing which men eat for their food hath ceased, and every
man \[now\] plundereth

"**3** his neighbour. Men wish to walk, but are

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

unable to move, the child waileth, the young man draggeth his limbs
along, and the hearts of the aged folk are crushed with despair; their
legs give way under them, and they sink down to the ground, and their
hands are laid upon their bodies \[in pain\]. The *shennu* <span
id="fr_171"></span>[1](#fn_170) nobles are destitute of counsel, and
\[when\] the storehouses which should contain supplies are opened, there
cometh forth therefrom nothing but wind. Everything

"**4** is in a state of ruin. My mind hath remembered, going back to
former time, when I had an advocate, to the time of the gods, and of the
Ibis-god, and of the chief Kher-heb priest I-em-hetep, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[2](#fn_171) the son of Ptah of his Southern Wall.

"Where is the place of birth of Hapi (the Nile)? What god, or what
goddess, presideth (?) over it? What manner of form hath he? It is he
who stablisheth

"**5** revenue for me, and a full store of grain. I would go to the
Chief of Het-Sekhet <span id="fr_173"></span>[3](#fn_172) whose
beneficence strengtheneth all men in their works. I would enter into the
House of Life, <span id="fr_174"></span>[4](#fn_173) I would unfold the
written rolls \[therein\], and I would lay my hand upon them."

Then \[Matar\] set out on his journey, and he returned to me
straightway. He gave me instruction concerning the increase of
Hapi, <span id="fr_175"></span>[5](#fn_174) and told me

6 all things which men had written concerning it, and he revealed to me
the secret doors (?) whereto my

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

ancestors had betaken themselves quickly, the like of which has never
been, to \[any\] king since the time of Ra, (?). And he said unto me:
"There is a city in the middle of the stream wherefrom Hapi maketh his
appearance;

"**7**. 'Abu' <span id="fr_176"></span>[1](#fn_175)was its name in the
beginning; it is the City of the Beginning, and it is the Nome of the
City of the Beginning. \[It reacheth\] to Uaua, <span
id="fr_177"></span>[2](#fn_176) which is the beginning of the land.
There is too a flight of steps, <span id="fr_178"></span>[3](#fn_177)
which reareth itself to a great height, and is the support of Ra, when
he maketh his calculation to prolong life to everyone; 'Netchemtchem
Ankh' <span id="fr_179"></span>[4](#fn_178) is the name of its abode.
'The two Qerti' <span id="fr_180"></span>[5](#fn_179) is the name of the
water, and they are the two breasts from which every good thing cometh
forth (?).

"**8**. Here is the bed of Hapi (the Nile), wherein he reneweth his
youth \[in his season\], wherein he causeth the flooding of the land. He
cometh and hath union as he journeyeth, as a man hath union with a
woman. And again he playeth the part of a husband and satisfieth his
desire. He riseth to the height of twenty-eight cubits \[at Abu\], and
he droppeth at Sma-Behutet <span id="fr_181"></span>[6](#fn_180)

"**9** to seven cubits. The union(?) there is that of the god Khnemu in
\[Abu. He smiteth the ground\] with his sandals, and \[its\] fulness
becometh abundant; he openeth the bolt of the door with his hand, and he
throweth open the double door of the opening through which the water
cometh.

"Moreover, he dwelleth there in the form of the

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

god Shu, <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_181) as one who is lord over
his own territory, and his homestead, the name of which is 'Aa' (i.e.,
the 'Island'). There he keepeth an account of the products of the Land
of the South and of the Land of the North,

"**10** in order to give unto every god his proper share, and he leadeth
to each \[the metals\], and the \[precious stones, and the four-footed
beasts\], and the feathered fowl, and the fish, and every thing whereon
they live. And the cord \[for the measuring of the land\] and the tablet
whereon the register is kept are there.

"And there is an edifice of wood there, with the portals thereof formed
of reeds, wherein he dwelleth as one who is over his own territory, and
he maketh the foliage of the trees (?) to serve as a roof.

"**11**. His God-house hath an opening towards the south-east, and Ra
(or, the Sun) standeth immediately opposite thereto every day. The
stream which floweth along the south side thereof hath danger \[for him
that attacketh it\], and it hath as a defence a wall which entereth into
the region of the men of Kens <span id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_182) on
the South. Huge mountains \[filled with\] masses of stone are round
about its domain on the east side, and shut it in. Thither come the
quarrymen with things (tools?) of every kind, \[when\] they

"**12** seek to build a House for any god in the Land of the South, or
in the Land of the North, or \[shrines\] as abodes for sacred animals,
or royal pyramids, and statues of all kinds. They stand up in front of
the House of

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

the God and in the sanctuary chamber, and their sweet smelling offerings
are presented before the face of the god Khnemu during his circuit, even
as \[when they bring\]

"**13** garden herbs and flowers of every kind. The fore parts thereof
are in Abu (Elephantine), and the hind parts are in the city of Sunt
(?). <span id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_183) One portion thereof is on the
east side <span id="fr_185"></span>[2](#fn_184) of the river, and
another portion is on the west side <span
id="fr_186"></span>[3](#fn_185) of the river, and another portion is in
the middle <span id="fr_187"></span>[4](#fn_186) of the river. The
stream decketh the region with its waters during a certain season of the
year, and it is a place of delight for every man. And works are carried
on among these quarries \[which are\] on the edges \[of the river?\],

"**14** for the stream immediately faceth this city of Abu itself, and
there existeth the granite, the substance whereof is hard (?); 'Stone of
Abu' it is called.

"\[Here is\] a list of the names of the gods who dwell in the Divine
House of Khnemu. The goddess of the star Sept (Sothis), the goddess
Anqet, Hap (the Nile-god), Shu, Keb, Nut, Osiris, Horus, Isis, and
Nephthys.

"\[Here are\]

"**15** the names of the stones which lie in the heart of the mountains,
some on the east side, some on the west side, and some in \[the midst
of\] the stream of Abu. They exist in the heart of Abu, they exist in
the country on the east bank, and in the country on the west bank, and
in the midst of the stream, namely, "*Bekhen*-stone, *Meri* (or
Meli)-stone, *Atbekhab* (?)-stone, *Rakes*-stone, and white
*Utshi*-stone; these are found

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

on the east bank. *Per-tchani*-stone is found on the west bank, and the
*Teshi*-stone in the river.

"**16** \[Here are\] the names of the hard (or, hidden) precious stones,
which are found in the upper side, among them being the . . . . . stone,
the name <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_187) of which hath spread
abroad through \[a space of\] four *atru* measures: Gold, Silver,
Copper, Iron, Lapis-lazuli, Emerald, *Thehen* (Crystal?), *Khenem*
(Ruby), *Kai*, *Mennu*, *Betka* (?), *Temi*, *Na* (?). The following
come forth from the fore part <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_188) of
the land: *Mehi*-stone, \[*He*\]*maki*-stone,

"**17** *Abheti*-stone, iron ore, alabaster for statues,
mother-of-emerald, antimony, seeds (or, gum) of the *sehi* plant, seeds
(or, gum) of the *amem* plant, and seeds (or, gum) of the incense plant;
these are found in the fore parts of its double city." These were the
things which I learned therefrom (i.e., from Matar).

Now my heart was very happy when I heard these things, and I entered
into \[the temple of Khnemu\]. The overseers unrolled the documents
which were fastened up, the water of purification was sprinkled \[upon
me\], a progress was made \[through\] the secret places, and a great
offering \[consisting\] of bread-cakes, beer, geese, oxen (or, bulls),
and beautiful things

18 of all kinds were offered to the gods and goddesses who dwell in Abu,
whose names are proclaimed at the place \[which is called\], "Couch of
the heart in life and power."

And I found the God standing in front of me, and I

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span> <span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

made him to be at peace with me by means of the thank-offering which I
offered unto him, and I made prayer and supplication before him. Then he
opened his eyes, and his heart was inclined \[to hear\] me, and his
words were strong \[when he said\], "I am Khnemu, <span
id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_189) who fashioned thee. My two hands were
about thee and knitted together thy body, and

"**19** made healthy thy members; and it is I who gave thee thy heart.
Yet the minerals (or, precious stones) \[lie\] under each other, \[and
they have done so\] from olden time, and no man hath worked them in
order to build the houses of the god, or to restore those which have
fallen into ruin, or to hew out shrines for the gods of the South and of
the North, or to do what he ought to do for his lord, notwithstanding
that I am the Lord and the Creator.

"I am \[he\] who created himself, Nu, the Great \[God\], who came into
being at the beginning, \[and\] Hapi, who riseth

"**20** according to his will, in order to give health to him that
laboureth for me. I am the Director and Guide of all men at their
seasons, the Most Great, the Father of the Gods, Shu, the Great One, the
Chief of the Earth. The two halves of the sky (i.e., the East and the
West) are as a habitation below me. A lake of water hath been poured out
for me, \[namely,\] Hap (i.e., the Nile), which embraceth the
field-land, and his embrace provideth the \[means of\] life for

"**21** every nose (i.e., every one), according to the

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

extent of his embrace of the field-land. With old age \[cometh\] the
condition of weakness. I will make Hap (i.e., the Nile) rise for thee,
and \[in\] no year shall \[he\] fail, and he shall spread himself out in
rest upon every land. Green plants and herbs and trees shall bow beneath
\[the weight of\] their produce. The goddess Renenet <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_190) shall be at the head of everything, and
every product shall increase by hundreds of thousands, according to the
cubit of the year. The people shall be filled, verily to their hearts'
desire,

"**22** and everyone. Misery shall pass away, and the emptiness of their
store-houses of grain shall come to an end. The land of Ta-Mert (i.e.,
Egypt) shall come to be a region of cultivated land, the districts
\[thereof\] shall be yellow with grain crops, and the grain \[thereof\]
shall be goodly. And fertility shall come according to the desire \[of
the people\], more than there hath ever been before."

Then I woke up at \[the mention of\] crops, my heart (or, courage) came
\[back\], and was equal to my \[former\] despair, and I made the

23 following decree in the temple of my father Khnemu:--

The king giveth an offering to Khnemu <span
id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_191) the Lord of the city of Qebhet, <span
id="fr_193"></span>[3](#fn_192) the Governor of Ta-Sti, <span
id="fr_194"></span>[4](#fn_193) in return for those things which thou
hast done for me. There shall be given unto thee on thy right hand \[the
river bank\] of Manu, <span id="fr_195"></span>[5](#fn_194) and on thy
left hand the river bank of Abu, together with the land about the city,

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

for a space of twenty measures, <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_195) on
the east side and on the west side, with the gardens, and the river
front

"**24** everywhere throughout the region included in these measures.
From every husbandman who tilleth the ground, and maketh to live again
the slain, and placeth water upon the river banks and all the islands
which are in front of the region of these measures, shall be demanded a
further contribution from the growing crops and from every storehouse,
as

"**25** thy share.

"Whatsoever is caught in the nets by every fisherman and by every
fowler, and whatsoever is taken by the catchers of fish, and by the
snarers of birds, and by every hunter of wild animals, and by every man
who snareth lions in the mountains, when these things enter \[the city\]
one tenth of them shall be demanded.

"And of all the calves which are cast throughout the regions which are
included in these measures, one tenth of their number

"**26** shall be set apart as animals which are sealed for all the burnt
offerings which are offered up daily.

"And, moreover, the gift of one tenth shall be levied upon the gold,
ivory, ebony, spices, carnelians (?), *sa* wood, *seshes* spice, *dum*
palm fruit (?), *nef* wood, and upon woods and products of every kind
whatsoever, which the Khentiu, <span id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_196) and
the Khentiu of Hen-Resu, <span id="fr_198"></span>[3](#fn_197) and the
Egyptians, and every person whatsoever \[shall bring in\].

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

"**27**. And \[every\] hand shall pass them by, and no officer of the
revenue whatsoever shall utter a word beyond these places to demand (or,
levy on) things from them, or to take things over and above \[those
which are intended for\] thy capital city.

"And I will give unto thee the land belonging to the city, which beareth
stones, and good land for cultivation. Nothing thereof shall be
\[diminished\] or withheld,

"**28** of all these things in order to deceive the scribes, and the
revenue officers, and the inspectors of the king, on whom it shall be
incumbent to certify everything.

"And further, I will cause the masons, and the hewers of ore (?), and
the workers in metal, and the smelters (?) of gold, and the sculptors in
stone,

"**29** and the ore-crushers, and the furnace-men (?), and
handicraftsmen of every kind whatsoever, who work in hewing, and
cutting, and polishing these stones, and in gold, and silver, and
copper, and lead, and every worker in wood who shall cut down any tree,
or carry on a trade of any kind, or work which is connected with the
wood trade, to

"**30** pay tithe upon all the natural products (?), and also upon the
hard stones which are brought from their beds above, and quarried stones
of all kinds.

"And there shall be an inspector over the weighing of the gold, and
silver, and copper, and real (i.e., precious) stones, and the \[other\]
things, which the metal-workers require for the House of Gold,

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

"**31** and the sculptors of the images of the gods need in the making
and repairing of them, and \[these things\] shall be exempted from
tithing, and the workmen also. And everything shall be delivered (or,
given) in front of the storehouse to their children, a second time, for
the protection of everything. And whatsoever is before thy God-house
shall be in abundance, just as it hath ever been from the earliest time.

"**32** And a copy of this decree shall be inscribed upon a stele,
\[which shall be set up\] in the holy place, according to the writing of
the \[original\] document which is cut upon wood, and \[figures of\]
this god and the overseers of the temple shall be \[cut\] thereon.
Whosoever shall spit upon that which is on it shall be admonished by the
rope. And the overseers of the priests, and every overseer of the people
of the House of the God, shall ensure the perpetuation of my name in the
House of the god Khnemu-Ra, the lord of Abu (Elephantine), for ever."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_165"></span>[121:1](leg24.htm#fr_166) Tcheser was a king of
the IIIrd Dynasty, and is famous as the builder of the Step Pyramid at
Sakkarah. His tomb was discovered by Mr. J. Garstang at Bet Khallaf in
Upper Egypt in 1901.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[121:2](leg24.htm#fr_167) I.e., the people who
were in front of, that is, to the South of Egypt, or the population of
the country which lies between Dakkah and Aswan.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[121:3](leg24.htm#fr_168) The ancient Egyptian
name for Elephantine Island, which appears to have gained this name
because it resembled an elephant in shape.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[121:4](leg24.htm#fr_169) I.e., the palace.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[121:5](leg24.htm#fr_170) I.e., risen.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[123:1](leg24.htm#fr_171) I.e., the high court
officials and administrators.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[123:2](leg24.htm#fr_172) The famous priest and
magician, who was subsequently deified and became one of the chief gods
of Memphis.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[123:3](leg24.htm#fr_173) Hermopolis.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[123:4](leg24.htm#fr_174) Per-ankh, or Pa-ankh,
was a name given to one of the temple-colleges of priests and scribes.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[123:5](leg24.htm#fr_175) I.e., the Inundation,
or Nile Flood.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[125:1](leg24.htm#fr_176) The Elephant City,
i.e., Elephantine.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[125:2](leg24.htm#fr_177) A portion of Northern
Nubia.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[125:3](leg24.htm#fr_178) This is probably an
allusion to the famous Nilometer on the Island of Philae.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[125:4](leg24.htm#fr_179) I.e., "Sweet, sweet
life."

<span id="fn_179"></span>[125:5](leg24.htm#fr_180) The Qerti were the
two openings through which the Nile entered this world from the great
celestial ocean.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[125:6](leg24.htm#fr_181) Diospolis of Lower
Egypt, or "Thebes of the North."

<span id="fn_181"></span>[127:1](leg24.htm#fr_182) The god who separated
the Sky-goddess Nut from the embrace of her husband, the Earth-god Keb,
and who holds her above him each day.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[127:2](leg24.htm#fr_183) Kens extended south
from Philae as far as Korosko.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[129:1](leg24.htm#fr_184) Perhaps Sunut, = the
Syene of the Greeks, and the סְוֵנֶה of the Hebrews.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[129:2](leg24.htm#fr_185) I.e., Syene.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[129:3](leg24.htm#fr_186) I.e., Contra Syene.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[129:4](leg24.htm#fr_187) I.e., the Island of
Elephantine.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[131:1](leg24.htm#fr_188) I.e., the stone was
very famous.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[131:2](leg24.htm#fr_189) The "fore part," or
"front," of the land means the country lying to the south of Nubia, and
probably some part of the modern Egyptian Sudan.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[133:1](leg24.htm#fr_190) He was the "builder
of men, maker of the gods, the Father who was from the beginning, the
maker of things which are, the creator of things which shall be, the
source of things which exist, Father of fathers, Mother of mothers,
Father of the fathers of the gods and goddesses, lord of created things,
maker of heaven, earth, Tuat, water and mountains" (Lanzone,
*Dizionario*, p. 957).

<span id="fn_190"></span>[135:1](leg24.htm#fr_191) The goddess of the
harvest.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[135:2](leg24.htm#fr_192) Or perhaps,
Khnemu-Ra.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[135:3](leg24.htm#fr_193) Qebhet is the name
given to the whole region of the First Cataract.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[135:4](leg24.htm#fr_194) The "Land of the
Bow," i.e., the Northern Sudan.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[135:5](leg24.htm#fr_195) The Land of the
setting sun, the West.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[137:1](leg24.htm#fr_196) schoinos.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[137:2](leg24.htm#fr_197) The inhabitants of
the Northern Sudan, probably as far to the south as Napata.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[137:3](leg24.htm#fr_198) The people of the
Island of Meroë, and probably those living on the Blue and White Niles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I.--Incantations Against Reptiles and Noxious Creatures In
General](leg25)
