[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg25)  [Next](leg27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 9. THE CHAPTER OF CASTING A SPELL ON THE CAT.

Recite \[the following formula\]:--

"Hail, Ra, come to thy daughter! A scorpion hath stung her **10** on a
lonely road. Her cry hath penetrated the heights of heaven, and is heard
along the paths. **11**. The poison hath entered into her body, and
circulateth through her flesh. She hath set her mouth against it; <span
id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_199) verily the poison is in her members.

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

"**12**. Come then with thy strength, with thy fierce attack, and with
thy red powers, and force it **13** to be hidden before thee. Behold,
the poison hath entered into all the members of this Cat which is under
my fingers. Be not afraid, be not afraid, **14** my daughter, my
splendour, \[for\] I have set myself near (or, behind) thee. I have
overthrown the poison **15** which is in all the limbs of this Cat. O
thou Cat, thy head is the head of Ra, the Lord of the Two Lands, the
smiter of the rebellious peoples. **16**. Thy <span
id="fr_202"></span>[1](#fn_200) fear is in all lands, O Lord of the
living, Lord of eternity. O thou Cat, thy two eyes are the Eye of the
Lord of the Khut uraeus, who illumineth **17** the Two Lands with his
Eye, and illumineth the face on the path of darkness. O thou Cat, thy
nose is the nose of **18** Thoth, the Twice Great, Lord of Khemenu
(Hermopolis), the Chief of the Two Lands of Ra, who putteth breath into
the nostrils of every person. O thou Cat, thine ears **19** are the ears
of Nebertcher, who hearkeneth unto the voice of all persons when they
appeal to him, and weigheth words (i.e., judgeth) in all the earth.
**20**. O thou Cat, thy mouth is the mouth of Tem, the Lord of life, the
uniter (?) of creation, who hath caused the union (?) of creation; he
shall deliver thee from every **21** poison. O thou Cat, thy neck
(*nehebt*) is the neck of Neheb-ka, President of the Great House,
vivifier of men and women by **22** means

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

of the mouth of his two arms. O thou Cat, thy breast is the breast of
Thoth, the Lord of Truth, who hath given to thee breath to **23**
refresh (?) thy throat, and hath given breath to that which is therein.
O thou Cat, thy heart is the heart of the god Ptah, who healeth **24**
thy heart of the evil poison which is in all thy limbs. O thou Cat, thy
hands **25** are the hands of the Great Company of the gods and the
Little Company of the gods, and they shall deliver thy hand from the
poison from the mouth of every serpent. O thou Cat, **26** thy belly is
the belly of Osiris, Lord of Busiris, the poison shall not work any of
its wishes in thy belly. O thou Cat, **27** thy thighs are the thighs of
the god Menthu, who shall make thy thighs to stand up, and shall bring
the **28** poison to the ground. O thou Cat, thy leg-bones are the
leg-bones of Khensu, <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_201) **29** who
travelleth over all the Two Lands by day and by night, and shall lead
the poison to the ground. O thou Cat, thy legs (or, feet) **30** are the
legs of Amen the Great, Horus, Lord of Thebes, who shall stablish thy
feet on the earth, and shall overthrow the poison. O thou Cat, thy
haunches are the haunches of Horus, **31** the avenger (or, advocate) of
his father Osiris, and they shall place Set in the evil which he hath
wrought. O thou Cat, thy soles are the soles of Ra, who shall make the
poison to return to the earth.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

\[paragraph continues\] O thou Cat, thy bowels are the bowels of **32**
the Cow-goddess Meh-urt, who shall overthrow and cut in pieces the
poison which is in thy belly and in all the members in thee, and in
\[all\] the members of the gods in heaven, and in \[all\] the members of
the gods on earth, and shall overthrow **33** every poison in thee.
There is no member in thee without the goddess who shall overthrow and
cut in pieces the poison of every male serpent, and every female
serpent, and every scorpion, and every reptile, which may be in any
member **34** of this Cat which is under the knife. Verily Isis weaveth
and Nephthys spinneth against the poison. This woven garment
strengtheneth this \[being, i.e., Horus\], who is perfect in words of
power, through **35** the speech of Ra Heru-khuti, the great god,
President of the South and North: 'O evil poison which is in any member
of this Cat which is under the knife, come, issue forth upon the
earth.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[145:1](leg26.htm#fr_201) I.e., she hath
directed her words against it.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[147:1](leg26.htm#fr_202) Literally "his."

<span id="fn_201"></span>[149:1](leg26.htm#fr_203) He was the messenger
of the gods, and travelled across the sky under the form of the Moon; he
sometimes appears as a form of Thoth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Another Chapter](leg27)
