[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg26)  [Next](leg28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ANOTHER CHAPTER.

Say the \[following\] words:--

"O Ra-\[Khuti\], come to **36** thy daughter. O Shu, come to thy wife. O
Isis, come to thy sister, and deliver her from the evil poison which is
in all her members. **37**. Hail, O ye gods, come ye and overthrow ye
the evil poison which is in all the members of the Cat which is under
the knife.

"**38**. Hail, O aged one, who renewest thy youth in

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

thy season, thou old man who makest thyself to be a boy, grant thou that
Thoth may come to me at \[the sound of\] my voice, and behold, let him
turn back from me Neta-ter. Osiris is on the water, the Eye of Horus is
with him. **39**. A great Beetle spreadeth himself over him, great by
reason of his grasp, produced by the gods from a child. He who is over
the water appeareth in a healthy form. If he who is over the water shall
be approached (or, attacked), the Eye of Horus, which weepeth, shall be
approached.

"Get ye back, **40** O ye who dwell in the water, crocodiles, fish, that
Enemy, male dead person and female dead person, male fiend and female
fiend, of every kind whatsoever, lift not up your faces, O ye who dwell
in the waters, ye crocodiles and fish. When Osiris journeyeth over you,
permit ye him to go to Busiris. Let your nostrils \[be closed\], **41**
your throats stopped up.

"Get ye back, Seba fiends! Lift ye not up your faces against him that is
on the water . . . . . Osiris-Ra, riseth up in his Boat to look at the
gods of Kher-ahat, and the Lords of the Tuat stand up to slay thee when
\[thou\] comest, O Neha-her, **42** against Osiris. \[When\] he is on
the water the Eye of Horus is over him to turn your faces upside down
and to set you on your backs.

"Hail, ye who dwell in the water, crocodiles and fish, Ra shutteth up
your mouths, Sekhet stoppeth up your throats, Thoth cutteth out your
**43** tongues, and

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Heka blindeth your eyes. These are the four
great gods who protect Osiris by their magical power, and they effect
the protection of him that is on the water, of men and women of every
kind, and of beasts and animals of every kind which are on the water
**44** by day. Protected are those who dwell in the waters, protected is
the sky wherein is Ra, protected is the great god who is in the
sarcophagus, protected is he who is on the water.

"A voice \[which\] crieth loudly is in the House of Net (Neith), a loud
voice is in the Great House, **45** a great outcry from the mouth of the
Cat. The gods and the goddesses say, 'What is it? What is it?' \[It\]
concerneth the Abtu Fish which is born. Make to retreat from me thy
footsteps, O Sebau fiend. I am Khnemu, the Lord of Her-urt. Guard
thyself **46** again from the attack which is repeated, besides this
which thou hast done in the presence of the Great Company of the gods.
Get thee back, retreat thou from me. I am the god. Oh, Oh, O \[Ra\],
hast thou not heard the **47** voice which cried out loudly until the
evening on the bank of Netit, the voice of all the gods and goddesses
which cried out loudly, the outcry concerning the wickedness which thou
hast done, O wicked Sebau fiend? Verily **48** the lord Ra thundered and
growled thereat, and he ordered thy slaughter to be carried out. Get
thee back, Seba fiend! Hail! Hail!"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II.--The Narrative of Isis](leg28)
