[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg35)  [Next](leg37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

VIII\. This much may be depended upon: the, religious rites and
ceremonies of the Egyptians were never instituted upon irrational
grounds, never built upon mere fable and superstition, but founded with
a view to promote the morality and happiness of those who were to
observe them, or at least to preserve the memory of some valuable piece
of history, or to represent to us some of the phenomena of nature. As
concerning the abhorrence which is expressed for onions, it is wholly
improbable that this detestation is owing to the loss of Diktys, who,
whilst he was under the guardianship of Isis, is supposed to have fallen
into the river and to have been drowned as he was reaching after a bunch
of them. No, the true reason of their abstinence from onions is because
they are observed to flourish most and to be in the greatest vigour at
the wane of the moon, and also because they are entirely useless to them
either in their feasts <span id="fr_279"></span>[1](#fn_277.md) or in their
times of abstinence and purification, for in the former

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

case they make tears come from those who use them, and in the latter
they create thirst. For much the same reason they likewise look upon the
pig as an impure animal, and to be avoided, observing it to be most apt
to engender upon the decrease of the moon, and they think that those who
drink its milk are more subject to leprosy and such-like cutaneous
diseases than others. The custom of abstaining from the flesh of the
pig <span id="fr_280"></span>[1](#fn_278.md) is not always observed, for
those who sacrifice a sow to Typhon once a year, at the full moon,
afterwards eat its flesh. The reason they give for this practice is
this: Typhon being in pursuit of this animal at that season of the moon,
accidentally found the wooden chest wherein was deposited the body of
Osiris, which he immediately pulled to pieces. This story, however, is
not generally admitted, there being some who look upon it, as they do
many other relations of the same kind, as founded upon some mistake or
misrepresentation. All agree, however, in saying that so great was the
abhorrence which the ancient Egyptians expressed for whatever tended to
promote luxury, expense, and voluptuousness, that in order to expose it
as much as possible they erected a column in one of the temples of
Thebes, full of curses against their king Meinis, who first drew them
off from their

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

former frugal and parsimonious course of life. The immediate cause for
the erection of the pillar is thus given: Technatis, <span
id="fr_281"></span>[1](leg37.htm#fn_279.md) the father of Bocchoris,
leading an army against the Arabians, and his baggage and provisions not
coming up to him as soon as he expected, was therefore obliged to eat
some of the very poor food which was obtainable, and having eaten, he
lay down on the bare ground and slept very soundly. This gave him a
great affection for a mean and frugal diet, and induced him to curse the
memory of Meinis, and with the permission of the priests he made these
curses public by cutting them upon a pillar. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[2](leg37.htm#fn_280.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_277"></span>[208:1](leg36.htm#fr_279.md) Bunches of onions
were offered to the dead at all periods of Egyptian history, and they
were regarded as typical of the "white teeth" of Horus. The onion was
largely used in medicine.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[209:1](leg36.htm#fr_280.md) The pig was
associated with Set, or Typhon, and the black variety was specially
abominated because it was a black pig which struck Horus in the eye, and
damaged it severely. See *Book of the Dead*, Chap. CXII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section IX](leg37.md)
