[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg47)  [Next](leg49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XX\. Such then are the principal circumstances of

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

this famous story, the more harsh and shocking parts of it, such as the
cutting up of Horus and the beheading of Isis, being omitted. Now, if
such could be supposed to be the real sentiments of the Egyptians
concerning those divine Beings whose most distinguishing characteristics
are happiness and immortality, or could it be imagined that they
actually believed what they thus tell us ever to have actually taken
place, I should not need to warn you, O Clea, you who are already
sufficiently averse to such impious and absurd notions of the God, I
should not, I say, have need to caution you, to testify your abhorrence
of them, and, as Aeschylus expresses it, "to spit and wash your mouth"
after the recital of them. In the present case, however, it is not so.
And I doubt not that you yourself are conscious of the difference
between this history and those light and idle fictions which the poets
and other writers of fables, like spiders, weave and spin out of their
own imaginations, without having any substantial ground or firm
foundation to work upon. There must have been some real distress, some
actual calamity, at the bottom as the ground-work of the narration; for,
as mathematicians assure us, the rainbow is nothing else but a
variegated image of the sun, thrown upon the sight by the reflection of
his beams from the clouds; and thus ought we to look upon the present
story as the representation, or rather reflection, of something real as
its true cause. And this notion is still farther suggested to us as well
by that solemn air of grief and

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

sadness which appears in their sacrifices, as by the very form and
arrangement of their temples, which extend into long avenues and open
aisles in some portions, <span id="fr_317"></span>[1](#fn_315) and in
others retreating into dark and gloomy chapels which resembled the
underground vaults which are allotted to the dead. That the history has
a substantial foundation is proved by the opinion which obtains
generally concerning the sepulchres of Osiris. There are many places
wherein his body is said to have been deposited, and among these are
Abydos and Memphis, both of which are said to contain his body. It is
for this reason, they say, that the richer and more prosperous citizens
wish to be buried in the former of these cities, being ambitious of
lying, as it were, in the grave with Osiris. <span
id="fr_318"></span>[2](#fn_316) The title of Memphis to be regarded

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

as the grave of Osiris seems to rest upon the fact that the Apis Bull,
who is considered to be the image of the soul of Osiris, is kept in that
city for the express purpose that it may be as near his body as
possible. <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](leg49.htm#fn_317) Others again
tell us that the interpretation of the name Memphis <span
id="fr_320"></span>[2](leg49.htm#fn_318) is "the haven of good men," and
that the true sepulchre of Osiris lies in that little island which the
Nile makes at Philae. <span id="fr_321"></span>[3](leg49.htm#fn_319)
This island is, they say, inaccessible, and neither bird can alight on
it, nor fish swim near it, except at the times when the priests go over
to it from the mainland to solemnize their customary rites to the dead,
and to crown his tomb with flowers, which, they say, is overshadowed by
the branches of a tamarisk-tree, the size of which exceeds that of an
olive-tree.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_311"></span>[228:1](leg47.htm#fr_313) According to the
legend given in the Fourth Sallier Papyrus, the fight between Horus and
Set began on the 26th day of the month of Thoth, and lasted three days
and three nights. It was fought in or near the hall of the lords of
Kher-aha, i.e., near Heliopolis, and in the presence of Isis, who seems
to have tried to spare both her brother Set and her son Horus. For some
reason Horus became enraged with his mother, and attacking her like a
"leopard of the south," he cut off the head of Isis. Thereupon Thoth
came forward, and using words of power, created a substitute in the form
of a cow's head, and placed it on her body (Sallier, iv., p. 2; see
*Select Papyri*, pl. cxlv.).

<span id="fn_312"></span>[228:2](leg47.htm#fr_314) Horus inherited the
throne by his father's will, a fact which is so often emphasized in the
texts that it seems there may be some ground for Plutarch's view.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[228:3](leg47.htm#fr_315) This view is
confirmed by the words in the hymn to Osiris, "she moved the inactivity
of the Still-Heart (Osiris), she drew from him his essence, she made an
heir."

<span id="fn_314"></span>[228:4](leg47.htm#fr_316) In Egyptian,
HERU-PA-KHART, "Horus the Child."

<span id="fn_315"></span>[230:1](leg48.htm#fr_317) Plutarch refers to
the long colonnaded courts which extend in a straight line to the
sanctuary, which often contains more than one shrine, and to the
chambers wherein temple properties, vestments, &c., were kept.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[230:2](leg48.htm#fr_318) In what city the cult
of Osiris originated is not known, but it is quite certain that before
the end of the VIth Dynasty Abydos became the centre of his worship, and
that he dispossessed the local god An-Her in the affections of the
people. Tradition affirmed that the head of Osiris was preserved at
Abydos in a box, and a picture of it, <span id="img_23000"></span>
![](img/23000.jpg) became the symbol of the city. At Abydos a sort of
miracle play, in which all the sufferings and resurrection of Osiris
were commemorated, was performed annually, and the raising up of a model
of his body, and the placing of his head upon it, were the culminating
ceremonies. At Abydos was the famous shaft into which offerings were
cast for transmission to the dead in the Other World, and through the
Gap in the hills close by souls were believed to set out on their
journey thither. One tradition places the <span id="page_231">p.
231</span> Elysian Fields in the neighbourhood of Abydos. A fine stone
bier, a restoration probably of the XXVIth Dynasty, which represented
the original bier of Osiris, was discovered there by M. Amélineau. It is
now in the Egyptian Museum at Cairo.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXI.](leg49)
