[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg44)  [Next](leg46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XVII\. At the first place where she stopped, and when she believed that
she was alone, she opened the chest, and laying her face upon that of
her dead husband, she embraced him and wept bitterly. Then, seeing that
the little boy had silently stolen up behind her, and had found out the
reason of her grief, she turned upon him suddenly, and, in her anger,
gave him so fierce and terrible a look that he died of fright
immediately. Others say that his death did not happen in this manner,
but, as already hinted, that he fell into the sea. Afterwards he
received the greatest honour on account of the goddess, for this
Maneros, whom the Egyptians so frequently call upon at their banquets,
is none other than he. This story is contradicted by those who tell us
that the true name of this child was Palaestinus, or Pelusius, and that
the city of this name was built by the goddess in memory of him. And
they further add that this Maneros is thus honoured by the Egyptians at
their feasts because he was the first who invented music. Others again
state that Maneros is not the name of any particular person, but a were
customary form of complimentary greeting

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

which the Egyptians use towards each other at their more solemn feasts
and banquets, meaning no more by it than to wish "that what they were
then about might prove fortunate and happy to them." This is the true
import of the word. In like manner they say that the human skeleton
which is carried about in a box on festal occasions, and shown to the
guests, is not designed, as some imagine, to represent the particular
misfortunes of Osiris, but rather to remind them of their mortality, and
thereby to excite them freely to make use of and to enjoy the good
things which are set before them, seeing that they must quickly become
such as they there saw. This is the true reason for introducing the
skeleton at their banquets. But to proceed with the narrative.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XVIII.](leg46)
