[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg41)  [Next](leg43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

XIV\. The first who had knowledge of the accident which had befallen
their king were the Pans and Satyrs, who inhabited the country round
about Chemmis, <span id="fr_305"></span>[1](#fn_303) and they having
informed the people about

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

it, gave the first occasion to the name of Panic Terrors, which has ever
since been made use of to signify any sudden fright or amazement of a
multitude. As soon as the report reached Isis, she immediately cut off
one of the locks of her hair, and put on mourning apparel in that very
place where she happened to be; for this reason the place has ever since
been called "Koptos," or the "city of mourning," though some are of
opinion that this word rather signifies "deprivation." After this she
wandered round about through the country, being full of disquietude and
perplexity, searching for the chest, and she inquired of every person
she met, including some children whom she saw, whether they knew what
was become of it. Now, it so happened that these children had seen what
Typhon's accomplices had done with the body, and they accordingly told
her by what mouth of the Nile it had been conveyed to the sea. For this
reason the Egyptians look upon children as endued with a kind of faculty
of divining, and in consequence of this notion are very curious in
observing the accidental prattle which they have with one another whilst
they are at play, especially if it be in a sacred place, forming omens
and presages from it. Isis meanwhile having been informed that Osiris,
deceived by her sister Nephthys, who was in love with him, had
unwittingly enjoyed her instead of herself, as she concluded from the
melilot-garland which he had left with her, made it her business
likewise to search out the child, the fruit of this unlawful commerce
(for her sister, dreading the

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

anger of her husband Typhon, had exposed it as soon as it was born).
Accordingly, after much pains and difficulty, by means of some dogs that
conducted her to the place where it was, she found it and bred it up;
and in process of time it became her constant guard and attendant, and
obtained the name of Anubis, and it is thought that it watches and
guards the gods as dogs do men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_303"></span>[219:1](leg42.htm#fr_305) I In Egyptian, KHEBT,
in the VIIIth nome of Lower Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XV.](leg43)
