[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg52)  [Next](leg54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[SECOND EXPLANATION OF THE STORY.\]

XXV\. There is another and a better method which some employ in
explaining this story. They assert that what is related of Typhon,
Osiris, and Isis is not to be regarded as the afflictions of gods, or of
mere mortals, but rather as the adventures of certain great Daemons.
These beings, they say, are supposed by some of the wisest of the Greek
philosophers, that is to say, Plato, Pythagoras, Xenocrates, and
Chrysippus, in accordance with what they had learned from ancient
theologians, to be stronger and more powerful than men, and of a nature
superior to them. They are, at the same time, inferior to the pure and
unmixed nature of the gods, as partaking of the sensations of the body,
as well as of the perceptions of the soul, and consequently liable to
pain as well as pleasure, and to such other appetites and affections, as
flow from their various combinations. Such affections, however, have a
greater power and influence over some of them than over others, just as
there are different degrees of virtue and

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

vice found in these Daemons as well as in mankind. In like manner, the
wars of the Giants and the Titans which are so much spoken of by the
Greeks, the detestable actions of Kronos, the combats between Apollo and
the Python, the flights of Dionysos, and the wanderings of Demeter, are
exactly of the same nature as the adventures of Osiris and Typhon.
Therefore, they all are to be accounted for in the same manner, and
every treatise of mythology will readily furnish us with an abundance of
other similar instances. The same thing may also be affirmed of those
other things which are so carefully concealed under the cover of
mysteries and imitations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XXVI](leg54)
