[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](leg61)  [Next](leg63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[§ XXXIX. In the first part of this chapter Plutarch continues his
identification of Typhon with drought, and his ally Aso, Queen of
Ethiopia, he considers to be the Etesian or north winds, which blow for
a long period when the Nile is falling. He goes on to say:--\]

As to what they relate of the shutting up of Osiris in a box, this
appears to mean the withdrawal of the

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Nile to its own bed. This is the more probable
as this misfortune is said to have happened to Osiris in the month of
Hathor, precisely at that season of the year when, upon the cessation of
the Etesian or north winds the Nile returns to its own bed, and leaves
the country everywhere bare and naked. At this time also the length of
the nights increases, darkness prevails, whilst light is diminished and
overcome. At this time the priests celebrate doleful rites, and they
exhibit as a suitable representation of the grief of Isis a gilded ox
covered with a fine black linen cloth. Now, the ox is regarded as the
living image of Osiris. This ceremony is performed on the seventeenth
and three following days, <span id="fr_342"></span>[1](#fn_340) and they
mourn: 1. The falling of the Nile; 2. The cessation of the north winds;
3. The decrease in the length of the days; 4. The desolate condition of
the land. On the nineteenth of the month Pachons they march in
procession to the sea, whither the priests and other officials carry the
sacred chest, wherein is enclosed a small boat of gold; into this they
first pour some water, and then all present cry out with a loud voice,
"Osiris is found." This done, they throw some earth, scent, and spices
into the water, and mix it well

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

together, and work it up into the image of a crescent, which they
afterwards dress in clothes. This shows that they regard the gods as the
essence and power of water and earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_337"></span>[243:1](leg60.htm#fr_339) Plutarch seems to be
confounding Osiris with Menu, the god of generation, who is generally
represented in an ithyphallic form. The festival of the phallus survived
in Egypt until quite recently.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[243:2](leg61.htm#fr_340) The Egyptian ANPU.
The texts make one form of him to be the son of Set and Nephthys.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[243:3](leg61.htm#fr_341) Plutarch's
explanations in this chapter are unsupported by the texts.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[244:1](leg62.htm#fr_342) The 17th day is very
unlucky; the 18th is very lucky; the 19th and 20th are very unlucky. On
the 17th day Isis and Nephthys made great lamentation for their brother
Un-nefer at Saïs; on the 19th no man should leave the house; and the man
born on the 20th would die of the plague.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section XL](leg63)
