[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws05)  [Next](sws07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

### III

#### TENSION

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> place I accidentally chose in my
weariness has become my permanent sleeping porch. From it I may look
into the Great Dipper all night. Queer how high they hang it out here.
Perhaps because they have so little water they do not want anyone to
reach it easily; he might spill it. These first nights I spend very
little time star-gazing.

The next thing I am aware of is the sun's white light, a warning that he
will soon peep over the horizon. This is the time a good Navajo gets up.
But I am not a good Navajo, and I wink sleepily at him; he tolerates my
blink as I roll over in my comfortable blankets for another hour of
sleep. The branches of the freak piñon-juniper keep his rays from my
eyes until the indecently late hour of six-thirty.

I am awakened a second time by a goat who wants to know what this new
kind of grass is. Ghats always want to know things. Dazedly I twirl my
blanket strap at her and look about me. Once more long shadows, but
these are clear, taut, and energetic, not softly focused and relaxing
like the patterns drawn by the setting sun. The sheep have begun their
lively munching, the goats their eternal uncomprehending researches.
Maria Antonia is at her wood-chopping again after lighting her fire of
cedar. Women trail vigorously back and forth from the old mother's shade
to their own houses,

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

their full ruffled skirts billowing behind them. The children are
teasing the calf, the dogs wait on the outskirts of all this activity
for the least sign of a morsel.

I am scarcely through with my morning routine, simple and brief though
it is, before Marie is with me. From my lookout on the trunk I have
noticed that our warp is not straight. It is noticeably shorter at the
left side than at the right. I call it to Marie's attention and she
calmly says, yes, she noticed it yesterday before she left. She had
measured with a string the distance on the two sides of the temporary
frame when she strung it, but she must have made a mistake, or more
probably a crosspole slipped before it was quite tight. She sits before
the loom and begins at about the middle to pull each warp at top and
bottom, working toward the left, until the whole looks more even. Her
patience is matched only by my impatience at this delay. At last it is
straighter, although even to my crooked eye, not absolutely so.

I have chosen to make first a blanket of stripes using the typical
Navajo colors, black, red, white, and gray. Marie begins with black. She
makes the start so deftly that I do not learn until we start our next
blanket that the first rows are different from the succeeding ones. She
pulls the heald with her left hand, flicks the warp with the spread
fingertips of her right, inserts a broad smooth stick called the batten,
and turns it. She throws her yarn through, pounds it down, and withdraws
the batten. Now she presses the heald rod against the loops of the heald
and she has a different shed, the alternate warps are forward. A casual
flip of the fingers across the warp, and the weft throwing and pounding
are repeated.

I at first think this flipping an unnecessary, possibly an aesthetic
gesture like the elaborate motions of a bootblack's

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

flannel. But when I take up the weaving position myself I find it serves
a very useful purpose. The texture of the warp changes somewhat from the
time it is first strung up to the time the blanket is finished. It is a
hard-spun strong yarn, but still capable of much stretching. For this
reason the warp must be tightened much more frequently at the beginning
of the weaving than after it approaches the center. Furthermore there
are wool fibers, so small as not to be easily discernible, which catch
one another and prevent the sheds from being completely thrown. The
swift light flip of the fingers separates such of these fibers on the
forward warps as adhere to those behind. Constant friction of fingers,
batten, comb, and yarn wears off these fibers so that as the weaving
proceeds to the middle of the loom length, they are gone leaving a
smooth tight warp.

Marie weaves about half of the narrow beginning black stripe, then,
handing me the comb, tells me to try it myself. It is the moment I have
longed for. All those things which are done so easily, so casually by
the Navajo women begin to take on unsuspected difficulties when I try
them. I have to think of the smallest details as if they were
significant. I have for some years prided myself on being able to sit
like a Navajo woman with both legs folded back at the right side and
with no support for the back. But I now realize that sitting that way
for a few minutes and changing posture is a different matter from
remaining in the position for several hours with no satisfactory shift.
And sitting is not the whole consideration. I am at the same time
pounding down the yarn to the floor level and the resultant kink in the
shoulder is quickly noticeable, or would be if I were not too interested
in the details of my new craft.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

I do not even know which way to hold the comb or batten. Marie, laughing
at my awkwardness, shows me that the wide part of the batten is the top,
the slightly concave side the front. I learn to hold it at the center
with thumb at the front, two fingers behind it. This position allows
sufficient control in inserting it. I know the principle of the sheds,
but knowing and doing are different matters. I quickly learn how to
alternate the heald and heald rod, but even now, after I have become
proficient at weaving, the arrangement seems somewhat miraculous to me,
and in those early days I had to think out each shift.

After I have my shed thrown and my batten in, Marie shows me how to hold
the comb. Its tapering handle rests on the bone of the lower thumb
joint; the comb is held loosely between the first two and the last two
fingers. Since we are weaving stripes which extend across the entire
width of the blanket, it is possible to throw the yarn or weft all the
way across if it is wound on a reed about twelve to fifteen inches long.
This is a crude shuttle. We have one for each color to be laid in
stripes. In all other cases we carry the yarn through with the fingers.

After I have got as far as inserting my first weft yarn, I press it down
with the batten, as I have seen Navajo women do, or as I thought I had
seen them do. "Why do you do that?" says Marie. "I thought that's the
way you do," say I meekly. "Never," says Marie emphatically. "Only poor
weavers do that. You should pound it down tight with the comb."

I manage to do so, but in my concentration to handle the comb properly I
have dropped the batten. It has turned over and I have to figure out its
top and front once more. The

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

next time I carefully pull out the batten and hold it in place only to
find I have laid down my comb. I fumble for it and get it once more into
position. Within a few days during which I not only weave but watch the
others for hours on end, I learn by an almost imperceptible motion to
shift the comb from the position necessary for pounding to the position
of rest.

Theoretically the healds regulate the warp; actually one must be
constantly on guard, especially at the beginning of the rug where the
warp is rough and stretchy, against picking up a warp or a series of
them from the wrong set. A little practice shows me such mistakes as I
weave along, and I gradually get a feeling of intimacy for the strands.

I am now beginning to coördinate healds, batten, comb, shedding,
inserting the weft and pounding it down. True I occasionally hit my
knees with the comb, but my injuries have no interest for me except
later in retrospect. In addition to all these matters I am bothered
seriously by the heavy double binding strands. They are not a part of
the loom, but are tied to the upper and lower sticks after the loom is
complete. Nevertheless they are of primary importance. I learn from
Marie that the test of a blanket is its edge. If it is bound in evenly
it will not pull when the weaving is done, it will exhibit a pleasing
purl at the exact center of the rug's thickness, and it will run exactly
parallel to the opposite edge its entire length. In other words, the
width of the blanket will be uniform throughout.

I must not forget to include these edge strands; I must twist them
properly and give an additional twist at proper intervals.

As I throw the lumpy shuttle reeds from right to left and

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

from left to right, I find that my stripe sags in the middle, in fact
sags badly. I have noticed that expert weavers often place additional
weft strands at what seem arbitrary places and for short distances. They
know that an unevenness of only a thread's width will be a fault. I have
allowed mine to become a veritable scallop before Marie suggests my
filling it in. Had I been as discerning as she, one row would have done
the trick. As it is, I must work with it for several rows and even then
the stripe is far from straight. I have also a convex scallop at a
different place from the sagging one. I can find no reason for this, but
in her matter-of-fact way Marie tightens the warp; and after several
rows of filling in, the difficulty is overcome. Once in a while Marie
rescues the blanket from my blundering fingers. She tightens the warp,
straightens the stripes, corrects the edges.

As I struggle along, learning to control unaccustomed muscles, Marie
sits by my side watching carefully lest I make a mistake. We don't talk
much, except about the points of the weaving. A child doesn't talk when
he is learning to write. Besides, Marie does not "tell" when teaching.
She "shows." The Navajo word for "teach" means "show" and is absolutely
literal. As the minutes fly, Marie winds the colors on my reeds.

I have come toward the top of my second stripe, a red one, when Maria
Antonia comes in. She shows Marie that the left edge is drawing in.
Marie takes the comb from me, turns it, and with its sharp point loosens
the weft on the left side by pulling it up and spreading the warp with
strong horizontal movements which look dangerous to me. I have yet to
learn that any blanket worth a continental will survive a greater
pressure than this, that all calculations are made on the basis

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of this tremendous strain. Another row or so shows that even this
treatment is not sufficiently drastic, and the women see the rug still
drawing in. I myself see nothing to fuss about. I am to get the shock
all at once much later.

Maria Antonia cuts out the sixth warp from the left, eliminates it
entirely. I weave on for several rows as she watches. Marie has shown me
how to lay the weft so that it will not pull in; she has also shown me
how to manipulate my comb with a subtle twist so that the yarn will lie
more loosely. But it is only much later, after I have practised alone
considerably, that I rediscover this subtlety. I hit upon it
accidentally and analyze it; from that time on it is mine. My attempts
at laying the yarn loosely are unsuccessful, and now Maria Antonia, as a
last resort, ties a piece of warp yarn firmly into the finished web and
hitches it to the left upright of the loomframe. I have seen many a
Navajo at her weaving, but never have I seen a makeshift like this. The
feature most humiliating to me is that the edge does not look crooked to
me, at least not very crooked.

The argument of the two women and their taking over the weaving for a
few minutes have been an immense relief for me. I have become almost too
stiff to move. They laugh at me and say, as I draw my legs slowly but
lengthily forth from the folds of my skirt, "You are like a stick."

My hand feels better for the respite also, as does my shoulder. The
comb, being heavy because of the notion this family has that the batten
must not be used for pounding home the weft, comes down with the cunning
torture of a minor inquisition on the bone of the second thumb joint.
This particular point of the weaver's anatomy receives all the impact of
the weft's reaction. Small wonder it is that many

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Navajo use light
combs and rely on the batten for beating the weft tight, at least where
it is laid straight. I am still feeling too inferior to mention this
slight annoyance, but secretly I am pleased to stop for a moment.

I have finished four stripes, a little less than a hand, at the end of
this my first day, a black, a red, a white, and a gray one. With
standards not very highly developed I am quite pleased with the result
of my handiwork as I, eating supper, view it from my trunk. The red
stripe lies straighter than the black, the white deviates less than the
red. With the gray I have had more trouble than with any, but its upper
edge, although not completely satisfactory, is nevertheless acceptable.

I have sampled yarn of every color. The white is the most even, the red
next because it is the white which has been dyed. Dyeing apparently
packs the fibers, making them firm and even. I suspect that black is
always uneven—a suspicion which learning to card later corroborates. The
wool of the black sheep has a short staple; it is crimpy, and no amount
of hand treatment will make it smooth and regular like the white. The
gray I am using is a combination of white and black, blended in carding,
and it has a lumpy texture which must continually be counteracted by
filling in.

This second evening as I take account of my achievement I can only
wonder where the day has gone. My legs are stiff, I have a knot in the
muscle of my right shoulder, my hands are cramped, a hangnail on the
index finger has been irritated by the warp, my head is weary from
concentration. But as I lean against my, blanket roll in the magic of
the short twilight my fingers itch to do "just *one* more row."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Sand-Paintings](sws07)
