[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sws16)  [Next](sws18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

### XIV

#### CRITICISM

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> next summer I arrive at Ganado to
learn that Marie and Tom have gone to Los Angeles, but Red-Point and his
family want me to come there. Atlnaba and Maria Antonia will be my
teachers. I arrive at White-Sands and receive a welcome the cordiality
of which cannot be dulled by shyness. Everything must be just as it was
last summer. Maria Antonia bids Ninaba go for a wagon cover but I stop
her; I have one of my own this year.

Last year in leaving my pleasant house I felt a pang I was too ashamed
to mention at leaving the poker I had used all summer. It was only a
stick of a convenient size and shape, strong enough to carry a full
coffee-pot, having a fork at the proper distance from the end, just one
of those things. I am pleasantly surprised then to find the same poker
lying with its point to the fireplace when I reappear.

I wanted to weave last summer; it is understood I shall want to weave
again this. I have given the next rug long and serious thought and have
concluded to try once more to make what we set out to do last summer. I
have modified the design so as to conform to the technique. I will do it
in the conventional colors, black, white, and red.

This time Atlnaba strings up the warp, her own spinning. There will be
little trouble with this tearing. She notes the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

design, changes somewhat the proportions of this one. The green was more
than five hands wide by more than six long. This is very little less
than four by little less than six. There can be no doubt that these
proportions are better for the hourglass design we intend to use.

Strangely no complications enter into this weaving. The warps of the
different sheds do not stick together. My hand does not hurt from the
continual thumping. Even when the design begins to grow after we lay in
a series of narrow stripes, the warp strands seem to know their places.
I make mistakes, of course, but find them at once and know, too, how to
correct them. The finished web is far from perfect. Atlnaba has tried to
catch my errors and has succeeded in bringing wandering strands back to
their places.

With Marie and Tom gone, the ranch is short-handed, and Atlnaba must put
her mind and effort into duties she was free from last year. She has two
large rugs strung up in her small hogan, a sand-painting one and an
ordinary one with red background. Besides bearing an additional burden
of labor, she does not feel very well, and her own weaving hardly
progresses. For these reasons and because I do not need her so much as
previously, she often leaves me to work by myself. My blanket when
finished has therefore inaccuracies which one of Atlnaba's would not
have, but they are what "make it look handmade."

As I advance about halfway to the center it seems to me the combination
of black, white, and red is too hard, too glaringly clean. I ask Atlnaba
if she has some gray yarn and she gives me a ball of a beautiful dark
gray mixture. When she sees that I have introduced it into my side
stripes, she is

<span id="img_11000"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A GOOD
EDGE](tn/11000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11000.jpg.md)  
A GOOD EDGE  
</span>

<span id="img_11001"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MY FOURTH RUG WITH
PATTERN&lt;br&gt; FOR THE SECOND](tn/11001.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11001.jpg.md)  
MY FOURTH RUG WITH PATTERN  
FOR THE SECOND  
</span>

<span id="img_11100"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![SHEEP](tn/11100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11100.jpg.md)  
SHEEP  
</span>

<span id="img_11101"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HUSKING
BEE](tn/11101.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11101.jpg.md)  
HUSKING BEE  
</span>

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

pleased. She feels with me that the pattern is softened and thereby
improved.

The mistake Marie and I made in the hourglass of the green blanket left
too much space at each side of the center to be filled in with stripes.
But I could have improved the effect had I made the stripes wider.
Somehow the narrowness of the stripes detracts from the dignity of the
design. This is only a minor lesson the green rug has taught me, and in
setting the side stripes of my new rug I guard against changing the
colors too often.

We need not wait until the blanket is finished to see that the changed
proportions—longer and narrower—the accurate placing of the pattern, the
introduction of the soft dark gray, and the widening of the side stripes
combine to make a vast improvement.

My delight in weaving has now a quiet satisfied character. The
matter-of-fact attitude of my family has communicated itself to me. I
let Atlnaba take a turn at the weaving just as her mother might and have
no qualms of conscience. When I complained of not being able to see the
edge pulling in, one of my white friends suggested that I tie a string
from the cloth beam to the top of the loom so that I could constantly
measure the distance of the web from a fixed point. I have done this,
and it adds materially to my perspective. Maria Antonia and Atlnaba
consider it a good idea.

We have visitors again this year. Many of them are women who were here
last year. One day Maria Antonia brings Tom's aunt, the one we brought
with us from the girl's sing last summer, to visit while Atlnaba is with
me. We are discussing the pattern. Atlnaba has suggested that a small
gray triangle within the innermost white one of the concentric triangle

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

combination would be nice. And still another good pattern would be a
step motive within the red triangle running in toward the center white
one and breaking up the rather large white space. We tell the newcomers
of these ideas, and they approve. Tom's aunt says she would outline each
of the triangles in a contrasting color, the red with black, the black
with red.

I should like any of the modifications. None would be difficult. The
outlining means additional work, but is very typical of Navajo weaving.
When Atlnaba made the small blanket with the comb pattern for me, she
picked up and dropped thirty different weft threads in weaving a single
row across the middle. A good weaver of course never considers how much
work a pattern is. She sees it as a finished whole and exerts herself to
accomplish the ideal.

This summer a number of interesting blankets are brought to the trader.
There is a revival, under the encouragement of trade, of the blankets
made of vegetal dyes. I happen in at the trading-post one day when an
expert at this type of weave brings in her blanket. It is a soft
harmonious combination of dark gray, black, white, a yellowish green and
two shades of rose, the color of the sand cliffs. The effect is
indescribable and impossible of reproduction.

The trader and I sink to the floor at the sides of the spread rug, the
weaver lights at the end. She tells us what each dye is made of. The
plants whose roots, leaves, stems, or blossoms furnish the materials are
scarce nowadays and it requires a great deal of labor to gather enough
to dye sufficient yarn. As we talk over the details several other women
come in, sit as lightly as the first, and unobtrusively add their
information.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

The trader pulls out other blankets dyed with natural colors as the talk
goes on. Each one brings forth some bit of new knowledge or an opinion
on texture or pattern.

The so-called vegetable dye fabrics may legitimately be termed blankets.
The kind I have been weaving, the most ordinary type, might better be
called rugs. For they are tight and firm in texture and therefore
somewhat stiff and hard, at least when new. They become softer and more
pliable with wear. The constant wear of tramping feet brings out all
latent flexibility.

But the vegetal dye blankets are in a class by themselves. They have a
style which is theirs alone. From their very inception they are
delightfully yielding. The warp of their foundation is coarser than the
one we use. The strands are separated by heavier twining yarn, which
causes them to stand farther apart than those to which we are
accustomed. The weft yarn is thicker but more loosely spun.

I return from the interview with the conviction that what I have learned
is a mere drop in the bucket compared to what there is to know. Not only
must I learn the plants and minerals used in the dyes, but also where to
find them and the long tedious processes of concoction. Nevertheless I
shall never be content until I have sometime made a blanket of this
type.

Another of our visitors is a schoolgirl who in spite of her education is
interested in weaving. She has been back at her home long enough to take
it up intensively again. I have James' *Indian Blankets and Their
Makers* with its many colored illustrations. She and Atlnaba leaf it
over by the hour until I think the whole book will disintegrate. They
happen

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

upon a photograph of Atlnaba taken when she was only five. She was then
called "The Little Weaver."

They criticise the designs in the book. They like the old-fashioned ones
best. The girl likes one so well she sketches it to take home with her.
But they have no tolerance for quaintness as such. If an old design is
badly placed or irregularly executed, they condemn it as heartily as
they do mine. Age does not excuse bad technique to them.

Much is said about keeping designs open so that the weaver "does not
weave her spirit in." The idea is still believed by some women. Atlnaba
makes many rugs with borders. The tapestry of the Sun's House has a
black border. But at the upper right-hand corner she has run one gray
thread across the border to serve as a "path." The little red-background
rug she made for me also has a black border, but it is unbroken.

From the discussion and criticisms of my guests this day I gather that
many designs with openings, especially those which are irregular are
really due to miscalculations and ill-adjustments. They may be later
rationalized as "sacred." One figure is, because of its age and texture,
a beautiful piece; these modern weavers have nothing but scorn for it.
The separate motives are not woven regularly, nor are they well spaced.
My critics and teachers refuse to make a rationalization for "holiness."
They continue with their remarks, leafing the pages over and over and
back again to begin once more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV: Dan](sws18.md)
