[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws34)  [Next](sws36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

### XXXII

#### TRAGEDY

<span class="smallcaps">On Sunday</span> Old-Mexican's-Son is home with
his brother, Big-Mexican. They had come by way of Water-in-the Ground
about midnight, and like all good Navajo they had stopped at the sing.
Instead of monotonous dancing and a large jesting audience they had
found a serious council of many men. Talk back and forth, forth and
back, always controlled but in an atmosphere charged with deep emotion.
After the celebration of the white people the crowds had increased;
besides wagons and horsemen there were many automobiles. About nine
o’clock a large one had turned around in a well worn auto track and had
unknowingly run over a Navajo, Little-Singer, who had chosen that
particular spot in which to lie down and go to sleep. Probably he had
not chosen it. He was just there when he wanted to sleep, and so he lay
down.

He was not killed. Hushed excitement attended the calling of the
ambulance and the transporting of the injured man fifteen miles to the
hospital. Several hours after, the guests convened to "talk it over." An
injury or a death is bad enough at any time or under any circumstance,
but for such a thing to happen at a sing held so that "all might be
restored"—this is incredible, a bad omen, the bitterest blow fate can
deal.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

The orthodox accused the young sophisticates of causing it because they
danced those steps in the summer. "They should only be danced in the
winter, and that is the cause of this misfortune. Anyway we have too
many white innovations. Automobiles are bad, but we are getting too many
of them. They are bound to bring disaster."

The young educated men defended themselves reasonably: "You dance the
dances of the Night Chant yourselves at the Ceremonial, and the snakes
are not frozen up then, for it is only August. And if you are going to
do away with everything you get from the white man you will have to give
up all your silver, your sheep, and even your horses. We got all of them
from the whites. Besides it isn't as if someone said, "Don't do it."
Nobody said anything."

"And so the argument went on," report my friends. "You know those
fellows can certainly bring out their points well."

"They surely do," I answer. "But what conclusion did they come to?"

"How could they come to any? The old men still believe the breakdown of
custom is the cause of all disaster; the young ones do not believe it.
It's the old story."

On Monday morning I go to Water-in-the-Ground, making a slight detour to
deposit the lamb in Red-Point's shade. I find Marie's wagon at the
trading-post. She tells me her mother is ill back there on the other
wagon. This is not just "not feeling good." There is tension in the very
air. Marie says Angela is with her, and if I will take her mother home
she can rest better. I find Maria Antonia reclining against a pile of
sheepskins and quilts in Atlnaba's wagon, feeling too wretched for even
the faintest smile. She has a bad headache;

<span id="img_24800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![TWO OF MY SISTERS
AND MY GIRL CHILDREN](tn/24800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24800.jpg)  
TWO OF MY SISTERS AND MY GIRL CHILDREN  
</span>

<span id="img_24801"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![A VERY LITTLE GIRL
ON A VERY LARGE PLAY-&lt;br&gt; GROUND](tn/24801.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24801.jpg)  
A VERY LITTLE GIRL ON A VERY LARGE PLAY-  
GROUND  
</span>

<span id="img_24900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![HASTIN-GANI'S WIFE
ATTACHES THE WARP&lt;br&gt; CURLS](tn/24900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24900.jpg)  
HASTIN-GANI'S WIFE ATTACHES THE WARP  
CURLS  
</span>

<span id="img_24901"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE FIFTEEN FOOT
LOOM](tn/24901.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24901.jpg)  
THE FIFTEEN FOOT LOOM  
</span>

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

her cough is alarming; a knife stabs at her left side, sometimes even
turns over slightly.

Angela helps her into the front seat of the car, and we bundle her up in
quilts. How many times in the last few days I have bowled along this
road considering it fairly smooth, excellent indeed as roads go out
here! Now as I drive as carefully as I can it seems to me each tiny
stone is a boulder, each groove a jolting rut. I realize the torture
Maria Antonia is going through, and I can do nothing to prevent it. In
an interminable half-hour we are back at the shade. Tenderly Angela
helps her grandmother and makes her as comfortable as possible on her
sheepskin bed. Djiba, as frisky as ever, wonders at her grandmother's
lack of response to her many diversions but does not cease, in fact
increases, her efforts to attract attention.

I retire to my own bower, worried but helpless. Angela struggles to make
dinner out of nothing. Soon Djiba walks as briskly and purposefully as
Atlnaba to my abode. She clutches in her tiny hand a note: "Will you
please give us a match? Angela." I wrap a few in the note, give her an
orange, and off she goes, her little full skirt swishing to the rhythm
of her diminutive bare feet, her bright face set in the direction of her
important errand.

On Tuesday I go to the shade to see how my grandmother is. She is worse.
"Has she been sick at her stomach since she got home?"

"No," answers Marie, "it was just from the jolting of the car, I guess."

Red-Point is glad I came. They are talking over a plan.

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

"You see we can't possibly take her to the hospital. Little-Singer died
there yesterday afternoon."

I am shocked. I understand perfectly why my grandmother cannot go there.
A place where one dies is contaminated, and if anyone goes there, he
puts himself in the way of the worst. I know, too, as do they all,
although they do not say it, that Little-Singer is the fourth person to
die at the hospital within a week. After considering the implications I
suggest, "But could the doctor come here to see her?"

"Yes, my father says that would be all right."

"Does he want to go down and get him? If so, I'll take him," I offer.

"He wants to go over toward Cornfields to get a man to sing. He sings
the Knife Chant and he cured my mother twice before when she was like
this."

Secretly I demur, as I suggest that we stop to get the doctor on the
way. Red-Point agrees, but somewhat hesitatingly. I take him first to
Old-Mexican's-Son, who persuades him, after a little talk, to get the
doctor. As we drive nearer the hospital, Red-Point, this staunch
independent veteran of life's wars, sinks in his seat. As I stop before
the door, he is fairly cringing. Horses, warriors, shots he is brave
enough to face, but this thing, Death! His only technique for it is
avoidance. I do not even go in but call out my question. The doctor is
not there. Perhaps he is at his house, and I hastily drive my
grandfather away from this house that strikes him with terror. We do not
go far, not even off the Mission campus, before he regains his
composure.

Now, after using all our powers of persuasion trying to force our
medicine upon him contrary to his confirmed belief, I spend forty-five
minutes searching within a space of two

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

acres for that doctor. There is a girl in charge here, she does not know
where he is. Another is in charge of the office, phones, and does not
know. No one even knows who might know. It would make a great difference
in my decision if I knew whether he would be back in ten minutes,
forty-five, or not until dark. As I fail in each inquiry to get any
satisfaction whatsoever, Red-Point becomes visibly more cheerful.

Finally I give up as someone mentions that today is the Fourth of July.
Perhaps the doctor is away for the day since it is a holiday. Grimly I
reflect on the circumstance that here, as in the city I come from, one
must get sick between ten and five of a Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday, or Friday. Let him who gets his lungs pierced in the night or
on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday look to his own fate. By the time I
have given up, Red-Point has himself and the situation in hand once
more. I surrender to him. I drive him to the home of his Knife Chanter.

He is not home either, but his wife knows where he is, just about to
ride out of sight under yonder cliff. Red-Point whoops and motions. In a
twinkling he has turned his horse, and in no time he is back. Red-Point
explains his errand, slips some money into his hand. He dismounts, darts
into his hogan for his bundle which his wife has already reached down
from its nail, and in less than ten minutes we are on our way back to
Red-Point's.

At three o’clock the Knife Chanter begins to sing. Maria Antonia has
high fever, and she can hardly breathe because of the pain in her side.
There is no sun today; the sky is dark, and a strong wind is blowing.
The ceremonial acts are neither new nor elaborate. There are no
sand-paintings. But before anything else is done, Maria Antonia must
bathe and

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

shampoo her hair in the yucca suds. The basket is prepared with its
attractive foam, its five pollen crosses and circle of yellow. There is
quite a large expanse of clean sand behind it, and on it the Chanter has
described four little crosses of yellow pollen.

He bids her walk around the basket on its sand foundation from east to
south to west to north, placing each foot in a designated spot. She is
so weak she staggers and cannot step carefully. I almost cry out as she
goes on, no one helping her, and finally falls to her knees on the sand.
She goes through with the shampoo, unties her own hair string, as the
Chanter and Marie help her. Her hair is wet as the cold wind, touched
with a few drops of rain, blows through the shade.

No one could be gentler or more tender than Marie as she finally helps
her mother to her bed and wraps her up when the bathing is over, and the
Chanter continues his steady singing to the accompaniment of his
deerhoof rattle. Angela warms a piece of outing flannel at the fire and
wraps it around her grandmother's feet. They are not cruel; their pity
is as poignant as mine. The sing must be done properly, if at all; the
details of it are no more cruel than the surgeon's scalpel. No one would
rush in and grab it from him; it is just as unthinkable for the profane
to step into the corner of the hut where only patient and Chanter should
be.

This sing, even more than the others, furnishes opportunity as well as
food for sober meditation. Here is no feast with merriment and
sociability. This is a matter to be compared with the doctor's sitting,
watch in hand, as he counts the beats of a vacillating pulse. My
sympathy has run the gamut from the weakest sort of pity to bitterness
at not finding the

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

doctor, from grim fatalism at being compelled to fetch the Chanter to
the most abject futility at watching Maria Antonia shampooing her hair
in that wind. It now flares into feverish anger which dies down in
despair as I see her rest once more disturbed, when she is forced by the
tenets of the cure to sit up while the Chanter blows medicine—pine
leaves floating on water—on her side where the pain torments her.

"After all," I ask myself, "is this more futile than the administration
of oxygen or the shot of adrenalin, each of which is a hope against
hope?"

But this is only rationalizing, for after all we do have a chance to
cure pneumonia, and I am sure that is what my grandmother has.

The afternoon singing with very little business lasts a little over two
hours. In the evening it begins about eight. One must not go to sleep in
a place with a sick person; the children carefully excluded. One may not
come in while the singing is in progress, but one may go out when a
particular song is finished and ere another has begun. I go out during a
long intermission. From my bed I hear the burden and the rattle until
after midnight.

Next morning Marie says her mother is a little better. My bitterness
mellows to fatalistic tolerance as I hope Maria Antonia may recover.
"Twice at least before she has survived not only the disease but the
treatment. She is unbelievably wiry; perhaps she will again. Even if the
doctor *had* come, what good could he have done? He would have ordered
complete rest. They would have the sing anyway, and what hope could he
have of success for his treatment? If she does not get over this, at
least he will not be blamed. They are following

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

their own creed. Whichever way the balance swings, they will be better
satisfied so."

Red-Point has promised to sing for a man at Black Mountain. He has
complete confidence in his friend, Knife Chanter, who will sing for four
nights. He goes off to attend to his own duties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII: Death](sws36)
