[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Navajo](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sws31)  [Next](sws33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EQAH5Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Spider Woman*, by Gladys A. Reichard, \[1934\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

### XXIX

#### WAR DANCE

<span class="smallcaps">Maria Antonia</span>, who is never really well,
is feeling even worse than usual. Her cough is bad; she feels weak and
has little energy. She is sixty-three but sees no reason why at that age
she should be able to do less than she did at thirty-five. Occasionally
she has a little stabbing pain in her left side. Red-Point has heard
that some people who live near Water-in-the-Ground are going to have a
War Dance. After consultation the family agree that it would be well for
Maria Antonia to join the patients. The whole family will contribute not
only labor but also all their financial means.

The War Dance is held more frequently than any of the Navajo sings. It
has been witnessed by more whites than any other. Whites understand none
of the rites completely, but this one, because the social and secular
side of it is more apparent, is even more thoroughly misunderstood and
misrepresented. Man gets out of sympathy with nature, with the elements,
or with the universe, and disease comes upon him. A diviner has the
power to tell what the cause of the disorder is; once the cause is
determined, steps in the form of one chant or another can be taken.

Causes are not, however, restricted to a man's own span of life. It may
be that one of his parents has come into contact with danger in a
disorderly manner during the time his mother

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

was carrying him. The particular dangers consist in dealing with enemies
or foreigners. If a warrior has killed or injured his enemy by hitting
him in the head or chest, that same fighter unless he has the War Dance
held for him, may become ill with an affliction of the head or chest.
His unborn child may also be later so afflicted. The Ancient People,
prehistoric inhabitants of the many ruins of the Navajo country, were
traditional enemies. Their power for harm has not ceased because they
are dead; if anything, death enhances their danger. The sight of a bone
of one of these people may have the same effects on a person or his
offspring as actual contact with an enemy. Even if he has not
consciously beheld such a disintegrated but still sentient relic it may
be that he has passed one, perhaps even stepped on it, unknowingly. If
indefinite dangers like this beset a man himself, who can account for
the experiences of his parents?

Maria Antonia was born the year the Navajo were released from their
captivity at Fort Sumner. Contacts there and later were almost entirely
with soldiers. Since the benefit of other sings has been only temporary
this one may have more permanent results. So, like Totlani's-Wife and
many other of her friends and acquaintances, Maria Antonia will try
this.

The War Dance will begin Thursday. On Wednesday all the cooking
utensils, bedding, and odds and ends necessary for a short sojourn, as
well as much goods by the yard and ceremonial paraphernalia, are loaded
into the wagons and taken to Water-in-the-Ground. Ninaba and Angela,
Ruby's sister, who is visiting, have been instructed to drive the sheep
in the same direction today. After all are well started I take Maria
Antonia and Djiba. We drive nine miles to the scene of our part of the
ceremony. Here is a tremendous shade

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

perhaps thirty-five by twenty feet in dimensions. It is new, the posts
are closely set, the roofing boughs are fresh and green.

There are few people here this early, but the chief cooks of the other
family participating have established themselves with their families and
pets in the northern half of the shade. Our women will use the southern
half, and this will be our home for several days. Here hundreds of
visitors will be fed at all hours, here all supplies are kept. Three
wagons with barrels of water stand outside. In front of the shade there
is a huge pile of wood; not far to the right are three large clean
Spanish ovens made of adobe. This is the center of the entertainment. A
War Dance consists largely of entertainment.

There are three patients besides Maria Antonia, an old woman with white
hair and no teeth, but very spry; her fourteen-year-old son; and a man
who is no relation to any of them. Marie knows his name but does not
know the old woman. Her eyes are quick and bright and humorous. The
patients remain for most of the five days of the performance in a summer
hogan five hundred or six hundred yards away from the cooking shade.
This hogan and the small shade in front of it are the stage for the
sacred part of the sing.

The most important property of the Dance is a trophy which represents
the ghost of the enemy. In the old days it was an enemy scalp or bone of
the Ancient People. Today a lock of hair, or a piece of skin of some
person not a Navajo may be used. It need not be taken in war but must
belong to an alien. Scalps from the medicine bundle of a chanter are not
unknown. It takes several hours to make the trophy stick, which is
marked and tied with many things.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

"Changing-Woman, who is the Earth Mother, bore two sons, First-born and
Child-of-the-Water, who derived such power from their father, the Sun,
that they were able to overcome the dreadful monsters which encumbered
the earth and prevented people from populating it. When they were four
days old—that is, old enough to think—they asked their mother, "Where
does Big-Monster live?" "Sh!" she warned. "Don't mention his name." But
they insisted, so she told them. They went off and not only attacked but
killed the monster for all time. First-born brought home a part of the
body of Big-Monster which he hung in a tree in front of his mother's
house to prove his prowess. This he and his brother continued to do,
until all the monsters were killed and the earth was a decent place to
live in.

"Changing-Woman herself had a great deal of power, but each time she
looked at one of the trophies she purified herself with pollen and a
prayer."

About three o’clock on Thursday, the first counted day of the sing, the
trophy stick is ready. "Our" party is ready to take it to Sunrise, about
fourteen miles west, where the opposing party awaits it. By this time
several hundred people have gathered. All of them want to go to Sunrise
with me! I tell Marie I cannot take all who want to go, she must choose
which they will be. We start with seven. Marie chooses to take her
mother's co-patient and another stranger, then there are Tom, Atlnaba,
and of course Dan. The man patient is in the party of horsemen, and the
fourteen-year-old boy on horseback carries the trophy. Maria Antonia is
the only patient who remains.

White-Haired-Woman guides us over a short cut—shorter in miles than in
hours—which leads past her winter hogan to Sunrise. For miles we climb
up and dip into thick-grassed slopes, and for as many miles see scarcely
a sheep or a trace of one. The reason, White-Haired-Woman tells us, "No

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

water to drink." We get stuck in deep sand once. The car disgorges its
load; all push, and we are out. Tom knows a detour. The crowd is
assembled at Sunrise, where not a blade of green is visible on any side.
Against jagged cliffs stands a cooking shade about half as large as
ours. In it particular guests, which include our party, are fed. People
walk over one another, there is scarce room to set a coffee cup. Order
and organization, which are so noticeable at all affairs at Red-Point's,
are conspicuously absent. Set on the sand some distance before the house
are tubs of boiled mutton, wash-boilers full of coffee, and gunny sacks
full of bread. The food is devoured by the hordes of guests.

The people of the opposing party offer us all possible hospitality.
Marie does not even know who they are. After the feast we wait for the
Girls' Dance (usually called Squaw Dance) to begin. The trophy stick
stands in a basket in a hogan where for hours it is the sole occupant.
Not until eleven o’clock does the trophy-bearer march out with it and
thereby start the dance. She must be a virgin and must never let the
trophy touch the ground from the time she first carries it until the
whole dance is over. The Sunrise party have made the choice. The child
is very young, does not look more than seven to me. I learn later from
Marie that she is so young that there are two who take turns because one
gets tired.

Her mother accompanies her as she comes from the hogan carrying the
trophy and seeks a young man to dance with her. The mother tells her to
grab a young man by the coat and draw him out into the center of the
dancing place. A large chorus stands on one side and sings vigorously,
pausing for only short intervals until sunrise.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

This is the dance of which white people make all manner of fun. The
girls force the young men to dance. They will not let one go until he
has paid for his dance. A Navajo man can get away by paying a dime, a
white man is expected to pay at least a quarter. But even if he gets off
by paying his coin, any presentable young buck will be invited again and
again. He may therefore save money by dancing for a long time with the
same girl. He may enjoy this, may even pay a girl to dance with him and
no one else the whole evening. On the other hand, his lack of a coin may
make him a girl's prisoner for hours.

The step of this dance is monotonous, a kind of disinterested shuffling
of one partner around the other. Often the man appears to be dragged by
the girl, who holds him by the coat if she follows old ways. More
intimate positions may be assumed, and those who dance together for a
long time take on a look as fatuous as that I have seen on our dance
floors. Many girls dance it. A girl who is not respectable is referred
to as one "who had to dance for her mother," meaning that her mother
forced her to dance and exacted from her the proceeds. This is what John
meant when he said his relatives must pick him a woman who does not
dance. It is what Marie means when she says, "My sister will never let
Ninaba dance."

Each of three nights of the War Dance are passed in this manner, one
here at Sunrise, the two following at Water-in-the-Ground. By dawn the
next morning most of the audience is strewn here and there on the ground
fast asleep. Shortly after sunrise people begin to gather before the
hogan, and one by one they take gifts into it, yards of calico, boxes
and boxes of crackerjack, uncounted bottles of soda pop, sacks

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

of candy, oranges, silk handkerchiefs, a fine Pendleton blanket.

After a goodly amount has been accumulated and the crowd is as close as
it can get to the house, small objects suddenly begin to fly out of the
smokehole and door. Women from our party form a semicircle in front of
the door; men and boys stand behind them. Women from the Sunrise side
come out and place calico around the necks of our party. They give them
as much of the other things as they can carry. Some of the recipients
have fifteen or more boxes of crackerjack and bottles of pop, others
have scarcely any. Complaints are most emphatic from those who receive
the most.

Everyone who came with me "got lots." Tom tells me a man gave him a
steer. We now have the bulky encumbrances of each passenger and besides
another hitcher begging me to take her. Nothing is so hard as for a
Navajo to say "No." One other thing that grieves him sorely is not to be
able to pack all his belongings. Both contingencies now arise. I
absolutely refuse to take on this woman. Lack of space is a good excuse,
but Marie finds it hard to make; the woman finds it impossible to
understand such an excuse. Meanwhile Tom is planning the load. He ties
here and straps there, feet must cease to exist. At that he is obliged
to send one large bundle on a wagon going back to Water-in-the-Ground.
He could get everything in Jonathan if our receipts were expressed in
almost any terms but pop bottles. They stubbornly refuse tighter
cinching and end up by riding in the laps of their owners. I don't dare
inquire about the steer, we might somehow have to take that too. I drive
back the longer but smoother and less sandy way; we arrive at
Water-in-the-Ground with every bottle intact.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX: Killing the Ghost](sws33)
