[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prsp09)  [Next](prsp11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Prosperity*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Eight God Will Pay Your Debts 

FORGIVE US our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors." In these
words Jesus expressed an infallible law of mind, the law that one idea
must be dissolved before another can take its place. If you have in your
mind any thought that someone has wronged you, you cannot let in the
cleansing power of Spirit and the richness of spiritual substance until
you have cast out the thought of the wrong, have forgiven it fully. You
may be wondering why you have failed to get spiritual illumination or to
find the consciousness of spiritual substance. Perhaps the reason is
here: a lack of room for the true thoughts because other thoughts fill
your mind. If you are not receiving the spiritual understanding you feel
you should have, you should search your mind carefully for unforgiving
thoughts. "Thoughts are things" and occupy space in the mind realm. They
have substance and form and may easily be taken as permanent by one not
endowed with spiritual discernment. They bring forth fruit according to
the seed planted in the mind, but they are not

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

enduring unless founded in Spirit. Thoughts are alive and are endowed by
the thinker with a secondary thinking power; that is, the thought entity
that the I AM forms assumes an ego and begins to think on its own
account. Thoughts also think but only with the power you give to them.

Tell me what kind of thoughts you are holding about yourself and your
neighbors, and I can tell you just what you may expect in the way of
health, finances, and harmony in your home. Are you suspicious of your
neighbors? You cannot love and trust in God if you hate and distrust
men. The two ideas love and hate, or trust and mistrust, simply cannot
both be present in your mind at one time, and when you are entertaining
one, you may be sure the other is absent. Trust other people and use the
power that you accumulate from that act to trust God. There is magic in
it: it works wonders; love and trust are dynamic, vital powers. Are you
accusing men of being thieves, and fear that they are going to take away
from you something that is your own? With such a thought generating fear
and even terror in your mind and filling your consciousness with
darkness, where is there room for the Father's light of protection?
Rather build walls of love and substance around yourself. Send out
swift, invisible messengers of love and trust for your protection. They
are better guards than policemen or detectives.

Do not judge others as regards their guilt or innocence. Consider
yourself and how you stand in the sight of the Father for having
thoughts about another's

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

guilt. Begin your reform with yourself. That means much to one who
enjoys an understanding of mind and its laws, though it may mean little
to the ordinary individual. He who knows himself superficially, just his
external personality, thinks he has reformed when he has conformed to
the moral and governmental laws. He may even be filled with his own
self-righteousness and daily lift up his voice to praise God that he is
not as other men are, that he has forgiven men their transgressions. He
looks on all men who do not conform to his ideas of morality and
religion as being sinners and transgressors and thanks God for his own
insight and keenness. But he is not at peace. Something seems lacking.
God does not talk to him "face to face," because the mind, where God and
man meet, is darkened by the murky thought that other men are sinners.
Our first work in any demonstration is to contact God, therefore we must
forgive all men their transgressions. Through this forgiveness we
cleanse our mind so that the Father can forgive us our own
transgressions.

Our forgiving "all men" includes ourselves. You must also forgive
yourself. Let the finger of denial erase every sin or "falling short"
that you have charged up against yourself. Pay your debt by saying to
that part of yourself which you think has fallen short: "Thou art made
whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing befall thee." Then "loose him,
and let him go." Treat sin as a mental transgression, instead of
considering it as a moral deflection. Deny in thought all tendency to
the error way and hold

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

yourself firmly to the Christ Spirit, which is your divine self. Part
company forever with "accusing conscience." Those who have resolved to
sin no more have nothing in common with guilt.

"Shall I be in debt as long as I hold debts against others?" We find
this to be the law of mind: a thought of debt will produce debt. So long
as you believe in debt you will go into debt and accumulate the burdens
that follow that thought. Whoever has not forgiven all men their debts
is likely to fall into debt himself. Does this mean that you should give
receipted bills to all those who owe you? No. That would not be erasing
the thought of debt from your mind. First deny in mind that any man or
woman owes you anything. If necessary, go over your list of names
separately and sincerely forgive the thought of debt which you have been
attaching to each person named. More bills may be collected in this way
than in any other, for many of these people will pay what they owe when
you send them this forgiving thought.

Debt is a contradiction of the universal equilibrium, and there is no
such thing as lack of equilibrium in all the universe. Therefore in
Spirit and in Truth there is no debt. However, men hold on to a thought
of debt, and this thought is responsible for a great deal of sorrow and
hardship. The true disciple realizes his supply in the consciousness of
omnipresent, universally possessed abundance. Spirit substance is
impartial and owned in common, and no thought of debt can enter into it.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

Debts exist in the mind, and in the mind is the proper place to begin
liquidating them. These thought entities must be abolished in mind
before their outer manifestations will pass away and stay away. The
world can never be free from the bondage of financial obligations until
men erase from their minds the thoughts of "mine and thine" that
generates debts and interest. Analyze the thought of debt and you will
see that it involves a thought of lack. Debt is a thought of lack with
absence at both ends; the creditor thinks he lacks what is owed him and
the debtor thinks he lacks what is necessary to pay it, else he would
discharge the obligation rather than continue it. There is error at both
ends of the proposition and nothing in the middle. This being true, it
should be easy to dissolve the whole thought that anyone owes us or that
we owe anyone anything. We should fill our mind with thoughts of
all-sufficiency, and where there is no lack there can be no debts. Thus
we find that the way to pay our debts is by filling our mind with the
substance of ideas that are the direct opposite of the thoughts of lack
that caused the debts.

Ideas of abundance will more quickly and surely bring what is yours to
you than any thoughts you can hold about debtors discharging their
obligations to you. See substance everywhere and affirm it, not only for
yourself but for everyone else. Especially affirm abundance for those
whom you have held in the thought of owing you. Thus you will help them
pay their debts more easily than if you merely erased

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

their names from your book of accounts receivable. Help pay the other
fellow's debts by forgiving him his debts and declaring for him the
abundance that is his already in Spirit. The idea of abundance will also
bring its fruits into your own life. Let the law of plenty work itself
out in you and in your affairs. This is the way the Father forgives your
debts: not by canceling them on His books but by erasing them from His
mind. He remembers them no more against you when you deny their reality.
The Father is the everywhere present Spirit in which all that appears
has its origin. God's love sees you always well, happy, and abundantly
provided for; but God's wisdom demands that order and right relation
exist in your mind before it may become manifest in your affairs as
abundance. His love would give you your every desire, but His wisdom
ordains that you forgive your debtors before your debts are forgiven.

To remedy any state of limited finances or ill-health that has been
brought about by worry one must begin by eliminating the worry that is
the original cause. One must free one's mind from the burden of debt
before the debt can be paid. Many people have found that the statement
"I owe no man anything but love" has helped them greatly to counteract
this thought of debt. As they used the words their minds were opened to
an inflow of divine love and they faithfully co-operated with the divine
law of forgiveness in thought, word, and deed. They built up such a
strong consciousness of the healing and enriching power of God's love
that

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

they could live and work peacefully and profitably with their
associates. Thus renewed constantly in health, in faith, and in
integrity, they were able to meet every obligation that came to them.

The statement "I owe no man anything but love" does not mean that we can
disclaim owing our creditors money or try to evade the payment of
obligations we have incurred. The thing denied is the burdensome thought
of debt or of lack. The work of paying debts is an inner work having
nothing to do with the debts already owed but with the wrong thoughts
that produced them. When one holds to the right ideas, burdensome debts
will not be contracted. Debts are produced by thoughts of lack,
impatient desire, and covetousness. When these thoughts are overcome,
debts are overcome, forgiven, and paid in full, and we are free from
them for all time.

Your thoughts should at all times be worthy of your highest self, your
fellow man, and God. The thoughts that most frequently work ill to you
and your associates are thoughts of criticism and condemnation. Free
your mind of them by holding the thought "There is now no condemnation
in Christ Jesus." Fill your mind with thoughts of divine love, justice,
peace, and forgiveness. This will pay your debts of love, which are the
only debts you really owe. Then see how quickly and easily and naturally
all your outer debts will be paid and all inharmonies of mind, body, and
affairs smoothed out at the same time. Nothing will so quickly enrich
your mind and

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

free it from every thought of lack as the realization of divine love.
Divine love will quickly and perfectly free you from the burden of debt
and heal you of your physical infirmities, often caused by depression,
worry, and financial fear. Love will bring your own to you, adjust all
misunderstandings, and make your life and affairs healthy, happy,
harmonious, and free, as they should be. Love indeed is the "fulfillment
of the law."

The way is now open for you to pay your debts. Surrender them to God
along with all your doubts and fears. Follow the light that is flooding
into your mind. God's power, love, and wisdom, are here, for His kingdom
is within you. Give Him full dominion in your life and affairs. Give Him
your business, your family affairs, your finances, and let Him pay your
debts. He is even now doing it, for it is His righteous desire to free
you from every burden, and He is leading you out of the burden of debt,
whether of owing or being owed. Meet every insidious thought, such as "I
can't," "I don't know how," "I can't see the way," with the declaration
"Jehovah is my shepherd; I shall not want." You "shall not want" the
wisdom, the courage to do, or the substance to do with when you have
once fully realized the scope of the vast truth that Almightiness is
leading you into "green pastures ... beside still waters."

In the kingdom of Truth and reality ideas are the coin of the realm. You
can use the new ideas that divine wisdom is now quickening in your mind

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

and start this very moment to pay your debts. Begin by thanking God for
your freedom from the debt-burden thought. This is an important step in
breaking the shackles of debt. The funds to pay all your bills may not
suddenly appear in a lump sum; but as you watch and work and pray,
holding yourself in the consciousness of God's leadership and His
abundance, you will notice your funds beginning to grow "here a little,
there a little," and increasing more and more rapidly as your faith
increases and your anxious thoughts are stilled. For with the increase
will come added good judgment and wisdom in the management of your
affairs. Debt is soon vanquished when wisdom and good judgment are in
control.

Do not yield to the temptation of "easy-payment plans." Any payment that
drains your pay envelope before you receive it is not an easy payment.
Do not allow false pride to tempt you to put on a thousand-dollar front
on a hundred-dollar salary. There may be times when you are tempted to
miss paying a bill in order to indulge a desire for some thing. This
easily leads one into the habit of putting off paying, which fastens the
incubus of debt on people before they realize it. It is the
innocent-appearing forerunner of the debt habit and debt thought that
may rob you of peace, contentment, freedom, integrity, and prosperity
for years to come. The Divine Mind within you is much stronger than this
desire mind of the body. Turn to it in a time like this, and affirm:
"Jehovah is my shepherd; I shall not want" this thing until

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

it comes to me in divine order.

Bless your creditors with the thought of abundance as you begin to
accumulate the wherewithal to pay off your obligations. Keep the faith
they had in you by including them in your prayer for increase. Begin to
free yourself at once by doing all that is possible with the means you
have and as you proceed in this spirit the way will open for you to do
more; for through the avenues of Spirit more means will come to you and
every obligation will be met.

If you are a creditor, be careful of the kind of thoughts you hold over
your debtor. Avoid the thought that he is unwilling to pay you or that
he is unable to pay you. One thought holds him in dishonesty, and the
other holds him subject to lack, and either of them tends to close the
door to the possibility of his paying you soon. Think well and speak
well of all those who owe you. If you talk about them to others avoid
calling them names that you would not apply to yourself. Cultivate a
genuine feeling of love for them and respect their integrity in spite of
all appearances. Declare abundant supply for them and thus help them to
prosper. Pray and work for their good as well as for your own, for yours
is inseparable from theirs. You owe your debtor quite as much as he owes
you and yours is a debt of love. Pay your debt to him and he will pay
his to you. This rule of action never fails.

Far-seeing Christians look forward to an early resumption of the
economic system inaugurated by the early followers of Jesus. They had
all things in

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

common, and no man lacked anything. But before we can have a truly
Christian community founded on a spiritual basis we must be educated
into a right way of thinking about finances. If we should all get
together and divide all our possessions, it would be but a short time
until those who have the prevailing financial ideas would manipulate our
finances, and plethora on one hand and lack on the other would again be
established.

The world cannot be free from the bondage of debt and interest until men
start to work in their minds to erase those things from consciousness.
If the United States forgave the nations of Europe all their debts and
wiped the slate clean, the law would not necessarily be fulfilled; for
there would probably remain a thought that they still owed us and that
we had made a sacrifice in canceling the obligations. We should not feel
very friendly about it and would not truly forgive them, and in that
case the error thought would be carried on. We must first forgive the
error thought that they owe us money and that we would be losing money
by canceling the debts. The man who is forced to forgive a debt does not
forgive it.

Above all we should fill our mind with the consciousness of that divine
abundance which is so manifest everywhere in the world today. There is
as much substance as there ever was, but its free flow has been
interfered with through selfishness. We must rid our mind of the selfish
acquisitiveness that is so dominant in the race thought, and in that way
do

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

our part in the great work of freeing the world from avarice. It is the
duty of every Christian metaphysician to help in the solution of this
problem by affirming that the universal Spirit of supply is now becoming
manifest as a distributing energy the world over; that all stored-up,
hoarded, vicious thoughts are being dissolved; that all people have
things in common. that no one anywhere lacks anything; and that the
divine law of distribution of infinite supply that Jesus demonstrated is
now being made manifest throughout the world. "The earth is the Lord's,
and the fulness thereof."

There is a legitimate commerce that is carried on by means of what is
called credit. Credit is a convenience to be used by those who
appreciate its value and are careful not to abuse it, for to do so would
be to ruin it. However, many persons are not equipped to use the credit
system to advantage and are likely to abuse it. In the first place, few
individuals are familiar with the intricacies of sound credit systems
and often assume obligations without being certain of their ability to
meet them, especially should some unforeseen complication arise.
Frequently an individual loses all that he invests and finds himself
involved in a burden of debt in addition. Such things are not in divine
order and are largely responsible for retarding prosperity.

No one should assume an obligation unless he is prepared to meet it
promptly and willingly when it comes due. One who knows God as his
unfailing resource can be assured of his supply when it is needed.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Then why should he plunge into debt when he is confident of his daily
supply without debt? There are no creditors or debtors in God's kingdom.
If you are in that kingdom, you need no longer be burdened with the
thought of debt either as debtor or creditor. Under divine law there is
no reaching out for things that are beyond one's present means. There is
an ever-increasing richness of consciousness coming from the certain
knowledge that God is infinite and unfailing supply. Outer things
conform to the inner pattern, and riches are attracted to the one who
lives close to the unselfish heart of God. His environment is made
beautiful by the glory of the Presence, and there is satisfying and
lasting prosperity in his affairs.

There is but one way to be free from debt. That is the desire to be
free, followed by the realization that debt has no legitimate place in
God's kingdom and that you are determined to erase it entirely from your
mind. As you work toward your freedom you will find it helpful to have
daily periods for meditation and prayer. Do not concentrate on debts or
spoil your prayers by constantly thinking of debts. Think of that which
you want to demonstrate, not that from which you seek freedom. When you
pray, thank the Father for His care and guidance, for His provision and
plenty, for His love and wisdom, for His infinite abundance and your
privilege to enjoy it.

Here are a few prosperity prayers that may help establish you in the
truth of plenty and erase the

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

error thought of debt. They are offered as suggestions for forming your
own prayers but may be used as given with excellent results.

I am no longer anxious about finances; Thou art my all-sufficiency in
all things.

The Spirit of honesty, promptness, efficiency, and order is now
expressed in me and in all that I do.

I am free from all limitations of mortal thought about quantities and
values. The superabundance of riches of the Christ Mind are now mine,
and I am prospered in all my ways.

The 23d Psalm

A Treatment To Free The Mind Of The Debt Idea

Jehovah is my shepherd; I shall not want

He maketh me to lie down in green pastures:

He leadeth me beside still waters.

He restoreth my soul:

He guideth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.

Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,

I will fear no evil; for thou art with me;

Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.

Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies:

Thou hast anointed my head with oil;

My cup runneth over.

Surely goodness and lovingkindness shall follow me all the days of my
life:

And I shall dwell in the house of Jehovah for ever.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](prsp11)
