[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prsp13)  [Next](prsp15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Prosperity*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Twelve Overcoming the Thought of Lack 

THE KINGDOM of heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea,
and gathered of every kind; which, when it was filled, they drew up on
the beach; and they sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but
the bad they cast away."

The mind of man is like the net catching every kind of idea, and it is
man's privilege and duty under the divine law to separate those that are
good from those which are not good. In this process the currents of
unselfish, spiritual love flowing through the soul act as great
eliminators, freeing the consciousness of thoughts of hate, lack, and
poverty, and giving the substance of Spirit free access into the
consciousness and affairs.

In another parable Jesus explained the same process as a separation of
the sheep from the goats. When this divine current of love and spiritual
understanding begins its work, we must make this separation. We put the
sheep, the good and obedient and profitable thoughts, on the right, and
we put the goats, the stubborn, selfish, useless thoughts, on the

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

left. Each must handle his own thoughts and overcome them by aligning
them with the harmony and order of the divine thought. There is an
infinite, omnipresent wisdom within us that will deal with these
thoughts and guide us in making the discrimination between the right and
the wrong when we trust ourselves fully to its intelligence. We can
establish a connection between the conscious mind and the superconscious
mind within us by meditation, by silence, and by speaking the word.

The superconscious mind within you discriminates among the kinds of food
you assimilate, controls your digestion, your breathing, and the beating
of your heart. It "doeth all things well," and it will help you do this
important work of directing you in the thoughts you should hold and the
ones you should cast out. As you develop this mind within yourself you
will find that you can gradually turn over more and more of your affairs
to its perfect discrimination. Nothing is too great for it to
accomplish, nor is anything too trivial for it to handle with perfection
and dispatch. This mind of the Spirit will guide you in perfect ways,
even in the minute details of your life, if you will let it do so. But
you must will to do its will and trust it in all your ways. It will lead
you unfailingly into health, happiness, and prosperity, as it has done
and is doing for thousands, if and when you follow it.

It is just as necessary that one should let go of old thoughts and
conditions after they have served their purpose as it is that one should
lay hold of

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

new ideas and create new conditions to meet one's requirements. In fact
we cannot lay hold of the new ideas and make the new conditions until we
have made room for them by eliminating the old. If we feel that we
cannot part with the goats, we shall have to do with fewer sheep. If we
insist on filling the vessels with the bad fish, we shall have to do
without the good. We are learning that thoughts are things and occupy
"space" in mind. We cannot have new or better ones in a place already
crowded with old, weak, inefficient thoughts. A mental house cleaning is
even more necessary than a material one, for the without is but a
reflection of the within. Clean the inside of the platter, where the
food is kept as well as the outside that people see, taught Jesus.

Old thoughts must be denied and the mind cleansed in preparation before
the affirmative Christ consciousness can come in. Our mind and even our
body is loaded with error thoughts. Every cell is clothed with thought:
every cell has a mind of its own. By the use of denial we break through
the outer crust, the material thought that has enveloped the cells, and
get down into the substance and the life within them. Then we make
contact with that substance and life which our denials have exposed, and
by it express the positive, constructive side of the law. When we
consistently deny the limitations of the material, we begin to reveal
the spiritual law that waits within ourselves to be fulfilled. When this
law is revealed to our consciousness, we begin to use it to demonstrate
all things that are good.

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

That is the state of consciousness that Jesus had, the Christ
consciousness.

Every man has a definite work to do in the carrying forward of the
divine law of spiritual evolution. The law is set into action by our
thinking and is continually supported by our thought as it develops our
soul. Within us are the great potentialities of Spirit that, put into
action, enable us to be, do, or have anything we will. Science tells us
that each of us has enough energy within himself to run a universe, if
we knew how to release and control it. We do this releasing by a process
of letting go and taking hold: letting go of the old or that which has
done its part and is no longer useful, and taking hold of the new ideas
and inspirations that come from the superconscious mind. Jesus told
Peter that what he should bind in earth would be bound in heaven and
what he should loose in earth would be loosed in heaven. He was not
talking about a geographical earth or a definite place in the skies
called heaven. He was explaining to Peter the law of mind. The conscious
mind is but the negative pole of a very positive realm of thought. That
positive realm of thought, Jesus called "the kingdom of the heavens." It
is not a place at all but is the free activity of the superconscious
mind of man. Whatever we bind or limit in earth, in the conscious mind,
shall be bound or limited in the ideal or heavenly realm, and whatever
we loose and set free in the conscious mind (earth) shall be loosed and
set free in the ideal, the heavenly. In other words,

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

whatever you affirm or deny in your conscious mind determines the
character of the supermind activities. All power is given unto you both
in heaven and in earth through your thought.

We must carefully choose what thoughts we are going to loose in the mind
and what thoughts we are going to bind, for they will come into
manifestation in our affairs. "As he \[man\] thinketh within himself, so
is he" and "whatsoever a man soweth \[in the mind\], that shall he also
reap \[in the manifestation\]." We must loose all thoughts of lack and
insufficiency in the mind and let them go, just as Jesus commanded be
done with the wrappings that held Lazarus: "Loose him, and let him go."
Loose all thoughts of lack and lay hold of thoughts of plenty. See the
abundance of all good things, prepared for you and for all of us from
the foundation of the world. We live in a very sea of inexhaustible
substance, ready to come into manifestation when molded by our thought.

Some persons are like fish in the sea, saying, "Where is the water?" in
the presence of spiritual abundance they cry, "Where will I get the
money? How will I pay my bills? Will we have food or clothes or the
necessities?" Plenty is here, all around, and when you have opened the
eyes of Spirit in yourself, you will see it and rejoice.

We mold omnipresent substance with our mind and make from it all the
things that our mind conceives. If we conceive lack and poverty we mold
that. If we visualize with a bountiful eye we mold

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

plenty from the ever-present substance. There is perhaps no step in
spiritual unfoldment more important than the one we are taking here. We
must learn to let go, to give up, to make room for the things we have
prayed for and desired. This is called renunciation or elimination,
sacrifice it may even seem to some people. It is simply the giving up
and casting away of old thoughts that have put us where we are, and
putting in their place new ideas that promise to improve our condition.
If the new ideas fail to keep this promise, we cast them away in their
turn for others, confident that we shall eventually find the right ideas
that will bring that which we desire. We always want something better
than we have. It is the urge of progress, of development and growth. As
children outgrow their clothes we outgrow our ideals and ambitions,
broadening our horizon of life as we advance. There must be a constant
elimination of the old to keep pace with this growth. When we cling to
the old ideals we hinder our advance or stop it altogether.

Metaphysicians speak of this eliminative work as denial. Denial usually
comes first. It sweeps out the debris and makes room for the new tenant
that is brought into the mind by the affirmation. It would not be wise
to eliminate the old thoughts unless you knew that there are higher and
better ones to take their place. But we need not fear this, because we
know the divine truth that God is the source of all good and that all
good things can be ours through the love and grace of Jesus Christ.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

None of us has attained that supreme place in consciousness where he
wholly gives up the material man and lives in the Spirit, as Jesus did,
but we have a concept of such a life and His example showing that it can
be attained. We shall attain it when we escape the mortal. This does not
mean that we must die to get free from mortality, for mortality is but a
state of consciousness. We die daily and are reborn by the process of
eliminating the thought that we are material and replacing it with the
truth that we are spiritual. One of the great discoveries of modern
science is that every atom in this so-called material universe has
within it superabundant life elements. God is life and Spirit, and He is
in every atom. We release this spiritual life quality by denying the
crust of materiality that surrounds the cells and affirming that they
are Spirit and life. This is the new birth, which takes place first as a
conception in the mind, followed by an outworking in body and affairs.
We all want better financial conditions. Here is the way to obtain them:
Deny the old thoughts of lack of money and affirm the new thought of
spiritual abundance everywhere manifest.

Every lesson of Scripture illustrates some phase of mental action and
can be applied to each individual life according to the need that is
most pressing at the time of its perception. If you do not look for the
mental lesson when reading Scripture, you get but the mere outer shell
of Truth. If however you have the proper understanding of the characters

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

in the narrative, knowing that they represent ideas in your own mind,
you can follow them in their various movements and find the way to solve
all the problems of your life. This does not mean that a study of the
written Scriptures will itself solve your problems unless you come into
the apprehension of the real Scriptures, the Bible of the ages, the Book
of Life within your own consciousness. But a study of the outer symbols
as given in the written Scriptures can and should lead you into the
understanding of the Truth of Being.

In every person we find the conflicting ideas represented by the
Children of Israel and the Philistines. They are pitted against each
other in a conflict that goes on night and day. We call these warring
thoughts Truth and error. When we are awakened spiritually we stand on
the side of Truth, knowing that Truth thoughts are the chosen of the
Lord, the Children of Israel. But the error thoughts sometimes seem so
real and so formidable that we quake and cringe with fear in their
presence.

We know that Truth will eventually prevail, but we put the victory off
somewhere in the future and say that the error is so large and strong
that we cannot cope with it now--we will wait until we have gathered
more strength. Then we need to stand still and affirm the salvation of
the Lord.

Ideas are not all of the same importance. Some are large and strong;
some are small and weak. There are aggressive, dominating ideas that
parade themselves, and brag about their power, and with

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

threats of disaster keep us frightened into submission to their wicked
reign. These domineering ideas of error have one argument that they
always use to impress us, that of the fear of results if we should dare
to come out and meet them in open opposition. This fear of opposing
ideas, even when we know them to be wrong, seems to be woven into our
very mental fabric. This fear is symbolized by the spear of Goliath
which, as the story relates, "was like a weaver's beam."

What is the most fearful thought in the minds of men today? Is it not
the power of money? Is not mammon the greatest Philistine, the Goliath
in your consciousness? It is the same whether you are siding with the
Philistines and are successful in your finances from a material
viewpoint, or whether you are with the Israelites and tremble in your
poverty. The daily appearance of this giant Goliath, the power of money,
is something greatly feared. Neither the Philistines nor the Israelites
are in possession of the Promised Land, neither side at peace or happy
in any security, so long as this domineering giant parades his strength
and shouts his boasts. This error idea claims he is stronger than the
Lord of Israel. He must be killed before all the other error thoughts
will be driven out of your consciousness and you can come into the
consciousness of plenty, the Promised Land of milk and honey.

The whole world today trembles before this giant error idea, the belief
that money is the ruling power. The nations of the world are under this
dominion

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

because men think that money is power. The rich and the poor alike are
slaves to the idea. Kings and great men of the earth bow and cringe
before the money kings. This is because man has given this power to
money by his erroneous thinking. He has made the golden calf and now he
falls before it in worship. Instead of making it his servant he has
called it master and become its slave. The rule of this mad giant has
been disastrous, and the end of it is rapidly approaching.

The first step in getting your mind free from this giant bugaboo is to
get a clear perception of your right as a child of God. You know that
you should put no other gods or powers before the true God. You know
also that you should not be under the dominion of anything in the
heavens above or the earth beneath, for you have been given dominion
over all. You will never find a better time to come into the realization
of the truth of who and what you are and what your rights are. Never was
a more propitious time to seek a new and better state of consciousness.
If you are in fear of the boasting Philistine giant, as so many around
you are, begin now to seek a way, as did David, to give his "flesh unto
the birds of the heavens." There is a way, a righteous way, that cannot
fail, and it is your duty to find it. Follow each step of the way that
is symbolically and beautifully set forth in the 17th chapter of I
Samuel.

The name David means "the Lord's beloved," and David represents your
righteous perception of your privileges as the child of God. You are not
a

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

slave to anything or to anybody in the universe. The threat of this
Goliath, the power of money, holds no terrors for you in this
consciousness. You have a smooth perception of Truth and you sling it
straight to the center of his carnal thinking, his forehead. The weight
of his shield and his armor does not intimidate you, for you see them
for what they are, empty and meaningless show, vulnerable in many places
to the true ideas with which you are armed.

Even the most ardent defenders of the money power will admit that it is
a tyrant and that they would not have it rule their world if they could
help it. It nearly always destroys its friends in the end. Any man who
becomes a slave to money is eventually crushed by it. On the other side
are whole armies of righteous people, Christians, who like the army of
Israel think that this giant cannot be overcome. They are waiting for
reinforcements, something larger and stronger in a physical way, with
which to overcome this enemy. They forget that "the battle is
Jehovah's."

Do you cringe before this giant when he comes out daily to impress you
with his boastings and threats? It does not have to be so. You need not
continue to fear. There is a little idea in your mind that can slay him.
You perhaps have not considered this little idea of much importance.
Perhaps you have kept it off on a lonely mountainside of your spiritual
consciousness, herding the sheep, which are your innocent thoughts. Now
let this David come forth, this perception of your rightful place in
Divine

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

Mind. Get a clear idea of where you really belong in creation and what
your privileges are. Do you think for a moment that God has so ordained
that men cannot escape from the terrible servitude of hard conditions?
Of course not. That would be injustice, and God is above all just.

It is your privilege to step out at any time and accept the challenge of
this boaster. The Lord has been with you in the slaying of the fear of
sin and sickness (the bear and the lion), and He will still be with you
in slaying the fear of poverty, which Goliath symbolizes. "The battle is
Jehovah's," and He is with us to deliver us "out of the hand of the
Philistines."

The weapons of the Lord's man are not carnal. He does not wage war after
the manner of the world. He does not use armor of steel or brass, the
protection of selfishness and the weapons of oppression. He goes forth
in the simplicity of justice, knowing that his innocence is his defense.
He uses only his shepherd's sling and smooth stones, words of Truth.
This is the will and the words of Truth that it sends forth. They are
disdained by the Philistines and many people laugh at the idea of using
words to overcome conditions. But words do their work, the work whereto
they are sent, and the great mass of materiality goes down before their
sure aim.

We know that money was made for man and not man for money. No man needs
to be a slave to his brother man or cringe before him to obtain money,
which is the servant of all alike. We are not bound

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

to the wheel of work, of ceaseless toil day after day, in order to
appease the god of mammon on his own terms. We are children of the
living God, who as a loving Father is right here in our midst, where we
may claim Him as our support and our resource on such conditions as He
lovingly reveals when we have acknowledged Him and denied mammon. This
day has Jehovah delivered this proud Philistine into our hands, and the
victory is ours. Praise God.

The five smooth stones chosen by David from the brook represent five
irrefutable statements of Truth. These statements sent forth from a mind
confident of itself, its cause, and its spiritual strength will crush
the forehead of Goliath, error's giant. The statements are the
following:

I am the beloved of the Lord. He is with me in all my righteous words,
and they do accomplish that whereto I send them forth.

My cause is just, for it is my divine right to be supplied with all
things whatsoever that the Father has placed at the disposal of His
children.

I dissolve in my own mind and the minds of all others any thought that
my own can be withheld from me. What is mine comes to me by the sure law
of God, and in my clear perception of Truth I welcome it.

I am not fearful of poverty, and I am under obligations to no one. My
opulent Father has poured out to me all resources, and I am a mighty
channel of abundance.

I selfishly own nothing, yet all things in existence

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

are mine to use and in divine wisdom to bestow upon others.

Do not hold yourself in poverty by the fear of lack and by practicing a
pinching economy. If you believe that all that the Father has is yours,
then there is surely no reason for skimping. Nothing will so broaden
your mind and your world as the realization that all is yours. When you
realize the boundlessness of your spiritual inheritance, nothing shall
be lacking in all your world. See with the bountiful eye; for "he that
hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed." This passage states an exact
law, the law of increase.

Religious leaders in the past have spread the belief that it is a
Christian duty to be poor and that poverty is a virtue. This is by no
means the doctrine of Jesus. He accepted the proposition fully, without
reservation or qualification, that God is our resource and that the
Father has provided all things for His children. He is often described
as being poor, without a place to lay His head, yet He had a parental
home at Nazareth and was welcomed gladly into the homes of both the rich
and the poor all over Palestine. He dressed as a rabbi, and His clothing
was so rich and valuable that the Roman soldiers coveted the seamless
robe He wore and cast lots for it. He found abundance in the kingdom of
God where everything needful becomes manifest not through hard labor but
through the realization of Truth.

Jesus seldom had need for money, because He went back of money to the
idea it represents and

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

dealt with money in the idea realm. Our government is back of all our
paper dollars, else they would have no value. God is back of every
material symbol, and it is in God rather than in the symbol that we
should put our faith. He is back of our call for food and raiment and
everything that we could need or desire. Jesus says all we need do is
ask in faith and in His name, believing that we receive, and we shall
have. And we should not hesitate to ask largely, for God can give much
as easily as He can give a little.

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question Helps](prsp15)
