[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](prsp11)  [Next](prsp13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Prosperity*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1936\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  Lesson Ten Right Giving, the Key to Abundant Receiving 

THERE IS a law of giving and receiving and it requires careful study if
we would use it in our prosperity demonstrations. It is a law of mind
action, and it can be learned and applied the same as any other law. The
teaching of Jesus stands out prominently, because it can be practically
applied to the affairs of everyday life. It is not alone a religion in
the sense that word is usually taken but is a rule of thinking, doing,
living, and being. It is not only ethical but practical, and men have
never yet sounded the depths of the simple but all-inclusive words of
Jesus. To some people it is unthinkable to connect the teaching of Jesus
with the countinghouse and the market place, but a deeper insight into
their meaning and purpose, which the Spirit of Truth is now revealing to
the world, shows that these lofty teachings are the most practical rules
for daily living in all departments of life. They are vital to modern
civilization and the very foundation of business stability. The law of
giving and receiving that Jesus taught, "Give, and it shall be given
unto you," is found to be applicable

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

to all our commercial as well as our social relationships.

We have not been more successful in making this doctrine of Jesus a
practical standard for everyday guidance because we have not understood
the law on which it is based. Jesus would not have put forth a doctrine
that was not true and not based on unchanging law, and we can be sure
that this doctrine of giving and receiving is powerful enough to support
all the affairs of civilization. We have not gone deeply enough into the
teaching but have thought we understood it from a mere surface study.
"Ye look at the things that are before your face," says Paul, and Jesus
also warned us to "judge not according to appearance." We should form no
conclusions until we have gone thoroughly into the causes and the
underlying laws. The things we see outwardly are the effects that have
arisen from causes that are invisible to us. There is an inner and an
outer to everything: both the mental and the material conditions pervade
the universe. Man slides at will up and down the whole gamut of cause
and effect. The whole race slides into an effect almost unconsciously
and so identifies the senses with the effect that the causes are lost
sight of for thousands of years.

An awakening comes in time and the cause side of existence is again
brought to the attention of men, as set forth, for example, in the
doctrine of Jesus Christ. But men cannot grasp the great truth in a
moment and cling to what is plainly visible to them, the effect side.
The truth that things have a spiritual

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

as well as a material identity and that the spiritual is the cause side
and of greatest value, is a revelation that may be slow in coming to
most people. In this instance it is the material side that they cling
to, thinking it to be all and refusing to let go. Men have taken the
letter or appearance side of the Jesus Christ doctrine and materialized
it to fit their beliefs and customs. That is the reason why the Christ
message has not purified commerce, society, and government. But it
should be made spiritually operative in those fields. It will easily do
the work desired when its mental side is studied and when it is
understood and applied from the spiritual viewpoint.

There is need for reform in economics more than in any other department
of everyday life. Money has been manipulated by greed until greed itself
is sick and secretly asks for a panacea. But it does not look to the
religion of Jesus Christ for healing. In fact that is the very last
place it would apply for aid, because many of the advocates of the Jesus
Christ doctrine are themselves economic dependents and have no solution
for the economic problem--not understanding the power of their own
religion. Yet no permanent remedy will ever be found for the economic
ills of the world outside a practical application of the laws on which
the doctrine of Jesus Christ is based.

The correctness of the solution of any problem is assured by the right
relation of its elements. All true reform begins with the individual.
Jesus began there. He did not clamor for legislation to control men or

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

their actions. He called His twelve apostles and through them
individually instituted that reform which has as its basis an appeal to
the innate intelligence, honesty, and goodness in every man. He told
them, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to the whole
creation."

As people learn more definitely about the dynamic effect of thought and
how ideas pass from mind to mind, they see more and more the wisdom of
the Christ teaching. They are beginning to understand that there is one
undeviating law of mind action and that all thinking and all speaking is
amenable to it. Thus when Jesus said, "By thy words thou shalt be
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned," He taught the
power of thoughts and words to bring results in accordance with the
ideas back of them.

Following the metaphysical side of the teaching of Jesus, we have found
that certain thoughts held in the minds of the people are causing
widespread misery, disease, and death. We have also found that these
thoughts can be dissolved or transformed and the whole man made over
through his conscious volition. Paul well understood this process. He
said, "Be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind."

Among the destructive thoughts that men indulge in and exercise are
those forms of selfishness which we know as avarice, covetousness, money
getting, the desire for financial gain and for possessing the things of
the world. These thoughts threaten seriously to

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

disturb the civilization of the world and the stability of the whole
race. The sole thought of money getting is being allowed by men and
women to generate its cold vapor in their souls until it shuts out all
the sunlight of love and even of life. The remedy for the misery caused
by destructive thoughts is not far to seek. It lies in constructive
thinking along the lines that Jesus laid down. Indeed the remedy for all
the ills to which flesh is heir lies in conformity to the divine law
that Jesus revealed to His true followers. It is said of these true
followers (Acts 4:32) that they were "of one heart and soul: and not one
of them said that aught of the things which he possessed was his own;
but they had all things common."

Many true Christians have observed this righteous law and sought to
conform to it in community life. Such efforts have not always been
successful, because there was not the necessary recognition of the
mental factor and the discipline of ideas. So long as the idea of
covetousness is lodged in the human mind as its dominant generating
factor, there can be no successful community life. That idea must be
eliminated from the mental plane first; the next step, the outer
practice, will then be safe and successful.

Everywhere true metaphysicians are preparing themselves to be members in
the great colony that Jesus is to set up, by working to eliminate from
their mind all selfish ideas, along with all other discordant vibrations
that produce inharmony among members of the same group. A step in this
direction

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

is the gradual introduction of the "freewill offering" plan to replace
the world's commercial standard of reward for services. We are striving
to educate the people on this question of giving and receiving and to
let their own experience prove to them that there is a divine law of
equilibrium in financial matters that corresponds to the law of balance
and poise that holds the suns and the planets in place. In order to make
a success of this great effort we must have the loving co-operation of
everyone to whom we minister. The law is based on love and justice, and
it equitably and harmoniously adjusts all the affairs of men. It goes
even further, for it restores a harmony and balance in both mind and
body that results in happiness and health as well as prosperity. Love
and justice are mighty powers, and all things must eventually come under
their influence, because even a few men and women of right motive can,
by right thinking and consequent just action, introduce these ideas into
the race consciousness and pave the way for their universal adoption.
The movement has already begun and is rapidly gaining headway. Every
student and reader is asked to give it impetus by resolving to be
unselfish and just without compulsion.

The race consciousness is formed of thought currents and the dominant
beliefs of all the people. A few men and women rise above these currents
of thought and become independent thinkers. The dominating race idea of
money getting as the goal of success is now being replaced by the idea
of usefulness and good works. This idea must be carried

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

out by individuals who have resolved to think and to act in the Jesus
Christ way. To be one of these individuals and to contribute to the
change in the race consciousness, first dedicate yourself in Spirit to
the ministry of Jesus and resolve to carry forward the great work He has
commissioned you to do. This does not mean that you must preach like
Paul or necessarily carry on any extensive work in the outer. In the
silence of your "inner chamber" you can do a mighty work of power by
daily denying the beliefs in avarice and covetousness and affirming the
universal sway of divine love and justice. You can make the idea of
exact equity and justice between man and man the central theme of all
your saying and doing. When you see examples of greed and avarice or
when thoughts of these seek a place in your mind, remember the words of
the Master: "What is that to thee? follow thou me."

Never for a moment allow yourself to entertain any scheme for getting
the better of your fellows in any trade or bargain. Hold steadily to the
law of equity and justice that is working in and through you, knowing
for a certainty that you are supplied with everything necessary to
fulfill all your requirements. Give full value for everything you get.
Demand the same for everything you give, but do not try to enforce that
demand by human methods. There is a better way: think of yourself as
Spirit working with powerful spiritual forces, and know that the demands
of Spirit must and will be met.

Do not plan to lay up for the future; let the future

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

take care of itself. To entertain any fears or doubts on that point saps
your strength and depletes your spiritual power. Hold steadily to the
thought of the omnipresence of universal supply, its perfect equilibrium
and its swift action in filling every apparent vacuum or place of lack.
If you have been in the habit of hoarding or of practicing stringent
economy, change your thought currents to generosity. Practice giving,
even though it may be in a small way. Give in a spirit of love and give
when you cannot see any possibility of return. Put real substance into
your gift by giving the substance of the heart with the token of money
or whatever it is. Through the power of your word you can bless and
spiritually multiply everything that you give. See yourself as the
steward of God handing out His inexhaustible supplies. In this manner
you are setting into action mental and spiritual forces that eventually
bring large results into visibility. Be happy in your giving. God loves
a cheerful giver because his mind and heart are open to the flow of the
pure substance of Being that balances all things.

Do not give with any idea that you are bestowing charity. The idea of
charity has infested the race consciousness for thousands of years and
is responsible for the great army of human dependents. Do all you can to
annul this mental error. There is no such thing as charity as popularly
understood. Everything belongs to God and all His children are equally
entitled to it. The fact that one has a surplus and gives some of it to
another does not make the one

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

a benefactor and the other a dependent. The one with the surplus is
simply a steward of God and is merely discharging the work of his
stewardship. When one asks for divine wisdom and understanding about
giving it becomes a joy both to the giver and the recipient.

Followers of Jesus who are doing His work of teaching and healing
should, like Him, receive free-will offerings for their ministry to the
people. The majority of those who apply to teachers and healers
recognize this law of giving and receiving, but there are quite a number
who do not understand it. First there are those who are in bondage to
the idea of avarice, and secondly, there are those who still are in
bondage to the idea of charity. Both these classes need education and
treatment to release them from mental limitation and mental disease. The
avaricious suffer most in body and are the most difficult to heal,
because of the mental bias that prompts them to get everything as
cheaply as possible, including the kingdom of heaven. They must be
patiently educated to be just because it is right, and to learn to "let
go" of the acquisitive spirit and replace it with the spirit of
generosity. They will do this readily enough as a mental drill but are
not so willing to let go of the money symbol. However, continued
treatments in the silence, supplemented with oral and written
instruction, will eventually prevail and heal them.

There are many examples that could be given to prove the outworking of
the law. The covetous idea

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

has a great power over the body. It would avail little to treat the
outer manifestation before first removing the inner cause from the mind.
The salvation of such people is to learn to give generously and freely,
not from compulsion or for the sake of reward but from a love of the
giving. Some metaphysicians think to cure their patients of the hold of
avaricious thoughts by charging them a good round price for their
treatments. By the same token the medical doctor who charges the most is
surest to heal his patients, and any service for which an exhorbitant
price is charged is the best! Surely this would be a foolish idea.
Metaphysical healing has become so popular that hundreds have gone into
it as a business and are making of it an industry founded on the old
commercial idea, just as cold and calculating, as hard and unyielding as
the idea is in the ranks of the money-changers of mammon.

Surely there is a "more excellent way," one more in harmony with divine
law, a way that permits the heart as well as the head and hand to be
used in the grace of giving and receiving. Those who are using the
freewill offering method meet with some criticism and opposition from
those who hold to the commercial method and say that charging a definite
sum is the legitimate way. They accuse Unity of fostering charity and
poverty and keeping alive the spirit of getting something for nothing
that is manifested by so many people. Our reply is that we are pursuing
the only course that could ever effectually eradicate these erroneous
states of consciousness and bring

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

people into an understanding of the spiritual law of prosperity through
giving in love.

Everyone should give as he receives; in fact, it is only through giving
that he can receive. Until the heart is quickened at the center and the
mind is opened up to Truth there is no permanent healing. Everyone can
make a fair return for everything he gets. We aim to show moneyless
paupers that they can give something in return for the good that has
been done them. It may be to pass the true word to some other needy one,
or merely to lift up their voice in thanksgiving and praise where before
they were dumb. We recognize the necessity of some action of the
mammon-bound mind. It must be made to let go somewhere before it can
receive the light and the power of Spirit.

Our work is to bring men and women to the place of true and lasting
dominion where they are superior to both riches and poverty. We can do
this by showing them that they are spiritual beings, that they live in a
spiritual world here and now, and that through the apprehension of the
Truth of their being and their relation to God this dominion is to be
realized.

The central and most vital fact that they must come to realize is that
an idea has the power of building thought structures, which in turn
materialize in the outer environment and affairs and determine every
detail of their existence. Every man is a king ruling his own subjects.
These subjects are the ideas existing in his mind, the "subjects" of his
thought. Each man's ideas are as varied and show

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

as many traits of character as the inhabitants of any empire. But they
can all be brought into subjection and made to obey through the I AM
power that is the ruler of the kingdom. In your domain of mind there may
be colonies of alien ideas--the Philistines, Canaanites, and other
foreign tribes, that the Children of Israel found in their Promised Land
when they attempted to take possession of it. The story of the Children
of Israel and how they gained the possession of that land is a
symbolical representation of the experience of everyone who seeks to
reclaim his own consciousness in the name of the Lord. The meaning in
Hebrew of the name Canaanite is "merchant" or "trader"; in other words,
a set of ideas that has to do with the commercial phase of life. Study
the Children of Israel (spiritual ideas) in their experiences with these
Canaanites and you will get many valuable hints on subduing and handling
your own money-getting ideas.

You may allow avariciousness and stinginess to develop in your mind
domain until the very blood in your body starts to dry up and your
nerves are shaken and palsied with the fear of future poverty. If so, it
is time these ideas were driven out and a new set of ideas settled in
your domain to become active in building up a new state of consciousness
(nation). Begin at once to let go of your all-consuming thoughts of
gain. Think about generosity and begin to be generous for your own sake.
"It is more blessed to give than to receive" will prove itself to you as
the law, for you will be blessed by a new influx of ideas

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

of life, health, and prosperity when you start giving.

Instead of being grasping and avaricious, perhaps you have gone to the
other extreme and have cultivated ideas of small things financially. You
may have been fostering poverty by holding ideas of pennies instead of
dollars or of hundreds instead of thousands. You may be thinking that
you cannot give because your income is small or your supply is limited.
Your remedy is to cultivate ideas of abundance. Claim God as your
inexhaustible resource; that all things are yours. But in order to set
in motion the accumulated energy of your thought you must also begin to
give. You may be able to give only pennies at first, but give them in
the name and the spirit of your opulent God. Send them forth with all
the love of your heart and say to them as they go, "Divine love through
me blesses and multiplies you."

Your consciousness is like a stream of water. If the stream is in any
way dammed up, the water settles in all the low places and becomes
stagnant. The quickest way to purify and reclaim the low, "swampy"
places in your consciousness is to let in the flood from above by
opening the dam. Many people try to demonstrate God as their supply by
repeating affirmations of abundance now present, but fail to deny and
thus to let go of the old condition and old belief in lack by beginning
to give as generously as possible. It is not the amount you give
measured by standards of the world, it is the good will you send forth
with the gift; which can be measured only by spiritual standards.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

"God loveth a cheerful giver." The Greek word here translated cheerful
is hilarion, which means really "hilarious, joyful." The gift may be
measured in dollars and cents but God looks not on such standards, He
looks on and loves the "joyful" giver. We read in Deuteronomy 28:47, 48,
"Because thou servedst not Jehovah thy God with joyfulness, and with
gladness of heart, by reason of the abundance of all things; therefore
shalt thou serve thine enemies ... in hunger, and in thirst, and in
nakedness, and in want of all things." This shows that there is a
definite relation between the cheerfulness or joyfulness of our giving
and our prosperity. Whether we make a large or a small gift, let us make
it with largeness of cheer and joy, even of hilarity, remembering that
God loveth a "hilarious" giver. "Keep therefore the words of this
covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do."

Blessings That May Be Placed On Our Gifts

Divine love, through me, blesses and multiplies this offering.

The Father gives abundantly; I receive thankfully, and give again
generously.

This is the bounty of God, and I send it forth with wisdom and joy.

Divine love bountifully supplies and increases this offering.

I give freely and fearlessly, fulfilling the law of giving and
receiving.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](prsp13)
