[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_320) 
[Next](bh1_322) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:321

*Narrated Aiyub:*

Hafsa said, 'We used to forbid our young women to go out for the two 'Id
prayers. A woman came and stayed at the palace of Bani Khalaf and she
narrated about her sister whose husband took part in twelve holy battles
along with the Prophet and her sister was with her husband in six (out
of these twelve). She (the woman's sister) said, "We used to treat the
wounded, look after the patients and once I asked the Prophet, 'Is there
any harm for any of us to stay at home if she doesn't have a veil?' He
said, 'She should cover herself with the veil of her companion and
should participate in the good deeds and in the religious gathering of
the Muslims.' When Um 'Atiya came I asked her whether she had heard it
from the Prophet. She replied, "Yes. May my father be sacrificed for him
(the Prophet)! (Whenever she mentioned the Prophet she used to say, 'May
my father be sacrificed for him) I have heard the Prophet saying, 'The
unmarried young virgins and the mature girl who stay often screened or
the young unmarried virgins who often stay screened and the menstruating
women should come out and participate in the good deeds as well as the
religious gathering of the faithful believers but the menstruating women
should keep away from the Musalla (praying place).' " Hafsa asked Um
'Atiya surprisingly, "Do you say the menstruating women?" She replied,
"Doesn't a menstruating woman attend 'Arafat (Hajj) and such and such
(other deeds)?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:322: 'Aisha: Fatima bint Abi Hubaish asked the Prophet, I got
persistent bleeding ...](bh1_322)
