[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_682) 
[Next](bh1_684) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:681

*Narrated 'Aisha:*

When Allah's Apostle became seriously ill, Bilal came to him for the
prayer. He said, "Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." I
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Abu Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he
stands in your place, he would not be able to make the people hear him.
Will you order 'Umar (to lead the prayer)?" The Prophet said, "Tell Abu
Bakr to lead the people in the prayer." Then I said to Hafsa, "Tell him,
Abu i Bakr is a soft-hearted man and if he stands in his place, he would
not be able to make the people hear him. Would you order 'Umar to lead
the prayer?' " Hafsa did so. The Prophet said, "Verily you are the
companions of Joseph. Tell Abu Bakr to lead the people in the prayer."
So Abu- Bakr stood for the prayer. In the meantime Allah's Apostle felt
better and came out with the help of two persons and both of his legs
were dragging on the ground till he entered the mosque. When Abu Bakr
heard him coming, he tried to retreat but Allah's Apostle beckoned him
to carry on. The Prophet sat on his left side. Abu Bakr was praying
while standing and Allah's Apostle was leading the prayer while sitting.
Abu Bakr was following the Prophet and the people were following Abu
Bakr (in the prayer).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:682: Abu Huraira: Once Allah's Apostle prayed two Rakat
(instead of four) and finished ...](bh1_684)
