[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_48)  [Next](bh1_50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:50

*Narrated Abu Jamra:*

I used to sit with Ibn 'Abbas and he made me sit on his sitting place.
He requested me to stay with him in order that he might give me a share
from his property. So I stayed with him for two months. Once he told
(me) that when the delegation of the tribe of 'Abdul Qais came to the
Prophet, the Prophet asked them, "Who are the people (i.e. you)? (Or)
who are the delegate?" They replied, "We are from the tribe of Rabi'a."
Then the Prophet said to them, "Welcome! O people (or O delegation of
'Abdul Qais)! Neither will you have disgrace nor will you regret." They
said, "O Allah's Apostle! We cannot come to you except in the sacred
month and there is the infidel tribe of Mudar intervening between you
and us. So please order us to do something good (religious deeds) so
that we may inform our people whom we have left behind (at home), and
that we may enter Paradise (by acting on them)." Then they asked about
drinks (what is legal and what is illegal). The Prophet ordered them to
do four things and forbade them from four things. He ordered them to
believe in Allah Alone and asked them, "Do you know what is meant by
believing in Allah Alone?" They replied, "Allah and His Apostle know
better." Thereupon the Prophet said, "It means:

1\. To testify that none has the right to be worshipped but Allah and
Muhammad is Allah's Apostle.

2\. To offer prayers perfectly

3\. To pay the Zakat (obligatory charity)

4\. To observe fast during the month of Ramadan.

5\. And to pay Al-Khumus (one fifth of the booty to be given in Allah's
Cause).

Then he forbade them four things, namely, Hantam, Dubba,' Naqir Ann
Muzaffat or Muqaiyar; (These were the names of pots in which Alcoholic
drinks were prepared) (The Prophet mentioned the container of wine and
he meant the wine itself). The Prophet further said (to them): "Memorize
them (these instructions) and convey them to the people whom you have
left behind."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:51: 'Umar bin Al-Khattab: Allah's Apostle said, The reward of
deeds depends upon the intention ...](bh1_50)
