[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_656) 
[Next](bh1_658) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:655

*Narrated 'Ubaid-Ullah Ibn 'Abdullah bin 'Utba:*

I went to 'Aisha and asked her to describe to me the illness of Allah's
Apostle. 'Aisha said, "Yes. The Prophet became seriously ill and asked
whether the people had prayed. We replied, 'No. O Allah's Apostle! They
are waiting for you.' He added, 'Put water for me in a trough." 'Aisha
added, "We did so. He took a bath and tried to get up but fainted. When
he recovered, he again asked whether the people had prayed. We said,
'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle,' He again said, 'Put
water in a trough for me.' He sat down and took a bath and tried to get
up but fainted again. Then he recovered and said, 'Have the people
prayed?' We replied, 'No, they are waiting for you. O Allah's Apostle.'
He said, 'Put water for me in the trough.' Then he sat down and washed
himself and tried to get up but he fainted. When he recovered, he asked,
'Have the people prayed?' We said, 'No, they are waiting for you. O
Allah's Apostle! The people were in the mosque waiting for the Prophet
for the 'Isha prayer. The Prophet sent for Abu Bakr to lead the people
in the prayer. The messenger went to Abu Bakr and said, 'Allah's Apostle
orders you to lead the people in the prayer.' Abu Bakr was a
soft-hearted man, so he asked 'Umar to lead the prayer but 'Umar
replied, 'You are more rightful.' So Abu Bakr led the prayer in those
days. When the Prophet felt a bit better, he came out for the Zuhr
prayer with the help of two persons one of whom was Al-'Abbas. while Abu
Bakr was leading the people in the prayer. When Abu Bakr saw him he
wanted to retreat but the Prophet beckoned him not to do so and asked
them to make him sit beside Abu Bakr and they did so. Abu Bakr was
following the Prophet (in the prayer) and the people were following Abu
Bakr. The Prophet (prayed) sitting."

'Ubaid-Ullah added "I went to 'Abdullah bin 'Abbas and asked him, Shall
I tell you what Aisha has told me about the fatal illness of the
Prophet?' Ibn 'Abbas said, 'Go ahead. I told him her narration and he
did not deny anything of it but asked whether 'Aisha told me the name of
the second person (who helped the Prophet ) along with Al-Abbas. I said.
'No.' He said, 'He was 'Ali (Ibn Abi Talib).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:656: Aisha: the mother of the believers: Allah's Apostle during
his illness prayed...](bh1_658)
