[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_240) 
[Next](bh1_242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:241

*Narrated 'Abdullah bin Mas'ud:*

Once the Prophet was offering prayers at the Ka'ba. Abu Jahl was sitting
with some of his companions. One of them said to the others, "Who
amongst you will bring the abdominal contents (intestines, etc.) of a
camel of Bani so and so and put it on the back of Muhammad, when he
prostrates?" The most unfortunate of them got up and brought it. He
waited till the Prophet prostrated and then placed it on his back
between his shoulders. I was watching but could not do any thing. I wish
I had some people with me to hold out against them. They started
laughing and falling on one another. Allah's Apostle was in prostration
and he did not lift his head up till Fatima (Prophet's daughter) came
and threw that (camel's abdominal contents) away from his back. He
raised his head and said thrice, "O Allah! Punish Quraish." So it was
hard for Abu Jahl and his companions when the Prophet invoked Allah
against them as they had a conviction that the prayers and invocations
were accepted in this city (Mecca). The Prophet said, "O Allah! Punish
Abu Jahl, 'Utba bin Rabi'a, Shaiba bin Rabi'a, Al-Walid bin 'Utba,
Umaiya bin Khalaf, and 'Uqba bin Al Mu'it (and he mentioned the seventh
whose name I cannot recall). By Allah in Whose Hands my life is, I saw
the dead bodies of those persons who were counted by Allah's Apostle in
the Qalib (one of the wells) of Badr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:242: Anas: The Prophet once spat in his clothes....](bh1_242)
