[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_413) 
[Next](bh1_415) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:413

*Narrated Anas:*

Some goods came to Allah's Apostle from Bahrain. The Prophet ordered the
people to spread them in the mosque --it was the biggest amount of goods
Allah's Apostle had ever received. He left for prayer and did not even
look at it. After finishing the prayer, he sat by those goods and gave
from those to everybody he saw. Al-'Abbas came to him and said, "O
Allah's Apostle! give me (something) too, because I gave ransom for
myself and 'Aqil" Allah's Apostle told him to take. So he stuffed his
garment with it and tried to carry it away but he failed to do so. He
said, "O Allah's Apostle! Order someone to help me in lifting it." The
Prophet refused. He then said to the Prophet: Will you please help me to
lift it?" Allah's Apostle refused. Then Al-'Abbas threw some of it and
tried to lift it (but failed). He again said, "O Allah's Apostle Order
someone to help me to lift it." He refused. Al-'Abbas then said to the
Prophet: "Will you please help me to lift it?" He again refused. Then
Al-'Abbas threw some of it, and lifted it on his shoulders and went
away. Allah's Apostle kept on watching him till he disappeared from his
sight and was astonished at his greediness. Allah's Apostle did not get
up till the last coin was distributed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:414: Anas: I found the Prophet in the mosque along with some
people. He said to ...](bh1_415)
