[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_723) 
[Next](bh1_725) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:722

*Narrated Jabir bin Samura:*

The People of Kufa complained against Sa'd to 'Umar and the latter
dismissed him and appointed 'Ammar as their chief . They lodged many
complaints against Sa'd and even they alleged that he did not pray
properly. 'Umar sent for him and said, "O Aba Ishaq! These people claim
that you do not pray properly." Abu Ishaq said, "By Allah, I used to
pray with them a prayer similar to that of Allah's Apostle and I never
reduced anything of it. I used to prolong the first two Rakat of 'Isha
prayer and shorten the last two Rakat." 'Umar said, "O Aba Ishaq, this
was what I thought about you." And then he sent one or more persons with
him to Kufa so as to ask the people about him. So they went there and
did not leave any mosque without asking about him. All the people
praised him till they came to the mosque of the tribe of Bani 'Abs; one
of the men called Usama bin Qatada with a surname of Aba Sa'da stood up
and said, "As you have put us under an oath; I am bound to tell you that
Sa'd never went himself with the army and never distributed (the war
booty) equally and never did justice in legal verdicts." (On hearing it)
Sa'd said, "I pray to Allah for three things: O Allah! If this slave of
yours is a liar and got up for showing off, give him a long life,
increase his poverty and put him to trials." (And so it happened). Later
on when that person was asked how he was, he used to reply that he was
an old man in trial as the result of Sa'd's curse. 'Abdul Malik, the sub
narrator, said that he had seen him afterwards and his eyebrows were
over-hanging his eyes owing to old age and he used to tease and assault
the small girls in the way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:723: 'Ubada bin As-Samit: Allah's Apostle said, Whoever does
not recite Al-Fatiha in his ...](bh1_725)
