[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_342) 
[Next](bh1_344) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:343

*Narrated Al-A'mash:*

Shaqiq said, "While I was sitting with 'Abdullah and Abu Musa
Al-Ash-'ari, the latter asked the former, 'If a person becomes Junub and
does not find water for one month, can he perform Tayammum and offer his
prayer?' (He applied in the negative). Abu Musa said, 'What do you say
about this verse from Surat "Al-Ma'ida": When you do not find water then
perform Tayammum with clean earth? 'Abdullah replied, 'If we allowed it
then they would probably perform Tayammum with clean earth even if water
were available but cold.' I said to Shaqiq, 'You then disliked to
perform Tayammum because of this?' Shaqiq said,'Yes.' (Shaqiq added),
"Abu Musa said, 'Haven't you heard the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar? He
said: I was sent out by Allah's Apostle for some job and I became Junub
and could not find water so I rolled myself over the dust (clean earth)
like an animal does, and when I told the Prophet of that he said, 'Like
this would have been sufficient.' The Prophet (saying so) lightly
stroked the earth with his hand once and blew it off, then passed his
(left) hand over the back of his right hand or his (right) hand over the
back of his left hand and then passed them over his face.' So 'Abdullah
said to Abu- Musa, 'Don't you know that 'Umar was not satisfied with
'Ammar's statement?' "

said to the former, "Haven't you heard the statement of 'Ammar to 'Umar?
He said, "Allah's Apostle sent you and me out and I became Junub and
rolled myself in the dust (clean earth) (for Tayammum). When we came to
Allah's Apostle I told him about it and he said, 'This would have been
sufficient,' passing his hands over his face and the backs of his hands
once only.' "

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:344: 'Imran bin Husain Al-Khuza'i: Allah's Apostle saw a person
sitting aloof and not praying with the ...](bh1_344)
