[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh1_61)  [Next](bh1_63) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 1:63

*Narrated Anas bin Malik:*

While we were sitting with the Prophet in the mosque, a man came riding
on a camel. He made his camel kneel down in the mosque, tied its foreleg
and then said: "Who amongst you is Muhammad?" At that time the Prophet
was sitting amongst us (his companions) leaning on his arm. We replied,
"This white man reclining on his arm." The an then addressed him, "O Son
of 'Abdul Muttalib."

The Prophet said, "I am here to answer your questions." The man said to
the Prophet, "I want to ask you something and will be hard in
questioning. So do not get angry." The Prophet said, "Ask whatever you
want." The man said, "I ask you by your Lord, and the Lord of those who
were before you, has Allah sent you as an Apostle to all the mankind?"
The Prophet replied, "By Allah, yes." The man further said, "I ask you
by Allah. Has Allah ordered you to offer five prayers in a day and night
(24 hours).? He replied, "By Allah, Yes." The man further said, "I ask
you by Allah! Has Allah ordered you to observe fasts during this month
of the year (i.e. Ramadan)?" He replied, "By Allah, Yes." The man
further said, "I ask you by Allah. Has Allah ordered you to take Zakat
(obligatory charity) from our rich people and distribute it amongst our
poor people?" The Prophet replied, "By Allah, yes." Thereupon that man
said, "I have believed in all that with which you have been sent, and I
have been sent by my people as a messenger, and I am Dimam bin Tha'laba
from the brothers of Bani Sa'd bin Bakr."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1:64: 'Abdullah bin Abbas: Once Allah's Apostle gave a letter to
a person and ordered him to go ...](bh1_63)
