[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mgr01)  [Next](mgr03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00085N62Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Myths of Greece and Rome*, by Jane Harrison, \[1928\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# MYTHS OF

# GREECE AND ROME

### INTRODUCTORY

THE study of Greek mythology has long been subject to two serious
disabilities. First, until about the turn of the present century, Greek
mythology was always studied through a Roman or Alexandrine medium.
Until quite recently it was usual to call Greek gods by their Latin
names: Zeus was Jove, Hera was Juno, Poseidon Neptune. We will not spend
time in slaying dead lions: the practice is now at an end. Jupiter, we
now know, though akin to, is not the same as Zeus: Minerva is no wise
Athena. But a more dangerous because subtler error remains. We have
dropped the Latin names, but we are still inclined to invest Greek gods
with Latin or Alexandrine natures, and to make of them toy-gods of a
late, artificial, and highly decorative literature. The Greek god of
love we no longer call Cupid, but we have not wholly rid our minds of
the fat, mischievous urchin, with his bow and arrows--a conception that
would have much astonished the primitive worshippers of the love-god in
his own city of Thespiæ, where the most ancient image of Eros was an
"unwrought stone."

The second disability is that until quite lately the study of Greek
mythology has always been regarded as strictly subordinate to the study
of Greek literature. Some knowledge of mythology has always been found

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

necessary to the intelligent reading of Greek authors-- poets,
dramatists, even philosophers. The scholar, even after the most vigorous
application of grammatical rules, was still occasionally driven to "look
up his mythological allusions." Hence we had, not histories of
mythology, not inquiries into how mythology came to be, but dictionaries
of mythology for reference. In a word, mythology was regarded not as a
subject in itself worthy of study, not as part of the history of the
human mind, but as *ancillary*, as the handmaid of literature. Nothing
so effectually starves a subject as to make it occupy this "ancillary"
position. To read a paragraph of Lemprière is to wonder how a subject
apparently so imbecile could still keep its hold on the human mind.

From these two disabilities the study of mythology has slowly, but only
very slowly, been released by the influence of modern scientific method.
The study of religion as a whole is a modern growth. So long as
religions were divided into one true and the rest false, progress was
naturally impossible. The slow pressure of science introduced first the
historical, then the comparative method. The facts of ancient and savage
religions being once collected and laid side by side, it became
immediately evident that there were resemblances as well as differences,
and some sort of classification became possible. With the historical
impulse came the desire to see if in religion also there existed a law
of development, and if the facts of religion succeeded each other in any
ascertainable order.

From this intrusion of the comparative and historical methods, two
religions long held themselves aloof: Christianity, as too sacred;
classical religion, as forming part of an exclusive stronghold, which
was supposed to stand in some strange antagonism to science. Greek and
Latin religions, as different, perhaps, as any two religions could be,
declared themselves one. Dying of this

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

unnatural partnership, and of their self-imposed isolation, they at last
consented to join hands with the rest of humanity and come to life
again. Greek religion is now studied as a whole, not merely as
mythology; as part of the spiritual history of the human race, not as
the means of interpreting a particular literature; as contrasted, not as
identical with the religion of the Romans.

The study of Greek religion owes much not only to reform in method, but
to a very large recent accession of material, material which has again
and again acted as a corrective to mistaken views, and as a means of
modifying mistaken emphasis. To take a single example: the discovery and
study of Greek vase-paintings alone has forced us to see the Greek gods
not as the Romans and Alexandrines, but as the early Greeks saw them. We
realize, for example, that Dionysus is not only the beautiful young
wine-god, but also an ancient tree-god, worshipped as a great post; that
the Sirens were not to the Greeks lovely, baleful mermaidens, but
strange bird-demons with women's heads. Moreover, excavation, that used
to concern itself with works of art only, now seeks for and preserves
every scrap of monumental evidence, however humble. This has focussed
our attention upon ritual. We discover and study not only the Hermes of
Praxiteles, but masses of terra-cottas and bronzes, shewing the local
type under which the god or goddess was worshipped; we read inscriptions
relating to local rites disregarded by Homer and the tragedians.

Specially important in their influence on the study of Greek religion
have been excavations on *prehistoric* sites. The poems of Homer were,
as will presently be seen, the great medium through which the popular
religion of Greece was fixed. Excavations, begun by Dr. Schliemann on
the site of Troy and culminating now in the excavations of Sir Arthur
Evans at Cnossus, have taught us much as to the religion of that great
civilization

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

which preceded Homer. Homer, therefore, is no longer the starting-point
in the history of Greek religion.

 

Before we proceed to examine Greek mythology, it is essential that we
should be quite clear on two points: (1) What exactly we mean by
mythology; (2) what is the relation of mythology to religion?

Religion, everywhere and always, is compounded of two factors; of
ritual--that is, what a man does; of mythology, what a man thinks and
imagines. These two elements are both informed and vitalized by a third,
by what a man feels, desires, wishes. To quote Professor Leuba, the unit
of conscious life is neither thought nor will nor action in separation,
but "all three in movement towards an action." Now, religion is only one
particular form of conscious life, and, again to quote Professor Leuba,
"conscious life is always orientated towards something to be secured or
avoided immediately or ultimately." The religious impulse is directed to
one end and one only, to the conversation and promotion of life.

While a man is doing a religious act, performing some ritual, he is also
necessarily busy thinking, imagining; some *imago*, however vague, of
whatever he is doing or feeling rises up in his mind. Why and how? Here
we must turn for help to psychology.

Man is, it would seem, the only animal who is the maker of clear images;
it is his human prerogative. In most animals, which act from what we
call instinct, action follows immediately and, as it were, mechanically
on conception, follows with an almost chemical certainty and swiftness.
But in the human animal, because of the greater complication of the
nervous system, perception is not transformed instantly into action;
there is an interval, longer or shorter, for choice. It is in this
interval that our *ideas*, our images arise. We do

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

not instantly get what we want, so we figure to ourselves our need, and
out of these images so created, which are, as it were, the empty shadows
of desire, our whole mental life is built up. If reaction were
instantaneous, we should have no image, no representation, practically
no mental life. Religion might have had ritual, but it would have been
barren of mythology.

All men, in virtue of their humanity, are image-makers, but in some the
image is clear and vivid, in others dull, lifeless, wavering. The Greeks
were the supreme *ikonists*, the greatest image-makers the world has
ever seen, and, therefore, their mythology lives on to-day. The genius
of Rome was not for *ikonism;* their mythology, save when they borrow
from the Greeks, is negligible. They worshipped not gods, not *dei*, but
powers, *numina*. These *numina* were only dim images of activities;
they never attained to personality, they had no attributes, no life
histories; in a word, no mythology.

We must always remember that mythology, the making of images, is only
one and, perhaps, not the greatest factor in religion. Because the
Romans were not *ikonists*, it does not follow that they were a people
less religious than the Greeks. The contrary is probably true. A vague
something is more awe-inspiring than a known someone. So Lucan felt in
writing of the imageless worship of the Gauls:

       "Not to have known  
The gods they fear, adds terror."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gods of Homer's Olympus](mgr03.md)
