[Intangible Textual
Heritage](../../index) [Journals](../index) [Ismâ’ili
materials](../../isl/isma/index)  
[Previous](isma1-3) [Next](isma2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## {Untitled Ismâ’ili document}

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

### II.

   In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Praise be to
God, who confirms every thing by his unity; to the glory of whose
reverence every thing bows; who embraces by science the thing in every
thing;<span id="page_299_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_299_note_dagger)
who is, and before whom was not anything; and who created out of nothing
things created; and the glory of whose dominion nothing resembles, so
that not any thing is too much for him if he wills it; and who is the
cause of every thing; and who dipenses with every thing, and whom
nothing dispenses with; whom all things need, and from whom and with
whom are all things; from whom every thing emanates, and who emanates
not from any thing; and who is not the general of any thing special, and
who comes not under anything; and by reason of whom nothing subsists,
and to the detriment of whom nothing changes; and to the degree of whose
essence there is no reaching for any perception, or any conjecture; who
is the Hidden of the hidden, and the Mystery of mystery; from whose
unity emanated a sole Amr. And to it was given for a covering the <span
id="page_300">p. 300</span> *Kâf* and the *Nûn*,<span
id="page_300_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_300_note_*) comprehending that
which was, and that which is, and that which is to be. So then, that is
his Word, and his effusion, and his out-pouring, and his science, and
the cause of that which is produced by him, and his perfection, and the
medium of his producing, and the means of his creating, and the
manifester of his declaring,<span
id="page_300_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_300_note_dagger) and the
exhibiter of his superior power, and a hiyûly<span
id="page_300_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_300_note_ddagger) to his
command, and a form to his volition, like as the Irâdeh is a hiyûly to
his Amr, and a form to his Meshiyeh;<span
id="page_300_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_300_note_sect) and as will is a
hiyûly to volition, and a form to the intellect.

   And so emanates from his sole Amr the first producer, the Sâbiḳ,<span
id="page_300_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_300_note_dvert) the most perfect
receiver, the simple substance, the apprehender, the comprehender, the
suited to the appropriation of perfection, the creator by no
reinforcement,<span
id="page_300_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_300_note_para) and the
correspondent of the Eternal One, and the Noble Root, the Primitive
Light, and the Universal Intelligence, the improver of things existing,
the shedder forth of things created, the producer of things produced,
the preceder of things made, the divine in essence, the conjoined with
felicities, the abiding, the constant, the medium between the Creator
and his reinforcement pertaining to things caused, the made one with the
Word, the sharer in the divine majesty, the prior by essence and rank,
the exempt from finiteness and defect, the place of the act of creation,
and the seat of the act of production, the shedder forth upon the
Tâly<span id="page_300_fr_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_300_note_**) as to
that which it receives of the out-pouring of the Highest, the lofty, the
form of forms, the originator of creatures, the governor of ranks, the
performer of wonders, and the manifester of extraordinaries, the
complete as to excellencies, the finisher of the first <span
id="page_301">p. 301</span> five,<span
id="page_301_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_301_note_*) the uniter of things
allied, the separater of things which differ. So then, it is the first
of substances, and the second of manifesters, the necessary by its
Cause, the competent by its divinity, the living, the emulous in
science, the potent, the ruler, the prohibiter, the commander, the
shedder forth, the receiver, the made, the maker, the perfected, the
perfecter, the lover, the beloved for its essence, the exerciser of
justice, the joyous with its delights, the qualified with the most
perfect of attributes, the designated by the most excellent of epithets,
which is set forth in the attributes and the names,<span
id="page_301_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_301_note_dagger) and which is
named Fate. So then, it is the fortune of fortunes, and the pen of that
which is written, and the hiyûly of every hiyûly, and the place of
science, and the supreme and primitive nature, which receives effusion
from its Cause, and is let out, and so becomes the shedder forth of the
lights of his Word, and takes its stand with his taking his stand, and
abides with his abiding, by virtue of a continual effusion of
reinforcements,<span
id="page_301_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_301_note_ddagger) from
eternity to eternity, endless, without measure, and incomputable. And
its receiving that which is not an end<span
id="page_301_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_301_note_sect) postulates that it
is a receiver in order to spreading, in order that the acted upon may be
converted into an actor, and that the Intelligence, and that which is
objective to the Intelligence, may become an intelligent being, and that
the height of its potency may be manifested, and the light of its
wisdom.

   And so emanates, in accordance with its volition, in order to the
continuance of the perfection of its felicity, through the fairness of
its forming, an active substance, congruous with its substance, which is
named the Universal Soul, and the Veritable Spirit, which is raised up
by it as a receiver of its effusion and its impresses, improving by the
succession of its benefits and its lights, prepared for the reception of
impress, naked of forms. So then, it is the <span id="page_302">p.
302</span> verity of verities, and the quintessence of things recondite,
which is designated as the Tâly to that Sâbiḳ, the essence of which is a
tablet for the inscribing of the letters of the pen of the Intelligence,
a root to that which is beside it of branches, and a branch to that
root, a place of beginning to the lettings out of things, and a cause of
the measurements of things which have parts, and a medium between the
first and the last, and the inward and the outward, the place of coming
out of that which is potential to the open field of actuality, the
sojourning-place of lights, the excellencies of science and
justice,<span id="page_302_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_302_note_*) a power
able to manifest sciences in that which is caused, a receiver of the
impress of its Cause, an actor, making its impresses upon that which is
caused, pervading through all existence, reinforcing, by effusion and
aiding, the rest of the Enclosures,<span
id="page_302_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_302_note_dagger) which
manifests things subtile, and forms things gross, and disperses through
the world its forces, and manifests its ideas in every genus and species
and person.

   And so emanates therefrom the Primitive Hiyûly, the receiver,
essentially, of the forms of things created, upon which the Soul pours
out that which it receives of the impress of its Cause, and through the
medium of which it perpetuates the perfection of its excellence, and
which, by the force of receptivity, and the perfection of preparation
for forms, it causes to become the distant three.<span
id="page_302_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_302_note_ddagger) For,
pervading nature and coursing forms are manifested in things whole and
things of parts, and things high and things low; and the Hiyûly thereby
becomes an absolute body, and the force of the soul is attached to it
with attachment, and so are parted off from it the higher envelopes, and
made out of it the lower bodies; while attractive, propensive force
manifests motion of volition.<span
id="page_302_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_302_note_sect)

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

   And so the Circumambient is fashioned in the most excellent of
fashions, and ordered in the most perfect of states. So then, it is the
cause of sensible motions, and the manifester of the forces of the Soul,
and the reconditeness of the idea of the Holy One, the limiter of
regions, the uniter of things simple and things composite, a cause of
place, an actualizer of time, which is enthroned in the evenness of the
Merciful, and the place of the loftiness of the envelopes, the basis of
the regulator of the day, the compriser of every cause and every
effect.<span id="page_303_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_303_note_*)

   Afterwards, is let out the Stellar Sphere,<span
id="page_303_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_303_note_dagger) with the fixed
stars, the seat of power, which compasses the earth and the heavens,
which is the standing-place of forms, and the lunar mansions, and the
zodiacal signs, which is denominated the heaven of the degrees of the
zodiacal signs, the actualizer of the great periods, the mover of that
which is beside it of envelopes.

   Afterwards, rises to view the Elevated Palace, the capacious
structure, the vestibule, the hall of Keiwân, who is the superior over
beings, the master of abstinence and chieftainship, the educator of
people of thought and ingenuity, <span id="page_304">p. 304</span> the
presider over cultivated spots and sown fields, the sheikh of the
overflowing, and the lords of groups of houses, the letter out of ages
by his rotation, the master of handicrafts, the black as to his colors.

   Afterwards, the Second Palace, the solid as to foundations, of which
the defenses hide Birjîs, who is the manifest by science and research,
the aider of the masters of the luminous and the enlightening, namely
the Lights, the shedder forth, whose beauty gives light, the powerful in
the house of the King of the invisible realm of heaven, the ordainer of
kings and rulers, the manifester of nights and days, the cause of
articles<span id="page_304_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_304_note_*) by his
movements, and the regulator of fundamentals by his reposings, who puts
in motion the great enlightener, the most potent master of revolution.

   Afterwards, the Fifth Palace, the palanquin of the fair Nâhaid, and
the sitting-place of the bright Zaharah, who is the star of the people
of gaiety and ordered song with music, the sweetheart of the sparkling
orbs, the adorner of women and girls, the belle of the celestial
spheres, the tempter of the king who presides over love and mirthfuness,
as for accidents; and as for colors, the white.

   Afterwards, the Sixth Palace, the shop of the devices of ’Uṭârid, who
is involved in every thing emanating, and every thing coming into
existence, the sage, the geometrician, and the sanctified ascetic, the
master of paintings and writings, who takes care of the niceties of the
arts, the compiler of diwâns, the educator of artificer and artizans,
the mingled, the colored, the refined, the varied.

   Afterwards, the Seventh Palace, the hippodrome of Jaulân, who is the
second enlightener, the hastener in journeyings, without delay, the
master of the fashionings of light, the star of the camel-train and
couriers, the colorer of things, who has command of striping and
reddening, who makes months and years to be, the agent of properties and
powers, the befriender as to supplies, the clother, who takes in hand
the concerns of common men.

   And after the seven homogeneous palaces,<span
id="page_304_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_304_note_dagger) come other
seven heterogeneous, which are the four Corner-stones, and their
intermediates, the circumscribing three.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

   The first, then, of the Corner-stones is the Globe of Ether, which is
the heaven of the shooting stars, and the station of the possessors of
tails and flowing manes, the highest of the elements, and the agent of
heats in substances.

   Next, the second, is the Globe of Air, with clouds and rains, the
place of convolution for the convolution of vapor, the agent of
thunder-clouds, and thunder-bolts, and mists, <span id="page_306">p.
306</span> and distant thunderings, the uniter of colds in freezing
cold, and the life of every thing animate which possesses form.

   And the third is the Globe of Water, the giver of moisture to things,
the image of science, the all-embracing, by means of which every thing
living is constituted, the manifest by the ocean, the filled with
substance, the pourer, the profuse.

   The fourth is the Globe of gross Earth, the centre of every subtile
circumambient,<span id="page_306_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_306_note_*) the
guardian of dryness in composites, the binder of separating parts.

   The first two are light, and the last two, heavy; and as for each two
of them, an intermediate determines them, that they may not exceed their
bounds.

   And after the fathers and the mothers have moved with the three
motions, and natural properties incline towards being awakened, and the
three generators appear, and the males are filled with the females, the
first of things generated is Minerals, which are compounded of the
Corner-stones, of which the lowest is sand, and the highest, small
pearls; and as for the second, it is Plants, of which the lowest is the
*kushût*,<span id="page_306_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_306_note_dagger)
and the highest, the tall palm; and the third is Animals, of which the
lowest is the intestinal worm, and the highest, man.

   So then, these are conjoined substances, and a material not
dissevered,<span
id="page_306_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_306_note_ddagger) spreading
itself from the apogee of the Holy One to the perigee of genus, coursing
through the worlds, appearing in things which rise to view, and hiding
itself in things obscured. In twenty-eight places of manifestation is
the Perfect in number, which are three groups of seven,<span
id="page_306_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_306_note_sect) successive as to
effusion, and the reinforcements <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> in
which the light of the Divine Word spreads itself of which the form is
perfectness, and the ideas are consummate.<span
id="page_307_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_307_note_*) And so it appears, in
every place of manifesttion, in the most elevated of Impersonations; and
them it causes to acknowledge the way of return and deliverance, and
instructs in the ideas of mystery and witness,<span
id="page_307_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_307_note_dagger) and commands
to obey and worship, and forbids to pass limits. Blessed, then, be that
which separates and unites, and which is conversant with that which is
made! And let gratitude be to our friends, and praise to our superiors,
for the bestowal of acquirements of knowledge, and gifts of thing
subtile, and the knowledge of quality, and that which is qualified, and
the qualifier. And in him who knows, who is assured, there is that which
apprehends every idea.

   These things, O my seignors and my brethren, are the verity of my
knowledge, and the philosophy of my essence and my quality,<span
id="page_307_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_307_note_ddagger) and my
circuit of my Ka’beh, and my stopping on my ’Arafeh,<span
id="page_307_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_307_note_sect) and the hidden
sense of my pilgrimage, and the idea of my visitation of the sacred
spots, and the finishing of my endeavor for the Ṣafâ of my Choice, and
the Marweh of my Fortitude,<span
id="page_307_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_307_note_dvert) and my
prostration to the Muḥammedan Ḳibleh and the Ḳureishite Ka’beh, and the
’Aly-presence, and the Hâshimite Corner-stones, and the Fâṭimite Domes,
and the Ismâ’ilian Imâms, and the Suns of the West and East,—from them
and to them let there be the best of peace-giving, and the most perfect
of salutation!

   "And thy Lord said by inspiration to the bee, 'Take thou of the
mountains for homes, and of the trees, and of what they rear for
shelter, and afterwards eat thou of every fruit; so pursue thou the ways
of thy Lord.' That makes <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> to come out
from within her a drink varied in its colors, in which there is healing
for men. Verily, therein is a sign to people who consider."<span
id="page_308_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_308_note_*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The Memorial of the acquirements of knowledge by the friend of God
Ibrâhîm,<span id="page_308_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_308_note_dagger)
of whose spirit was Isma’îl,—let peace from both of them be to us! The
Blessed Belief.

   Praise be to God who has directed us to his religion, the right, and
brought us to his way, the straight, and elected us to the creed of our
father Ibrâhîm, and freely bestowed it upon us! for it is the ancient
doctrine which is the doctrine of Isma’îl the noble. And let the
benedictions of God, and his peace, and his salutations, and his
honoring, be to the Possessors of pure elements, and pervading
envelopes, and angelic souls, and holy intelligences!<span
id="page_308_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_308_note_ddagger) I believe as
they who profess the unity, believe, and hold to that which they who
know, hold to, and I declare as they who believe, declare, that the
world with all its parts, from the roof to the ground, is originated,
potential; and that that which is originated is that which is potential,
needing an originator who exercises preference; and that he is God, the
Eternal, the Necessary; the essentially Rich, the Self-subsistent, whom
things potential take the place of, and are necessary to, whom we
qualify with the qualifyings of hallowing and exalting, and acquit
ourselves of the profession of vacuity,<span
id="page_308_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_308_note_sect) as well as of
anthropomorphism.

   And I believe that the Prophets of God are so of right, and veritably
Nâṭiḳs, whose testimony is confirmed by intellectual proofs, and
decisive arguments; and that the Leaves of the Prophets, and their
Books, sent down to them, are the word of God,—let him be magnified and
glorified! and <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> as for the letter of
his revelation, that there is no vagueness in it, and no uncertainty,
and no defect, and no fault; and that the angels are they who are the
favorite servants of God, who are the Karûbis and the Spirituals;<span
id="page_309_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_309_note_*) and that the religions
to which the Nâṭiḳs call, during the periods, and the laws which they
establish for the people of the ages, are correct as to terms, truthful
as to ideas, obligatory as to the following of them, obvious for their
utility, the denier of which, during their time, is an infidel, and the
opposer of which, during their season, is an obdurate wretch; and as for
the law of our period, that it is the Muḥammedan law, and that the
religion of this our time is the religion of Aḥmed.

   And I believe that the punishment of the sepulchre and its comfort
are a reality; and that Munkir and Nakîr are a reality; and the
gathering, and the blast;<span
id="page_309_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_309_note_dagger) and the
resurrection, a reality; and the Garden and the Fire, a reality; and the
Book, and the reckoning, and the Ṣirâṭ,<span
id="page_309_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_309_note_ddagger) and the
Balance, a reality; and the coming to an end, and the returning to God,
a reality; and the seeing of him, a reality; and the allowed and the
forbidden, a reality; and that the commanding of acts of obedience and
services, is a thing admitted;<span
id="page_309_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_309_note_sect) and the
prohibition of acts of disobedience and offences, a thing objective to
the intellect; and that prayer, and alms; and fasting, and pilgrimage,
and holy warfare, and justice, and beneficence, and the giving to a
relative, are obligatory on the believers; and that the commission of
adultery, and the practice of usury, and obscenity, and depravity, and
the killing without right, and games, and things intoxicating, are
forbidden to the Muslims.

   And I believe that the Jinns are existent, and the Sheiṭâns not
unreal; and that Iblîs and his troop, the cursed, are the friends of
infidels and hypocrites.

   And I believe that there is no perfection except by the knowledge of
oneself; and no elevation except by making sure the sciences of
religion; and no deliverance except by sincerity as to the articles of
faith; and no rest except <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> in the
renunciation of conveniences, and the taking to utilities; and no
knowledge except by the profession of unity; and no clean purification,
and no attaining, except by perseverance; and no coming up except by the
Imâm; and no obedience except by the friends; and no disobedience except
by following the adversaries; and no direction, and no being a Muslim,
except by submission to the rightful Imâms; and no faith except by love
to the pure people of the Family;<span
id="page_310_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_310_note_*) and no religion except
the religion of the Lords of disclosure and allegory; and no belief
except the belief of the Masters of wisdom and the letter of revelation;
and no doctrine except the doctrine of the Dâ’is of Isma’îl.

   These things are the cream of my doctrine, and my belief on my
setting out and my return; and the refined gold of my faith, and the
credence of my heart. And therewithal I submit to God in my inmost soul,
and my open doing, and hope for the end of the attainment of things
desired. And I am fixed in what my tongue has uttered in the presence of
my chiefs and my brethren. And we read, "Upon those who believe, and who
perform good actions, there rests no guilt in respect to that which they
eat, provided they stand in awe, and believe, and perform good actions,
and after that stand in awe, and believe, and after that stand in awe,
and do virtuously; and God loves those who do virtuously."<span
id="page_310_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_310_note_dagger)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The Memorial of the talker with God Mûsa,—let peace from both of them
be to us! The Allegorical Sense of the Blessed Belief. "He it is who has
sent down to thee the Book, of which some verses are explicit, which are
the mother of the Book, and others not precise. So then, as for them in
whose hearts is wandering, they follow that which is not precise,
pertaining to it, from desire to seduce, and from desire to allegorize
it; while no one knows its allegorical sense, except God and those who
are firmly established in science, who say, 'We believe in it; all is
<span id="page_311">p. 311</span> from our Lord;' and only the
possessors of hearts reflect."<span
id="page_311_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_311_note_*) I hold fast to the
Possessor of majesty and omnipotence, and I fortify myself in the King
of the visible realm and the invisible, and I entrust myself to the
Living One, who dies not, our Deity, and the Deity of those who discover
to us, and our Lord, and the Lord of our superiors, and our Friend, and
the Friend of our friends. And I acknowledge that there is no outward
without its inward; and no form without its perfect idea; and no rind
without its core; and no Light without its veil;<span
id="page_311_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_311_note_dagger) and no Knowing
One without his Gate; and no law without its way; and no way without its
verity; and no verity without its letter of revelation; and no letter of
revelation without its allegorical sense; and no allegorical sense
except to the firmly established in science; and no being firmly
established in science except to the allegorizers.

   So then, as for our saying God, its allegorical sense is the Word.
And the allegorical sense of the world is a place for manifesting the
divine greatness. And as for the coming into existence, it is the
posteriority of the caused to the cause, and the latter's preceding the
former, agreeably to convincing proofs, *a priori* and *a posteriori*,
with reference to order, by argument from order of time, not order of
place. And as for potentiality, it is the essence of the being in need,
and the ordaining of the realization of the relation of cause to effect.
And "the essentially Necessary" implies the absurdity of defining by
that which is devoid of quality. And as for the Ma’na's<span
id="page_311_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_311_note_ddagger) being
established as pre-existent and eternal, and the hallowing of the
self-existently Necessary, and the exempting of him from his qualities,
it is that we abstract from him every thing which occurs to our minds,
and is fixed in our perceptions; and we know that <span id="page_312">p.
312</span> he is above the reach of the choicest of our perceptions and
our conjectures; and his unreached qualities take us out of the ditch of
sentimentalizing and the profession of vacuity, while they save us from
the fetter of anthropomorphism and assimilation.

   And as for prophecy and communication by message, they are the
manifestation of the Word in the Veil, and the setting up of the Guide,
and the Conductor, and the Gate to the open way of truth and the path of
rectitude. And as for the Prophet, he is the informer with regard to
fundamentals, calling to that to which the Envoy<span
id="page_312_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_312_note_*) calls. And as for the
Envoy, he is the Nâṭiḳ, calling to the two Roots, the Sâbiḳ and the
Tâly, and the three Branches, the Jedd and the Fatḥ and the Khiyâl,<span
id="page_312_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_312_note_dagger) which make the
higher five comprising perfection. The Nâṭiḳ is an outward, of which the
inward is the Tâly, to which latter it pertains to train and manage,
while the opposite is the case in regard to composing and putting
together. And as for the confirmation of communication by message, by
means of proof and analogy, it is the allegorical sense of the
Asâs,<span id="page_312_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_312_note_ddagger)
and the manifestation to the intelligent among men of Ideas composed by
the Nâṭiḳ. And as for the sending down of the Leaf and the Book, and
Jebrîl's bringing the Address, it is the coming of aid to the Nâṭiḳ from
the Sâbiḳ, and its directing with reference to composing, and its
assisting in the writing out. The embodiment of form objective to the
intellect is necessary; and the Address is the verification of things
determined by the intellect. And as for the favorite angels, they are
the knowing, active forces in the upper and lower worlds. And as for
their glorifying night and day, and their ascribing of dominion for
people of the faith, with asking of forgiveness, it is the continuing of
those forces to order the succession of the Amrs, and the manifestation
of the properties thereof, in their known place, without
intermission,<span id="page_312_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_312_note_sect)
And the Karûbis are the forces <span id="page_313">p. 313</span> which
support the Nâṭiḳs in composing the letter of revelation. And the
Spirituals are the forces which belong to the Asâses in the disclosure
of the allegorical sense. And as for religions and laws, they are the
institutions of divine intelligences for the good estate of earthly
bodies, in order to the perfecting of the sciences of human souls; which
are six, while seven is the number of the days of the week.<span
id="page_313_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_313_note_*)

   And as for the sepulchre, it is corporeal form and the enveloping
Palaces. And as for the punishment of the sepulchre, it is the
impression made upon the soul by the shackle of that which comes to it
of Hiyûly-forms, opposed to its natural properties; which is in the way
of fettering. And the comfort of the sepulchre is the loss of the
impression made upon it thereby, and its taking refuge in the
verification of the apprehensions pertaining to its Palace-like
instruments;<span
id="page_313_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_313_note_dagger) which is by
the power of attraction. And as for the fixing by Munkir and Nakîr, it
is the mastery of the forces of passionate desire and anger. And as for
the gathering, it is the hastening of souls in pursuing the route of
their instruments, and their decamping to the rear-guard of their
instruments,<span
id="page_313_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_313_note_ddagger) and the
conclusion from premises of creatures, in respect to their days, and the
verity of the idea of a day which calls all men to their Imâm. And as
for the awakening, it is the manifestation of souls in world after
world, in accordance with their acquirements of wrong and crime. And as
for the allegorical sense of the resurrection, the resurrection of
individual souls is separation from the apprehensions of sense, and
corporeal instruments; and the resurrection of laws and religions is the
appearance <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> of the Ḳâim<span
id="page_314_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_314_note_*) of the time; and the
resurrection of the period in the Universal Soul's showing itself in the
well-doings of individual souls; and the resurrection of resurrections
is the perfection of deliverance and salvation, and the relief of all
souls from being made to emanate, and their reaching the world of the
Holy Ones and the place of Lights, and the ending of the prolongation of
the hours of the Great Day, and the coming together of the planets,
after their separation, at the point of the first equipoise in
revolution; and the resurrection of the whole is the consummation of the
two awakenings,<span
id="page_314_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_314_note_dagger) and the
closing together of the two zones,<span
id="page_314_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_314_note_ddagger) and the
reversion of science and power to the Universal Soul, in the two worlds,
and the coming to nothing of articles, and the failure of difference in
fundamentals, and the Hiyûly's putting off the clothing of form, and the
Soul's dispensing with the efficiencies of necessity,<span
id="page_314_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_314_note_sect) and the Knowing
One's becoming alone as to his sort and his principle,<span
id="page_314_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_314_note_dvert) and the
verification of his saying, "And to him shall all command revert."<span
id="page_314_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_314_note_para)

   And as for the Book, it is the tablet of secret thought, and the
place of that by which the soul is determined in respect to holding to
be true and imagining. And as for the reading of it, it is the soul's
eyeing and regarding its objects of knowledge akin to itself. And if
they are proved sciences and decisive verities, the soul takes hold of
them by the right hand, because they pertain to the higher alternative
of direction and certain knowledge; and if they are the imaginings of
conjecture and the accreditings of supposition, and the doubtings of
syllogism, and the beliefs of the following of authority, the soul takes
hold of them by <span id="page_315">p. 315</span> the left hand,<span
id="page_315_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_315_note_*) because they pertain to
the lower alternative of conjecturing and error. And as for the
reckoning, it is that the superior Universal Soul stands by inferior
individual souls, in respect to that which emanates from them of sayings
and doings, and sciences and operations, whilst they use the instruments
of form, and outward shapes, with the four compound forces, out of which
are made up the forces of man, which are the angelic, and the brutal,
and the bestial, and the Satanic. And so, if the angelic increases, and
the force of certain knowledge predominates, they merit the good of
compensation, and are safe from the evil of penalty, and are elevated,
as devotees, to the inner court of the invisible realm of the celestial
spheres, to have command of worlds beneath which the Regal Powers<span
id="page_315_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_315_note_dagger) have sway, and
are raised by degrees to their spiritual mansion, and their world of
light; and if one of the three \[other\] forces predominates, and
hinders them from experiencing resurrection, they merit the torment of
penalty, and return into the defile of the place of return, and are
brought back to the long zig-zag, and to base, hideous form, and are
dismissed to a shade in three parts,<span
id="page_315_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_315_note_ddagger) and are
imprisoned in the caverns of abjectness and weakness. And as for the
Balance, it is the medium which the intellect makes use of in order to
apprehension, and discernment, and preference between the incoherencies
of falsehood and the accordances of that which is precious. And as for
that which is weighed, it is views and firmly established beliefs, as
respects sayings and doings, and sciences and operations. And as for the
weigher, it is the intellect, the apprehender, the comprehender, the
discerner between the composite and the simple. And as for the
Ṣirâṭ,<span id="page_315_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_315_note_sect) it is
the intermediate between progression and attainment, shared in common,
and the soul's way of transit to the upper world, from the lower <span
id="page_316">p. 316</span> opposed thereto, between that which is
corporeal and that which is spiritual, a place of twisting for minerals,
a place of bending for plants, a place of stooping for animals, a place
of erect standing for spiritual men and deities.<span
id="page_316_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_316_note_*)

   And as for the idea of the Garden, it is the eight worlds, of which
the first is the Garden of the Balancer which is the station of man; and
the second, the Garden of ’Adan, which is the station of angels; and the
third, the Garden of eternal life, which consists of the worlds of the
celestial spheres; and the fourth, the Superior Garden, which consists
of the worlds of spirit abstracted from the enveloping worlds; and the
fifth, the Garden of Firdaus, which consists of the worlds of the
Soul-like; and the sixth, the Garden of comfort, which is the world of
science; and the seventh, the Garden of Riḍhwân, which is the world of
the Intelligene; and the eighth, the Garden of the peace of aid; which
is the world of the Divine Amr, from which the worlds come forth, and to
which is their return.<span
id="page_316_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_316_note_dagger) And as for the
gradations of the Garden, they are the degrees of sciences, and the
measures of perceptions, in every known Place.<span
id="page_316_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_316_note_ddagger) And as for
the delights, and the enclosures, they are the whirling about of souls
in the inner court of their acquirements of knowledge, and their gaiety
on reaching their places of witness,<span
id="page_316_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_316_note_sect) and their
stopping-places. And as for the couches, and the shades, and the
cushions, and the mantles, they are the places of manifestation of souls
in rival forms, and their putting off disagreeing forms, and clothing
themselves in suitable impersonations. And as for the water-pitchers,
and the goblets, and the butler, and the wine-chalice, and the wine,
they are instruments of the apprehensive faculties, and helps to the
comprehension of the sciences of the invisible realm and the angels. And
the butler is the Imâm of the circling period; and the wine-chalice is
that which the Nâṭiḳ composes of the outward; <span id="page_317">p.
317</span> and the pure wine is the allegorical sense of the letter of
revelation, and the disclosure of the hidden.

   And as for the Fire, it is the seven worlds, namely, the three things
generated and the four Corner-stones; of which the first is Leẓa, which
is the Globe of Ether; after which is El-Jehîm, the centre of Air and
Freezing Cold; after which is Es-Sa’îr, the mansion of Water; after
which is El-Hâwiyeh, the place of sepulture; after which is Jehennam,
the world of animals other than man; after which is Saḳar, the station
of plants; after which is Sejjîl, the place of dead minerals. And its
descents are the forms of its hideous impersonations, and its gross,
heavy envelopes. And its people are the individual souls which profess
false religions and depraved beliefs. And as for the punishment and the
penalty, it is that which one experiences of sufferings and pains and
diseases, and separation from things habituated to, by the inroad of
misfortunes and calamities. And as for the Zubâniyeh,<span
id="page_317_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_317_note_*) the helps of El-Jehîm,
they are the forms of doubts and ignorances, and the impersonations of
errors and phantasms, and the manifesters of false views and failures.
And Mâlik<span id="page_317_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_317_note_dagger)
is the impersonation of composite ignorance. And as for the being
qualified with badness, that is the being collared with the serpent and
the scorpion, and the change of skins, and the being folded to breaking,
and the being brought back to the lowest of two low states,<span
id="page_317_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_317_note_ddagger) and the
being conducted into the zig-zag of Es-Sa’îr, and the tree Zaḳḳûm,<span
id="page_317_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_317_note_sect) and the becoming
akin to the Adversaries,<span
id="page_317_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_317_note_dvert) and the
gathering of the fruits of infidelity and repugnance, and the feeding on
the *ḍharî’*<span id="page_317_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_317_note_para)
and putrefaction. And the belief of that which fits not the intellect,
and religion, and the following of authority, are the People of
uncertainties and conjecturing,<span
id="page_317_fr_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_317_note_**) and the drink of
hot water, and the sentences adverse to the certain truth.

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

   And as for the coming to an end, and the return to God,—let him be
exalted! it is the terminating of all the relations and connections
which are between things simple and things composite, of the spiritual
and corporeal worlds, and things subtile and things gross, in the four
Upholding Roots,<span id="page_318_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_318_note_*)
the traces of the Word, in the order indicated, by means of of the
letters of God conjoined with the Amr;<span
id="page_318_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_318_note_dagger) which is the
idea of the return of things composite, having relation to number, to
Unity; which is anterior to Ether, which is the principle of number, and
its origin, and which is the principle of the perfect, the deficient,
and the redundant.<span
id="page_318_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_318_note_ddagger)

   And as for the seeing of him,—let him be exalted! it is the knowledge
of the rank of the Imâm, and the witnessing of his lights, comprehending
that which is special and that which is general, and the regarding of
his traces, embracing ideas and corporeities.

   And as for the allowed, it is that which is necessary to be
manifested and laid open. And as for the forbidden, it is that which is
necessary to be concealed and hidden. And obedience is the entering into
covenant with the Ḳâim of the time. And disobedience is the inclining to
the Imâms of error and hostility. And as for prayer, it is the
connection of the Dâ’i with the House of peace, through paternal
connection, in respect to religiousness, with the Imâm.<span
id="page_318_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_318_note_sect) And alms is the
coming of wisdom to him who is worthy, and the guiding of the inquirer
to the open way of truth. And fasting is the abstaining from disclosure
of the verities of legal enactments, in the presence of others than
those to whom they are suited, during the period of disclosure. And as
for the going into retirement,<span
id="page_318_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_318_note_dvert) it is the Imâm's
hiding himself by means of his Veils,<span
id="page_318_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_318_note_para) and his concealing
himself by means of some of his Dâ’is and his Ḥujjahs, that is, night,
which is the Imâm's veiling himself by his Veils from sight. <span
id="page_319">p. 319</span> And day is that which proves the period of
disclosure, that is, the breaking of fast, which is the manifestation of
the Imâm behind a Veil, and his causing souls to know without a Gate.
And as for the breaking of fast, it is the coming out to view of the
divine ideas, and the knowledge of the verity of the circumstances of
the Place of return;<span
id="page_319_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_319_note_*) which is its
manifestation without a Veil with which it veils itself, and without a
Gate by which entrance is made to it; and the manifestation of guarded
secrets and reserved sciences. And as for pilgrimage, it is correct
motive in respect to love of the Seignors, the Imâms, and constancy in
friendship for the people of the Family, the Family of science and
wisdom. And the setting out is the cutting off of speculation, to the
neglect of that which is beside them. And the provision for the way, and
the pack-camel, is the asking to be reinforced with their idea.<span
id="page_319_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_319_note_dagger) And the
entering upon the sacred territory is departure from the doctrines of
the Adversaries, and the acquiring of receptivity and preparation. And
as for the stopping on ’Arafeh and Muzdelifeh,<span
id="page_319_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_319_note_ddagger) it is the
being intent upon the canons of wisdom and knowledge. And as for the
idea of the slaying and the shearing,<span
id="page_319_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_319_note_sect) it is the putting
an end to falsehood by the manifestation of the truth. And the casting
of stones at intervals of three thousand paces<span
id="page_319_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_319_note_dvert) is the rejection
of doubting and supposing and conjecturing, as respects sciences and
operations. And the kissing of the Black Stone<span
id="page_319_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_319_note_para) is acceptance of
the call from the aided Nâṭiḳ. And the going around the corners<span
id="page_319_fr_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_319_note_**) is the knowledge of
the groups of seven pertaining to the relation of cause to effect. <span
id="page_320">p. 320</span> And the Makâm and Zemzem<span
id="page_320_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_320_note_*) are the call to that
which is inward and the call as to that which is outward. And the
running between Marweh and Ṣafâ is the performance of the covenant with
faithfulness. And the finishing of pilgrimage by the complete visitation
of the sacred spots, is the responding to the Mâdhûns with respect to
the general call. And the going against an enemy and holy warfare are
the scrutinizing of the arguments of those who are repugnant, and the
bringing to nought their sayings by intellectual proofs and decisive
arguments. And as for the commission of adultery, it is the responder's
being brought into connection<span
id="page_320_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_320_note_dagger) without a
witness, and the laying open of things before the choosing to enter into
covenant. And the practice of usury is the passionate desire for
enrichment, and the seeking of things perishable by the divulging of
secrets. And obscenity is the mentioning of commendable actions as
pertaining to the obstinate disobedients, and the reference of fair
deeds to the hostile transgressors. And depravity is the exchange of the
Knowing One for the Ignorant. And transgression is the preferring of
that which is excelled above that which excels. And justice is the
abandoning of that which is deficient, when the perfect exists. And fair
doing is the science of the comprehensiveness of the Imâm, and his
sovereignty over that which is inward and that which is outward, or
which appears and which hides itself. And the giving to a relative is
love of the Family of the Envoy, and friendship for the posterity of the
Immaculate,<span
id="page_320_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_320_note_ddagger) and the
extolling of the Hâshimites, and the declaration of the imamship of the
Fâṭimite Imâms. And injustice is the making others than the people of
the Family the depositories of the imamship, and the falling away from
the Knowing One, the Living One, and the imitating of the Ignorant, the
Lifeless. And as for the killing without right and evidence, it is the
contending for victory without science, and the striving to put to rout
without proof. And games are the sciences of the Party of the Outcasts,
and the things believed by the Party of the Externalists; which prevent
souls <span id="page_321">p. 321</span> from inquiring into verities,
and from contemplating things which are recondite, and interdict the
following of the rules of the ignorants, and the institutions of the
Adversaries and the repudiating zealots. And the forbidden intoxicating
draught is that which diverts the intellect from direction toward the
knowledge connected with inquiry concerning the Imâm, and the witnessing
of his lights, comprehending the special and the general, and the
regarding of his traces, embracing ideas and corporeities.

   And as for the Jinns, they are the Hiders of themselves from the eyes
of the aliens, but the Attendants upon the perfect, the good, who expand
wings of mercy over the inhabitants of the metropolises. And as for the
’Ifrîts and the Ghûls, they are the accursed, obstinate Adversaries, of
the species of the gainsayers and the repugnant,—let the curse of God
and of the angels be on them all! And as for Iblîs he is the undertaker
of hostility to the manifest Imâm of the age, through envy and hatred.

   This is the allegorical sense of my belief with respect to religion,
and the refined ore of my holding with respect to the summing up of the
substance of certain knowledge; which is the religion of the Noble
Envoy, and the creed of our father Ibrâhîm, and the doctrine of the
great Annunciation, and the belief of the people of the Noble Family.
"So then, whoever changes it, after that he has heard it, the fault
thereof rests only upon those who change it. Verily, God is one who
hears, one who knows."<span
id="page_321_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_321_note_*)

   As for the pious, verily they are beheld taking comfort upon couches;
in their faces is discerned the brightness of comfort; they have given
them to drink pure wine sealed, of which the seal is a perfume of musk.
And let those be eager, then, for that, who are eager for gladness, and
joy, and happiness, and resurrection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

   The Memorial of the Spirit of God ’Îsa and his Legatee Shemun,—let
peace from both of them be to us! The Knowledge of the rank of the
Imâm,—let the most distinguished peace, and the most perfect salutation,
be to his memory! which is the hidden Sense of alms.

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

   It is a saying of his,—let him be exalted! "And we have indeed
ennobled the sons of Adam, and borne them upon the land and upon the
sea, and bestowed on them good things, and distinguished them above many
of those whom we have created, with distinction. On a certain day, we
shall call all men to their Imâm; and so, whoever have their books given
to them in their right hands, those will read their books, and will not
be wronged a mite; and whoever is blind in this world, he will be blind
in the world to come, and more out of the way."<span
id="page_322_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_322_note_*) Praise be to God who
has taught us, and informed us, and ennobled us, and made us to see, in
that he has directed us to the way of the profession of unity, and has
put us, by causing to follow the Imâms of truth, among the most
distinguished of his servants! And benediction, and peace, and
salutation, and honoring, be to the memory of our Friend, the Imâm of
the time, the point of the circle of religions, the Ḳibleh of the people
of the faith, and the plain way to the Gardens, the affirmed as to his
existence by argument and proof, the verity of verities, and the end of
ways, and the acme of the intention of created things, and the cause of
the existence of the Tâly and the Sâbiḳ,<span
id="page_322_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_322_note_dagger) the firm bond
of alliance with God, and his clear light, and his certain truth, and
his preceptive Book, and his prolonged shadow, and the
watering-reservoir of him, and his blessed Place of standing,<span
id="page_322_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_322_note_ddagger) and his
knotted standard, and his Amr by which existence appears, and his Word
from which the worlds come forth, and to which they return, the proposed
end, the perfection of the knowledge of whom has to do with the
ordaining of laws and creeds, the showing of whose rank is that which is
intended by the manifestation of occasions and causes, for whose sakes
intellects and souls are made fast,<span
id="page_322_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_322_note_sect) and on whose
account is the manifestation of that which is objective to the intellect
and that which is objective to sense, around whom is the circling of the
celestial spheres and the envelopes, and from whom proceeds the
sustenance of spirits and bodies, and through whom is the remaining of
the Corner-stones and the things generated, and to whom pertains the
consolidation of causes and things caused, of whose familiarity the
<span id="page_323">p. 323</span> worlds<span
id="page_323_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_323_note_*) are the manifesters,
and of whose sanctity they are the place,<span
id="page_323_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_323_note_dagger) and of the
lights of whose divinity they are the place of appearing, and of the
mysteries of whose humanity they are the hiding-places,<span
id="page_323_fr_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_323_note_ddagger) and of the
suns of whose glory they are the rising-places, and of the moons of
whose perfection they are the setting-places,<span
id="page_323_fr_sect"></span>[§](#page_323_note_sect) by the following
of whom elevation is attained, and through the love of whom abiding is
perpetual, and by the knowledge of whom there is salvation from the
obscurities of El-Hâwiyeh, and arrival at high degrees, and deliverance
from the snare of polytheism and disobedience, and rectitude in the open
way of direction and faith, to whom the Prophets and the Envoys point,
and in whom the courses and the paths come to an end. So then, he is the
idea of the Book, and the import of the Address,<span
id="page_323_fr_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_323_note_dvert) and the way of
right judgment, and the hidden sense of the Veil, and the Gate of Gates.
And he is the divine effusion, and the other consummate
out-pouring.<span id="page_323_fr_para"></span>[¶](#page_323_note_para)
And to him belongs light, and darkness, and the causing to exist, and
annihilation. By obedience to him is perfection, and the reaching to the
most exalted of states; and by disobedience to him is irreclaimableness,
and falling into the pit of ruin. No companion is without him, and no
place dispenses with him; and his effusion is not severed from things
produced; and from his science escapes not the weight of a mite, either
in the earth or in the heavens; and he exempts not from his sovereignty
either things which move or things which are at rest, or things outward
or things inward. So then, let worthiness to be glorified, and
worthiness to be hallowed, be ascribed to his noble presence! And let
there be a hallowing and an exalting of his eternal majesty, and a
magnifying and a praising of his great throne!

   And to his side we betake ourselves, and with knowledge of him we
wake to attention, and to gratitude to him we <span id="page_324">p.
324</span> give utterance, and to his mercy we render thanks, and in the
profession of his unity we believe, and to his Enclosures we yield
obedience, and to his Nâṭiḳs<span
id="page_324_fr_*"></span>[\*](#page_324_note_*) we give credit. And
their Asâses we acknowledge, and their Imâms we know for certain. And
with their direction we have contracted, and upon their gladdening with
intimacy and secret converse we rely, and in the open way of their
counsel we stand fast, and in the light of their lights we see, and in
the love of them, and friendship to them, we die and live, and in
obedience to them we go on journeys. And if they had not benignantly
bestowed upon us their long-suffering, certainly we should not have
perceived the enactments of the time, and the Mediators of the Merciful,
and the Gate of God, the Knowing One, the Omniscient.

   And know thou that every Imâm of the time is according to the time;
who is the first and the last, the outward and the inward; who is
knowing to every thing.

   This, then, is a part of the hidden things of the science of
religion, and the mystery of certain knowledge, and the faith of the
believers, and the light of the Rightful, and the tenets of those who
profess unity, and the crown of those who have knowledge, and the end of
the patient, and the mark of every one who has an aim, and the
watering-place of everyone who goes to water. So hold thou on to it,
with the holding on of him who hopes to have it on the day of
return;<span id="page_324_fr_dagger"></span>[†](#page_324_note_dagger)
and provision thyself with it, for it is the best of provisions for the
way. And it is that which is most important of the sciences, and that
which is the highest of them. And thou shalt not communicate it except
to those to whom it is suited.

   And praise be to God who has directed us hereto! and we should not
have been to be directed, if God had not directed us. And do thou, O
God, bless our chief Muḥammed, and his Family, the good, the pure, with
a benediction abiding to the day of doom! And God is our sufficiency.
And well is he the Guardian! And well is he the Friend! And well is he
the Defender! And let peace be to the Messengers! And praise be to God,
the Lord of worlds!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](isma2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_299">p. 299</span>

<span id="page_299_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_299_fr_dagger) Meaning,
who knows the essence of every thing.

<span id="footnotes_page_300">p. 300</span>

<span id="page_300_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_300_fr_*) By the *Kâf* and
the *Nûn* is meant the creative mandate \#\#\#, *be thou*.

<span id="page_300_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_300_fr_dagger) Meaning
the declaration of his mind and will by revelation.

<span id="page_300_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_300_fr_ddagger) The
Greek ὕλη, matter without form. Of course, both this word and "form" are
here used metaphorically.

<span id="page_300_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_300_fr_sect) By the
Irâdeh, or the Will, and the Meshiyeh, or the Volition, seem here to be
intended the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly, presently to be mentioned, of which the
former emanates directly from the Amr, while the latter emanates from
it. The same application of names is found in the books of the Druzes.
See De Sacy's *Exposé de la Religion des Druzes*, Tome ii. pp. 21-2.

<span id="page_300_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_300_fr_dvert) i. e.
Preceder.

<span id="page_300_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_300_fr_para) Meaning,
without any aiding from a higher power.

<span id="page_300_note_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_300_fr_**) i. e.
Follower. See below.

<span id="footnotes_page_301">p. 301</span>

<span id="page_301_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_301_fr_*) Meaning the first
five emanations, namely, the Amr, the Sâbiḳ, the Tâly, the Primitive
Hiyûly, and the Circumambient. See below.

<span id="page_301_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_301_fr_dagger) Namely,
those applied to God by the Muslims.

<span id="page_301_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_301_fr_ddagger)
Meaning reinforcements from the Amr, received by the Sâbiḳ, and
transmitted to the Prophets of every period, and to the seven Imâms of
each, as their representatives, by virtue of which the Deity himself is
conceived of as taking his stand, and abiding, in them.

<span id="page_301_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_301_fr_sect) Namely, the
reinforcement from the Amr.

<span id="footnotes_page_302">p. 302</span>

<span id="page_302_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_302_fr_*) Meaning that the
divine attributes of knowledge and justice are tabernacled in it.

<span id="page_302_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_302_fr_dagger)
Enclosures of the Deity. This name seems to include, in the Ismâ’ilian
system, all created existences. See [p. 306](#page_306).

<span id="page_302_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_302_fr_ddagger) By
which is meant the three classes of existence farthest removed from the
Deity, namely, Minerals, Plants, and Animals. See below.

<span id="page_302_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_302_fr_sect) The name of
"the higher envelopes" includes the Stellar Sphere, and the seven
Palaces, presently to be mentioned; while the four Globes, of Ether,
Air, Water, and gross Earth, together with Minerals, Plants, and
Animals, which are also presently to be mentioned, constitute what are
called "the lower bodies." It is evidently the Universal Soul of which
all these <span id="footnotes_page_303">p. 303</span> conceived to be
incorporations, differing only in grade; for they are said to come into
existence in consequence of the union of the Soul with "absolute body."
But by the inclination of the Soul to absolute body is first developed,
according to this system, motion of volition. It follows from this, that
all the emanations previously mentioned are to be considered as
involuntary.

<span id="footnotes_page_303">p. 303</span>

<span id="page_303_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_303_fr_*) From this
description it is evident that the Circumambient is Finite Space.

<span id="page_303_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_303_fr_dagger) This is
the outer concave of the ancient Ptolemaic system of astronomy as
appears from what follows in our text, taken in connection with the
following passage from an astronomical work of El-Farghâny, an Arabic
astronomer probably of the ninth century of our era: "So then, we say
that the number of the spheres which compass all the motions of the
stars, is eight; of which seven belong to the seven planets, and the
eighth is the highest belonging to the fixed stars, which is the sphere
of the zodiacal signs. And the figure of these spheres is like the
figure of globes one within another. And so the smallest of them is that
which is the nearest of them to the earth which is the globe of the
Moon, and the second belongs to ’Uṭârid, \[Mercury,\] and the third, to
Ez-Zaharah, \[Venus,\] and the fourth, to the Sun, and the fifth, to
El-Mirrîkh, \[Mars,\] and the sixth, to El-Mushtary, \[Jupiter,\] and
the seventh, to Zuḥal, \[Saturn,\] and the eighth, to the fixed stars.
And so, as for the sphere of the fixed stars, which is the sphere of the
zodiacal signs, on the one hand, its centre is the centre of the earth;
and as for the centres of the seven globes which belong to the planets,
they deviate from the centre of the earth, variously." See *Ferganensis
Elementa Astronomica*, ed. J. Golius, pp. 45-6.

<span id="footnotes_page_304">p. 304</span>

<span id="page_304_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_304_fr_*) Meaning articles
of belief.

<span id="page_304_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_304_fr_dagger) The
spheres, or concaves, of the seven planets are referred to under this
general name. We have proof of this, and a most important help to the
understanding of the descriptions above given of these several Palaces,
as well <span id="footnotes_page_305">p. 305</span> as a clear
indication of the source from which the ideas here expressed were
derived, in Esh-Shahrastâny's account of the Sabians. This author, after
characterizing Sabiism as a system inculcating assiduity in action,
rather than a religious disposition, goes on to speak of its followers
as those who hold to "Spiritual Existences, pure and holy, in substance,
act, and state," which are necessary mediators between man and the
glorious Creator, in respect to all benefits received from him; so that
man must cultivate intercourse with them, by "assiduity in action,
austerity, and withdrawment from the mundanities of passions." He also
tells us that the Sabians hold these Spiritual Existences to be "the
mediating occasions, in respect to production, and causing to exist, and
alteration from one state to another, and the causing of created things
to tend from a beginning to a perfection." After this he adds: "Some of
them are the regents of the seven planets in their spheres, which are
their Palaces; and to every Spiritual there is a Palace, and to every
Palace, a sphere. And the relation of a Spiritual to that Palace which
is appropriate to it, is the relation of the soul to the body; so that
it is its lord, and its regent, and its intendant. And they name the
Palaces lords; and often they name them fathers, and the elements
mothers; and so the action of the Spirituals is to cause them to move,
by a peculiar power, in order that from their motions actualities may
arise within natural properties and the elements, and therefrom
compoundings, and temperaments in composites, upon which follow
corporeal forces, and to which are superadded spiritual souls, like the
species of plants and the species of animals." He also distinguishes the
Spirituals of the Sabian system as "universal" in their "impressions,"
to which are to be referred the distinctions of species, and
"particular," to which are to be referred the distinctions of one
individual of a species from another; and as exerting their influences
either in the upper air, in the heavens, in the lower atmosphere, and on
the earth, or every where, in all existences, alike. See
Esh-Shahrastâny's *Book of Relig. and Philos. Sects*, pp. 203-5. This
statement by Esh-Shahrastâny makes it quite evident what is intended by
the Palaces and the beings occupying them, described in our text; and
also throws light upon the union of these Palaces with the four
Corner-stones, or elements, presently to be mentioned as the immediate
occasion of the generation of Minerals, Plants and Animals. As to the
portraitures of the several regents of the planets, given in our text,
however, I am unable to show that they have their analogies in any other
system, although I do not doubt that such will be found to be the case.
Some of the names which these regents bear in the text may be seen, by
reference to our extract from El-Farghâny's astronomical work, to be
those which are ordinarily given to some of the planets in Arab
astronorny. But others differ. It is deserving of notice, also, that,
although seven Palaces are spoken of in our text, the third and fourth,
in the order of their being "let out," namely that of the Sun and that
of Mars, are omitted in the description.

<span id="footnotes_page_306">p. 306</span>

<span id="page_306_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_306_fr_*) See [note † p.
303](#page_303_note_dagger).

<span id="page_306_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_306_fr_dagger) *Cuscuta
epithymum*, a parasitic climbing plant, without roots, and without
leaves, but bearing small seeds at its extremities. See *Ebn Baithar's
Heilund Nahrungs-mittel*, übersetzt von Dr. Joseph v. Sontheimer, Bd ii.
s. 380.

<span id="page_306_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_306_fr_ddagger)
Meaning, not dissevered from the Deity. See [p. 299](#page_299).

<span id="page_306_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_306_fr_sect) These three
groups are as follows: 1. the Deity, the Amr, the Sâbiḳ, the Tâly, the
Primitive Hiyûly, the Circumambient, and the Stellar Sphere; 2. the
seven Palaces; and 3. the Four Corner-stones, and the three classes of
generated existences, Minerals, Plants, and Animals. Consequently, "the
Perfect in number" denotes some absolute numerical principle pervading
all things. It can be nothing else than Unity of number. The ἓν ἀρχή
πάντων of the Pythagoreans may be referred to as a parallel, provided
only that simultaneousness of existence is ascribed to this principle of
Unity and the Deity, for it is said of the Deity, above, that he "is,
and before him was not any thing." [See p. 299](#page_299).

<span id="footnotes_page_307">p. 307</span>

<span id="page_307_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_307_fr_*) See [note ‡ p.
301](#page_301_note_dagger).

<span id="page_307_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_307_fr_dagger) Meaning
the knowledge of God as he is, or, allegorically, acquaintance with the
rank and power of the Imâm. See [p. 318](#page_318).

<span id="page_307_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_307_fr_ddagger)
Meaning what is essence and quality to me.

<span id="page_307_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_307_fr_sect) Stopping on
the hill ’Arafeh, a short distance from Mekkeh, is one of the ceremomes
of pilgrimage to the holy city.

<span id="page_307_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_307_fr_dvert) There is a
play on words, here, which cannot be rendered in English. The arduous
ceremony of the walk to and fro between Ṣafâ and Marweh is alluded to;
but the idea of the person speaking is, that what he has said is in the
way of sincere endeavor to be the object of the friendship of the Imâm,
and to be bold in his service.

<span id="footnotes_page_308">p. 308</span>

<span id="page_308_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_308_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sur. xvi,
vv. 70-71. This passage seems to be used in an allegorical sense, as a
recommendation of diligent seeking after hidden knowledge.

<span id="page_308_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_308_fr_dagger) This
piece and the two following are called "Memorials" of Abraham, Moses,
and Jesus, under the pretense that they contain that which is kindred to
the teachings of these earlier Prophets.

<span id="page_308_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_308_fr_ddagger) A
description of the Imâms, as made up of the four elements in their
purity, pervaded by influences of the celestial spheres, with special
aidings from the Amr, through the Sâbiḳ and the Tâly.

<span id="page_308_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_308_fr_sect) See [note ‖
p. 276](isma1-2.htm#page_276_note_dvert).

<span id="footnotes_page_309">p. 309</span>

<span id="page_309_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_309_fr_*) See [note † p.
304](#page_304_note_dagger). The Karûbis are Cherubim.

<span id="page_309_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_309_fr_dagger) Meaning
the blast of the trumpet to rouse the dead to final Judgment.

<span id="page_309_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_309_fr_ddagger) The
bridge over Hell.

<span id="page_309_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_309_fr_sect) Meaning a
thing which the reason allows.

<span id="footnotes_page_310">p. 310</span>

<span id="page_310_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_310_fr_*) The family of
Muḥammed.

<span id="page_310_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_310_fr_dagger) Ḳurân,
Sur. v. v. 94.

<span id="footnotes_page_311">p. 311</span>

<span id="page_311_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_311_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sur. iii.
v. 5. El-Beiḍhâwy explains the expression "mother of the Book," in this
passage, to mean "its root, that to which the test of it amounts." This
orthodox commentator is obliged to admit that an allegorical sense
pertaining to some verses of the Ḳurân, is here recognized; but he
claims that there are points left indefinite because God reserves to
himself the knowledge of them, and that man has no concern with the
allegorical sense, except where it becomes necessary to lean upon it
with reference to faith or practice. See *Beidhawii Comm. in Coranum*,
vol. i. pp. 145-6.

<span id="page_311_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_311_fr_dagger) The Veil
of the Ismâ’ilian system seems to be the human person of the Imâm, while
the so called Light is the veritable Imâm himself.

<span id="page_311_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_311_fr_ddagger) i. e.
The Idea, the absolute Deity.

<span id="footnotes_page_312">p. 312</span>

<span id="page_312_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_312_fr_*) Muḥammed.

<span id="page_312_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_312_fr_dagger) The
Jedd, or the Primogenitor, the Fatḥ, or the Opening, and the Khiyâl, or
the Image, are here, evidently, used as names of the Primitive Hiyûly,
the Circumambient, and the Stellar Sphere

<span id="page_312_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_312_fr_ddagger) See
[note \* p. 266](isma1-2.htm#page_266_note_*).

<span id="page_312_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_312_fr_sect) What is here
allegorized will be best understood by another quotation from
Esh-Shahrastâny's statement of the belief of the Sabians in regard to
the so called Spirituals. He says, "And they create in hallowing and
glorifying, not disobeying God as to that which he commands, and doing
that which they <span id="footnotes_page_313">p. 313</span> are
commanded. . . . . . And we depend upon them as our administrators, so
that they are our lords and our divinities, and our askers, and our
intercessors beore God; while he is the Lord of lords, and the God of
gods." See Esh-Shahrastâny's *Book of Relig. and Philos. Sects*, p. 203.
The next sentences show that by "the Amrs" are here intended the
reinforcements which the Amr transmits to the Nâṭiḳs and Asâses, or
Prophets and Legatees, of the seven periods.

<span id="footnotes_page_313">p. 313</span>

<span id="page_313_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_313_fr_*) This seems to
indicate that the Prophet of the seventh period was not considered as
having established the new order of things, when this sermon was
composed.

<span id="page_313_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_313_fr_dagger) By which
are intended the senses.

<span id="page_313_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_313_fr_ddagger) This
and the "pursuing the route of their impediments" are expressions
borrowed from the operations of an army in the field, to signify a
victory gained by souls over all the obstacles of corporeal form.

<span id="footnotes_page_314">p. 314</span>

<span id="page_314_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_314_fr_*) i. e. The Taker
of his stand, meaning the manifestation of the Amr in each new Prophet.
See [note ‡ p. 301](#page_301_note_ddagger).

<span id="page_314_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_314_fr_dagger)
Probably, the awakening by Munkir and Nakîr, (see [note ‡ p.
288](isma1-3.htm#page_288_note_ddagger),) and the awakening for final
Judgment.

<span id="page_314_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_314_fr_ddagger)
Meaning the two zones called, in the astronomy of the Arabs "the zone of
primary motion," a circle intersecting the earth near the north and
south poles, which regulates the rotation of all the heavenly bodies
together, from east to west, around the earth, every twenty-four hours;
and "the zone of secondary motion," a circle, intersecting the earth at
other than the polar points, which regulates the revolutions of the sun
and stars from west to east around the earth, in varying periods. See
*Ferganensis Elementa Astronmica*, pp. 15-16, 46.

<span id="page_314_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_314_fr_sect) See [p.
302](#page_302).

<span id="page_314_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_314_fr_dvert) See [note
§ p. 306](#page_306_note_sect).

<span id="page_314_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_314_fr_para) Ḳurân, Sur.
xi. v. 123.

<span id="footnotes_page_315">p. 315</span>

<span id="page_315_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_315_fr_*) The taking hold
by the right hand, or by the left, in this passage signifies good or
evil augury. The language is borrowed from the scene of the
judgment-day, as anticipated by the Muslim, when the good man will have
his book of accounts put into his right hand, and the bad man will be
made to take it by the left hand. See *Tableau Général de l'Empire
Othoman* par M. De M. D'Ohsson, Tome i. p. 47.

<span id="page_315_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_315_fr_dagger) Meaning
the Regents of the planets.

<span id="page_315_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_315_fr_ddagger)
Meaning that they become embodied in minerals, plants, or animals. [See
p. 317](#page_317).

<span id="page_315_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_315_fr_sect) See [note ‡
p. 309](#page_309_note_ddagger).

<span id="footnotes_page_316">p. 316</span>

<span id="page_316_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_316_fr_*) Here is
allegorized that sort of intermediate state represented in the Muslim
creed by the bridge over Hell, which the good pass with the speed of
lightning, while the bad are precipitated from it into the flames below.
It is explained to mean the scene of the progress of souls through this
world, in its various stages of mineral, vegetable, and animal
embodiment.

<span id="page_316_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_316_fr_dagger) All this
may be understood by reference to the system of cosmogony, detailed in
the first piece contained in this document.

<span id="page_316_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_316_fr_ddagger) Place
of the reinforcements of the Amr. See [p. 301](#page_301).

<span id="page_316_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_316_fr_sect) See [note †
p. 307](#page_307_note_dagger).

<span id="footnotes_page_317">p. 317</span>

<span id="page_317_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_317_fr_*) Demons of the
Muslim Hell.

<span id="page_317_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_317_fr_dagger) A note
to the original manuscript, in Arabic, interprets this to be the name of
"the barbed and feathered arrow of the porter of Hell."

<span id="page_317_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_317_fr_ddagger)
Meaning, to El-Jehîm. See above.

<span id="page_317_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_317_fr_sect) The Tree of
Hell.

<span id="page_317_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_317_fr_dvert) A name
given to the Spirits of Hell.

<span id="page_317_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_317_fr_para) The *ḍharî’*
is said to be a plant of heating qualities, found on the shore of the
Dead Sea. See Ibn Beiṭâr's *Heil-* und *Nahrungs-mittel*, Bd. ii. p.
145.

<span id="page_317_note_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_317_fr_**) A name given
to the Spirits of Hell.

<span id="footnotes_page_318">p. 318</span>

<span id="page_318_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_318_fr_*) The four
elements.

<span id="page_318_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_318_fr_dagger) See
[note \* p. 300](#page_300_note_*).

<span id="page_318_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_318_fr_ddagger) See
[note § p. 306](#page_306_note_sect); and it is worthy of notice in that
connection, that the relations of number as even, and odd, in the two
opposite respects of too little and too much, are referred to in the
last clause of this sentence.

<span id="page_318_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_318_fr_sect) On the
relation of the Dâ’i to the Imâm, [see p. 280](isma1-3.htm#page_280).

<span id="page_318_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_318_fr_dvert) This is
one of the duties obligatory upon the Muslim. It is defined to consist
"in remaining several days and nights in the interior of a mosque, there
to fast, pray, and meditate, in an unbroken and complete collectedness
of mind." See D'Ohsson's *Tableau Général de l'Empire Othoman*, Tome ii.
p. 7.

<span id="page_318_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_318_fr_para) See [note †
p. 311](#page_311_note_dagger).

<span id="footnotes_page_319">p. 319</span>

<span id="page_319_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_319_fr_*) A name applied to
the Imâm, as one who brings back the Amr to the world, by virtue of
those reinforcements from the Amr which are the essential part of his
being.

<span id="page_319_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_319_fr_dagger) Meaning
to have the true idea of the Imâm formed in the mind.

<span id="page_319_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_319_fr_ddagger) A
locality near Mekkeh, one of the sacred stations of the Muslim pilgrim,
where he spends the night after visiting ’Arafeh. See D'Ohsson's
*Tableau Général de l'Empire Othoman*, Tome ii. p. 29.

<span id="page_319_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_319_fr_sect) Meaning, of
animals for the sacrifice offered in connection with pilgrimage to
Mekkeh.

<span id="page_319_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_319_fr_dvert) A ceremony
several times repeated by the Muslim pilgrim, in memory of Abraham's
putting demons to flight, by throwing stones at them, who tempted him to
disobey God. See D'Ohsson's *Tabl. Gén. de l'Empire Othoman*, Tome ii.
pp. 29, ff.

<span id="page_319_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_319_fr_para) The black
stone on one comer of the Ka’beh which is kissed by the pilgrim in
making the tour of the Ancient House. See Burckhardt's *Travels in
Arabia*, vol. i. p. 249.

<span id="page_319_note_**"></span>[\*\*](#page_319_fr_**) Of the
Ka’beh.

<span id="footnotes_page_320">p. 320</span>

<span id="page_320_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_320_fr_*) The Maḳâm, or
Maḳâm Ibrâhîm, i. e. The station of Abraham, supposed to mark the spot
where the patriarch stood to build the original Ka’beh, is a small
building which the Muslim pilgrim passes immediately befare reaching
that inner shrine of the Mosque. The well Zemzem is situated near by,
but farther from the Ka’beh. See Burckhardt's *Travels in Arabia*, vol.
i. pp. 266-7.

<span id="page_320_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_320_fr_dagger) Meaning
his being admitted to the fraternity.

<span id="page_320_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_320_fr_ddagger) A name
applied to Fâṭimeh.

<span id="footnotes_page_321">p. 321</span>

<span id="page_321_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_321_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sur. ii.
v. 177.

<span id="footnotes_page_322">p. 322</span>

<span id="page_322_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_322_fr_*) Ḳurân, Sur. xvii.
vv. 72-4.

<span id="page_322_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_322_fr_dagger) Meaning
the Amr, or Word, but in a secondary sense. See below, and [pp.
301-2](#page_301).

<span id="page_322_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_322_fr_ddagger) See
[note ‡ p, 301](#page_301_note_ddagger).

<span id="page_322_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_322_fr_sect) Meaning,
embodied.

<span id="footnotes_page_323">p. 323</span>

<span id="page_323_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_323_fr_*) The eight higher
worlds and the seven lower, mentioned above.

<span id="page_323_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_323_fr_dagger) The
embodiment.

<span id="page_323_note_ddagger"></span>[‡](#page_323_fr_ddagger)
Meaning, whose manifested divinity they show, and whose concealed
divinity they hide. But let it be carefully observed, that the divinity
here ascribed to the Imâm is only a derived divinity.

<span id="page_323_note_sect"></span>[§](#page_323_fr_sect) Meaning,
whose rising, sun-like glory they exhibit, and whose setting, moon-like
light they shroud. There is allusion, in this and the preceding clause,
to the distinction between the Imâm making himself known, and the Imâm
withdrawing into seclusion, which is clearly expressed in the preceding
sermon. See [pp. 318-19](#page_318).

<span id="page_323_note_dvert"></span>[‖](#page_323_fr_dvert) The
revelation by Gabriel. See [p. 312](#page_312).

<span id="page_323_note_para"></span>[¶](#page_323_fr_para) Meaning the
effusion of God, and that of the Amr.

<span id="footnotes_page_324">p. 324</span>

<span id="page_324_note_*"></span>[\*](#page_324_fr_*) As the
representative of the Amr, the Imâm is here said to have his Nâṭiḳs;
while immediately afterwards is recognized his relation of successor to
the Nâṭiḳ, in the Ismâ’ilian hierarchy.

<span id="page_324_note_dagger"></span>[†](#page_324_fr_dagger) The day
of final account.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
