<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj39)  [Next](atfj41) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

<span id="img_44"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![44. Mamikiko Tastes
the White Sake](tn/44.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/44.jpg)  
44. Mamikiko Tastes the White Sake  
</span>

### XXXVIII

### WHITE SAKÉ

Two thousand or more years ago Lake Biwa, in Omi Province, and Mount
Fuji, in Suruga Province, came into being in one night. Though my story
relates this as fact, you are fully entitled to say, should you feel so
inclined, 'Wonderful indeed are the ways of Nature'; but do so
respectfully, if you please, and without levity, for otherwise you will
grossly offend and will not understand the ethical ideas of Japanese
folklore stories.

Well, at the time of this extraordinary geographical event, there lived
one Yurine, a man of poor means even for those days. He loved saké wine,
and scarcely ever spent a day without drinking some of it. Yurine lived
near the place which is now called Sudzukawa, a little to the north of
the river known as Fujikawa.

On the day which followed Fuji San's appearance Yurine became ill, and
was in consequence unable to drink his cup of saké. He became worse and
worse, and, at last feeling that there could be no hope for him, decided
to give himself the pleasure of drinking a cup before he died.
Accordingly he called to himself his only son,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Koyuri, a boy of
fourteen years, and told him to go and fetch him a cup or two of the
wine. Koyuri was sorely perplexed. He had no saké in the house, and
there was not a single coin left wherewith to buy. This he did not like
to tell his father, fearing that the unpleasant state of affairs might
make him worse. So he took his gourd, and went wandering along the
beach, wondering how he could get what his father wanted. While thus
employed Koyuri heard a voice calling him by name. As he looked up
towards the pines which fringed the beach, he saw a man and a woman
sitting beneath an immense tree; their hair was a scarlet red, and so
were their bodies. At first Koyuri was afraid,—he had never seen their
like before,—but the voice was kindly, and the man was making signs to
him to approach. Koyuri did so in fear and trembling, but with that
coolness which characterises the Japanese boy.

As Koyuri approached the strange people he noticed that they were
drinking saké from large flat cups known as 'sakadzuki,' and that on the
sand beside them was an immense jar, from which they took the liquor;
moreover, he noticed that the saké was whiter than any he had seen
before.

Thinking always of his father, Koyuri unslung his gourd, reported his
father's illness, and begged for saké. The red man took the gourd, and
filled it. After expressing gratitude, Koyuri ran off delighted. 'Here,
father, here!' said he as he reached his hut: 'I have got you the saké,
the best I have ever seen, and I am sure it tastes as good as it looks;
try it and tell me!'

The old man took the wine and drank greedily,

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

expressing great satisfaction, and said that it was indeed the best he
had ever tasted. Next day he wanted more. The boy found his two red
friends, and again they filled the gourd. In short, Koyuri had his gourd
filled for five days in succession, and his father had regained spirits
and was almost well in consequence.

Now, there lived in the next hut to Yurine an unpleasant neighbour who
also was fond of saké, but too poor to procure it. His name was
Mamikiko. On hearing that Yurine had been drinking saké for the last
five days he became furiously jealous, and, calling Koyuri, asked where
and how he had procured it. The boy explained that he had got it from
the strange people with red hair who had been living near the big pine
tree for some days past.

'Give me your gourd to taste,' cried Mamikiko, snatching it roughly. 'Do
you think that your father is the only man who is good enough for saké?'
Putting the gourd to his lips, he began to drink; but he threw it down
in disgust a second later, and spat out what was in his mouth. 'What
filth is this?' he cried. 'To your father you give the most excellent
saké, while to me you give foul water! What is the meaning of it?' He
gave Koyuri a sound beating, and then told him to lead the way to the
red people on the beach, saying, 'I will beat you again if I don't get
some good saké; so you had better see to it!'

Koyuri led the way, weeping the while at the loss of his saké, which
Mamikiko had thrown away, and fearing the anger of his red friends. In
the usual place they found the strangers, who had both been drinking and

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

were still doing so. Mamikiko was surprised at their appearance: he had
seen nothing quite like them before. Their bodies were of the pink of
cherry blossom shining in the sun, while their long red hair almost
frightened him; both were naked except for a green girdle made of some
curious seaweed.

'Well, boy Koyuri, what are you crying about, and why back so soon? Has
your father drunk the saké already? If so he must be almost as fond of
it as we.'

'No, no: my father has not drunk it; but Mamikiko, here, took it from me
and drank some, spitting it out and saying it was not saké; the rest he
threw away, and then made me bring him here. May I have some more for my
father?' The red man refilled the gourd and told him not to mind, and
seemed amused at Koyuri's account of Mamikiko spitting it out.

'I am as fond of saké as any one,' cried Mamikiko: 'will you give me
some?'

'Oh, yes; help yourself,' said the red man; 'Help yourself.' Mamikiko
filled the largest of the cups, and, putting it to his nose, smelt the
fragrance, which was delicious; but as soon as he put it to his lips his
face changed, and he had to spit again, for the taste was nauseating.

'What is the meaning of this?' he cried angrily; and the red man
answered still more angrily:

'You do not seem to be aware of who I am. Well, I will tell you that I
am a shojo of high degree, and I live deep in the bottom of the ocean
near the Sea Dragon's Palace. Recently we heard that a sacred mountain
had arisen on the edge of the sea, and, as it is a lucky omen, and a
sign that the Empire of Japan will exist in perpetuity, I have

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

come here to see it. While enjoying the magnificent scene from Suruga
coast I met this good boy Koyuri, who asked for saké for his poor sick
old father, and I gave him some. Now, this saké is not ordinary saké,
but sacred, and those who drink it live for ever and retain their youth;
moreover, it cures all diseases even in the aged. But you must know that
any medicine is sometimes a poison, and thus it is that this sweet
sacred white saké is good only in taste to the righteous, and
bad-tasting and poisonous to the wicked. Thus I know that, as it tastes
evil to you, you are an evil and wicked man, selfish and greedy.' And
both the shojos laughed at Mamikiko, who, on hearing that the few drops
which he must have swallowed would act as poison and soon kill him,
began to cry with fear and to regret his conduct. He begged and implored
forgiveness and that his life might be spared, and vowed that he would
reform if only given a chance. The shojo, drawing some powder from a
case, gave it to Mamikiko, and told him to swallow it in some saké;
'for,' said he, 'it is better to repent and reform even in your old age
than not at all.'

Mamikiko drank it down this time, finding the wine sweet and delicious;
it strengthened him and made him feel well, and he reformed and became a
good man. He made friends again with Yurine and treated Koyuri well.

Some years later Mamikiko and Yurine built a hut at the southern base of
Fuji San, where they brewed white saké from a recipe given them by the
shojo, and they gave it to all who suffered from saké poisoning. Both
Mamikiko and Yurine lived for 300 years.

In the Middle Ages a man who had heard this story

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

brewed white saké at the foot of Mount Fuji; he made it with rice yeast,
and people became very fond of it. Even to-day white saké is brewed
somewhere at the foot of the mountain, and is well known as a special
liquor belonging to Fuji. I myself drank it in 1907 without fear of
living beyond my fifty-fifth year.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIX. The Blind Beauty](atfj41)

</div>
