<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj18)  [Next](atfj20) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span id="img_20"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![20. O Tokoyo Sees the
Girl About to be Thrown Over Cliff](tn/20.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20.jpg)  
20. O Tokoyo Sees the Girl About to be Thrown Over Cliff  
</span>

### XVII

### A STORY OF OKI ISLANDS

THE Oki Islands, some forty-five miles from the mainland of Hoki
Province, were for centuries the scene of strife, of sorrow, and of
banishment; but to-day they are fairly prosperous and highly peaceful.
Fish, octopus, and cuttlefish form the main exports. They are a weird,
wild, and rocky group, difficult of access, and few indeed are the
Europeans who have visited them. I know of only two—the late Lafcadio
Hearn and Mr. Anderson (who was there to collect animals for the Duke of
Bedford). I myself sent Oto, my Japanese hunter, who was glad to return.

In the Middle Ages—that is, from about the year 1000 A.D.—there was much
fighting over the islands by various chieftains, and many persons were
sent thither in banishment.

In the year 1239 Hojo Yoshitoshi defeated the Emperor Go Toba and
banished him to Dogen Island.

Another Hojo chieftain banished another Emperor, Go Daigo, to
Nishi-no-shima. Oribe Shima, the hero of our story, was probably
banished by this same Hojo chieftain,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

whose name is given to me as Takatoki (Hojo), and the date of the story
must be about 1320 A.D.

At the time when Hojo Takatoki reigned over the country with absolute
power, there was a samurai whose name was Oribe Shima. By some
misfortune Oribe (as we shall call him) had offended Hojo Takatoki, and
had consequently found himself banished to one of the islands of the Oki
group which was then known as Kamishima (Holy Island). So the relater of
the story tells me; but I doubt his geographical statement, and think
the island must have been Nishi-no-shima (Island of the West, or West
Island <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)).

Oribe had a beautiful daughter, aged eighteen, of whom he was as fond as
she was of him, and consequently the banishment and separation rendered
both of them doubly miserable. Her name was Tokoyo, O Tokoyo San.

Tokoyo, left at her old home in Shima Province, Ise, wept from morn till
eve, and sometimes from eve till morn. At last, unable to stand the
separation any longer, she resolved to risk all and try to reach her
father or die in the attempt; for she was brave, as are most girls of
Shima Province, where the women have much to do with the sea. As a child
she had loved to dive with the women whose daily duty is to collect
awabi and pearl-oyster shells, running with them the risk of life in
spite of her higher birth and frailer body. She knew no fear.

Having decided to join her father, O Tokoyo sold what property she could
dispose of, and set out on her

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

long journey to the far-off province of Hoki, which, after many weeks
she reached, striking the sea at a place called Akasaki, whence on clear
days the Islands of Oki can be dimly seen. Immediately she set to and
tried to persuade the fishermen to take her to the Islands; but nearly
all her money had gone, and, moreover, no one was allowed to land at the
Oki Islands in those days—much less to visit those who had been banished
thence. The fishermen laughed at Tokoyo, and told her that she had
better go home. The brave girl was not to be put off. She bought what
stock of provisions she could afford, at night went down to the beach,
and, selecting the lightest boat she could find, pushed it with
difficulty into the water, and sculled as hard as her tiny arms would
allow her. Fortune sent a strong breeze, and the current also was in her
favour. Next evening, more dead than alive, she found her efforts
crowned with success. Her boat touched the shore of a rocky bay.

O Tokoyo sought a sheltered spot, and lay down to sleep for the night.
In the morning she awoke much refreshed, ate the remainder of her
provisions, and started to make inquiries as to her father's
whereabouts. The first person she met was a fisherman. 'No,' he said: 'I
have never heard of your father, and if you take my advice you will not
ask for him if he has been banished, for it may lead you to trouble and
him to death!'

Poor O Tokoyo wandered from one place to another, subsisting on charity,
but never hearing a word of her father.

One evening she came to a little cape of rocks, whereon stood a shrine.
After bowing before Buddha and imploring

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

his help to find her dear father, O Tokoyo lay down, intending to pass
the night there, for it was a peaceful and holy spot, well sheltered
from the winds, which, even in summer, as it was now (the 13th of June),
blow with some violence all around the Oki Islands.

Tokoyo had slept about an hour when she heard, in spite of the dashing
of waves against the rocks, a curious sound, the clapping of hands and
the bitter sobbing of a girl. As she looked up in the bright moonlight
she saw a beautiful person of fifteen years, sobbing bitterly. Beside
her stood a man who seemed to be the shrine-keeper or priest. He was
clapping his hands and mumbling 'Namu Amida Butsu's.' Both were dressed
in white. When the prayer was over, the priest led the girl to the edge
of the rocks, and was about to push her over into the sea, when O Tokoyo
came to the rescue, rushing at and seizing the girl's arm just in time
to save her. The old priest looked surprised at the intervention, but
was in no way angered or put about, and explained as follows:—

'It appears from your intervention that you are a stranger to this small
island. Otherwise you would know that the unpleasant business upon which
you find me is not at all to my liking or to the liking of any of us.
Unfortunately, we are cursed with an evil god in this island, whom we
call Yofuné-Nushi. He lives at the bottom of the sea, and demands, once
a year, a girl just under fifteen years of age. This sacrificial
offering has to be made on June 13, Day of the Dog, between eight and
nine o'clock in the evening. If our villagers neglect this, Yofuné-Nushi
becomes angered, and causes great storms,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

which drown many of our fishermen. By sacrificing one young girl
annually much is saved. For the last seven years it has been my sad duty
to superintend the ceremony, and it is that which you have now
interrupted.'

O Tokoyo listened to the end of the priest's explanation, and then said:

'Holy monk, if these things be as you say, it seems that there is sorrow
everywhere. Let this young girl go, and say that she may stop her
weeping, for I am more sorrowful than she, and will willingly take her
place and offer myself to Yofuné-Nushi. I am the sorrowing daughter of
Oribe Shima, a samurai of high rank, who has been exiled to this island.
It is in search of my dear father that I have come here; but he is so
closely guarded that I cannot get to him, or even find out exactly where
he has been hidden. My heart is broken, and I have nothing more for
which to wish to live, and am therefore glad to save this girl. Please
take this letter, which is addressed to my father. That you should try
and deliver it to him is all I ask.'

Saying which, Tokoyo took the white robe off the younger girl and put it
on herself. She then knelt before the figure of Buddha, and prayed for
strength and courage to slay the evil god, Yofuné-Nushi. Then she drew a
small and beautiful dagger, which had belonged to one of her ancestors,
and, placing it between her pearly teeth, she dived into the roaring sea
and disappeared, the priest and the other girl looking after her with
wonder and admiration, and the girl with thankfulness.

As we said at the beginning of the story, Tokoyo had been brought up
much among the divers of her own

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

country in Shima; she was a perfect swimmer, and knew, moreover,
something of fencing and jujitsu, as did many girls of her position in
those days.

Tokoyo swam downwards through the clear water, which was illuminated by
bright moonlight. Down, down she swam, passing silvery fish, until she
reached the bottom, and there she found herself opposite a submarine
cave resplendent with the phosphorescent lights issuing from awabi
shells and the pearls that glittered through their openings. As Tokoyo
looked she seemed to . see a man seated in the cave. Fearing nothing,
willing to fight and die, she approached, holding her dagger ready to
strike. Tokoyo took him for Yofuné-Nushi, the evil god of whom the
priest had spoken. The god made no sign of life, however, and Tokoyo saw
that it was no god, but only a wooden statue of Hojo Takatoki, the man
who had exiled her father. At first she was angry and inclined to wreak
her vengeance on the statue; but, after all, what would be the use of
that? Better do good than evil. She would rescue the thing. Perhaps it
had been made by some person who, like her father, had suffered at the
hands of Hojo Takatoki. Was rescue possible? Indeed it was more: it was
probable. So perceiving, Tokoyo undid one of her girdles and wound it
about the statue, which she took out of the cave. True, it was
waterlogged and heavy; but things are lighter in the water than they are
out, and Tokoyo feared no trouble in bringing it to the surface—she was
about to tie it on her back. However, the unexpected happened.

She beheld, coming slowly out of the depths of the cavern, a horrible
thing, a luminous phosphorescent

 

<span id="img_21"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![21. O Tokoyo sees
Yofuné-Nushi Coming Towards Her](tn/21.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/21.jpg)  
21. O Tokoyo sees Yofuné-Nushi Coming Towards Her  
</span>

 

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

creature of the shape of a snake, but with legs and small scales on its
back and sides. The thing was twenty-seven or eight shaku (about
twenty-six feet) in length. The eyes were fiery.

Tokoyo gripped her dagger with renewed determination, feeling sure that
this was the evil god, the Yofuné-Nushi that required annually a girl to
be cast to him. No doubt the Yofuné-Nushi took her for the girl that was
his due. Well, she would show him who she was, and kill him if she
could, and so save the necessity of further annual contributions of a
virgin from this poor island's few.

Slowly the monster came on, and Tokoyo braced herself for the combat.
When the creature was within six feet of her, she moved sideways and
struck out his right eye. This so disconcerted the evil god that he
turned and tried to re-enter the cavern; but Tokoyo was too clever for
him. Blinded by the loss of his right eye, as also by the blood which
flooded into his left, the monster was slow in his movements, and thus
the brave and agile Tokoyo was able to do with him much as she liked.
She got to the left side of him, where she was able to stab him in the
heart, and, knowing that he could not long survive the blow, she headed
him off so as to prevent his gaining too far an entrance into the cave,
where in the darkness she might find herself at a disadvantage.
Yofuné-Nushi, however, was unable to see his way back to the depths of
his cavern, and after two or three heavy gasps died, not far from the
entrance.

Tokoyo was pleased at her success. She felt that she had slain the god
that cost the life of a girl a-year to the people of the island to which
she had come in search of

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

her father. She perceived that she must take it and the wooden statue to
the surface, which, after several attempts, she managed to do,—having
been in the sea for nearly half-an-hour.

In the meantime the priest and the little girl had continued to gaze
into the water where Tokoyo had disappeared, marvelling at her bravery,
the priest praying for her soul, and the girl thanking the gods. Imagine
their surprise when suddenly they noticed a struggling body rise to the
surface in a somewhat awkward manner! They could not make it out at all,
until at last the little girl cried, 'Why, holy father, it is the girl
who took my place and dived into the sea! I recognise my white clothes.
But she seems to have a man and a huge fish with her.'

The priest had by this time realised that it was Tokoyo who had come to
the surface, and he rendered all the help he could. He dashed down the
rocks, and pulled her half-insensible form ashore. He cast his girdle
round the monster, and put the carved image of Hojo Takatoki on a rock
beyond reach of the waves.

Soon assistance came, and all were carefully removed to a safe place in
the village. Tokoyo was the heroine of the hour. The priest reported the
whole thing to Tameyoshi, the lord who ruled the island at the time, and
he in his turn reported the matter to the Lord Hojo Takatoki, who ruled
the whole Province of Hoki, which included the Islands of Oki.

Takatoki was suffering from some peculiar disease quite unknown to the
medical experts of the day. The recovery of the wooden statue
representing himself made

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

it clear that he was labouring under the curse of some one to whom he
had behaved unjustly—some one who had carved his figure, cursed it, and
sunk it in the sea. Now that it had been brought to the surface, he felt
that the curse was over, that he would get better; and he did. On
hearing that the heroine of the story was the 'daughter of his old enemy
Oribe Shima, who was confined in prison, he ordered his immediate
release, and great were the rejoicings thereat.

The curse on the image of Hojo Takatoki had brought with it the evil
god, Yofuné-Nushi, who demanded a virgin a-year as contribution.
Yofuné-Nushi had now been slain, and the islanders feared no further
trouble from storms. Oribe Shima and his brave daughter O Tokoyo
returned to their own country in Shima Province, where the people hailed
them with delight; and their popularity soon re-established their
impoverished estates, on which men were willing to work for nothing.

In the island of Kamijima (Holy Island) in the Oki Archipelago peace
reigned. No more virgins were offered on June 13 to the evil god,
Yofuné-Nushi, whose body was buried on the Cape at the shrine where our
story begins. Another small shrine was built to commemorate the event.
It was called the Tomb of the Sea Serpent.

The wooden statue of Hojo Takatoki, after much travelling, found a
resting-place at Honsoji, in Kamakura.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[102:1](atfj19.htm#fr_28) Since writing this, I
have found that there is a very small island, called Kamishima, between
the two main islands of the Oki Archipelago, south-west of the eastern
island.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVIII. Cape of the Woman's Sword](atfj20)

</div>
