<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj54)  [Next](atfj56) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

### LIII

### THE PRECIOUS SWORD 'NATORI NO HOTO'

IDE KAMMOTSU was a vassal of the Lord of Nakura town, in Kishu. His
ancestors had all been brave warriors, and he had greatly distinguished
himself in a battle at Shizugatake, which took its name from a mountain
in the province of Omi. The great Hideyoshi had successfully fought in
the same place so far back as in the eleventh year of the Tensho Era
1573-1592—that is, 1584—with Shibata Katsuiye. Ide Kammotsu's ancestors
were loyal men. One of them as a warrior had a reputation second to
none. He had cut the heads off no fewer than forty-eight men with one
sword. In due time this weapon came to Ide Kammotsu, and was kept by him
as a most valuable family treasure. Rather early in life Kammotsu found
himself a widower. His young wife left a son, called Fujiwaka. By and by
Kammotsu, feeling lonely, married a lady whose name was Sadako. Sadako
later bore a son, who was called Goroh. Twelve or fourteen years after
that, Kammotsu himself died, leaving the two

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

sons in charge of Sadako. Fujiwaka was at that time nineteen years of
age.

Sadako became jealous of Fujiwaka, knowing him, as the elder son, to be
the heir to Kammotsu's property. She tried by every means to put her own
son Goroh first.

In the meantime a little romance was secretly going on between a
beautiful girl called Tae, daughter of Iwasa Shiro, and young Fujiwaka.
They had fallen in love with each other, were holding secret meetings to
their hearts' content, and vowing promises of marriage. At last they
were found out, and Sadako made their conduct a pretext for driving
Fujiwaka out of the house and depriving him of all rights in the family
property.

Attached to the establishment was a faithful old nurse, Matsue, who had
brought up Fujiwaka from his infancy. She was grieved at the injustice
which had been done; but little did she think of the loss of money or of
property in comparison with the loss of the sword, the miraculous sword,
of which the outcast son was the proper owner. She thought night and day
of how she might get the heirloom for young Fujiwaka.

After many days she came to the conclusion that she must steal the sword
from the Ihai (shrine—or rather a wooden tablet in the interior of the
shrine, bearing the posthumous name of an ancestor, which represents the
spirit of that ancestor).

One day, when her mistress and the others were absent, Matsue stole the
sword. No sooner had she done so than it became apparent that it would
be some months perhaps before she should be able to put it into the
hands of the rightful owner. For of Fujiwaka nothing had been heard

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

since his stepmother had driven him out. Fearing that she might be
accused, the faithful Matsue dug a hole in the garden near the ayumiya—a
little house, such as is kept in every Japanese gentleman's garden for
performing the Tea Ceremony in,—and there she put the sword, meaning to
keep it hidden until such time as she should be able to present it to
Fujiwaka.

Sadako, having occasion to go to the butsudan the day after, missed the
sword; and, knowing O Matsue to have been the only servant left in the
house at the time, taxed her with the theft of the sword.

Matsue denied the theft, thinking that in the cause of justice it was
right of her to do so; but it was not easy to persuade Sadako, who had
Matsue confined in an outhouse and gave orders that neither rice nor
water was to be given her until she confessed. No one was allowed to go
near Matsue except Sadako herself, who kept the key of the shed, which
she visited only once every four or five days.

About the tenth day poor Matsue died from starvation. She had stuck
faithfully to her resolution that she would keep the sword and deliver
it some day to her young master, the lawful heir. No one knew of
Matsue's death. The evening on which she had died found Sadako seated in
an old shed in a remote part of the garden, and trying to cool herself,
for it was very hot.

After she had sat for about half-an-hour she suddenly saw the figure of
an emaciated woman with dishevelled hair. The figure appeared from
behind a stone lantern, glided along towards the place where Sadako was
seated, and looked full into Sadako's face.

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

Sadako immediately recognised Matsue, and upbraided her loudly for
breaking out of her prison.

'Go back, you thieving woman!' said she. 'I have not half finished with
you yet. How dare you leave the place where you were locked up and come
to confront me?'

The figure gave no answer, but glided slowly along to the spot where the
sword had been buried, and dug it up.

Sadako watched carefully, and, being no coward, rushed at the figure of
Matsue, intending to seize the sword. Figure and sword suddenly
disappeared.

Sadako then ran at top speed to the shed where Matsue had been
imprisoned, and flung the door open with violence. Before her lay Matsue
dead, evidently having been so for two or three days; her body was thin
and emaciated. '

Sadako perceived that it must have been the ghost of O Matsue that she
had seen, and mumbled 'Namu Amida Butsu; Namu Amida Butsu,' the Buddhist
prayer asking for protection or mercy.

After having been driven from his family home, Ide Fujiwaka had wandered
to many places, begging his food. At last he got some small employment,
and was able to support himself at a very cheap inn at Umamachi Asakusa
Temple.

One midnight he awoke and found standing at the foot of his bed the
emaciated figure of his old nurse, bearing in her hands the precious
sword, the heirloom valued beyond all others. It was wrapped in scarlet
and gold brocade, as it had been before, and it was laid reverentially
by the figure of O Matsue at Fujiwaka's feet.

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

'Oh, my dear nurse,' said he, 'how glad am I———' Before he had closed
his sentence the figure had disappeared.

My story-teller did not say what became of Sadako or of her son.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LIV. The White Serpent God](atfj56)

</div>
