<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj23)  [Next](atfj25) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span id="img_26"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![26. They Monkeys
Listen to the Priest's Sermon](tn/26.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/26.jpg)  
26. They Monkeys Listen to the Priest's Sermon  
</span>

### XXII

### REINCARNATION

IN the far-north and mountainous portion of Echigo Province is a temple
which during the reign of the Emperor Ichijo had a curious story
attached to it; and, though the Emperor Ichijo reigned so long ago as
between the years 987 and 1011 A. D., the teller of the story assured me
that he believed the temple to be in existence still.

The temple's name is Kinoto, and it is situated in the hills in wild
woods, which in those days must have been almost virgin forest.

The monk who reigned supreme over the Kinoto Temple was a youngish man,
but very devout; he read sacred sermons from the holy Buddhist Bible,
aloud, twice a-day.

One day the good youth perceived that two monkeys had come down from the
mountain and sat listening to his reading with serious faces and no
tricks. He was amused, and, taking no notice, continued to read. As soon
as he had finished, the monkeys went off into the hills.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

The monk was surprised to see the monkeys appear at both his sermons
next day; and when on the third day they came again he could not help
asking why they came so regularly.

'We have come, holy father, because we like to hear the words and
sermons of Buddha as read by yourself, and greatly do we desire to
retain all the wisdom and virtues which we have heard you recite. Is it
possible for you to copy out the great and holy Buddhist book?'

'It would be a very laborious affair,' answered the priest, highly
astonished; 'but, so rare an interest is it that you animals take in the
sermons of our Great Lord Buddha, I will make an effort to satisfy your
wish, hoping that thereby you may be benefited.'

The monkeys bowed and left the priest, pleased with themselves and the
promise they had obtained, while the priest set to at his gigantic
labours of copying the Buddhist Bible. Some six or seven days later
about five hundred monkeys came to the temple, each bearing parchment
paper, which they laid before the priest, their foreman saying how
deeply grateful they would be when they had got the copy of the Bible,
so that they might know the laws and mend their ways; and, bowing again
before the priest, they retired, all except the first two monkeys. These
two set diligently to work to find food for the priest while he wrote.
Day after day they went into the mountains, returning with wild fruits
and potatoes, honey and mushrooms; and the priest wrote steadily on,
being thus attended, until he had copied five volumes of the sacred
book.

When he had reached the end of the fifth volume

 

<span id="img_27"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![27. The Priest Writes
the First Five Volumes](tn/27.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/27.jpg)  
27. The Priest Writes the First Five Volumes  
</span>

 

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the monkeys, for some unaccountable reason, failed to come, and the good
priest was quite nervous on their account. The second day of their
absence he went in search of them, fearing that they must have been
overcome by some misfortune. Everywhere the priest found traces of their
forages in his behalf,—branches broken off the wild fruit trees,
scratchings and holes where they had been looking for wild potatoes.
Evidently the monkeys had worked hard, and the poor priest felt deeply
anxious on their account.

At last, when near the top of the mountain, his heart gave a bound and
was filled with sorrow when he came to a hole which the monkeys had made
in looking for wild potatoes—so deep that they had been unable to get
out. No doubt both of them had died of broken hearts, fearing that the
priest would think they had deserted him.

There remained nothing to do but to bury the monkeys and pray for their
blessing; which he did. Shortly after this the priest was called away
from the temple to another: so, as he saw no necessity to continue
copying the Buddhist Bible, he put the five volumes he had copied into
one of the pillars of the temple, which had a sort of shelf cupboard cut
in it.

Forty years later there arrived at the temple one Kinomi-ta-ka Ason, who
had become Governor or Lord of Echigo Province. He came with half of his
retainers and domestics, and asked the priests if they knew anything of
the unfinished copy of the Buddhist Bible. Was it in the temple still?

'No,' they said, 'we were none of us here at the

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

time your Lordship mentions. But there is one old man, a servant, who is
eighty-five years of age, and he may be able to tell you something. We
will send for him.'

Shortly afterwards a man with flowing white beard was ushered in.

'Is it the old document that a priest began copying out for the monkeys
you want? Well, if so, that has never been touched since, and is a
matter of so little importance that I had nearly forgotten about it. The
document is in a little secret shelf which is hollowed out in one of the
main pillars of the temple. I will fetch it.'

Some ten minutes later the documents were in the hands of Kinomi-ta-ka
Ason, who was in ecstasy of delight at the sight of them. He told the
priests and the old man that he was the Lord of Echigo Province, and
that he had journeyed all the way to their temple to see if unfinished
volumes of the Bible remained there.

'For,' he said, 'I was the senior of the two monkeys who were so anxious
to obtain copies of the whole of our Lord Buddha's sermons; and, now
that I have been born a man, I wish to complete them.'

Kinomi-ta-ka Ason was allowed to take the five volumes away with him,
and for five years he kept copying out the sacred book. He copied three
thousand volumes in all, and it is said that they are now kept in the
Temple of Kinoto, in Echigo, as its most sacred treasure.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. The Diving-Woman of Oiso Bay](atfj25)

</div>
