<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj42)  [Next](atfj44) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

<span id="img_47"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![47. The Spirit of the
One-Eyed Priest, Yenoki, Appears to Sonobé](tn/47.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/47.jpg)  
47. The Spirit of the One-Eyed Priest, Yenoki, Appears to Sonobé  
</span>

### XLI

### THE SPIRIT OF YENOKI <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

THERE is a mountain in the province of Idsumi called Oki-yama (or Oji
Yam a); it is connected with the Mumaru-Yama mountains. I will not vouch
that I am accurate in spelling either. Suffice it to say that the story
was told to me by Fukuga Sei, and translated by Mr. Ando, the Japanese
translator of our Consulate at Kobe. Both of these give the mountain's
name as Okiyama, and say that on the top of it from time immemorial
there has been a shrine dedicated to Fudo-myo-o (*Achala*, in Sanskrit,
which means 'immovable,' and is the god always represented as surrounded
by fire and sitting uncomplainingly on as an example to others; he
carries a sword in one hand, and a rope in the other, as a warning that
punishment awaits those who are unable to overcome with honour the
painful struggles of life).

Well, at the top of Oki-yama (high or big mountain) is this very old
temple to Fudo, and many are the

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

pilgrimages which are made there annually. The mountain itself is
covered with forest, and there are some remarkable cryptomerias, camphor
and pine trees.

Many years ago, in the days of which I speak, there were only a few
priests living up at this temple. Among them was a middle-aged man,
half-priest, half-caretaker, called Yenoki. For twenty years had Yenoki
lived at the temple; yet during that time he had never cast eyes on the
figure of Fudo, over which he was partly set to guard; it was kept shut
in a shrine and never seen by any one but the head priest. One day
Yenoki's curiosity got the better of him. Early in the morning the door
of the shrine was not quite closed. Yenoki looked in, but saw nothing.
On turning to the light again, he found that he had lost the use of the
eye that had looked: he was stone-blind in the right eye.

Feeling that the divine punishment served him well, and that the gods
must be angry, he set about purifying himself, and fasted for one
hundred days. Yenoki was mistaken in his way of devotion and repentance,
and did not pacify the gods; on the contrary, they turned him into a
tengu (long-nosed devil who dwells in mountains, and is the great
teacher of jujitsu).

But Yenoki continued to call himself a priest—'Ichigan Hoshi,' meaning
the one-eyed priest—for a year, and then died; and it is said that his
spirit passed into an enormous cryptomeria tree on the east side of the
mountain. After that, when sailors passed the Chinu Sea (Osaka Bay), if
there was a storm they used to pray to the one-eyed priest for help, and
if a light was seen on the top of Oki-yama they had a sure sign

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

that, no matter how rough the sea, their ship would not be lost.

It may be said, in fact, that after the death of the one-eyed priest
more importance was attached to his spirit and to the tree into which it
had taken refuge than to the temple itself. The tree was called the
Lodging of the One-eyed Priest, and no one dared approach it—not even
the woodcutters who were familiar with the mountains. It was a source of
awe and an object of reverence.

At the foot of Oki-yama was a lonely village, separated from others by
fully two ri (five miles), and there were only one hundred and thirty
houses in it.

Every year the villagers used to celebrate the 'Bon' by engaging, after
it was over, in the dance called 'Bon Odori.' Like most other things in
Japan, the 'Bon' and the 'Bon Odori' were in extreme contrast. The Bon'
was a ceremony arranged for the spirits of the dead, who are supposed to
return to earth for three days annually, to visit their family
shrines—something like our All Saints' Day, and in any case quite a
serious religious performance. The 'Bon Odori' is a dance which varies
considerably in different provinces. It is confined mostly to
villages—for one cannot count the pretty geisha dances in Kyoto which
are practically copies of it. It is a dance of boys and girls, one may
say, and continues nearly all night on the village green. For the three
or four nights that it lasts, opportunities for flirtations of the most
violent kind are plentiful. There are no chaperons (so to speak), and
(to put it vulgarly) every one 'goes on the bust'! Hitherto-virtuous
maidens spend the night out as

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

impromptu sweethearts; and, in the village of which this story is told,
not only is it they who let themselves go, but even young brides also.

So it came to pass that the village at the foot of Oki-yama
mountain—away so far from other villages—was a bad one morally. There
was no restriction to what a girl might do or what she might not do
during the nights of the 'Bon Odori.' Things went from bad to worse
until, at the time of which I write, anarchy reigned during the festive
days. At last it came to pass that after a particularly festive 'Bon,'
on a beautiful moonlight night in August, the well-beloved and charming
daughter of Kurahashi Yozaemon, O Kimi, aged eighteen years, who had
promised her lover Kurosuke that she would meet him secretly that
evening, was on her way to do so. After passing the last house in her
mountain village she came to a thick copse, and standing at the edge of
it was a man whom O Kimi at first took to be her lover. On approaching
she found that it was not Kurosuke, but a very handsome youth of
twenty-three years. He did not speak to her; in fact, he kept a little
away. If she advanced, he receded. So handsome was the youth, O Kimi
felt that she loved him. 'Oh how my heart beats for him!' said she.
'After all, why should I not give up Kurosuke? He is not good-looking
like this man, whom I love already before I have even spoken to him. I
hate Kurosuke, now that I see this man.'

As she said this she saw the figure smiling and beckoning, and, being a
wicked girl, loose in her morals, she followed him and was seen no more.
Her family were

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

much exercised in their minds. A week passed, and O Kimi San did not
return.

A few days later Tamae, the sixteen-year-old daughter of Kinsaku, who
was secretly in love with the son of the village Headman, was awaiting
him in the temple grounds, standing the while by the stone figure of
Jizodo (Sanskrit, *Kshitigarbha*, Patron of Women and Children).
Suddenly there stood near Tamae a handsome youth of twenty-three years,
as in the case of O Kimi; she was greatly struck by the youth's beauty,
so much so that when he took her by the hand and led her off she made no
effort to resist, and she also disappeared.

And thus it was that nine girls of amorous nature disappeared from this
small village. Everywhere for thirty miles round people talked and
wondered, and said unkind things.

In Oki-yama village itself the elder people said:

'Yes: it must be that our children's immodesty since the 'Bon Odori' has
angered Yenoki San: perhaps it is he himself who appears in the form of
this handsome youth and carries off our daughters.'

Nearly all agreed in a few days that they owed their losses to the
Spirit of the Yenoki Tree; and as soon as this notion had taken root the
whole of the villagers locked and barred themselves in their houses both
day and night. Their farms became neglected; wood was not being cut on
the mountain; business was at a standstill. The rumour of this state of
affairs spread, and the Lord of Kishiwada, becoming uneasy, summoned
Sonobé Hayama, the most celebrated swordsman in that part of Japan.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

'Sonobé, you are the bravest man I know of, and the best fighter. It is
for you to go and inspect the tree where lodges the spirit of Yenoki.
You must use your own discretion. I cannot advise as to what it is best
that you should do. I leave it to you to dispose of the mystery of the
disappearances of the nine girls.'

'My lord,' said Sonobé, 'my life is at your lordship's call. I shall
either clear the mystery or die.'

After this interview with his master Sonobé went home. He put himself
through a course of cleansing. He fasted and bathed for a week, and then
repaired to Oki-yama.

This was in the month of October, when to me things always look their
best. Sonobé ascended the mountain, and went first to the temple, which
he reached at three o'clock in the afternoon, after a hard climb. Here
he said prayers before the god Fudo for fully half an hour. Then he set
out to cross the short valley which led up to the Oki-yama mountain, and
to the tree which held the spirit of the one-eyed priest, Yenoki.

It was a long and steep climb, with no paths, for the mountain was
avoided as much as possible by even the most adventurous of woodcutters,
none of whom ever dreamed of going up as far as the Yenoki tree. Sonobé
was in good training and a bold warrior. The woods were dense; there was
a chilling damp, which came from the spray of a high waterfall. The
solitude was intense, and once or twice Sonobé put his hand on the hilt
of his sword, thinking that he heard some one following in the gloom;
but there was no one, and by five o'clock Sonobé had reached the tree
and addressed it thus:

'Oh, honourable and aged tree, that has braved

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

centuries of storm, thou hast become the home of Yenoki's spirit. In
truth there is much honour in having so stately a lodging, and therefore
he cannot have been so bad a man. I have come from the Lord of Kishiwada
to upbraid him, however, and to ask what means it that Yenoki's spirit
should appear as a handsome youth for the purpose of robbing poor people
of their daughters. This must not continue; else you, as the lodging of
Yenoki's spirit, will be cut down, so that it may escape to another part
of the country.'

At that moment a warm wind blew on the face of Sonobé, and dark clouds
appeared overhead, rendering the forest dark; rain began to fall, and
the rumblings of earthquake were heard.

Suddenly the figure of an old priest appeared in ghostly form, wrinkled
and thin, transparent and clammy, nerve-shattering; but Sonobé had no
fear.

'You have been sent by the Lord of Kishiwada,' said the ghost. 'I admire
your courage for coming. So cowardly and sinful are most men, they fear
to come near where my spirit has taken refuge. I can assure you that I
do no evil to the good. So bad had morals become in the village, it was
time to give a lesson. The villagers’ customs defied the gods. It is
true that I, hoping to improve these people and make them godly, assumed
the form of a youth, and carried away nine of the worst of them. They
are quite well. They deeply regret their sins, and will reform their
village. Every day I have given them lectures. You will find them on the
"Mino toge," or second summit of this mountain, tied to trees. Go there
and release them, and afterwards tell the Lord of

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kishiwada what the
spirit of Yenoki, the one-eyed priest, has done, and that it is always
ready to help him to improve his people. Farewell!'

No sooner had the last word been spoken than the spirit vanished.
Sonobé, who felt somewhat dazed by what the spirit had said, started off
nevertheless to the 'Mino toge'; and there, sure enough, were the nine
girls, tied each to a tree, as the spirit had said. He cut their bonds,
gave them a lecture, took them back to the village, and reported to the
Lord of Kishiwada.

Since then the people have feared more than ever the spirit of the
one-eyed priest. They have become completely reformed, an example to the
surrounding villages. The nine houses or families whose daughters
behaved so badly contribute annually the rice eaten by the priests of
Fudo-myo-o Temple. It is spoken of as 'the nine-families rice of Oki.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[259:1](atfj43.htm#fr_42) Fukuga Sei said that
this was an old story told him by his nurse, who was a native of the
village of Oki-yama; also, that a solid gold Buddha, eighteen inches in
height, had been stolen from the temple three years ago.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLII. The Spirit of the Lotus Lily](atfj44)

</div>
