<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj57)  [Next](atfj59) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

<span id="img_61"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![61. The Spirit of the
Willow Tree Appears to Gobei](tn/61.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/61.jpg)  
61. The Spirit of the Willow Tree Appears to Gobei  
</span>

### LVI

### THE SPIRIT OF A WILLOW TREE SAVES FAMILY HONOUR

LONG ago there lived in Yamada village, Sarashina Gun, Shinano Province,
one of the richest men in the northern part of Japan. For many
generations the family had been rich, and at last the fortune descended
in the eighty-third generation to Gobei Yuasa. The family had no title;
but the people treated them almost with the respect due to a princely
house. Even the boys in the street, who are not given to bestowing
either compliments or titles of respect, bowed ceremoniously when they
met Gobei Yuasa. Gobei was the soul of good-nature, sympathetic to all
in trouble.

The riches which Gobei had inherited were mainly money and land, about
which he worried himself very little; it would have been difficult to
find a man who knew less and cared less about his affairs than Gobei. He
spent his money freely, and when he came to think of accounts his easy
nature let them all slide. His great pleasures were painting kakemono
pictures, talking to his friends, and eating good things. He ordered his
steward

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

not to worry him with unsatisfactory accounts of crops or any other
disagreeable subjects. 'The destiny of man and his fate is arranged in
Heaven,' said he. Gobei was quite celebrated as a painter, and could
have made a considerable amount of money by selling his kakemonos; but
no—that would not be doing credit to his ancestors and his name.

One day, while things were going from bad to worse, and Gobei was seated
in his room painting, a friend came to gossip. He told Gobei that the
village people were beginning to talk seriously about a spirit that had
been seen by no fewer than three of them. At first they had laughed at
the man who saw the ghost; the second man who saw it they were inclined
not to take quite seriously; but now it had been seen by one of the
village elders, and so there could be no doubt about it.

'Where do they see it?' asked Gobei.

'They say that it appears under your old willow tree between eleven and
twelve o'clock at night—the tree that hangs some of its boughs out of
your garden into the street.'

'That is odd,' remarked Gobei. 'I can remember hearing of no murder
under that tree, nor even spirit connection with any of my ancestors;
but there must be something if three of our villagers have seen it. Yet,
again, where there is an old willow tree some one is sure to say, sooner
or later, that he has seen a ghost. If there is a spirit there, I wonder
whose it is? I should like to paint the ghost if I could see it, so as
to leave it to my descendants as the last ominous sign on the road which
has led to the family's ruin. That I shall make an effort

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

to do. This very evening I will sit up to watch for the thing.'

Never had Gobei been seized with such energy before. He dismissed his
friend, and went to bed at four o'clock in the afternoon, so as to allow
himself to be up at ten o'clock. At that hour his servant awoke him; but
even then he could not be got up before eleven. By twelve o'clock,
midnight, Gobei was at last out in his garden, hidden in bushes facing
the willow. It was a bright night, and there was no sign of any ghost
until after one o'clock, when clouds passed over the moon. Just when
Gobei was thinking of going back to bed, he beheld, arising from the
ground under the willow, a thin column of white smoke, which gradually
assumed the form of a charming girl.

Gobei stared in astonishment and admiration. He had never thought that a
ghost could be such a vision of beauty. Rather had he expected to see a
white, wild-eyed, dishevelled old woman with protruding bones, the
spectacle of whom would freeze his marrow and make his teeth clatter.

Gradually the beautiful figure approached Gobei, and hung its head, as
if it wished to address him.

'Who and what are you?' cried Gobei. 'You seem too beautiful, to my
mind, to be the spirit of one who is dead. If you are indeed spectral,
do tell me, if you may, whose spirit you are and why you appear under
this willow tree!'

'I am not the spirit or ghost of man, as you say,' answered the spirit,
'but the spirit of this willow tree.'

'Then why do you leave the tree now, as they tell

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

me you have done several times within the last ten days?'

'I am, as I say, the spirit of this willow, which was planted here in
the twenty-first generation of your family. That is now about six
centuries ago. I was planted to mark the place where your wise ancestor
buried a treasure—twenty feet below the ground, and fifteen from my
stem, facing east. There is a vast sum of gold in a strong iron chest
hidden there. The money was buried to save your house when it was about
to fall. Never hitherto has there been danger; but now, in your time,
ruin has come, and it is for me to step forth and tell you how by the
foresight of your ancestor you have been saved from disgracing the
family name by bankruptcy. Pray dig the strong box up and save the name
of your house. Begin as soon as you can, and be careful in future.'

Then she vanished.

Gobei returned to his house, scarcely believing it possible that such
good luck had come to him as the spirit of the willow tree planted by
his wise ancestor had said. He did not go to bed, however. He summoned a
few of his most faithful servants, and at daybreak began digging. What
excitement there was when at nineteen feet they struck the top of an
iron chest! Gobei jumped with delight; and it may almost be said that
his servants did the same, for to see their honoured master's name fall
into the disgrace of bankruptcy would have caused many of them to
disembowel themselves.

They tore and dug with all their might, until they had the huge and
weighty case out of the hole. They broke off the top with pickaxes, and
then Gobei saw a

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

collection of old sacks. He seized one of these; but the age of it was
too great. It burst, and sent rolling out over a hundred immense
old-fashioned oblong gold coins of ancient times, which must have been
worth £30 each. Gobei Yuasa's hand shook. He could hardly realise as
true the good fortune which had come to him. Bag after bag was pulled
out, each containing a small fortune, until finally the bottom of the
box was reached. Here was found a letter some six hundred years of age,
saying:

'He of my descendants who is obliged to make use of the treasure to save
our family reputation will read aloud and make known that this treasure
has been buried by me, Fuji Yuasa, in the twenty-first generation of our
family, so that in time of need or danger a future generation will be
able to fall back upon it and save the family name. He whose great
misfortune necessitates the use of the treasure must say: "Greatly do I
repent the folly that has brought the affairs of our family so low, and
necessitated the assistance of an early ancestor. I can only repay such
by diligent attention to my household affairs, and also show high
appreciation and give kindness to the willow tree which has so long been
watching and guarding my ancestor's treasure. These things I vow to do.
I shall reform entirely."'

Gobei Yuasa read this out to his servants and to his friends. He became
a man of energy. His lands and farms were properly taken care of, and
the Yuasa family regained its influential position.

Gobei painted a kakemono of the spirit of the willow tree as he had seen
her, and this he kept in his own room during the rest of his life. It is
the famous painting, in

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

the Yuasa Gardens to-day, which is called 'The Willow Ghost,' and
perhaps it is the model from which most of the willow-tree-ghost
paintings have sprung.

Gobei fenced in the famous willow tree, and attended to it himself; as
did those who followed him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: LVII. The Camphor Tree Tomb](atfj59)

</div>
