<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Japan](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](atfj10)  [Next](atfj12) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Ancient Tales and Folk-lore of Japan*, by Richard Gordon Smith,
\[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span id="img_12"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![12. The Procession of
Ghosts](tn/12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12.jpg)  
12. The Procession of Ghosts  
</span>

### IX

### 'THE PROCESSION OF GHOSTS' <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

SOME four or five hundred years ago there was an old temple not far from
Fushimi, near Kyoto. It was called the Shozenji temple, and had been
deserted for many years, priests fearing to live there, on account of
the ghosts which were said to haunt it. Still, no one had ever seen the
ghosts. No doubt the story came into the people's minds from the fact
that the whole of the priests had been killed by a large band of robbers
many years beyond the memory of men—for the sake of loot, of course.

So great a horror did this strike into the minds of all, that the temple
was allowed to rot and run to ruin.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

One year a priest, a pilgrim and a stranger, passed by the temple, and,
not knowing its history, went in and sought refuge from the weather,
instead of continuing his journey to Fushimi. Having cold rice in his
wallet, he felt that he could not do better than pass the night there;
for, though the weather might be cold, he would at all events save
drenching the only clothes which he had, and be well off in the morning.

The good man took up his quarters in one of the smaller rooms, which was
in less bad repair than the rest of the place; and, after eating his
meal, said his prayers and lay down to sleep, while the rain fell in
torrents on the roof and the wind howled through the creaky buildings.
Try as he might, the priest could not sleep, for the cold draughts
chilled him to the marrow. Somewhere about midnight the old man heard
weird and unnatural noises. They seemed to proceed from the main
building.

Prompted by curiosity, he arose; and when he got to the main building he
found Hiyakki Yakô (meaning a procession of one hundred ghosts)—a term,
I believe, which had been generally applied to a company of ghosts. The
ghosts fought, wrestled, danced, and made merry. Though greatly alarmed
at first, our priest became interested. After a few moments, however,
more awful spirit-like ghosts came on the scene. The priest ran back to
the small room, into which he barred himself; and he spent the rest of
the night saying masses for the souls of the dead.

At daybreak, though the weather continued wet, the priest departed. He
told the villagers what he had seen,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

and they spread the news so widely that within three or four days the
temple was known as the worst-haunted temple in the neighbourhood.

It was at this time that the celebrated painter Tosa Mitsunobu heard of
it. Having ever been anxious to paint a picture of Hiyakki Yakô, he
thought that a sight of the ghosts in Shozenji temple might give him the
necessary material: so off to Fushimi and Shozenji he started.

Mitsunobu went straight to the temple at dusk, and sat up all night in
no very happy state of mind; but he saw no ghosts, and heard no noise.

Next morning he opened all the windows and doors and flooded the main
temple with light. No sooner had he done this than he found the walls of
the place covered, as it were, with the figures or drawings of ghosts of
indescribable complexity. There were far more than two hundred, and all
different.

Could he but remember them! That was what Tosa Mitsunobu thought.
Drawing his notebook and brush from his pocket, he proceeded to take
them down minutely. This occupied the best part of the day.

During his examination of the outlines of the various ghosts and goblins
which he had drawn, Mitsunobu saw that the fantastic shapes had come
from cracks in the damp deserted walls; these cracks were filled with
fungi and mildew, which in their turn produced the toning, colouring,
and eventually the figures from which he compiled his celebrated picture
Hiyakki Yakô. <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23) Grateful

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

was he to the imaginative priest whose stories had led him to the place.
Without him never would the picture have been drawn; never could the
horrible aspects of so many ghosts and goblins have entered the mind of
one man, no matter how imaginative.

My painter's illustration gives a few, copied from a first-hand copy of
Mitsunobu's.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[61:1](atfj11.htm#fr_22) Somewhere between the
years 1400 and 1550 there lived a family of celebrated painters covering
three generations, and consequently difficult to be accurate about.
There were Tosa Mitsunobu, Kano Mitsunobu, and Hasegawa Mitsunobu;
sometimes Tosa Mitsunobu signed his pictures as Fujiwara Mitsunobu. When
to this I add that there were other celebrated painters—Kano Masanobu,
Kano Motonobu, besides their families, imitators, and name forgers—you
will realise the difficulties into which one may fall in fixing on names
and dates; but, as usual, I have been placed safely on high ground by a
kind friend, H.E. Mr. Hattori, the Governor, whose knowledge of Art is
great. Undoubtedly it was Tosa Mitsunobu who painted the picture known
as the Hiyakki Yakô, or as 'The One Hundred Ghosts' Procession, which is
celebrated, and has served as a map of instruction in the drawing of
hobgoblins and ghosts, 'spooks,' 'eries,' or whatever you may choose to
call them. As far as I can judge, the picture was painted about the end
of the first half of the fifteenth century.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[63:1](atfj11.htm#fr_23) It is well known that
certain fungi and mildews produce phosphorescent light amid certain
circumstances. No doubt the priest saw the cracks in the wall amid these
<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> circumstances, and the noise he heard
was made by rats. I once read a story about a haunted country-house in
England, the ghost in which was eventually found to be a luminous
fungus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. A Faithful Servant](atfj12)

</div>
