[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ct01)  [Next](ct03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# INTRODUCTION.

THE texts contained in the present volume represent two different
collections. The first nineteen myths were collected by me in the summer
of 1909, under the auspices of the Bureau of American Ethnology. My sole
informant was Jim Buchanan, a Coos Indian, living in Acme, Lane County,
Oregon. He is at the present time the only member of the Coos tribe who
still remembers and can relate coherently some of the: myths and
traditions of the by-gone generations. The texts numbered 20-32 were
collected by Mr. Harry Hull St. Clair, 2d, in the summer of 1903. His
informants, I understand, were Jim Buchanan and Tom Hollis, the latter
of whom lives at present on the Siletz Reservation, in the State of
Oregon.

Owing to the fact that a few texts obtained from Jim Buchanan were not
as vivid in his memory as some of the other traditions, they will be
found lacking in continuity of narration and in clearness of
description. Some of these texts are abundant in obscure passages. We
are in certain cases especially in doubt as to the performer of an
action or to the identity of the speaker. While it might have been
comparatively easy to restore to these passages their original
definiteness, I thought it advisable (mainly from linguistic
considerations) to let them stand as they were narrated, leaving the
interpretation of the intended meaning to the good judgment of the
reader.

As might have been expected, Mr. St. Clair's system of writing down the
Indian texts is quite different from

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

the one adopted by me. I did not, however, on the whole, encounter any
difficulties in transcribing his phonetic system in accordance with my
own. Only in a few cases were the discrepancies so great as to
necessitate a distinct treatment. These cases either cover words and
phrases not familiar to me through my own texts, or they represent
expressions which, in my judgment, may have been misheard, and
consequently mis-spelled, by Mr. St. Clair. All such passages are
printed in this work in Italics, and are accompanied in most cases by
footnotes, in which I endeavor to show the original expression that may
have been intended by the narrator. Section numbers referred to in the
footnotes are those in my grammar of the Coos language, in "Handbook of
American Indian Languages" (Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 40,
Part 2).

     HARTLEY HALL,  
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY,  
        June, 1910.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alphabet](ct03.md)
