[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ct03)  [Next](ct05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

# CREATION MYTHS.

### I. ARROW YOUNG MEN (THE CREATION OF THE WORLD).

Two young men were travelling. They stopped in the middle of their
journey, (and one of them said,) "How would it be if we two should try
it? What do you think about it?"--"It would be good if we two should try
it," answered the other one. "We ought to try it with that soot here."
They had five pieces (disks) of soot. Now they stopped and dropped one
piece into the ocean. The <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> world at that
time was without land. Everything was covered with water. Again they
dropped one piece (disk). The ocean was rolling over the disk. The next
day they dropped another disk. Then they stopped at some small place and
dropped another disk into the ocean. They looked at it from above, Now
land began to appear, and they saw it. They were very glad when they saw
the land coming up.

The next day they dropped another disk. Land began to stick out (come
up). They looked frequently at the waves, that rolled back and forth
continually. "What is <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> your opinion?" said
one of the two men. Shall we try it again?"--"With what shall we try
it?" asked the other one. The water was still rolling back and forth.
"Let us split this mat." They did so, and placed the two pieces over the
five disks of soot. Now they went down to examine it. Still the land was
not solid enough. So one of them said, "Let us split this basket in
two!" They split it, and put it on the sand beach. The waves <span
id="page_8">p. 8</span> were held back now, since the water was able to
go down through the basket. Now the young men went down and examined the
land. "This will do," said one of them. "It's good that way."

Now they began to look around the world which they had created. There
were no trees. "Suppose we set up some trees," said one of them. "It
would be very good," answered the other one. Then they stuck into the
ground the feathers of an eagle. The feathers began <span id="page_9">p.
9</span> to grow, and developed soon into fir-trees. "All kinds of trees
shall grow," said the older man. All the different kinds of trees
commenced to grow. "Suppose we create animals," said one of the young
men. "It won't be good if there shouldn't be any animals. The future
generations ought to have animals." (Then they created animals.)

Early in the morning they went to look at the world they had created.
Suddenly they saw tracks on the ocean beach. "Whose tracks may these
be?" asked one of them. They followed the tracks, and soon came upon a
person <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> sitting (on the top of a snag).
"You, indeed, must have made these tracks. Who are you?"--"I am a
medicine-man," answered the person whose face was painted all over with
red paint. "You have no right to travel here. This is our world, we have
made it. Are you surely a medicine-man?" They seized the stranger and
killed him. Then they spilled his blood in all directions, and said to
him, "You will be nothing, the last generation shall see you."

Then they turned back. Suddenly one of them became pregnant. The child
could not come out. "What will become of us? We ought to have wives."
None of them had done anything; nevertheless he became pregnant. <span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> The child was all the time trying to come out,
but could not do it. So they sent some one to the north, and told him,
"There is a man living there. He is a good man. Bring him here." Some
one went to get him. They went out in a canoe. To their surprise, there
were no waves. So they wished that waves would come. "Five times shall
the north wind come and (bring) five breakers." And so it was. They were
waiting for the fifth wave. And when this came, they went ashore. (They
found the <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> man, and brought him to the
pregnant person.) As soon as he saw the pregnant man, he took out the
child. It was a girl. From this girl all the people took their origin.
She caused the people to multiply, and to inhabit the world.

Now the young men continued their journey. They once more examined the
world which they had created, and found it to be good. Everything began
to assume its present appearance.

They both had bows. "How would it be if we should shoot towards the
sky?" Indeed, they began to shoot. They looked at their arrows as they
were shooting them. <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> "You too ought to
shoot one arrow," said one of the young men. "Shoot it so that it shall
hit the shaft of mine, and it will look as if it were one arrow; but
don't shoot too hard!" He shot and hit it. "Shoot again!" Their arrows
became joined, and reached down to the place where they were standing.
"Suppose we climb up now!"--"All right!" They shook the, arrows. "Are
they firm? Won't they come apart?--Now you try to climb up!" He climbed
up. "This is very good indeed." <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> Then the
other man climbed up. They looked down, and saw the beautiful appearance
of the world which they had created. Nobody knows what became of the two
young men. Here the story ends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Crow (and the Thunder-Bird)](ct05)
