[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ct08)  [Next](ct10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 6. THE FLOOD.

When (one day) the flood-tide (came), there (was) no ebb-tide.
(Everything was) full of water. Not long (afterwards) the water
(reached) its full (mark). The earth was entirely filled with people.
There were too many people, and they looked at the water as it (reached)
its full (mark).

Some people had big canoes, and some had small canoes. All kinds of
people crowded in when they settled down on the earth. Some people had
stored away braided ropes. So they quickly went into the canoes. All
people became thus scared.

The earth sank into the water. Wherever a small (piece of land) was
sticking out, there they went. A small <span id="page_47">p. 47</span>
piece of land was sticking out. There the people assembled. All kinds of
animals came there in pairs. All kinds of little birds, all came there
in pairs. All kinds of things came there in that manner. They were mixed
up there with the people. It seemed as if no one knew (the other), when
they were thus mixed up with the people. Wherever the top of a fir-tree
was sticking out, there they fastened their canoes to it. Some people
had no braided ropes. Some people drifted far away. Many people had
braided ropes. They no longer knew each other.

The small (piece of) land kept on floating. This was the name of the
small river, "QalâL." <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_2) This one was
sticking out. There the people assembled. There all kinds of things came
together. All kinds of animals were among the people. All kinds of birds
mixed in there in pairs. Nobody knew (the other one). People were
afraid. (The thing that) was sticking out disappeared. They were
scattered everywhere, the people who drifted far away. The water carried
them far away. As soon as night came on, the people had their canoes
fastened. They were watching their canoes. They were watching the canoes
when they were made fast. Some people had short ropes. Suddenly (they
would let them) loose, and (they) would drift away. The water would
carry them away. One-half of the people became thus scattered. They no
longer knew one another.

When evening came, the water ran down. Everywhere people had one canoe
(that was) fastened. They did not know how to take care of the canoes
when the water went (down). Whenever a canoe was caught on a limb, they
would let it loose. Some people did not watch the canoes. They did not
watch them, and the canoes would consequently tip over whenever they got
caught on a limb. This caused their canoes to tip over when night came
<span id="page_49">p. 49</span> on. Thus they were working. They could
not sleep while they were watching their canoes.

When the earth became dry again, the people dropped down to the ground
with their canoes. So again they severally came back there. Everywhere
they settled down individually,--one man with one woman. Thus they
settled down. The animals, too, came back ashore when the earth became
dry. And the little birds (did) likewise. The little birds went
everywhere in pairs. They did not know the place where they dropped
down, and the people (started) to go far away. They did not know where
they dropped down. Thus the people became scattered.

Thus only the story is being told.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[47:2](ct09.htm#fr_4) Across North Bend, called
to-day Kentock Stew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Origin of the Coos People](ct10)
