[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ct15)  [Next](ct17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 13. THE GIANT WOMAN.

(*Second Version*.)

She was all the time stealing people. Whenever she found a person, she
would take him home. No one knew whither she carried them. This became
the topic of their conversation.

One morning many young men from the village came together. One of them
said, "Suppose, we go there!--<span id="page_79">p. 79</span> You shall
hide there at such a distance, while I will do the same." No one knew
how many (men) they were. They went there; and, indeed, (they) were
hidden everywhere, one (by one).

One came there. Indeed, he saw the Giantess going down -into the water.
The young man held a knife. The young man wore a buckskin shirt. The
Giantess smiled as she was coming. "Halloo, my husband! Come! we two
will go home." Thus she said to the young man. "Not so." Thus answered
the young man. "Bring your money!'--"Not so, my husband! Only then shall
you have it, when we get home." Thus spoke the Giantess. "I, too, am a
bad man. Do you see this knife?" Thus spoke the young man. He took off
his shirt. He spread the shirt out on the ground. "This you shall fill
with your money." Indeed, the Giantess went and brought the money. She
put it there in the shirt. "Come now, my husband! we two will go home.
Only then shall you, indeed, have my money." Thus the Giantess spoke.

Five times she went for her money. "Now come, my husband!" The young man
examined it and tried the weight. As he lifted the shirt, it was full.
"This ought to be the right weight." Thus the young man was thinking.
"Come now, my husband! we two will go home." Thus she said to him. "Go
again, bring your money!" Indeed, she went.

The young man ran away. He carried the money and ran. He already saw the
Giantess come. The young man was out of breath, and jumped to one side.
Now another man ran from there and carried the money. The Giantess came
in a hurry. "Come, my husband!" The young man ran, and (then) jumped
aside. Now another person ran from there. He carried the money. "Come,
my husband!" Thus said the Giantess. Thus they ended <span
id="page_81">p. 81</span> it. The last one ran with it. She, too, the
Giantess, ran. She almost overtook him. "Come, my husband!"

The Giantess came to a village. "Which one is my husband?" Thus spoke
the Giantess. She was beaten. Many persons were clubbing her. They hit
her with a knife.. But nothing happened to the Giantess. They were
hitting her with sticks. "What shall we do if we don't kill her?" Thus
they were thinking. Now, the Giantess began to pull them to and fro. She
pulled them in the direction of her home. She dragged them all. Indeed,
she dragged all the people towards her.

There lived one old woman. She had a granddaughter. Thus she said to
her: "Where is she taking them?" Thus she asked her granddaughter. "She
is already far away." Thus spoke her granddaughter. "Take me there,
granddaughter. I know where her vulnerable spot is. Only give me a
knife, granddaughter. We two will go there." Indeed, they two went
there, (she and) her granddaughter. "Come here, O elder sister! You
shall help me." Thus spoke the Giantess. "Is that you, indeed, O
cousin?" Thus that old woman spoke: "Where is her foot?" Thus that old
woman spoke. "You put my hand there." The old woman was blind. Indeed,
they put it there to her foot. The old woman seized the knife. She felt
for her foot, and began to cut her leg. The Giantess fell. The dear old
lady killed the Giantess. Her body was spread out. It was entirely (made
up of) bones. The bones were hard when they examined them. This was the
reason why they could not kill her. No matter (how long) they would
shoot arrows at her, (they) would strike there against her bones. They
also hit her with a knife, and likewise they could not kill her.
However, that dear old lady killed her. That old woman knew her.

Then they all went to get her money, and they divided <span
id="page_83">p. 83</span> among themselves the money of the Giantess.
They were not going to do anything, when they (should) possess the
clothes of the Giantess.

Thus the story is being told. Now there it ends.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. The Giant Women. (Third Version.)](ct17)
