[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ct17)  [Next](ct19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15. THE GIRL AND HER PET.

Five brothers lived (together). Their father and mother were alive.
Their sister was in the habit of bathing all the time. She used to go
bathing early in the morning, and would go bathing in the evening. She
would always (do) that way.

Once she went bathing. The young woman was swimming <span
id="page_87">p. 87</span> (where) there was a somewhat deep place. She
swam naked. One day a small snake was swimming. The snake was as large
as a hair, (and) was very pretty. it swam towards her. She stretched out
her hand, and the little snake came into her hand. She went ashore with
it.. The woman picked up a little moss and put (the snake) there. Then
the woman dressed, and went home with it.

She took it into the house. She took it there where her bed was. "What
am I going to do with it?" Thus she was thinking. Then she gathered
moss. Indeed, she worked hard. There she put the pet. What may it do?"
Thus the woman was thinking.

The parents (of) the woman did not know it. Every evening she would go
bathing. Then she examined the pet. It was big already. The woman was
glad when she saw that it was large. Not long (afterwards) it grew up.
The woman was again picking moss. The woman was always bathing; and
whenever she came home, she would examine it.

She examined it once, and it seemed as if a lump was on its head. She
examined it, and verily she saw (what was) about to develop into horns.
She saw that (they were) large already. Thus she said: "You shall take
care of me, my pet." Thus she said. She was glad when she saw it. Her
elder brothers, her mother, and also her father, came to know it. "What
do you intend to do with it?" And the young. girl answered thus:
"Verily, I will raise it."

The horns were sticking out already. The horns stretched out to (the
roof of) the house. Thus she said to her elder brother: "Tear off these
boards." Indeed, her elder brother tore them off. The two tips \[heads\]
passed out of the house, when the horns grew. It looked very pretty when
they grew up. (The snake) coiled many <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>
times, as it lay. The head was sticking out (from) the middle. It looked
everywhere.

One morning it disappeared. Where may it have gone?" Thus the young girl
was thinking. Suddenly they heard something. They heard something back
in the woods. So they looked there, and ahead of them they saw coming
the grown-up snake. Thus the young girl spoke: "Indeed, it is my pet
that is coming." The pet was dragging (something). The pet had horns. It
was dragging deer. The young girl was very glad when the (pet) brought
home deer. There the pet came back again, and lay down (where it used
to) lie.

Five times it went into the woods. It also brought as many elk; (namely)
five (times). And also five deer it dragged (home). They were very glad.
They became rich when their food was being bought. The two horned heads
passed out from (the roof of) the house. It seemed as if the young girl
was afraid of the pet. So (they) let it rest. Their house was full of
food. People were buying their food.

Whenever her pet would disappear, the young girl would think thus:
"Where may it have gone?" Suddenly she saw a wind on the water. "What
may be the thing I see on the water? I never saw such a wind." Suddenly
she saw (the pet) swimming in the water. Behind (it) a whale was
coining. It brought the whale ashore, when it (the pet) returned. They
cut (the whale) into pieces. Again the pet came back, where it usually
lay.

Five times it was dragging (something from) the ocean. It kept on
bringing home as many whales. The owners became rich while the (food)
was being bought. Thus it said to its master: "I am going home to the
ocean. I shall not come back. This will be the end. I shall leave you
now. You shall not think of me. Whenever the time comes, I will again
give you (with a) whale. You shall <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> watch
for it." Thus it spoke to its master. "I will always be (the cause of
it), whenever the water gets rough." Thus it spoke. "Whenever a person
travels in a canoe, (and) the water gets rough, I shall cause the water
to go under the canoe."

Indeed, it was thus. The nephew (pet) went home to the ocean. It may be
there to-day. It went out to the mouth of the river, and let itself down
there into the water.

Now this is the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 16. The Five Grizzly-Bears](ct19.md)
