[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ct31)  [Next](ct33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 29. THE WOMEN WHO MARRIED THE BEAVER.

Two girls lived in Takimiya, and their relatives told them (to go) to
Tsketc. A chief's son was living there. <span id="page_175">p.
175</span> He (had) lots of money and many sea-otter hides. The young
man usually hunted sea-otters. And a Beaver worked (for him), and also a
Muskrat worked (for him). They two would skin (the animals) (while) they
two were working (for him). They two lived below him.

So the young girls were going (one after the other). Thus some one told
them: "He has no wife. You two go there to the chief's son. Him you two
shall take for a husband." Now, they two arrived there. They two arrived
at the house of the Beaver and Muskrat. They two found a somewhat
good-looking man. Then they two began to think, "It must be here that we
two were sent." Then they two married the Beaver, and lived there. In
the evening the Beaver spoke thus: "I am going fishing." He was gone one
night. When he came back, thus he said to his wives: "There are trout in
my canoe. The big trout belongs to you, and the small trout belong to
your younger sister." So early in the morning they two went down to the
water. They two looked everywhere. They two did not see anything. Not
even a canoe did they two see. A snag only was lying at his
landing-place. Willow-leaves only were lying (on top) at the end of the
snag. Long salmon-berry sticks only were on top, lying crossways in the
middle of the log. So they two turned back and said, "We two saw
nothing." Thus they two said. "Beaver cuttings only we two saw lying on
the top of a log." So that old man yelled. He was angry at his wives.
They two saw nothing inside. The Beaver had no food. They two saw only
many sea-otter hides, the hides of the chief's son, (for) whom they two
were working.

So the next night he went fishing again a whole night. Now, indeed, the
next day he brought home (some) trout. So they two went to get it, and
they two cooked it. This <span id="page_177">p. 177</span> was their
(dual) food. And small (quantities of) camas was their (dual) lunch. And
they two gave the camas to the old Beaver. He had no teeth, and could
not eat the camas. So he did not want the camas. He would throw it into
his mouth, and it would again drop out. The people living up the river
were watching him. That old man seemed to be getting lively. His cheeks
seemed (to be painted with) red paint. Now Beaver went there to the
chief's son. He asked Beaver, "Why is your cheek (full of) red paint?"
That old man seemed to laugh, and then said, "Perhaps something came
from some place." He would not say why his cheeks were (full of) red
paint.

Now, one (day) early in the morning a man was bathing up the river,
where (the girls) were living. (He was a) good-looking young man. His
clothes had many beads on them. Thus they two were thinking: "This must
be the place we two were sent to. We two must have made a mistake." So
on that day he changed himself into a sea-otter, and began to swim
around. The women saw him. The women were pretty. They pursued him with
arrows. Beaver, Muskrat, and the women got into a canoe, and they
pursued the sea-otter. Once (when) the sea-otter seemed to come (out)
near, Beaver took his bow and shot one arrow. The shot reached only
halfway Then Muskrat shot. He almost hit the sea-otter. So the two women
became angry. Thus they two said to him, "Your shot fell short close by
right here; but your little brother almost hit the sea-otter." So that
old man became angry, (and said,) "Why don't you two go (with the) man
whose shot (went) far?" So they did not kill the sea-otter. Then they
went ashore and returned.

And that young sea-otter went home instantly. So thus they two said: "We
two must have made a mistake. <span id="page_179">p. 179</span> That
young man must have been doing it thus. He always does (it) that way."
(It is said that they were heard to say thus.) Then they two began thus
to think: "We two will go there." So they two found the house. They two
saw a pretty young man inside. So thus they two said to him: "You are
our (dual) husband." Then the young man thought thus: "Of course, it is
good. I shall (have) both (for) my wives." Then at night they went to
bed.

And the next day he woke up sick. (He was) very sick. Something came out
on his skin, and he just became (full of) maggots. The younger girl no
longer wanted the young man; but the older one took care of him, and
washed him. Then one (day) the older woman thus said to him: "I will
take you home to my folks." So the young man was thinking thus: "Of
course, I will go with you." Then they went on the beach. He became very
sick. He was (covered) entirely with maggots. He could hardly walk. And
the young girl carried (packed) him frequently. The younger girl no
longer wanted the young man. Whenever they would sit down to rest, the
younger girl would sit a little ways off. So they very nearly got back.
The young man began thus to think: "It will look bad if I get there that
way." So he said thus to his wife: "You two go (ahead), I will come
somewhat later. I won't turn back. You shall wait for me there." And he
went away. He washed himself, changed his clothes, and again looked just
as they two had seen him first. Both of the women had baskets (as)
packs. When he overtook the women, they two just turned over their
baskets, and they are still there. The baskets turned into stone there.
Again his beauty was such (as) when they two saw him first. And the
younger girl again seemed to like him. But he did not want her: he
wanted only the older girl. Then they got back.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

At the same time Beaver got angry. He came to know (that) the young man
had carried off his wives. So he assembled many people. He was going to
kill the chief's son, (because) he had taken away his wives. Now they
almost arrived there. Thus he said to his suite: "You must stay here. I
will go first. I want to see him." Thus he said to his suite: "If I get
killed, you will scent swamp-roots."

So the people that came with him were waiting. Now he went and came to
the house. Now he struck the door four times with a big knife. So then
he asked, "Where is TsaneL?" He opened the door and looked inside. So
thus they told him: "Come in! Your wives are here below." When he
entered, they beat him, and (then) killed him; and they took his knife
and made a tail (out of it). Then they threw him into the lake. "You
shall be nothing. You shall be a beaver. The last people shall usually
see you." And the people that were waiting for him surely scented
swamp-roots, and so they all went back. They were going home
(severally).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 30. The Woman Who Became a Bear](ct33)
