[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt01)  [Next](dlt03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

# PREFATORY NOTE.

FOR a right understanding of what the Gospels teach concerning the "last
things" it is indispensable that the antecedents upon which that
teaching was, in the first instance, based should be studied.
Eschatology, like so many other things, went through a process of
development before it assumed that form which the Gospels have made so
familiar to us. No developed growth can be satisfactorily studied
without knowing something about its earlier processes of formation and
the conditions under which development took place. And, therefore, if we
wish to understand what the Gospels teach concerning the "end of the
world," the first requisite is that we should have some idea of that
earlier

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

teaching upon which it is based. Where is this earlier teaching to be
found? Firstly, in the Old Testament; secondly, and chiefly, in the
Apocalyptic literature; and thirdly, though in a much less degree, in
Rabbinical literature, wherein are re-echoed so many of the popular
conceptions on this subject which were current in our Lord's day. It is
the main object of the following pages to offer to the general reader
some insight into what these three classes of literature have to say
upon the subject under consideration.

In order to show in the clearest manner the character of these
antecedents, it has been thought well to give a goodly number of
quotations from each class of literature. This seemed the more necessary
because the connection between the Gospel Eschatology and that which
preceded it cannot be adequately realised unless the *ipsissima verba*
of each are placed side by side and compared; but it is very tedious to
be constantly

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

interrupting the reading by turning up references, and therefore to have
these quoted in full before one will, it is hoped, be found to be a
considerable convenience. In the case of the Apocalyptic and Rabbinical
literatures it seemed doubly necessary to give quotations, and not
merely references, because many of the editions of the works belonging
to those two classes of literature are, owing to their expense,
unavailable for those who have not the use of a good theological
library.

But while the purpose of this book is, in the main, to present in
popular form an outline of the antecedents of Christ's doctrine of the
"last things," it is impossible to remain altogether silent upon some
topics which inevitably suggest themselves. When it is found, for
example, that there is substantial identity in a number of essential
points between the Eschatology of the Gospel and its antecedents, many
people will be inclined

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

to wonder whether there is anything at all original and specific in the
Gospel teaching on the subject. Therefore it has been attempted here to
indicate certain crucial points on which there is a fundamental
difference between the Gospel teaching and its antecedents.

Further, another question which arises is as to why it was that Christ
based so much of His eschatological teaching, both as regards thought
and form, on what had preceded; the attempt is made to answer this
question as well.

The whole subject of Eschatology is of vast area; it ramifies to an
amazing extent, and it is full of perplexing problems. Of these latter
the most critical one is undoubtedly the question as to how far the
Eschatology of the Gospels actually represents, on the one hand, the
teaching of our Lord, and, on the other, the belief of the early Church.
Many people will be inclined to say that

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

this is a preliminary which ought to be dealt with before the subject
itself is taken in hand. But the writer has deliberately and of set
purpose avoided this thorny subject here, and for several reasons. In
the first place, his main object, for the present, has been to examine
the antecedents; in the second, the task of attempting to differentiate
between the sources of the Gospels is not one to place before general
readers; it would necessarily take up a great deal of space, it would
involve much diversion from the main subject in hand, and it is quite
certain that final conclusions cannot be reached until scholars have
expended a great deal more labour upon the problems involved. A third
reason is that, in any case, the Gospels are so saturated with
Eschatology that even if a great deal of it were eliminated the kernel
would remain, and this, as will be seen in the two last chapters of the
book, is what really counts.

At the same time the writer is fully aware

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

that it is only a corner of the subject which is touched upon here;
indeed, it is little more than an introduction to one department of the
subject that has been attempted.

But, as already hinted, the following pages are not intended for
scholars; they are written, in the first place, for the large number of
clergy whose manifold parochial duties make it impossible for them to
find the requisite time for investigating the subject at first hand
themselves, and who, nevertheless, desire to have, in succinct form, an
outline of some of the main elements of Eschatology as they existed in
pre-Christian times. So that, although very far from exhaustive, the
material here offered may, it is hoped, be useful to many of the clergy.
In the second place, the writer has had in mind that large and
increasing body of lay men and women who are deeply interested in the
theological thought of the day, and who may desire to have some insight
into one of the various New Testament

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

problems which are exercising the minds of scholars at the present time.

The writer feels it incumbent upon him to take this opportunity of
expressing his indebtedness and gratitude to the Rev. Professor Charles
for his invaluable editions of Apocalyptic writings; without his
published texts and translations, with their suggestive notes, workers
in this field of study would be placed at a great disadvantage.

The writer desires also to express his sincere thanks to the Rev. Cyril
W. Emmet for his assistance in correcting the proof-sheets.

W. O. E. O.                 

HATCH END, *Advent* 1908.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1. The Antecedents of the Gospel Teaching:
Introductory](dlt03.md)
