[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt08)  [Next](dlt10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### ESCHATOLOGICAL TEACHING IN RABBINICAL LITERATURE.

IT may not be altogether without interest, as illustrating the growth of
some of the ideas referred to in the preceding chapters, to take a brief
glance at some of the eschatological ideas contained in the later Jewish
literature. Frequently, however, what is said on the subject in this
literature reflects much earlier thought; so that while in some cases we
may trace development, in others it is nothing more than the
crystallisation of traditions that have been handed down for
generations.

#### §i. *The Signs which precede the End*. <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44.md)

In Rabbinical writings the technical term for the terrors of the "last
times," previous

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

to the Advent of the Messiah, is *Cheble ha-Meshiach* or *Cheblo shel
Mashiach*, the "birth-pangs," <span id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45.md) or
"travail" of the Messiah (*Shabbath* 118*a*). In the Mishnah tractate,
*Sota* ix. 15, we have the following account of these travails: "As
traces of the approach of Messiah are to be regarded that arrogance
increases, ambition shoots up, that the vine yields fruit and yet wine
is dear. The government turns to heresy. There is no instruction. The
place of assembly (the synagogue) is devoted to lewdness. Galilee is
destroyed, Gablan laid waste. The inhabitants of a district go from city
to city without finding compassion. The wisdom of the learned is hated,
the godly despised, truth is absent. Boys insult old men, old men stand
in the presence of children. The son depreciates his father, the
daughter rebels against the mother, the daughter-in-law against the
mother-in-law. A man's enemies are his house-fellows." <span
id="fr_46"></span>[2](#fn_46.md) In the "years" immediately preceding the
Advent of the Messiah each year is to be characterised by a special
plague; the rise of false Messiahs

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

is also one of the signs of the end the study of the *Torah* ("Law")
will cease, heresy will increase, and men will give up hoping for the
Messiah <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) (*Sanhedrin* 97*a*.md); see
also *Pesikta* 51*b*. In the *Apocalypse of Abraham* xxx., a Jewish work
of the second century A.D., ten "plagues" are mentioned as portents of
the Advent of the Messiah: distress, fire, pestilence among the beasts,
famine, earthquakes, and wars, hail and frost, ravening wild beasts,
pestilence and death among men, destruction and flight, and subterranean
noises. The War of Gog and Magog is also frequently referred to in
Rabbinical literature (*Berachoth* 7*b*, *Pesikta* 79*a*, etc.; see, for
further references, the *Jewish Encyclopædia*, v. 212; and §iii. of this
chapter).

#### §ii. *The Advent of the Messiah*.

In Rabbinical literature there is never any ambiguity about the central
person of the Eschatological Drama; in the Old Testament it is sometimes
[Jehovah](errata.htm#2.md) Himself Whose Advent as Judge is looked for, at
other times it is one who is subordinate to Him; in the Apocalyptic
literature also we come across passages in which God Himself is the
central

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

figure at the "last times," though more generally it is His Messiah. In
the writings which we are now considering it is invariably the Messiah,
and none other, whose Advent is spoken of. But it is taught that the
Advent of the Messiah is only an episode in the life of one who has
existed from all time; King Messiah, it is said, pre-existed before the
Creation of the world. <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48.md) According to
Weber, however, the meaning of this statement is that it was God's will
from all eternity to create the Messiah and to send Him into the
world; <span id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49.md) that is to say, He existed
potentially, but not actually, from all time. In the later Jewish
theology it is taught that the Messiah lives in the Garden of Eden. But
in spite of this pre-existence of the Messiah, whether from all eternity
or of more limited duration, He is to be born of a woman and is to be of
the seed of David (*Bereshith rabbah* c. xii., *Sanhedrin* 93*b*); it is
said in *Pesikta* 149*a*: "Happy the hour in which the Messiah was born,
happy the womb from which he came forth! <span
id="fr_50"></span>[3](#fn_50.md) Happy the generation that sees him; happy
the eye that is honoured by looking up him!" <span
id="fr_51"></span>[4](#fn_51.md) Thus the Messiah is always regarded

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

as *human* and nothing more, and this in spite of His being reckoned as
superior to the angels. It is instructive to observe that the accounts
of the actual Advent of the Messiah in Rabbinical literature are
generally wanting in all the supernatural *traits* which we read of in
the Old Testament descriptions of the Advent as well as in those of the
Apocalyptic literature; this must in great part, if not altogether, be
due to the purely human character ascribed to the Messiah in Rabbinical
literature. He comes as the warring champion of His people to deliver
them from the oppression of their enemies; this is clearly seen in the
*Targum of Jonathan* to Isa. lii. 14, 15; it is here said that at the
Messiah's Advent He will destroy many peoples, and He will silence Kings
by His wonderful deeds; then, in dealing with Isa. liii. 2, the *Targum*
tells of the coming Messiah as the Righteous One; and there follows a
description of His power and majesty; He will annihilate the wealthy and
the great, and thus take away the reproach of His people. As the
deliverer (*Goel*; "Redeemer" seems too strong a word to use, as it
connotes more in Christian phraseology than in Jewish) of His people,
the Messiah is compared to Moses, who delivered the Israelites from the
Egyptian

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

bondage (*cf.* 1 Cor. x. 1-4); and it is said, therefore, that just as
Moses lived in retirement before he came forth for his work of leading
the Israelites out of Egypt, so will the Messiah be in hiding for some
time previous to His Advent; this is brought out in *Pesikta* 49*b*:
"Just as the first Goel (*i.e.*, Moses) manifested himself to Israel and
then hid himself from them, so will the last Goel (*i.e.*, the Messiah)
manifest himself first, and then hide himself from the people. For how
long?--For forty-five days, according to Dan. xii. 11. 12. And whither
will he lead them? Some say: into the Judæan desert; others: into the
desert of Sihon and Og, according to Hos. ii. 16. . . ." <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52.md)

These passages are sufficient to show that the teaching in Rabbinical
literature concerning the actual Advent differs considerably from that
of the Old Testament and Apocalyptic literature.

#### §iii. *The Judgement on the Wicked*.

One of the main elements in Rabbinical Eschatology is the War of Gog and
Magog (*cf.* chap. iii. §ii.); this idea is, of course,

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

based on Ezek. xxxviii. 14-xxxix. 16, but it is greatly elaborated in
this later literature. This "War" represents the final attack of the
Gentiles, expressed collectively by the term "Gog and Magog," upon the
Messiah and His faithful followers; the point of the whole conception is
to set forth the doctrine of the Judgement upon the Wicked in the "last
times." As is to be expected, a Particularistic attitude is taken in the
Rabbinical writings, that is to say, the Gentiles are as a body regarded
as the "Wicked," and as such are to be condemned to eternal punishment,
while the people of the Messiah, *i.e.*, the Jews, are to inherit the
happiness and glory of the Messianic Kingdom. At the same time, it is
only fair to remember that the Rabbis were to a large extent forced into
this Particularistic attitude by their contemplation of the actual
sinfulness of the non-Jewish world; above all, the non-recognition of
Jehovah and the non-observance of His Law on the part of the Gentile
world must have made the heathen peoples appear as outside the pale of
divine mercy in the eyes of the Rabbis. This is well illustrated in
*Abodah Zarah* 8*b*, where it is said that the War of Gog and Magog
against the Messiah is not

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

only undertaken because of the enmity of the Gentiles towards the
Messiah, but also because they desire to do away altogether with the Law
of God. Moreover, it is not only against the Law of God that the
Gentiles are described as fighting in the "last times," but against God
Himself; thus Rabbi Levi, in *Pesikta* 79*a*, explains the words of
Zech. xiv. 3 (*Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those
nations, as when he fought in the day of battle*) as referring to the
"last times," and God is made to say to the Gentiles: "Sinner, thou
comest to try conclusions with Me! As thou livest, I will make war
against thee." <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53.md) In the same way in
*Mechilta* 48*b*, Psalm ii. is explained as referring to the War of Gog
and Magog; Jehovah laughs them to scorn, the armies of Gog and Magog
will suffer the fate of Pharaoh and his host, they will be swallowed up
by the deep, so that the very fish will tremble (*cf.* Ezek. xxxviii.
20); it is Jehovah Himself Who will fight against Gog and Magog, and
will destroy the Gentile hosts, Israel alone will be saved. <span
id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54) (See, further, the next section..md)

Speaking generally, therefore, the Judgement

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

on the Wicked in the "last times" is to be executed, according to
Rabbinical teaching, rather on account of Gentile enmity than on account
of their wickedness; though they are reckoned among the wicked
indiscriminately because of their repudiation of the Law of Jehovah.
(See, further, the *Targum of Pseudo-Jonathan* on Num. xi. 26.)

#### §iv. *The Blessedness of the Righteous*.

From what has been said in the preceding section we shall expect to find
Particularistic views held with regard to the Righteous in Rabbinical
literature; and for the most part this is so. It is Israel, the people
of the Law, for whom Blessedness is reserved. The materialistic views
always held with regard to the Messianic Kingdom naturally resulted in
the idea, not infrequently expressed, that in the Messianic Era the
requirements of the Law--in particular the sacrificial and priestly
laws--would be strictly observed; it was this observance which
constituted righteousness, and brought with it its reward. It is true
that sometimes another and very remarkable view is met with, viz., that
a new Law would be proclaimed by the Messiah; in the *Targum* 

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

to Isa. xii. 3, for example, it says: "Ye shall receive a new Law from
the Elect One of the Righteous"; and a Midrashic passage, commenting on
Eccles. xi. 8. (*All is vanity*), declares: "The Law which man learns in
this world is nothing in comparison with the Law of the Messiah"
(*Midrash Koheleth*, on xi. 8). But the Righteous who are to enjoy this
Law are the Chosen People, and they only. The general attitude of
Rabbinical teaching on this subject is expressed in the Talmud thus: "In
the Messianic time no proselytes will be received" (*Abodah Zarah*
3*b*). But within the ranks of Israel a great differentiation is made
between the righteous and the evil, and their lot in the "last times" is
very different. The wicked Israelites share the same fate as the heathen
Gentiles; they are to die the eternal death in Gehenna; this is their
merited punishment. This teaching is, however, often found modified; it
is taught that originally Gehenna was never intended to receive
Israelites, but only Gentiles; but, at any rate, for Israelites it is
only a place of purification, while for the Gentiles it is a place of
punishment. Then, again, it is taught that Gehenna is only for those
Gentiles who have forsaken God and served idols

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (*Sanhedrin* 105*a*), so that here the
blessedness of the Righteous among the Gentiles is contemplated. Later
Judaism takes this milder and more rational view. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55.md) Of the lot of the Righteous and the
Wicked, generally, after the "last times," the few following references
will give a good idea: in *Abodah Zarah* 3*b* it is said of the sun that
with its blazing rays it will torment the Wicked, but refresh the
Righteous; in *Shemoth rabbah* c. xiv. it is said that in Gehenna the
Wicked are covered in darkness; in *Bereshith rabbah* c. xii. it is said
that death shall be altogether taken away; this must, of course, be
spoken of in reference to the Righteous; above all things, after the
terrors of the "last times" have passed away, the Righteous who will
have been spared will enjoy great peace in the Messianic Kingdom.

From the two preceding sections it will be seen that the Judgement upon
the Wicked and the Blessedness of the Righteous include the subjects of
the Gathering of the Gentiles and the Ingathering of Israel; for the
final gathering together of these is, speaking quite generally, for the
purpose of assigning to them their punishment and reward respectively.
It will, therefore, not be necessary to devote

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

special sections here to the consideration of their final gathering.
(See chaps. iii. §§ii., iii.; vi. §§i. ii.)

#### §v. *The Resurrection of the Dead*.

As we have already seen (chaps. iii. §iv.; vi. §iii.), the Resurrection
formed part of the Messianic hope both in Old Testament and Apocalyptic
writings. The Rabbinical literature has much to say on this subject; in
the first place, "the very term used to express the idea of sharing in
the future life is 'to inherit the land' (*Sanhedrin* xi. 1, with
reference to Isa. lx. 21). The Resurrection, therefore, was believed to
take place solely in the Holy Land (*Pesikta rabbah* i. after Psalm
cxvi. 9). . . . Jerusalem alone is the city of which the dead shall
blossom forth like grass (*Kethuboth* 111*b*, after Psalm lxxii. 16).
Those that are buried elsewhere will therefore be compelled to creep
through cavities in the earth until they reach the Holy Land (*Pesikta
rabbah* i., with reference to Ezek. xxxvii. 13; *Kethuboth*
111*a*)." <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56.md) Here again we meet with
Particularistic views (in later times Universalistic ideas on the
subject came to the fore, see below), and

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

this is further illustrated by the fact that it was taught that in order
that *all* Israel might partake of the joys of the Messianic Kingdom,
those who had died before the coming of the Messiah and who were
gathered in Sheol, would be brought up from there; the one condition was
that they should have the mark of the Covenant (*i.e.* Circumcision);
this, of course, precluded the Gentiles, according to the early
Rabbinical view, from hoping for the Resurrection. It was further taught
that all those who are imprisoned in Sheol should be brought out by the
Messiah, who Himself would come and fetch them thence (*cf.* 1 Pet. iii.
19); <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57.md) in *Bereshith rabbah* we read:
"And when they that were bound in Gehinnom saw the light of the Messiah,
they rejoiced in receiving Him, and said, This is He who will lead us
out of darkness" (see Jellinek, *Beth Hamidrash* ii. 50). After they
have been brought out of Sheol there will follow the Resurrection of the
Just. God, it is said further, will give the Messiah the "Key" of the
Resurrection of the dead (*Sanhedrin* 113*a*). Elsewhere (*Jer. Targum*
to Exod. xx. 15, *cf.* *Berachoth* 15*b*) it is said that the trumpet
shall be blown to arouse the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

dead, and that this will be the signal for the Resurrection. (*Cf.* Isa.
xxvii. 13; 1 Cor, xv. 52; 1 Thess. iv. 16). Another interesting belief
was that men would rise from the dead in the same clothes in which they
had been laid in the tomb. In *Sanhedrin* 90*b* this is paralleled by
the example of a grain of wheat, which does not come forth from the
earth naked, but covered in its garment (*cf.* 1 Cor. xv. 37); and if
this is so with a grain of wheat, how much more with the human body! It
is for this reason that minute directions are given by dying Rabbis
regarding the clothes in which they are going to be buried. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58.md) But in later times the circumscribed idea
of the Resurrection of Israel alone gave way to that of a general
Resurrection; "as in the course of time the national hope with its
national resurrection and final day of judgement no longer satisfied the
intellect and human sentiment, the resurrection assumed a more universal
and cosmic character. It was declared to be solely the act of God, Who
alone possesses the Key that will unlock the tombs (*Berachoth* 15*b*).
. . . Nor is the wrath of the last judgement believed any longer to be
brought upon the heathen solely as such.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

\[paragraph continues\] All evil-doers who have blasphemed God and His
Law, or acted unrighteously, will meet with their punishment (*Tos.
Sanh.* xiii.; *Midr. Teh.* vi. 1, ix. 15)." <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md)

#### §vi. The Messianic Banquet.

This has been referred to in chap. iii. v. and vi. §iv., where we saw
that the subject is mentioned several times in the Apocalyptic
literature; it plays a more prominent part in Rabbinical literature,
thus, in the *Targum of Pseudo-Jonathan* to Num. xi. 26 ff., in the
prophecy of Eldad and Medad, we are told of this Messianic Banquet at
which the Israelites will feast with great joy upon the ox that has been
prepared for them for this purpose from the beginning. Bousset (*Die
Religion des Judenthums im neutestamentlichen Zeitalter*, p. 271)
mentions a parallel idea in Iranian Eschatology, according to which the
marrow of the slain ox Hadhayos is to be the food of immortality for the
Righteous. But it is in connection with Leviathan that the Messianic
Banquet is usually referred to in Rabbinical literature; for example, in
*Baba Bathra* 74*a*,

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

it is said that at the time of the Resurrection a banquet will be given
by God to the Righteous, and that at this feast the flesh of Leviathan
will be eaten. Very quaint ideas of a haggadic character (*i.e.*
didactic narrative) figure in this literature; according to one, it
appears that prior to the Banquet the Righteous will take part in the
hunting of Leviathan and Behemoth; the angel Gabriel has the task of
slaying Leviathan, but he will not be able to accomplish it without the
help of God, Who will therefore come and divide the monster with His
sword. According to another haggadah, when Gabriel fails, God will order
Leviathan to engage in a battle with the "ox of the mountain," which
will result in the death of both of them (*Baba [Bathra](errata.htm#3.md)*
75*a*); then Leviathan will be cut up and eaten by the Righteous. These
haggadahs are probably based upon such passages as Isa. xxvii. 1: *In
that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish
Leviathan the swift serpent, and Leviathan the crooked serpent; and he
shall slay the dragon that is in the sea?* Psalm lxxiv. 12-15: . . . .
*Thou didst break the heads of the Leviathan, thou wilt give him for
food* . . . .; <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md) Job. xxvi.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

\[paragraph continues\] 12, 13, and others. As Leviathan represents the
principle of evil, his destruction symbolises the end of sin; <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61.md) the banquet on his flesh, which is a much
later idea, is interpreted by Maimonides as being an allusion to the
spiritual enjoyment of the intellect; <span
id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62.md) originally it probably connoted something
far more materialistic, and it may be safe to say that it was based upon
the ordinary custom of royal banquets.

#### §vii. *The Appearance of Elijah, the Forerunner*.

The thought of the "Forerunner" is so prominent in the Gospels that a
brief reference to it as regards Jewish post-biblical literature will
not be out of place here. The fact of Elijah's appearance is mentioned
first in Mal. iv. 5: *Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before
the great and terrible day of the Lord come*; though this is, of course,
referred to in Mal. iii. 1, but Elijah is not mentioned by name there;
and in the Gospels the words in Isa. xl. 3, are adapted to the same
purpose,

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

though in their original context the reference is to the historical
conditions of the time: *The voice of one that crieth, Prepare ye in the
wilderness the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a highway
for our God*. How firm the belief was, long before the Christian Era,
that Elijah was to fill this office may be seen from Sir. xlviii. 4-10:
How wast thou glorified, O Elijah, in thy wondrous deeds! And who shall
glory like unto thee? . . . Who was recorded for reproofs in their
seasons, to pacify anger before it brake forth into wrath; to turn the
heart of the father unto the son, and to restore the tribes of Jacob."
According to a tradition contained in *Yalkut Shimeoni*, it is said in
reference to Isa. lii. 7, that three days before the Advent of the
Messiah, Elijah will appear upon the mountains of Israel, and will
announce to the world that the time of peace is about to come; so loud
will his voice be that it will be heard from one end of the earth to the
other. According to *Erubin* 43*a*, Elijah will first present himself
before the Sanhedrin when he comes. In connection with this it is
interesting to note that at the appearance of John the Baptist, priests
and Levites from Jerusalem, and therefore without doubt emissaries from
the central

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Jewish authorities, came to the Baptist in the
wilderness to enquire who he was (John i. 19: *And this is the witness
of John, when the Jews sent unto him from Jerusalem priests and Levites
to ask him, Who art thou?*). But the most important part of the
Rabbinical teaching on the subject is that Elijah will lead the Jews to
repentance when he appears; thus in *Pirqe de-Rabbi Elieser* c. 43, it
says "Israel will not bring forth the 'great repentance' before Elijah
comes" <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) (see Luke i. 16, 17.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[128:1](dlt09.htm#fr_44.md) These sections should
be compared with the corresponding ones in chaps. ii., iii., v., vi.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[129:1](dlt09.htm#fr_45.md) The meaning assigned to
the expression "birth-pangs of the Messiah" is, perhaps, a later
figurative adaptation of what was in the first place understood
literally. It may be a survival of the myth wherein the birth of the
Messiah of the "woman" was described (*cf.* Rev. xii. 1 ff.; Oesterley
and Box, *op. cit.* p. 218).

<span id="fn_46"></span>[129:2](dlt09.htm#fr_46.md) See Schürer, *The
Jewish People in the Time of Jesus Christ*, II. ii. p. 155.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[120:1](dlt09.htm#fr_47.md) A saying of Rabbi Simon
ben Jochai.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[121:1](dlt09.htm#fr_48.md) *Cf.* John viii. 68.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[121:2](dlt09.htm#fr_49.md) Weber, *Juedische
Theologie*, p. 366 ff.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[121:3](dlt09.htm#fr_50.md) *Cf.* Luke xi. 27.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[121:4](dlt09.htm#fr_51.md) Weber, *op. cit.* p.
366.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[133:1](dlt09.htm#fr_52.md) Weber, *op. cit.* p..3
4.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[135:1](dlt09.htm#fr_53.md) Weber, *op. cit.* p.
389.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[135:2](dlt09.htm#fr_54.md) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[138:1](dlt09.htm#fr_55.md) Weber, *op. cit.* pp.
390 ff.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[139:1](dlt09.htm#fr_56.md) *Jewish Encycl.* x.
383b.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[140:1](dlt09.htm#fr_57.md) Weber, *op. cit.* p.
368.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[141:1](dlt09.htm#fr_58.md) Weber, *op. cit.* p.
370.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[142:1](dlt09.htm#fr_59.md) *Jewish Encycl.* x.
384*a*.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[143:1](dlt09.htm#fr_60.md) *Cf.* *The Evolution of
the Messianic Idea*, p. 53.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[144:1](dlt09.htm#fr_61.md) *Cf.* *The Evolution of
the Messianic Idea*, pp. 185 ff.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[144:2](dlt09.htm#fr_62.md) *Jewish Encycl.* viii.
38a.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[146:1](dlt09.htm#fr_63.md) For these references to
the Rabbinical literature see Weber, *op. cit.* pp. 352 ff., *Jewish
Encycl.* v. 126 ff., where many more examples will be found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Coming of the Messiah, The Son of Man](dlt10.md)
