[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt03)  [Next](dlt05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### CHAPTER II.

### THE ANTECEDENTS OF THE GOSPEL TEACHING: THE OLD TESTAMENT.

IN the prophetical writings of the Old Testament we frequently come
across such phrases as "The Day of the Lord," "Those days," "That day,"
"The last days," etc., and around such expressions <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) "there centre certain conceptions and
expectations; a brief study of these must be our present task. It is
necessary, however, to explain at the outset that it is not with the
whole subject of Eschatology in the Old Testament that we propose to
deal, but only with those elements which are directly concerned with the
purpose in hand, viz.: The antecedents of the Gospel teaching. There are
various points in the Eschatological Drama

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

which only indirectly touch our main subject; these we shall leave aside
at present, or, at most, merely allude to in passing.

It will be best for the sake of clearness to deal separately, at least
as far as this is possible, with those elements which come into
consideration here; they are four in number; to these some points of
interest, though of subsidiary importance, will be added later on. These
four elements in the Old Testament doctrine of the "last things" are as
follows:--

i\. The Signs which precede the End.

ii\. The Advent of Jehovah, the Judge.

iii\. The Judgement upon the Wicked.

iv\. The Blessedness of the Righteous.

In drawing attention to some of the passages which deal with these, it
will clearly be impossible to do so in an exhaustive manner; for, on the
one hand, it would become tedious and take up a great deal of space
unnecessarily, and, on the other, it would take us too far afield. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7)

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

#### §i. *The Signs which precede the End*.

The earliest mention that we have of the "Day of the Lord" is in the
book of Amos for the present we do not enquire as to the reasons why
that "Day" was to come about; it is sufficient to say that it heralds
the end of things, that it inaugurates a new era, <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8) and that certain signs precede the opening
of that era. The prophets very frequently connect what they say about
this "Day" with the present conditions of the people, or with various
historical events; but the underlying principles of their teaching
concerning it are unaffected by this; and it is the expression of these
underlying principles with which we have to deal.

In Amos v. 16-18, 20, we read as follows: *Therefore thus said the Lord,
the God of hosts, the Lord: Wailing shall be in all the broad ways; and
they shall say in all the* 

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

*streets, Alas! alas! and they shall call the husbandman to mourning,
and such as are skilful of lamentation to wailing. And in all vineyards
shall be wailing: for I will pass through the midst of thee, saith the
Lord. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord! Wherefore would ye
have the day of the Lord? it is darkness, and not light. . . . Shall not
the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark, and no
brightness in it?* See, too, viii. 9, 10. Two points are noticeable here
regarding the signs which precede the end; sorrow and lamentation among
men, and the terror of darkness in the physical world; the reiteration
of this latter phenomenon emphasises the fact of its inspiring *fear*.
In Isa. viii. 21, 22, we have a passage which is eschatological in form
and thought, though the immediate context in which it stands has nothing
to do with the "last things"; it contains, however, to a large extent,
the same notes as those which occur in the Arnos passage: *And they
shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it shall come to
pass, that, when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and
curse by their king and by their God, and turn their faces upward. And
they shall look unto the earth; and behold distress* 

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

*and darkness, the gloom of anguish; and into thick darkness they shall
be driven away*. Although the text is a little ambiguous here in parts,
it is clear that we have the same combination of thought, viz., sorrow
among men and darkness in the physical world, as was found in the Amos
passage, which is unquestionably eschatological. More pointed and much
richer in detail is Isa. xiii. 6-16: *Howl ye; for the day of the Lord
is at hand; as destruction from the Almighty shall it come. Therefore
shall all hands be feeble, and every heart of man shall melt,. and they
shall be dismayed; pangs and sorrows shall take hold of then; they shall
be in pain as a woman in travail; they shall be amazed one at another;
their faces shall be faces of flame. Behold, the day of the Lord cometh,
cruel, with wrath and fierce anger, to make the land a desolation, and
to destroy the sinners thereof out of it. For the stars of heaven and
the constellations thereof shall not give their light the sun shall be
darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to
shine. . . . Therefore I will make the heavens to tremble, and the earth
shall be shaken out of her place, in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and
in the day of his fierce anger. . . . Every* 

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

*one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one that is taken
shall fall by the sword. Their infants also shall be dashed in pieces
before their eyes; their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives
ravished*.

It is clear from the context that these words were uttered in reference
to historical events, the doom of Babylon being foremost in the
prophet's mind; but the eschatological *traits* contained in the passage
had evidently long before this period assumed a stereotyped character,
for the same distinguishing marks recur again and again in passages of
varied contents and of different ages. That which stands out clearly in
the passage before us is the same as in the two other passages already
quoted--anguish and sorrow among men, and darkness and other terrifying
phenomena in the physical world--only here the words are more striking
owing to the wealth of detail. The same thoughts are expressed in a
somewhat different way in Isa. xxiv. 23; the preceding verses here tell
of the punishment of the proud in the day of the Lord, it then goes on
to say: *Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed; for the
Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion*. In Zeph. i. 14-16, the same
*traits* appear, but in this passage,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

again, the eschatological ideas are connected with, and adapted to,
definite historical events; The great day of the Lord is near, it is
near and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the Lord: the
mighty man crieth there bitterly. That day is a day of wrath, a day of
trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness. A day of
the trumpet and alarm, against the fenced cities, and against the high
battlements. The way in which the stereotyped conceptions concerning the
"Day of the Lord" are utilised and applied to present conditions is well
illustrated in this passage, where the oft-recurring description of the
"darkness" of that Day is followed by reference to a siege. But the most
striking details concerning the signs of the "Day of the Lord" are to be
found in Joel ii. 1 ff.; while we have here a further example of
adaptation to present circumstances, the description of eschatological
data shows distinct development: *Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound
an alarm in my holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land
tremble: for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand; a day
of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness*,

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

*as the dawn spread upon the mountains; a great and strong people, there
hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after them, even
to the years of many generations. A fire devoureth before them; and
behind them a flame burneth. . . . The appearance of them is as the
appearance of horses; and as horsemen so do they run. Like the noise of
the chariots on the tops of the mountains do they leap, like the noise
of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set in
battle array. At their presence the peoples are in anguish: all faces
are waxed pale. . . . The earth quaketh before them; the heavens
tremble; the sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars withdraw their
shining: and the Lord uttereth his voice before his army; for his camp
is very great; for he is strong that executeth his work; for the day of
the Lord is great and very terrible; and who can abide it?* And in
verses 30, 31, of the same chapter: *And I will show wonders in the
heavens and in the earth, blood and fire, and pillars of smoke. The sun
shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great
and terrible day of the Lord come*. And, once more, in Joel iii. 15, 16,
we find for the third time in a short book the description of

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

the darkening of the heavenly bodies: *The sun and the moon are
darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining. And the Lord shall roar
from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; and the heavens and the
earth shall shake*. . . . These Joel passages show with great
distinctness the way in which eschatological teaching is combined with
prophecies about the Jewish nation which are prompted by present
historical conditions. It is important to bear the fact of this
combination in mind; it is characteristic of the writings of all those
prophets who give expression to these eschatological conceptions; and
since the prophets attach them to a large variety of different
historical conditions belonging to periods far apart from each other,
the conclusion is forced upon us that we must recognise in Old Testament
Eschatology a body of beliefs which were common property, belonging to
no *one* age, and evidently of very considerable antiquity. How ancient
these beliefs were, may be seen from the fact that the expression "Day
of the Lord," which according to Hebrew usage sums up and includes the
whole cycle of eschatological conceptions, appears as a well-known
*terminus technicus* the first time it occurs in the Old Testament,
viz., Amos v. 18.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Moreover, there are grounds for believing that
the eschatological material presented to us in the Old Testament
constituted a body of *popular beliefs* long current among the people
before the prophets took them over and utilised them for the purpose of
inculcating higher beliefs. As to the origin of these popular beliefs,
this is not the place to discuss the question; <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) it is sufficient for us to note the use made
of them by the prophets, for, as far as we are at present concerned, it
is the prophetical basis which is our starting-point. Even in the
history of eschatological beliefs, as contained in the Old Testament, it
is by no means always possible to trace each step in the development of
ideas, a fact which seems to indicate that side by side with the
prophetic teaching on the subject popular notions also went on
developing. An example of this may be seen in the part played by Elijah
in the popular conception of later days; nowhere in the Old Testament is
there any record as to how it came about that the person of Elijah
became an element in eschatological teaching--though it is reasonable to
suppose that the account in 2 Kings ii. was the starting-point in
this--yet he figures

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

suddenly in connection with the "Day of the Lord" in Mal. iv. 5:
*Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and
terrible day of the Lord come*. Our Lord showed (Matt. xi. 14, xvii.
10-13) that, taken in the literal sense in which it was originally
intended to be taken, this eschatological trait was erroneous. But the
point is both interesting and important, as it shows the possibility of
the existence of other *popular* elements which are not recorded in the
Old Testament, but which are perhaps still preserved in portions of the
Apocalyptic literature (see below, chap. vi.). So much then for some Old
Testament examples of the signs which are to precede the End.

#### §ii. *The Advent of Jehovah, the Judge*.

It is not always possible to keep the details of Old Testament teaching
on Eschatology, which we are considering under these four heads,
entirely apart; the various elements necessarily run into each other to
a large extent, being, as they are, so closely connected with each
other. Under our present heading attention is to be drawn to some Old
Testament references to the central fact of

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

the Eschatological Drama, viz., the Advent of Jehovah. In most cases,
though not invariably, Jehovah appears as Judge; thus in Amos v. 17 we
read: *I will pass through the midst of thee, saith the Lord*; the
preceding verses tell of the wickedness of the people, *e.g.*, verse 12,
*For I know how manifold are your transgressions and how mighty are your
sins* . . ., and it is for this reason, as the context goes on to show,
that Jehovah is about to "pass through the midst" of them, *i.e.*, it is
in order, as their Judge, to punish them. The belief in the *personal
appearance* of Jehovah is one which must be borne in mind in view of
what will be said in future chapters (see too, the section on
*Theophanies* below). It is brought out prominently again in Isa. xxiv.
23; the former half of this verse, as already shown above, contains the
stereotyped conceptions concerning the signs pre-ceding the Advent, the
latter half goes on to say: *For the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount
Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously*. The
bringing of Zion and Jerusalem into the circle of eschatological ideas
is characteristic of a somewhat later development; it recurs in Isa.
lxv. 17-19: *For, behold, I create new heavens and a new* 

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

*earth: and the former things shall not be remembered, nor come into
mind. But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for,
behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing and her people a joy. And I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping
shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying*. The thought is
also present in the well-known passage in Mal. iii. 1-3 concerning the
Advent: . . . And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his
temple, and the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in, behold,
he cometh, saith the Lord of hosts. But who may abide the day of his
coming? And who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a
refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap. . . . The earlier conception
appears, however, in a passage which is evidently much later than the
thought it expresses, Isa. lxvi. 15, 16: *For, behold, the Lord will
come with fire, and his chariots shall be like the whirlwind; to render
his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire
will the Lord plead, and by his sword, with all flesh: and the slain of
the Lord shall be many*. Similar to this passage is Nah. i. 3-6: *The
Lord hath his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are
the dust of his feet*.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *He rebuketh the sea, and maketh it dry, and
drieth up all the rivers. . . . The mountains quake at him, and the
hills melt; and the earth is upheaved at his presence, yea, the world
and all that dwell therein. Who can stand before his indignation? and
who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? his pry is poured out like
fire, and the rocks are broken asunder by him*. As in the case of the
signs which are to precede the end, so with the central fact of the
Advent of Jehovah, its combination with present historical occurrences
is characteristic of Old Testament Eschatology. A good example of this
is afforded by the opening verses of the book of Micah; the prophecy is
taken up against Samaria and Jerusalem on account of their idolatry, and
this wickedness is represented as the cause of Jehovah's Advent, so that
in the middle of the prophecy familiar eschatological *traits* suddenly
appear. The prophecy (Mic. i. ff.) begins: *The word of the Lord that
came to Micah . . . which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem. Hear,
ye peoples, all of you; hearken, O earth, and all that therein is: and
let the Lord God be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple*.
So far we have words which are in the regular prophetic style and in
which there

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

is not necessarily any sign of eschatological thought; and if the words
of verse 5 followed verse 2 (just quoted) the connection would be
perfectly clear, viz.: *For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and
for the sins of the house of Israel* . . . . ; but the following words
of verses 3, 4 intervene: *For, behold, the Lord cometh forth out of his
place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.
And the mountains shall be molten under him, and the valleys shall be
cleft, as wax before the fire, as waters that are poured down a steep
place*. This, it will be noticed, is one of the regular conceptions
descriptive of the coming of Jehovah; its position, therefore, in the
midst of an ordinary prophecy illustrates the truth that eschatological
conceptions are utilised and adapted by the prophets for special
purposes. Another example of this occurs in Zeph. i. 7-10: *Hold thy
peace at the presence of the Lord; for the day of the Lord is at hand*;
then comes the prophecy of the punishment of the sinners in Jerusalem,
and it continues: *And in that day, saith the Lord, there shall be the
noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second
quarter, and a great crashing from the hills*; a little further on, in
verse 14, comes again the definite

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

announcement of the Advent of Jehovah: *The great day of the Lord is
near, it is near and hasteth greatly, even the voice of the day of the
Lord: the mighty man crieth there bitterly*. Zephaniah refers, once
more, to this in iii. 8: *Therefore wait for me, saith the Lord, until
the day that I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather
the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine
indignation, even all my fierce anger; for all the earth shall be
devoured with the fire of my jealousy*. Examples of other prophetic
utterances concerning the Advent of Jehovah are: Joel ii. 1, *Blow the
trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain; let all the
inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord cometh, for it
is nigh at hand*. Hag. ii. 6, *For thus saith the Lord of hosts: Yet
once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth,
and the sea, and the dry land*; ii. 21, 22, *I will shake the heavens
and the earth, and I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will
destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations*; and once more,
Zech. ii. 13, *Be silent, all flesh, before the Lord; for he is waked up
out of his holy habitation*. These will be sufficient to illustrate the
Old Testament teaching concerning

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the actual Advent of Jehovah, but see further below, *Theophanies*.

#### §iii. *The Judgement upon the Wicked*.

This judgement, which belongs inseparably to Old Testament
eschatological teaching, is always against the wicked regarded as the
enemies of Jehovah; this *trait*, too, is largely conditioned by the
historical circumstances of the time. In its earliest form it may
reasonably be assumed that the judgement was upon the powers of
evil, <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10) but this was adopted by the
prophets and applied at one time to the wicked within the Israelite
nation, at another to the Gentiles, who, as not being the worshippers of
Jehovah, were usually regarded as the natural enemies both of the
Israelites and of Jehovah, and are thus classed among the wicked. But,
as will be seen in the next section, universalistic tendencies sometimes
caused a modification of this attitude in regard to the Gentiles. In the
passages now to be considered, therefore, both Israelites in some cases,
and Gentiles in others, are represented as the objects of divine wrath,
whose punishment is to be accomplished at

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Jehovah's Advent. Amos is again the first to
sound these notes; he denounces Israelite and Gentile alike, all are to
suffer the just judgement on account of their wicked deeds at the Advent
of Jehovah: i. 2, *The Lord shall roar from Zion, and utter his voice
from Jerusalem; and the pastures of the shepherds shall mourn, and the
top of Carmel shall wither*. The long passage which follows shows a
combination of historical events with the prophecies of judgement, but
at the base of all lies the thought contained in the verse just quoted
that the Advent of Jehovah will bring with it the punishment of the
wicked whether they be Gentiles or the people of the Lord; indeed, the
guilt of these latter is the greater, according to Amos, since they were
the chosen of the Lord: *You only have I known of all the families of
the earth: therefore I will visit upon you all your iniquities* (iii.
2). A specific denunciation against the Israelites is contained in v.
18: *Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord? Wherefore would ye
have the day of the Lord? it is darkness, and not light*. These words
reveal the existence of a popular, but erroneous, conception of the "Day
of the Lord." <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) In

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Isa. viii. 22, there is an evident echo of the
belief in the punishment of the wicked in the "Day of the Lord," though
it is an adaptation to a particular time and event; the language,
however, is unmistakeably eschatological: *And they shall look unto the
earth, and behold, distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish; and into
thick darkness they shall be driven away*; see, too, xi. 4: *And he
shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of
his lips shall he slay the wicked*; the words occur in the middle of a
well-known eschatological passage. Very clear, again, is the thought in
Isa. xiii. 9, 11: *Behold, the day of the Lord cometh, cruel, with wrath
and fierce anger; to make the land a desolation, and to destroy the
sinners thereof out of it. . . . And I will punish the world for their
evil, and the wicked for their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy
of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the
terrible*. This is spoken of in reference to Gentiles; see further Isa.
xvii. 9, however, where it is against the wicked in Israel that
punishment "in that day" is proclaimed; but that chapter concludes with
one of the most graphic passages in the whole Old Testament, and here

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the doom is pronounced against the Gentiles because of their enmity
against the people of God; the words are of such living force that the
whole passage must be quoted: *Ah, the uproar of many peoples, which
roar like the roaring of the seas; and the rushing of the nations, that
rush like the rushing of mighty waters! The nations shall rush like the
rushing of many waters; but he shall rebuke them and they shall flee far
of and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind,
and like the whirling dust before the storm. At eventide behold terror;
and before the morning they are not. This is the portion of them that
spoil, and the lot of them that rob us*. Here again we have the
adaptation of eschatological ideas to a particular event. Then again in
Isa. xxiv. 21-23 it says: *And it shall come to pass in that day, that
the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones on high, and the kings
of the earth. And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are
gathered together in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and
after many days shall they be punished. Then shall the moon be
confounded, and the sun ashamed*. . . .; the verse that follows shows
that the whole passage is eschatological; it has been already quoted
above. One other

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

passage from this book must be mentioned, as it is of considerable
importance in view of the Gospel teaching (see below ix. §iii.); it is
lxvi. 22-24: *For as the new heavens and the new earth which I will
make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and
your name remain. And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to
another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to
worship before me, saith the Lord. And they shall go forth, and look
upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me; for
their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they
shall be an abhorring unto all flesh*. Micah, like Amos, declares the
punishment of the chosen people in "that day" equally with the other
peoples of the earth; in the eschatological passage already alluded to
above, occur these words: . . . *For the transgression of Jacob is all
this, and for the sins of the house of Israel*. . . . (Mic. i. 5-9).
Nahum, on the other hand, in his "burden" on Nineveh, in that part which
is characterised by eschatological traits, says: *But with an
over-running flood he will make full end of the place thereof, and will
pursue his enemies into darkness* (i. 8). Then again, Zephaniah takes up
his parable against the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

land of Judah in the words: *And I will bring distress upon men, that
they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against the
Lord; and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as
dung. Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them
in the day of the Lord's wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured by
the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make an end, yea a terrible* (or
"speedy") *end, of all them that dwell in the land* (i. 17, 18). The
prophet's denunciation continues: *Gather yourselves together, O nation
that lath no shame; before the decree bring forth, before the day pass
as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before
the day of the Lord's anger come upon you* (ii. 1, 2; *cf.*, too, iii.
8, 11). In the book of Zechariah we meet with some new elements, though
they do not occur here for the first time; the Jewish nation is to be
the instrument for punishing the Gentiles in the "last times," though
Jehovah Himself will fight for His people against those who attack them.
But the prophet goes on to say that the gracious spirit of the Lord will
be poured out upon His people so that they will repent of all their
wickedness. See, for these thoughts, Zech. xii.; a few citations

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

from this chapter may be given to illustrate what has been said. In
verses 2 ff. it says: *Behold I will make Jerusalem a cup of reeling
unto all the peoples round about, and upon Judah also shall it be in the
siege against Jerusalem. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I
will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all the peoples; all that
burden themselves with it shall be sore wounded; and all the nations of
the earth shall be gathered together against it. . . . In that day will
I make the Chieftains of Judah like a pan of fire among wood, and like a
torch of fire among sheaves; and they shall devour all the peoples round
about, on the right hand and on the left. . . . And it shall come to
pass in that day I will seek to destroy all the nations that come
against Jerusalem. And I will pour out upon the house of David, and upon
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication*.
. . . Then in chap. xiv. the theme is taken up again and somewhat
varied: the nations will attack Jerusalem when the day of the Lord
comes, and the city will be sacked; *then*, in the words of the prophet,
*shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he
fought in the day of battle* (verses 1-3). This

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

chapter will come before us again. Lastly, in Mal. iii. 18, iv. 1-3,
indiscriminate punishment upon all the wicked is announced when the "Day
of the Lord" comes, though primarily, it would seem, the Jews are meant:
*Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serveth God and him that serveth him not. For, behold,
the day cometh, it burneth as a furnace; and all the proud, and all that
work wickedness, shall be stubble; and the day that cometh shall burn
them up, saith the Lord of hosts, and it shall leave them neither root
nor branch. . . . And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be
ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I do make, saith the
Lord of hosts*; in this last verse the just are spoken of as those who
are to annihilate the wicked, that is to say, they are to constitute the
army of the Lord, see Joel ii. 11, where this army is again spoken of,
but it appears that here the army of the Lord is to be composed of a
"great and strong people" (see verse 2) whom the Lord will raise up for
the purpose of punishing the wicked in Israel: *And the Lord uttereth
his voice before his army; for his camp is very great; for he is strong
that executeth his word; for the day of the Lord is great and very* 

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

*terrible*. With what has been said in this section compare chap. v.
§iii.

#### §iv. *The Blessedness of the Righteous*.

What has been already said more than once must be repeated here, namely,
that historical conditions are often the point of attachment utilised by
the prophets for the purpose of adding teaching concerning the "last
things"; it is only by remembering this that we can understand how it is
that in one and the same passage clear references to present conditions
are found side by side with expressions and prophecies which are as
clearly eschatological. An example of this is found in Amos. v.; part of
this chapter deals with the wickedness of the house of Israel, but the
hope of forgiveness is held out to those who turn from evil and do the
will of God; in the very middle of the chapter, however, occur some
traits which are indisputably eschatological (verses 16-18, 20), while,
on the other hand, the last verse runs: *Therefore will I cause you to
go into captivity beyond Damascus, saith the Lord, whose name is the God
of hosts*--an obvious reference to an historical event

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

about to occur in the near future, but nothing to do with the "last
things." This method of the prophets is of the highest importance, for
it tended to show the intimate connection that exists between the
condition of men hereafter and their present manner of life; it may be
true enough that the prophets had but hazy conceptions as to the actual
state of the departed, but that did not affect the principle taught of
the relationship between man's state here and hereafter, namely, that
according as he was loyal and obedient to the ethical demands of
Jehovah, or not, here, so was his condition to be one of peace, or the
reverse, hereafter. That among the people material notions obtained
concerning the time to come, and that even the prophets themselves
looked for the reign of Jehovah as something that was to take place on
*this* earth, did not in the least interfere with the principle they
sought to inculcate; indeed this must have made their teaching more
realistic, and therefore more effective. Since those days the conscience
of mankind, quickened by the teaching of Christ, has recognised how
truly those prophets taught; the expression of the truth may have been
inadequate, the belief may have been to some extent erroneous, but the
underlying principle

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

is acknowledged by most men to have been a true one. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

In the preceding section we saw that one of the main elements of
prophetic eschatological teaching was that in the final issue punishment
awaited the wicked; in the present section we must see how the converse
of this was also part of the teaching of the Old Testament. In the
passage just referred to (Amos v.) the presence of eschatological
*traits* make it probable that in the mind of the prophet these lay
behind *all* his words in this particular prophecy, and therefore it may
be assumed that he had in mind the reward of the Righteous in the "Day
of the Lord" when he says, in v. 14, 15: *Seek good, and not evil, that
ye may live; and so the Lord, the God of hosts, shall be with you, as ye
say. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgement in the
gate; it may be that the Lord, the God of hosts, will be gracious unto
the remnant of Joseph*; then follows the eschatological passage proper
quoted in a previous section. There are a number of passages in the book
of Isaiah in which the thought of the final Blessedness of the Righteous
finds expression; notable

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

among these is the long passage in iv. 2-6; this speaks of the happy
state of the remnant of Israel in the Messianic Age, which follows after
the "last things." A few words may be quoted: *In that day shall the
branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the land
shall be excellent and comely, for them that are escaped of Israel. And
it shall come to pass, that he that remaineth in Jerusalem shall be
called holy, even every one that is written among the living in
Jerusalem*. . . . Isaiah's doctrine of the "Remnant" <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) is important in connection with our
present subject, for the belief that only a few, comparatively speaking,
will deserve the reward of the Righteous in "that day" finds expression
both in his writings as well as in those of later prophets; in x. 20
ff., for example, he says: *And it shall come to pass in that day that
the remnant of Israel, and they that are escaped of the house of Jacob,
shall no more again stay upon him that smote them. . . . For though thy
people Israel be as the sand of the sea, only a remnant of them shall
return; a consumption is determined, overflowing with righteousness*.
The ideal picture of the reign of peace, in Isa. xi. 1-9, is, of course,
to be the lot of the

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Righteous. The joy of the Righteous is again
spoken of in the eschatological passage, Isa. lxv. 17 ff.; in verses 18,
19 we read: *But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create*
(*i.e.*, "new heavens and a new earth"): *for, behold, I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy. And I will rejoice in
Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no
more heard in her, nor the voice of crying*. . . . The same thought
occurs again in lxvi. 10 ff. and in verse 22 of this chapter: *For as
the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain
before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain*. The
blessedness of the Righteous in the "Day of the Lord" is further
referred to by the prophet Nahum; in i. 7 occur these words: *The Lord
is good, a stronghold in the day of trouble; and he knoweth them that
put their trust in him*; both the preceding and following verses are of
an eschatological character, the words must therefore be regarded as
expressive of thoughts belonging to the same cycle of ideas. The same is
to be said of Zeph. ii. 3: *Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth,
which have wrought his judgement; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it
may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord's anger*. Again in the
book of Joel a familiar eschatological

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

passage ends thus: *And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call
on the name of the Lord shall be delivered: for in Mount Zion and in
Jerusalem shall be those that escape, as the Lord hath said, and among
the remnant those whom the Lord doth call* (ii. 32). The dwelling of
Jehovah in Jerusalem among His people after the terrors of "that day"
are past is again referred to in Joel iii. 16, 17: *But the Lord will be
a refuge unto his people, and a stronghold to the children of Israel. So
shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, dwelling in Zion, my holy
mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy*. . . . The constant reference to
the actual dwelling of Jehovah in Jerusalem must strike us as somewhat
over-bold, for it would be a mistake to suppose that the prophets did
not intend this to be understood in a literal sense; it must, however,
be remembered that the prophets picture the conditions under which this
is to take place as very different from ordinary earthly conditions; it
is a "new heaven" and a "new earth" which is to come into existence
first; the destruction and obliteration of all evil is likewise to be
accomplished before Jehovah's reign on earth commences; so that the idea
is not so incongruous as it might appear at first sight. It is

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

true that to localise Jehovah's presence and to restrict it to the
capital of the Jewish nation seems somewhat derogatory to the majesty
and illimitableness of the Divine Personality; but, after all, what
alternative was there? The conceptions about the spiritual world were
still far too undeveloped to permit of transferring the kingdom that was
to come to the land where, according to the belief of the times, "all
things are forgotten"; and it followed that to conceive rightly of the
place where Jehovah and His angels dwelt as that wherein the reign of
peace and joy was to be, was an impossibility on account of the
spiritual conceptions which such a belief required. Even at the present
day things are often written--especially in hymns--about what, for the
want of a better name, we call "Heaven," which can scarcely be said to
denote very high spiritual conceptions about the world to come; so that
it is not surprising to find among writers who lived so many centuries
ago, and who had not yet received the revelation which came by Christ, a
great mixture of materialistic ideas with spiritual thought in the
descriptions of the world to come. And being thus restricted by the
nature of the case to this earth, it was necessarily to Jerusalem

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

that the prophets looked as that which was to be the centre of the new
kingdom which Jehovah was going to establish; this is so self-evident,
seeing that the Jews alone were the worshippers of Jehovah, that the
point need not be insisted upon further. One or two other passages may
be quoted to illustrate this--Zech. xiv. 8-11: *And it shall come to
pass in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem; half
of them toward the eastern sea, and half of them toward the western sea,
in summer and winter shall it be. And the Lord shall be King over all
the earth: in that day shall the Lord be one, and his name one. . . .
And men shall dwell therein, and there shall be no more curse; but
Jerusalem shall dwell safely*. In Mal. iv. 1, 2, after the announcement
of the approach of the "Day" and the destruction of the wicked, it
continues: *But unto you that fear my name shall the sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings*.

These passages will be sufficient to illustrate the prophets' teaching
concerning the Blessedness of the Righteous when the signs which are to
precede the coming of the "Day of the Lord" have been fulfilled.

Before summing up what has been said in this chapter, some subsidiary
points, not altogether unimportant, must be considered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[12:1](dlt04.htm#fr_6) With the question as to
how the ideas which gave birth to these expressions came into being
themselves, we are not concerned here; the subject is fully dealt with
in the writer's book, *The Evolution of the Messianic Idea* (1908), see
especially chaps. x., xi., xvi.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[13:1](dlt04.htm#fr_7) It may be thought that the
large number of references to be quoted in full in this and the
following chapter is unnecessary, and that it would have sufficed to
indicate chapter and verse; the reason why the present course has been
adopted, is because so many readers find it troublesome to have to be
constantly looking up references, and therefore soon give up doing so;
but the argument to be considered cannot be adequately followed, unless
<span id="page_14">p. 14</span> the words of Scripture themselves are
read. It has therefore been thought well, in spite of the space taken
up, to show by quotations how the roots of the Gospel teaching
concerning the subject under consideration are embedded in the Old
Testament writings.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[14:1](dlt04.htm#fr_8) Sometimes the "Day" is
used in a wide sense for the new era itself.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[21:1](dlt04.htm#fr_9) See the writer's book
referred to above, pp. 241 ff.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[28:1](dlt04.htm#fr_10) *Cf.* *The Evolution of
the Messianic Idea*, chap. xiii.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[29:1](dlt04.htm#fr_11) See *The Evolution of
the Messianic Idea*, chap. xvi. pp. 241-248.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[38:1](dlt04.htm#fr_12) *Cf.* the Gospel
teaching of the Kingdom of God, which shows still more pointedly the
indissoluble connection between Ethics and Eschatology.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[39:1](dlt04.htm#fr_13) See, on this subject,
*The Evolution of the Messianic Idea*, chap. xiv. pp. 206 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Antecedents of the Gospel Teaching: Some Further
Elements in the Old Testament](dlt05)
