[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt02)  [Next](dlt04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE DOCTRINE OF THE LAST THINGS

### CHAPTER I.

### THE ANTECEDENTS OF THE GOSPEL TEACHING: INTRODUCTORY.

THE Christian Religion has its roots in, and has grown out of, the
Jewish Religion. This is a statement of fact which nobody would be
prepared to deny. The Old Testament was written by Jews, mainly about
Jews, for Jews; the New Testament was written by Jews, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) to whom the Old Testament was the "Word of
God"; what the "Scriptures," *i.e.*, the Old Testament, said was to them
authoritative as nothing else was; and therefore the New Testament, and
especially the Gospels, is permeated with Jewish belief and thought.
When Christ teaches, He bases His teaching, in the first instance, upon
Jewish

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

doctrine; He develops that doctrine, expands it, spiritualises it, when
needful; but His teaching, like that of His Church, is founded upon the
teaching of the prophets. *Think not that I came to destroy the Law, or
the Prophets: I came not to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say
unto you, Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot or one tittle shall
in no wise pass away from the law, till all things be
accomplished*. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) This principle is
further insisted upon in the words: *The scribes and the Pharisees sit
in Moses' seat; all things therefore whatsoever they bid you, these do
and observe*. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) This second passage is
very pointed, for our Lord testifies to the correctness of Pharisaic
teaching, though He goes on to denounce the failure of the Pharisees to
carry out their teaching in practice. And it is upon this Pharisaic
teaching that, in the first instance, He bases His own. As far as it
went, and as far as it was not a perversion, as it was in some cases, of
the precepts of the Law (as, *e.g.*, in Matt. xxiii. 23, 24), the
teaching of the Pharisees was in accordance with the "teaching of
Moses"; and therefore Christ's command to the people to observe
whatsoever the Pharisees taught was

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

altogether what might have been expected. The scribes and Pharisees were
together the keepers of the Law, and in this respect they were faithful
and loyal to their trust; but as students of the Law, as well as keepers
and teachers, their guilt was all the greater when hypocrisy and
self-seeking contaminated their orthodoxy. Their claim to be better than
other men, which the very name "Pharisee" implied ("one who separates
himself" from others, and thus attains, or has attained, a higher degree
of sanctity), was in itself of the nature of spiritual pride. But in
spite of this, it is very necessary to remember that numbers of their
body must have been genuine and true men (*cf.*, *e.g.*, John iii. 1
ff.), and that they were the real upholders of orthodoxy against such
teachers of heresy as the Sadducees. What they taught, therefore, was
the teaching of Moses and the prophets; and this was, at any rate, one
of the antecedents of the Gospel teaching, and therefore upon it Christ
based, in part, His own teaching.

These things are all so obvious that the mention of them may appear
superfluous. And yet--what a strange thing it is that Christian
theologians, scholars, and teachers

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

so rarely, comparatively speaking, take this obvious fact into
consideration. It is well that in our age this is changing, and that
more and more it is coming to be seen that the Christian religion can
only be adequately understood by studying its beginnings, that early
Christian thought and teaching can only be fully grasped when seen in
the light of Jewish thought and teaching, that the Gospels can only be
fully appreciated when explained from the Jewish point of view, and that
the language of the Gospels must be studied in the light of that which
the Jews of our Lord's day and of the preceding centuries spoke, whether
Aramaic, or a dialect of this, or Hellenistic Greek, and not in the
light of that used by classical Greek authors. In a word, there are many
signs which point to the fact that the conviction is gaining ground
among Christians generally that our religion must be studied and taught
and understood from the point of view of its Founder. And since Christ
was, according to the flesh, a Jew, brought up according to Jewish ideas
(*cf.* Luke ii. 51), and deeply versed in the Jewish Scriptures,
uncanonical <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) as well as canonical, we
must look to Judaism--pre-Christian

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Judaism--as that in which the antecedents of
Christian teaching are to be sought.

But in saying that pre-Christian Judaism contained the germs from which
Christian teaching was developed, we would guard ourselves from seeming
to imply that our Lord in His teaching merely utilised the tenets of
Judaism; for this would be as much as to say that there was nothing
specifically original or distinctive about Christianity, an assertion to
which the contemplation of the Personality of Christ, quite apart from
everything else, would give the lie; and clearly the men of our Lord's
own day perceived that in His teaching there was something unique and
different from that with which they were familiar--*And they were
astonished at his teaching: for he taught them as having authority, and
not as the scribes* <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)--but while, on the
one hand, we see that the teaching of Christ was *sui generis*, that
teaching itself tells us, on the other hand, that a very great deal of
the content of Christianity constituted the natural development of
Judaism. This was necessarily bound to be the case, for Judaism
contained a very large amount of

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

the body of Absolute Truth, the knowledge of which, by divine grace, has
been accorded to mankind; and this being so, it could not fail to be
embodied in Christian teaching.

Further, in speaking of pre-Christian Judaism, it is indispensable that
one should realise that this included two elements which differed
greatly from each other, both in their content and in their spirit; they
are best expressed under the titles of "Orthodox Judaism" and
"Hellenistic Judaism," and both formed the basis of much that Christ
taught. It was stated just now that our Lord was deeply versed in
uncanonical as well as in canonical Jewish writings, *i.e.*, in
Hellenistic Jewish literature as well as in the Old Testament
Scriptures. This statement will, it is hoped, be substantiated in chaps.
v., vi., vii., below; but here it will be well to indicate as briefly as
possible how it came about that, in addition to the Old Testament
Scriptures, this new body of Hellenistic Jewish literature came into
being.

By the commencement of the second century B.C. Palestinian Judaism had
become permeated with Greek thought. This began, in the first instance,
through the use of the Greek language, which was, in course of time, the
means of the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

spread of Greek civilisation. It was not only among the Jews of the
Dispersion that the influence of the Greek spirit became pre-dominant,
that was to be expected; but it was also in Palestine itself that this
influence was so strong as to sweep away almost entirely, for a time,
all that was best in Judaism. Nothing could be more painfully
significant than these words in 1 Macc. i. 11-15: *In those days came
there forth out of Israel transgressors of the law, and persuaded many,
saying, Let us go and make a covenant with the Gentiles that are round
about us; for since we were parted from them many evils have befallen
us. And the saying was good in their eyes. And certain of the people
were forward herein, and went to the king, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) and he gave them licence to do after the
ordinances of the Gentiles. And they built a place of exercise in
Jerusalem according to the laws of the Gentiles; and they made
themselves uncircumcised, and forsook the holy covenant, and joined
themselves to the Gentiles, and sold themselves to do evil*. Such
passages are not isolated (*cf.* 2 Macc. ix. 7-17). But while the
results of Hellenistic influence were in many respects disastrous among
the Jews, in some other respects they were for good. The knowledge

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

of Greek literature and philosophy with which the Jews of the Dispersion
came into contact had the effect of breaking down national prejudices
and Jewish narrowness; there resulted in these Jews a new mental
development, their ideas expanded, their attitude towards men other than
those of their own race became more tolerant, a tendency towards
Universalism, directly opposed to their traditional Particularism,
manifested itself; and the conception which arose in consequence,
namely, that of the religion of Jehovah becoming a world religion, and
not merely the possession of one people, was a magnificent one, a
divinely inspired one, which in due time became realised. The greatest
literary products of this blending of Jewish and Greek genius were what
is known as the Wisdom literature and the Apocalyptic literature; on
this latter see further below, chaps. iv., v.

But as far as Palestinian Judaism was concerned, an altogether new order
of things was brought about by the wars of the Maccabees. The
nationalist movement which resulted in the Maccabæan victories was
utilised by the leading spirits of the nation to crush out, if possible,
any lingering remnants of Hellenism; this it failed to do. But it was
this nationalist

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

party which was henceforth to hold sway in Palestine; from it came forth
the *Pharisees*. Their antagonism to the Hellenistic spirit was wholly
justified, both on political and moral grounds; but it must be
remembered that at first, at all events, this antagonism arose rather
from political than from religious motives. It is most probably the case
that ethical purity had much to do with the beginnings of a revolt
against Hellenism in Palestine, but it is extremely improbable that this
alone would have been effective had it not been for the national
question which resulted in the successful Maccabæan wars, because the
party which consisted of the faithful adherents of the Law was too small
and uninfluential. With the resuscitation of the *national* idea came
again particularistic tendencies, and with renewed strength, for there
seemed more need than ever for the nation to keep itself from
contamination with the Gentiles; the bitterness left behind by the wars
went a long way towards widening the breach between Jew and Gentile. And
in a natural course there arose now a stricter observance of the Law;
this is distinctly observable in official post-Maccabæan literature, and
it is reflected in post-Christian Jewish literature, the New Testament
writings

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

coming in between the two testifies still further to the fact.

From what has been said it will have been seen that from the rise of the
Greek period two parties stood in opposition to each other in Palestine,
the orthodox party, and those who demanded and insisted upon greater
latitude in belief; the Particularists and the Universalists, the
Judaists and the Hellenists. Until the Maccabæan period, the Hellenists
were in the ascendant, after that their antagonists held sway; but the
two opposing schools of thought each held their own right up to the time
when, in the year. 70 A.D., the final catastrophe took place, and Jewish
national life came to an end. But it is of the first importance to
remember that Pharisaism and Hellenism, with all that these two terms
imply, played their parts in moulding the religious thought of the Jews
long before the Maccabæan period, and continued to do so long after, and
that therefore both contributed their *quota* towards the religious
development of the people, and in each are to be discovered the
antecedents of Gospel teaching.

When it is said, therefore, that Christian teaching must be explained in
the light of

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Jewish teaching, it will be understood that
under "Jewish teaching" are included the two schools of thought referred
to above, viz.: Hellenistic Judaism as well as Orthodox Judaism; the
latter representing above all things the championship of the Law, the
former having as its predominant element eschatological teaching, and
being the expression of the thoughts and speculations of the
Apocalyptists.

It is almost wholly with the latter that we shall be concerned in the
present connection, for upon it was based, to a large extent, the
Christian doctrine of the "last things." But the Hellenistic literature,
in so far as it deals with Eschatology, is itself based in the first
instance upon the teaching of the Old Testament prophets; and therefore,
our first duty must be to try and discern in the prophetical writings
the leading thoughts which were developed and expanded by the
Apocalyptists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](dlt03.htm#fr_0.md) The third Gospel and the
Acts forming the only exceptions.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](dlt03.htm#fr_1.md) Matt. v. 17, 18.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:2](dlt03.htm#fr_2.md) Matt. xxiii. 2, 3.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:1](dlt03.htm#fr_3.md) For the justification of
this statement see below.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:1](dlt03.htm#fr_4.md) Mark i. 22.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:1](dlt03.htm#fr_5.md) Antiochus Epiphanes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Antecedents of the Gospel Teaching: The Old
Testament](dlt04.md)
