[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt05)  [Next](dlt07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

### CHAPTER IV.

### THE ANTECEDENTS OF THE GOSPEL TEACHING. THE APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE: INTRODUCTORY.

OLD Testament Eschatology forms the foundation upon which the
Apocalyptic writers based their speculations, in the first instance;
and, as will be seen, these writers repeat and develop the conceptions
and prophecies which have been epitomised under the various headings in
the preceding chapters. But before we come to examine in some little
detail the eschatological contents of their writings, it may be well,
firstly, to offer some general remarks upon the Apocalyptic literature
as a whole, and, secondly, to enumerate the books from which the
material to be utilised is taken.

It is important to remember that the Apocalyptic literature as a whole
is a *popular* literature; that is to say, it reflects the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

thoughts of religious circles which were outside the recognised
Rabbinical schools; and it embodies religious ideas which in many points
sharply conflicted with the strict scholastic orthodoxy of the
Pharisees. The main energies of the latter were devoted to the
development of the "Oral tradition," in order to build a hedge around
the Law, <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md) and fix a sharp line of
demarcation between Israel and the outside world. The Apocalyptists, on
the other hand, though loyal to the Law, did not make it their exclusive
preoccupation. They were much more deeply interested in "transcendental
Messianism," and in speculative schemes regarding the "end" of the age,
and all that such involved. On the other hand, orthodox Rabbinic
Judaism--which represents the triumph of the Pharisaic party within the
ranks of Judaism--practically banned the entire Apocalyptic literature.
Nevertheless, Apocalyptic teaching profoundly influenced orthodox
Judaism in some respects. These writings emphasise the individual side
of religion equally with that of the righteous community; not the nation
as such, but the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

community of the righteous within it--the "plant of righteousness," as
it is called in the *Book of Enoch*--will inherit the divine reward; the
influence of prophetic teaching is very plainly visible here. The
exalted religious scheme which dominates these books tended to overcome
national and Particularistic limitations; and here certain of the
prophetical writers have their successors in the Apocalyptists. It is,
however, on the side of the Messianic hope that this literature is most
significant; and here the points of contact, as will be seen later on,
are most striking and important. Another noteworthy characteristic is
its supernatural colouring; in the place of the old antithesis,
*present* and *future*, it substitutes that of *above* and *below*. It
thus acquires an "other-worldliness" which was in marked contrast to the
strictly practical and narrow purview of scholastic Pharisaism, and
formed a distinct advance towards the lofty spirituality of the New
Testament. <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) Herein, once more,
prophetical influence is seen to be asserting itself. But there is
another feature in this literature which is of the highest importance;
in the words of Professor Charles:

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

"The object of Apocalyptic literature in general was to solve the
difficulties connected with a belief in God's righteousness and the
suffering condition of his servants on earth. The righteousness of God
postulated the temporal prosperity of the righteous, and this postulate
was accepted and enforced by the Law. But while the continuous
exposition of the Law in the post-exilic period confirmed the people in
their monotheistic faith and intensified their hostility to heathenism,
their expectations of material well-being, which likewise the Law had
fostered, were repeatedly falsified, and a grave contradiction thus
emerged between the old prophetic ideals, and the actual experience of
the nation, between the promises of God and the bondage and persecution
which the people had daily to endure at the hands of their pagan
oppressors. The difficulties arising from this conflict between promise
and experience might be shortly resolved into two, which deal
respectively with the position (1) of the righteous as a community, and
(2) of the righteous man as an individual. The Old Testament prophets
had concerned themselves chiefly with the former, and pointed in the
main to the restoration (or 'resurrection') of Israel as a nation, and
to Israel's ultimate possession of the earth as a reward of
righteousness. Later, with the growing claims of the individual, and the
acknowledgment of these in the religious and

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

intellectual life, the second problem pressed itself irresistibly on the
notice of the religious thinkers, and made it impossible for any
conception of the divine rule and righteousness which did not render
adequate satisfaction to the claims of the righteous individual to gain
acceptance. Thus, in order to justify the righteousness of God, there
was postulated not only the resurrection of the righteous nation but
also the resurrection of the righteous individual. Apocalyptic
literature, therefore, strove to show that, in respect alike of the
nation and of the individual, the righteousness of God would be fully
vindicated; and, in order to justify its contention, it sketched in
outline the history of the world and of mankind, the origin of evil and
its course, and the final consummation of all things; and thus, in fact,
it presented a Semitic philosophy of religion." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md)

 

Now it is clear that when, in days gone by, men spoke and wrote about
what was going to take place at the end of the world, their utterances
must have been either of the nature of prophecy or speculation; in
either case they believed that they were the recipients of Divine
communications; it was God, they were convinced, who was according them

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

revelations of things that were to be. Their visions of the "last
things" were thus "Apocalyptic" visions, *i.e.*, the uncovering, or
revealing, through divine agency, of what was going to happen at the end
of the world. By the time of the New Testament period the great body of
eschatological ideas was fully developed; these ideas, though in their
germ reaching back to the earliest prophetical times, matured and became
more or less crystallised during the two eventful centuries that
immediately preceded the rise of Christianity. It was these centuries
which saw the unfolding and rich growth of the *Apocalyptic Movement*
with its vast eschatological developments, the antecedents of which we
have sought to indicate in the preceding chapters; and, as we have seen,
the literature which was the outcome of this *Movement* was popular in
character. It is worth while to try and realise for a moment the
importance and significance of these two facts. If this Apocalyptic
literature had thus been in the making during the two centuries
preceding the Advent of Christ, the Jewish nation, as a whole, must have
been familiar with at least the central ideas with which it dealt. It is
well known that the people looked for the "Restoration

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

of Israel" <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) when the Messiah should
come, and believed that at His appearing their hopes regarding an ideal
future would be realised; but this expectation and these hopes had been
formulated and fostered by the Apocalyptists, basing much of their
teaching, of course, upon the prophetical literature; the result was
that owing to this Apocalyptic literature, the nation had been prepared
for the coming of the Messiah. But another point of high importance is
that our Lord Himself must have been familiar, at all events, with the
essential points with which this literature dealt. It was said just now
that the Apocalyptic literature was one which reflected the thoughts of
religious circles which were outside the recognised Rabbinical schools,
and that much which it taught conflicted with the strict scholastic
orthodoxy of the Pharisees; the main reason of this was because in this
Apocalyptic literature the outlook was wider, the atmosphere was freer,
and there was none of that narrow, circumscribed, hair-splitting
legalism, which other authorities besides the Gospels have taught us to
connect with Pharisaism. The antagonism of the Pharisees towards our
Lord must have been in part due to His eschatological

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

teaching, and this must also have been *one* of the reasons why the
people clung to Him and followed Him; for it must be remembered that as
soon as they looked upon Him as the Messiah, they would connect with Him
all the current ideas regarding the end of the world.

The Apocalyptic writings with which we are specially concerned here are
the following:--

*The "Ethiopic" Book of Enoch*. This book is composite in character; in
it are incorporated several works by different authors and of different
dates. The following table shows the various elements which the book
contains with their approximate dates:--

"The Book of Enoch," chaps. i.--xxxvi. (170 B.C.); lxxxiii.--xc.
(166-161 B.C.); xci.--civ. (134-95 B.C.)

"The Book of Celestial Physics," chaps. lxxii.--lxxxii. (166-161 B.C.).

"The Book of Similitudes," chaps. xxxvii.--lxx. (94-64 B.C.).

"The Apocalypse of Noah," extracts from this work are interspersed
throughout the above. This Apocalypse is referred to in *The Book of
Jubilees*, x. 13, 14, xxi. 10; its date is uncertain, but it was
undoubtedly written before the commencement of the Christian Era.

\[paragraph continues\] There are also many interpolations, some from
Christian sources, in the book.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

The name *"Ethiopic" Book of Enoch* is given because the earliest
version of the work which has been preserved is the Ethiopic. It only
represents part of the "Enoch literature," which must at one time have
been voluminous. The importance of this book will be seen when it is
realised that, in the words of Professor Charles, "all the writers of
the New Testament were familiar with it, and were more or less
influenced by it in thought and diction. It is quoted as a genuine
production of Enoch by St Jude, and as Scripture by St Barnabas. The
authors of *The Book of Jubilees*, *The Apocalypse of Baruch* and *The
Fourth Book of Esdras* laid it under contribution. With the earlier
Fathers and Apologists it had all the weight of a canonical book, but
towards the close of the third and the beginning of the fourth centuries
it began to be discredited, and finally fell under the ban of the
Church." <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)

In the quotations from this work which will be given below the
references are from Professor Charles's edition; it will not be
necessary to indicate in each instance from which particular portion the
quotation is taken, as a reference to the table given above will show
this. The book will be quoted as "Ethiopic Enoch" to

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

distinguish it from the "Slavonic Enoch" (see below on this latter).

*The Sibylline Oracles*.--Most of this work is later than the beginning
of the Christian Era; the portions with which we are concerned, however,
belong probably to the second century B.C.; they are the "Proœmium" and
Book iii.

*The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs*.--Written between 109-105 B.C.
Regarding the use made of this work by New Testament writers, see
Charles, in his edition, pp. lxxviii.--xcii.

*The Psalms of Solomon*.--This work is of composite authorship; the date
is approximately 70-40 B.C.

*The Book of Jubilees*.--A Pharisaic work belonging to about 40-10 B.C.

*The Book of the Secrets of Enoch*.--This is often referred to as the
"Slavonic Enoch" on account of its existing at present only in Slavonic.
Though belonging to the once voluminous "Enoch literature," it is quite
a distinct work from the "Ethiopic Enoch," spoken of above. It was
written by an Alexandrian Jew at the beginning of the Christian Era; but
pre-existing material has been largely utilised.

*The Ascension of Isaiah*.--A book of composite authorship, partly
Jewish and partly Christian, the latter being, however, probably based
on earlier Jewish work, the earliest portions belong to the very
beginning of the Christian Era, the latest to the end of the first
century A.D., or somewhat later.

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

*The Assumption of Moses*.--The work of a Pharisee, belonging to quite
the beginning of the Christian Era; it was written in Palestine.

*The Apocalypse of Baruch* (Syriac).--A composite work written by
Pharisees; though not written till the second half of the first
Christian century, it reflects earlier beliefs and ideas, and is of
considerable importance in the present connection. It is an entirely
different work from the Greek Apocalypse of Baruch.

*The Fourth Book of Esdras*.--This extremely important Jewish
Apocalyptic work belongs to the end of the first Christian century, but
it embodies many conceptions of pre-Christian times. In the English
Apocrypha it is called the *Second* Book of Esdras, but the more
strictly accurate title is as given here.

It will not be inappropriate to append here a selected Bibliography of
the above-mentioned works:

*The Book of Enoch* (English text 1890, Ethiopic text 1906) edited by R.
H. Charles.--The Greek text is published by Dr Swete in The Old
Testament in Greek, vol. iii. (1899).

*The Sibylline Oracles*.--Translated from the Greek into English blank
verse, with notes (1889), edited by M. S. Terry.

*The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs* (English 1908, Greek text
1908).--Edited by R. H. Charles.

*The Psalms of Solomon*.--These have been published in Greek and
English, under the title "The Psalms of

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

the Pharisees," edited by Ryle and James (1891); the Greek text has also
been published by Dr Swete, *op. cit.* pp. 765-787 (1896),

*The Book of Jubilees*.--Translated from the Editor's Ethiopic text;
edited by R. H. Charles (1902).

*The Book of the Secrets of Enoch*.--Edited by Morfill and Charles
(1896).

*The Ascension of Isaiah*.--Text, translation, and commentary, by R. H.
Charles (1900).

*The Assumption of Moses*.--Text, translation, and commentary, by R. H.
Charles (1897).

*The Apocalypse of Baruch*.--Translated from the Syriac, and edited by
R. H. Charles (1896).

*The Fourth Book of Esdras* (Ezra).--The Latin text has been published
by Bensley and James in "Texts and Studies," iii. 2 (1895).

All the above, with the exception of the *Secrets of Enoch*, exist in a
German translation, together with Notes, in Kautzsch's *Die Apokryphen
and Pseudepigraphen des Alten Testaments*, vol. ii. (1900); the
different books are edited by leading German scholars.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[66:1](dlt06.htm#fr_16.md) "Make a fence to the
Torah" (*Pirqe Aboth*, i. 1), which Dr Taylor, in his edition of the
work, paraphrases in the words: "Impose additional restrictions so as to
keep at a safe distance from the forbidden ground."

<span id="fn_17"></span>[67:1](dlt06.htm#fr_17.md) *Cf.* Oesterley and Box,
*op. cit.* pp. 34, 211.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[69:1](dlt06.htm#fr_18.md) Professor Charles in
*Encycl. Bibl.* i. 213, 214.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[71:1](dlt06.htm#fr_19.md) *Cf.* Luke ii. 38.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[73:1](dlt06.htm#fr_20.md) *The Book of Enoch*, pp.
1, 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Antecedents of the Gospel Teaching: The
Apocalyptic Literature.](dlt07.md)
