[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt11)  [Next](dlt13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

#### CHAPTER X.

#### THE GOSPEL TEACHING OF THE SECOND ADVENT:-CONTRAST WITH ITS ANTECEDENTS.

HAVING now briefly followed out the eschatological teaching of the Old
Testament, the Apocalyptic literature, and the Gospels, and having
illustrated each by quotations, we shall in the present chapter compare
the Gospel presentation of the facts with the earlier teaching, and
attempt to point out some of the main differences between the two; while
in the next and concluding chapter we shall seek to account for what is,
in spite of certain very pointed differences, the substantial identity
in many particulars of the Eschatology of all three classes of
literature.

#### §i. *The Central Figure in the Eschatological Drama*.

The first thing that naturally suggests itself

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

for consideration is the Personality of Him Who occupies the central
position in the Eschatological Drama. In the Old Testament it is, as a
rule, Jehovah Himself Who appears, sometimes as Judge of the Israelite
nation (Amos v. 17), sometimes as Judge of all flesh (Isaiah lxvi. 15,
16), and at other times as the champion of His Chosen People (Isaiah
lxv. 17-19). But this is not always so; in some of the most striking
Messianic passages of the Old Testament the Central Personality
alternates between Jehovah and His Anointed. The classical example of
this is to be seen by comparing the following passages together, Isaiah
H. 2-4; iv. 2-6; ix. 5, 6; xi. 1-5; these four passages constitute what
is in most respects the essence of the Old Testament Messianic teaching.
In the first (ii. 2-4) Jehovah Himself is described as the Messianic
Ruler; He is to be the universal Judge over all peoples. The Messianic
Ruler is therefore divine, and His subjects are to include all nations.
In the second passage (iv. 2-6) Jehovah is again represented as the
Messianic Ruler on earth, but the method of His appearing is not of the
same literal character as described in the earlier passage; it is
indicated by the *Shekhinah*; His subjects

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

are now restricted to those of the Children of Israel who have passed
through a purifying process. In this passage, too, a new element enters
into the circle of ideas, namely, the "Branch of Jehovah," forming the
point of attachment for the idea of the "shoot," or "twig," of Jesse
(Isaiah xi. 1, 10), and thus bringing in the connection of the house of
David with the Messianic Ruler. In the third passage (ix. 5-6; 6-7 in
the English Bible) it is a divine-human ruler--the Immanuel-conception
in vii. 14 forming the link--who is to sit upon the throne of David; his
subjects are to be the Children of Israel only. And in the fourth
passage (xi. 1-5) a purely human ruler is presented, upon whom, however,
the Spirit of Jehovah is manifest in a unique manner; he is a descendant
of Jesse, and therefore presumably (though this is not explicitly
stated) his subjects are restricted to the Children of Israel. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84) It seems, therefore, incontrovertible
that, if one is to take these passages as they stand, in their natural
meaning, and without reading into them thoughts and ideas which belong
to later ages, one is forced to the conclusion that, at

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

first, the prophet believed in the actual, visible presence of Jehovah
Himself on earth when the "last times," which are to follow after the
"signs," draw near; later on it is taught that Jehovah delegates this
office to another. Other Old Testament writers also exhibit a similar
uncertainty as to the Personality Who is to be the central figure in the
"last times"; one of the latest passages in the Old Testament presents
this idea of uncertainty, Mal. iii. 1: *Behold I send my messenger, and
he shall prepare the way before me*--that is clear enough, referring as
it does to the forerunner; but in the latter part of the verse we read:
*And the Lord, whom ye shall seek, shall suddenly come to his temple;
and the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in, behold he cometh,
saith the Lord of Hosts*; the plain sense of the word requires one to
differentiate between the "Lord" and the "messenger of the covenant";
and this differentiation seems natural when one remembers that
uncertainty as to who the central figure in the Eschatological Drama is
to be is characteristic of those Old Testament writers who deal with the
subject. It is the same in the Apocalyptic writings, as will have been
noticed in the passages which have been quoted in a previous chapter.
Now when we

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

come to the Gospel teaching we find no traces of any uncertainty in this
matter; it is Christ, and Christ only, Who is the Central Figure in the
"last times." Then, again, while in the earlier teaching it is always
*Jehovah* who is to be the Judge--an office which is never committed to
the Messiah of pre-Christian times, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85)--and the Messiah is always a human
being, <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86) in the Gospel teaching
*Christ* is the *Judge*, <span id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_87) and He is
also the Messiah; thus the Divine Judge and the human Messiah are found
to be centred in the Person of Christ. *This is the testimony which
Christ bears of Himself: But when the Son of Man shall come in his
glory, and all the angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne of
his glory, and before him shall be gathered all the nations; and he
shall separate them one from another* . . . (Matt. xxv. 31-33); and on
the other hand: *The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many* (Mark x. 45). This
point of

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

contrast between the antecedents of the Gospel teaching and this
teaching itself is clearly of the highest importance; for it shows, on
the one hand, that the earlier teaching was in some sense inadequate,
but on the other hand, that it witnessed to a great truth. That the
Christ's witness here concerning Himself implies that of His dual
nature, the divine and the human, is sufficiently clear not to need
further emphasis.

#### §ii. *The Time of the Second Advent*.

In the Old Testament and Apocalyptic writings the "last times" by no
means always or necessarily imply the end of all things. Although *when*
the "last times" are to come about is never definitely stated, they are
always represented as a process upon which shall follow the inauguration
of the new Age; but the scene of this new Age and the conditions under
which it will be lived do not differ, excepting in one particular, very
greatly from the conditions under which men have lived hitherto. The one
particular is the *happiness* of that Age, and all that this involves;
but it is not by any means always regarded as of unending duration; it
will be lived on this

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

earth, under very happy conditions, but under natural conditions. On the
other hand, a development of belief took place; with a doctrine of the
Resurrection, together with the conceptions expressed by the terms
Gehenna, Paradise, Heaven, came the preparation for more spiritual
ideas, and belief in a future life. This teaching, which thus connects
the "last times" and the succeeding Messianic Kingdom with this earth,
and here gradually develops a belief in the existence of the life to
come, after the Resurrection and therefore in a sphere other than
earthly--this teaching corresponds in some particulars with that of the
Gospel; but the latter presents some marked points of contrast.
According to the teaching of our Lord the Kingdom which He came to found
came into being at His first Advent, and could therefore be spoken of as
already present, *The Kingdom of Heaven is within you* (Luke xvii. 21;
*cf.* Matt. vii. 13; xi. 12; xii. 25), and also as belonging to the
future, *There be some of them that stand here, which shall in no wise
taste of death, till they see the Kingdom of God* (Luke ix. 27; *cf.*
Matt. vi. 6; viii. 11; Mark ix. 11; Luke xiii. 15); similarly we are to
learn from this that the Kingdom is wholly spiritual, it is not a
question as to whether it

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

belongs to this world or to the world to come, because it stands outside
of such considerations. The great differentiation which men make between
this world and the next cannot come into consideration, in the same way,
with God Who is spirit (*cf.* John iv. 24), for the kingdom has
reference solely to the spiritual part of man's nature, and his
spiritual attitude towards it as now present is the condition of his
belonging to it hereafter: *Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of
God as a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein* (Mark x. 15).

The chief point of contrast, therefore, so far, between the Gospel
teaching and that which went before is that, according to the former,
the Messianic Era, *i.e.*, the Kingdom of God, is established without
the "signs" that precede the "last times," and without the various other
elements which belong to the Eschatological Drama according to the
presentment of the earlier literature (the only exception to this is
that the forerunner appears in the Gospel as well as in the earlier
teaching). These elements are presented in the Gospels in connection
with Christ's *Second Advent*. But, according to the Gospel teaching,
the Second Advent is really only to be the consummation of the Kingdom
which the Messiah founded

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

while on earth; this only serves to emphasise the truth that the
"Kingdom to come" is only the continuation and more complete fulness and
realisation of what has already been inaugurated on earth. The earlier
teaching, as a rule, makes the establishment of the Kingdom and its
consummation one and the same thing, or, at all events, very closely
connected; but even here there is not always uniformity of teaching; for
sometimes the sequence of events is: the "signs" which precede the end,
the establishment of the Kingdom, the Resurrection and Judgement
(sometimes these last two are interchanged); at other times the
establishment and consummation of the Kingdom come last, and the Kingdom
endures for ever. This uncertainty, in one respect, is reflected in the
Gospel teaching, at least in so far as the time of the Second Advent is
concerned; for it cannot be denied that the Second Advent (the technical
term for this in the Gospels, and in the New Testament generally, is
*Parousia*) is sometimes represented as about to take place within the
present generation (see, *e.g.*, Matt. x. 23; xvi. 28; xxiv. 34; Mark
viii. 28; ix. 1; Luke ix. 27), at other times it is implied that it will
not be until some future,

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

probably distant, date; this is certainly what must naturally be
concluded from those passages which say that before the end comes the
Gospel must be preached to all nations (*e.g.*, Mark xiii. 10; *cf.*
Matt. xxviii. 19, 20). 'The difficulty is enhanced by the fact that the
end of the world is sometimes identified with the destruction of
Jerusalem. The full solution of these difficulties may perhaps be
brought about by differentiating the various sources from which our
Gospels in their present form have been compiled; but this is a
precarious task, and one which cannot be touched upon here. It may
legitimately be pointed out that according to our Lord's own testimony
the time of His Second Advent was known only to the Father: *But of that
day and hour knoweth no one, not even the angels of heaven, neither the
Son* (the words "neither the Son" are omitted by some important
authorities, but see Mark xiii. 32), but the Father only (Matt. xxiv.
36).

#### §iii. *The Character of the Kingdom*.

But if there is a certain similarity between the Gospel teaching and its
antecedents in respect of the uncertainty of the actual time

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

of the end, the two show a marked contrast between the conceptions which
they respectively present concerning the character of the Kingdom. This
is mainly seen in comparing the materialistic ideas of the earlier
teaching with the spiritual teaching in the Gospels. In the Old
Testament, as well as in the Apocalyptic literature, the Messianic
Kingdom is described as a time in which material prosperity will be at
its height, and the peace, which is another characteristic of this
Kingdom, will be achieved by the overthrow and subjugation of the
enemies of the Israelites; all nations are to bow down before them and
acknowledge them as their masters; the Kingdom is a kingdom of this
world. This is also the case in the more developed teaching of *Eth.
Enoch*, see, *e.g.*, xxxviii. 4, 5: "And from that time those who
possess the earth will no longer be powerful and exalted, and they will
not be able to behold the face of the holy, for the light of the Lord of
Spirits is seen on the face of the holy, and righteous and elect. Then
will the kings and the mighty perish, and be given into the hand of the
righteous and holy." But in the Gospel teaching everything that has to
do with the Kingdom of God is of a spiritual character;

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

nothing could be in greater contrast to the earlier teaching than this.
The Kingdom itself is described by Christ as *not of this world* (John
xviii. 36), and therefore the happiness and peace of those who belong to
it is of a spiritual kind. A *trait* which often occurs in the earlier
literature is that in the time to come the righteous will look upon the
wicked in their torments as though exulting over them; such an idea is,
of course, wholly absent from the Gospel teaching, indeed it is a
further point of contrast that the Gospels have far less to say about
the judgement on the wicked than the earlier literature; the Gospel
teaching is characterised by a much more pronounced note of hope; <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_88) nothing, for example, could be more
striking than the words in the parable: *Go out quickly into the streets
and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor and the maimed and
blind and lame. . . . And the lord said unto the servant, Go out into
the highways and hedges, and constrain them to come in* . . .; the
Kingdom is as far as possible all-embracing; it is only, as it were,
upon compulsion that the invincibly wicked

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

have to be cast out of it; even the wicked are included among the
subjects of the Kingdom in the hope that they may thereby be leavened,
and it is only at the very end, when they have consistently repudiated
the gift of eternal life, that hope for them ceases; see the parables of
the draw-net (Matt. xiii. 47-49), and of the leaven (Matt. xiii. 33).

The point of contrast here centres, therefore, in the fact of the wish
that the wicked, by becoming better, should continue for ever as members
of the Kingdom. They are not regarded as naturally shut out; on the
contrary, it is taken for granted that in the normal course they *ought*
to be included among its members. <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89)
According to the Gospel teaching every single human being is of account;
and this brings us to another point of contrast between the earlier
teaching and that of the Gospel regarding the Kingdom; it is that the
importance of the individual is recognised in the latter, and
practically ignored in the former; instead of the blessedness of *the
Righteous* in the Kingdom, it is the blessedness of *the righteous one*
that is emphasised in the Gospel teaching, each individual receiving

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

recognition; and instead of the judgement on *the Wicked*, it is the
judgement on *each wicked man* that is emphasised, each individual
receiving judgement; this is a point of contrast which is of very great
importance, and the significance of it cannot be overrated.

In summing up, therefore, the chief points of contrast between the
Gospel teaching and that of its antecedents, we see, firstly, that there
is no ambiguity as to the Personality of the Central Figure in the
Eschatological Drama as presented in the Gospels; secondly, that the
Gospel teaching is in every respect more spiritual than that of the
earlier literature; thirdly, that the Gospel sounds a note of hope
hitherto unknown; and fourthly, that in the Gospels the individual is
raised to a place of importance which was not accorded him in earlier
days. Besides this, it may also be added that much of the vagueness in
the earlier literature is replaced by the more positive teaching of the
Gospels, and the broad moral issues of the latter stand in marked
contrast to a great deal of less important matter that figures in the
antecedent teaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[192:1](dlt12.htm#fr_84) See for details
concerning what is said here, *The Evolution of the Messianic Idea*,
chaps. xiv., xv.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[194:1](dlt12.htm#fr_85) We are, of course, only
referring to the Judge in the restricted eschatological sense.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[194:2](dlt12.htm#fr_86) It is true that the
office of the Messiah, as ruler on earth, is sometimes, as we have seen,
ascribed to Jehovah; but the Messiah Himself is always a human being in
Old Testament teaching.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[194:3](dlt12.htm#fr_87) Sometimes, in some of
the parables, it is God Himself Who is the Judge (see Matt. xviii. 32;
xx. 8; xxii. 11; Luke xviii. 7).

<span id="fn_88"></span>[201:1](dlt12.htm#fr_88) It is true to say that
the Apocalyptists were to a great extent driven by *despair* of better
things on earth to frame their eschatological ideas; on the other hand,
the basis of Gospel Eschatology is *hope*.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[202:1](dlt12.htm#fr_89) *Cf.* 1 Tim. ii. 4:
*Who willeth that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Christian Adaptation of Jewish Teaching.](dlt13)
