[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlt10)  [Next](dlt12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

### THE GOSPEL TEACHING OF THE SECOND ADVENT.

THE Gospel teaching of the Second Advent, as far as the four main points
already referred to are concerned, is so familiar that on reading the
passages given above from the Old Testament and the Apocalyptic
literature which deal with the antecedents of this teaching, passages
from the Gospels will have spontaneously suggested themselves; therefore
it will not be necessary to give many quotations. Nevertheless, for
purposes of illustration a certain number of passages must be cited;
this will also serve to show more clearly the identity of thought
between the Gospel teaching and that which preceded, on certain
fundamental points. We shall take the four main elements in the same
order as in chaps. ii. and v.; comparisons can then be very easily made
with the corresponding sections in each; the subsidiary points of
interest referred to

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

in previous chapters will also be dealt with here. It should, however,
be mentioned in passing that points of similarity with antecedent
teaching only constitute one aspect of the Gospel teaching; we shall, in
the next chapter, draw attention to another aspect, according to which
it presents important points of contrast with the earlier teaching.

#### §i. *The Signs which precede the End*.

The most striking of these are the physical phenomena which are to
herald the approach of Christ, thus in Luke xxi. 25, 26, we read: *And
there shall be signs in sun, moon, and stars; and upon the earth
distress of nations, in perplexity for the roaring of the sea and the
billows; men fainting for fear, and for expectation of the things which
are coming on the world; for the powers of the heavens shall be shaken*
(*cf.* Matt. xxiv. 29; Mark xiii. 24; and see the quotation from Joel
ii. 28-32 in Acts ii. 17 ff.). In connection with these physical
phenomena it is interesting to recall the words in Rev. vi. 12-17: . . .
*and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair; and the whole moon
became as blood, and the stars of the heaven fell unto the earth . . .
and the heaven* 

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

*was removed as a scroll when it is rolled up; and every mountain and
island were moved out of their places . . . and they say to the
mountains and to the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him
that sitteth upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb*. . . .
Earthquakes and famine are other signs (see Matt. xxiv. 7; Mark xiii.
8). Further, universal fighting, not only war between nations, but also
enmity between relatives and friends, are to be signs of the end--Matt.
xxiv. 6, 7: *And ye shall hear of wars, and rumours of wars: see that ye
be not troubled; for these things must needs come to pass; but the end
is not yet. For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom*. . . . The conflict between near relations is described, for
example, in Matt, x. 21.: *And brother shall deliver up brother to
death, and the father his child; and children shall rise up against
their parents and cause them to be put to death*; so, too, in verses 35,
36, of the same chapter: *For I came to set a man at variance against
his father; and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter-in-law
against her mother-in-law, and a man's foes shall be they of his own
household*. It will be noticed on comparing these words with the
parallel ones in the earlier literatures that the

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

similarity amounts often to verbal identity. Another of the signs of the
"last times" is the appearance of false Messiahs, thus in Matt. xxiv.
23, 24, we read: *Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is the
Christ, or, Here; believe it not. For there shall arise false Christs,
and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, so as to
lead astray, if possible, even the elect*. This feature does not appear
to be at all prominent in the earlier literature, but that it existed is
probable, as it occurs in the Rabbinical literature, which reflects and
reserves so many traditional beliefs (see above, chap. vii. §i).

#### §ii. *The Second Advent of the Messiah*.

In Jewish theology it is taught that above the earth there are seven
heavens; <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) the highest of these, the
seventh, is called *Araboth*; this is the dwelling-place (or *Mechiza*)
of God. But not only does the Almighty dwell here, the angels who serve
Him are there, and also the souls of the righteous (*Chagigah* 15*b*;
see Weber, *op. cit.* pp. 162 ff.). But there are, so it is taught,
three divisions in this "seventh

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

heaven"; God Himself dwells in the innermost division, which is hidden
from view by a *pargôd* ("curtain") of clouds; the righteous are in the
next division, <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75) and the angels in the
outermost. Behind the *pargôd* of clouds, where God dwells, is the
heavenly throne together with the "glory" of God. The "glory" of God is
said to dwell upon the divine throne, and is often used for the
Personality of God Himself, especially in the *Targums*. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76) A further point of great interest is the
fact that in the divine Mechiza, or "dwelling-place," no being may ever
enter, with the one exception of *Metatron*, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[3](#fn_77) who is permitted to enter and act as
mediator between the Israelites and God by writing down their merits in
the Divine Presence. This teaching, which is found in Rabbinical
writings belonging to times subsequent to the beginning of Christianity,
reflects nevertheless thoughts and beliefs which existed long before the
Christian Era; they are, therefore, worth bearing in mind in considering
a few Gospel passages relative to the Second Advent of

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

Christ. In Matt. xxv. 31 we read: *But when the Son of Man shall come in
his glory and all the angels with him, then shall he sit on the throne
of his glory* (*cf.* Mark xii. 25, 26); again, in Matt. xxiv. 30: *And
then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven . . . and they
shall see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and
great glory*. Here one may be permitted to suggest that "the sign of the
Son of Man in heaven" refers to the "glory" to which reference was made
above. It has been suggested that by this "sign" is meant that Christ
would appear with or on the Cross (Bousset on Rev. i. 7), and that "if
St Matthew had this in mind, the 'sign of the Son of Man' would mean the
crucified Saviour appearing in the air." <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) This idea seems incongruous in view of the
words "on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory"; for the
Cross would be too suggestive of humiliation. But besides this, it must
be remembered that the "glory of God," or the *Shekhinah*, was always
regarded as the sign of the Divine Presence. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79) The words in Rev. i. 7 (*Behold, he cometh
with the clouds*;

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

*and every eye shall see him, and they which pierced him; and all the
tribes of the earth shall mourn over him*), which are cited in support
of the view that the "sign" means the crucified Saviour, do not
necessarily do so, for the mention of those "which pierced him" may well
have been made in order to emphasise the overwhelming difference there
is to be between the humiliation of Christ while on earth and His glory
when He shall appear again; His persecutors are to be witnesses of this;
and when it says, further, "all the tribes of the earth shall mourn over
Him," this is parallel to the words in Matt. xxiv. 30: *Then shall all
the tribes of the earth mourn*, their reason for mourning being that
Christ has come to judge them, <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) in
contradistinction to the gathering together of the elect, described in
the next verse (*cf.* Luke xxi. 28, where Christ reassures His own
followers). The thought of the righteous elect dwelling in the divine
*Mechiza* is illustrated by Matt. xix. 28: *Verily, I say unto you, that
ye which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man shall
sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon* 

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

*twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel*. Assuming, as one
may justly do, that this Jewish belief of the *Mechiza* and its three
divisions, existed in pre-Christian times, the thought of Christ coming
with the angels and the saints would naturally suggest itself.

A distinctive feature of the Gospel teaching concerning the Second
Advent which requires a brief mention, is the suddenness of the
Messiah's coming; in Matt. xxiv. 27, for example, our Lord teaches: *For
as the lightning cometh forth from the east, and is seen even unto the
west, so shall be the coming of the Son of Man*. Closely connected with
this suddenness of the Advent is its unexpectedness; more than one
parable of eschatological content teaches this, and the frequent
emphasis laid on the need of watching is, of course, due to this
feature. (See, for example, Matt. xxiv. 37-51, xxv. 13, and the parable
of the Ten Virgins xxv. 1-12.)

#### §iii. *The Judgement on the Wicked*.

As in the parallel sections in the Old Testament and in the Apocalyptic
literature, it is the *final* punishment of the Wicked that is here
referred to. The most instructive and

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

best known passage regarding this subject is Matt. xxv. 41-46; here,
concerning the Wicked, it is said: *Then shall he say also unto them on
the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed, into the eternal fire which is
prepared for the devil and his angels. . . . And these shall go away
into eternal punishment*. Again, Matt. xiii. 41, 42: *The Son of Man
shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom
all things that cause stumbling, and them that do iniquity, and shall
cast them into the furnace of fire; there shall be the weeping and
gnashing of teeth*. (*Cf.* verses 49, 50; Luke xiii. 28.) The strange
idea of the "worm that dieth not," which we referred to in an earlier
section (chap. ii. §iii.), occurs in reference to the Wicked in Mark ix.
48, where Gehenna is spoken of as the place *where their worm dieth not
and the fire is not quenched*. The fire of Gehenna, or Hell, is referred
to again in Mark ix. 43, and often in the Synoptic Gospels.

#### §iv. *The Blessedness of the Righteous*.

As in the preceding section, it will be only necessary to give one or
two quotations to

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

illustrate this subject. In Matt. xxv. 34 we read: *Then shall the King
say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit
the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world*; so, too,
in verse 46, . . . *But the righteous* (shall go) *into eternal life*.
Almost always, though there are one or two exceptions (Matt. viii. 11,
Luke 28), the idea of the Israelites being in any way specially
privileged is absent in the Gospel teaching; here Universalism has
conquered Particularism, and this must have been one of the main reasons
for the hatred felt by the Pharisees towards our Lord. The most striking
passage, perhaps, in the Gospels illustrative of the Universalist spirit
is Matt. xxiv. 31; *And he shall send forth his angels with a great
sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the
four winds, from one end of heaven to the other*. That the "elect" here
are not to be understood as being restricted to those of Jewish race
seems clear from the earlier part of this chapter, the whole of which is
eschatological, for in verse 14 occur the words: *And this gospel of the
Kingdom shall be preached in the whole world for a testimony unto all
the nations; and then shall the end come*. The blessedness of the

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

righteous, be they of whatsoever race, is also distinctly taught in the
account of the great Judgement (xxv. 31-46) referred to above, for in
verse 32 it says that before Him shall be gathered all nations; and He
shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the
sheep from the goats.

#### §v. *The Gathering of the Gentiles*.

As has been pointed out in an earlier chapter (vi. §i.), the Gospel
teaching on this point is adumbrated in the *Ethiopic Book of Enoch* and
in the *Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs*; from the quotations
already given from these two books it will have been seen that the
attitude towards the Gentiles in the "last times" taken up is, with the
rarest exceptions, Universalistic; they are to be gathered, not in order
that they may be destroyed, but that they may be saved. Although here
and there in the Gospels a Particularistic tendency may be discerned, it
is altogether exceptional when this does occur; the general teaching is
that without differentiating between Jew and Gentile, every soul that is
fit for the Kingdom shall inherit it;

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

there are, indeed, some striking passages in which certain of the Jewish
race are directly said to be *unfit* for the Kingdom; these only
emphasise the Universalistic character of the Gospel teaching. As
illustrative of how widely all men are embraced in the Gospel view of
the Kingdom, no words could be more instructive than those in Matt.
xxiv. 14: *And this gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in the whole
world for a testimony unto all the nations; and then shall the end
come*. How entirely without any differentiation the Kingdom is promised
to all who shall be found worthy is seen, for example, in Matt. xxv. 32
ff. . . . . *And before him shall be gathered all the nations: and he
shall separate them one from another, as the shepherd separateth the
sheep from the goats* . . . (*cf.* Luke ii. 31, 32; xiii. 29); many
other passages containing similar Universalistic teaching could be
given. In one or two instances a special position of privilege seems to
be accorded to the Jewish nation, thus in Matt. xix. 28 we read: *And
Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed
me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man shall sit on the throne of
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of* 

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Israel*; it must, however, be added, that the
words which follow may legitimately be taken in a quite general sense,
namely, *And every one that hath left houses or brethren . . . shall
inherit eternal life*. Then, lastly, there are quite a number of
instances in which it is said that the Jews will be cast out of the
Kingdom on account of their unworthiness, and their places be taken by
others; so, for example, Matt. viii. 12: *But the sons of the Kingdom
shall be cast forth into the outer darkness: there shall be the weeping
and gnashing of teeth*. Some of the parables quite clearly teach the
same thing; thus in the parable of the householder who planted a
vineyard we read at its close (Matt. xxi. 41): *He will miserably
destroy those miserable men, and will let out the vineyard unto other
husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits in their seasons*; the
whole drift of the parable leaves no doubt as to who are intended by
"those miserable men," and by the "other husbandmen," even if it were
not made doubly clear by the words in verse 43: *Therefore I say unto
you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken away from you, and shall be given
to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof*. (*Cf.* further Matt.
xxi. 31; Luke xiii. 7-9.)

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

#### §vi. *The Ingathering of Israel*.

The ingathering of the dispersed Israelites all over the world is a
regular feature in the Eschatology of the Old Testament and of the later
literature; but from what has already been said we shall scarcely expect
to see it figure prominently in the Gospels. One passage, it is true,
which seems to be based on Isa. xxvii. 13, very probably did, in the
first instance, refer to the dispersed Israelites, but it is a question
whether the words were not deliberately chosen with a view to adapting
them to a wider use; the passage is Matt. xxiv. 31: *And he shall send
forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather
together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the
other*. It is more in accordance with the demand of true religion which,
as the Gospel teaches, is the condition of entry into the Kingdom that
we read in Luke iii. 7 ff. . . . *Ye offspring of vipers, who warned you
to flee from the wrath to come? Bring forth, therefore, fruits worthy of
repentance, and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to
our father; for I say unto you that God is able of these* 

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

*stones to raise up children unto Abraham*. . . . That the Jewish nation
was intended to be the medium whereby salvation was to be brought to all
men <span id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) seems definitely implied in such
words as: *Salvation is of the Jews* (John iv. 22), and: *Go ye
therefore, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them* . . .
(Matt. xxviii. 19); but this high privilege only emphasised the fact
that their ingathering was to be conditioned by their spiritual state.
See, further, the words in Matt. xix. 28: *Verily I say unto you, that
they which have, followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man
shall sit on the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel*.

As an illustration of the spirit of the Gospel teaching, it is
instructive to compare the thought of Israel being the medium of
proclaiming, and bringing the knowledge of, salvation to all men, with
the earlier idea which sometimes finds expression, of the Israelites
being the instrument of punishing and destroying the Gentiles. (*Cf.*
above, chap. ii. §iii.)

A feature that should be mentioned in connection with the ingathering of
Israel is

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

the state of the Temple in the time of bliss which is to be the lot of
the Righteous; we have here an element concerning which the Gospel
teaching and its antecedents are in striking contrast. In the Old
Testament one great hope associated with the Messianic Age was that
Jerusalem and the Temple would be rebuilt. Such prophecies as Ezek.
xl.--xliv., xlvii., Isa. xxiv. 23, liv. 11 ff., lx. 10 ff., lxv. 17-19,
which suggest the prospect of a new and glorious city and a restored
Temple-worship, strongly fostered such hopes. In Hag. ii. 7-9 the
consciousness that the second Temple (before its restoration by Herod)
compared unfavourably with the first is already apparent. (*Cf.* also
Tobit xiv. 5.) It was expected that a new and glorious Jerusalem would
be built in the Messianic Age, of sapphires, gold, and precious stones,
etc. (*Cf.* Tobit xiii. 15 ff.; xiv. 4; Rev. xxi. 9-21.) This is
identical with the "new" or "upper" Jerusalem ("the Jerusalem that is
above," which is referred to in Gal. iv. 26, Hebr. xii. 22) which had
been seen in vision by Adam, Abraham, and Moses (Syriac *Apocalypse of
Baruch* iv. 26), and which was to be made manifest in all its glory by
the Messiah (*cf.* *iv. Esdras* vii. 26, Syriac *Apocalypse of Baruch*
xxxii. 4). In later times, after the

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

complete destruction of both city and Temple, this hope came to even
more vivid expression. (See, further, *Sibylline Oracles* iii. 286-290,
625-658; *Book of Jubilees* i. 29 ff.; xxiii. 27 ff.) The restoration of
the Holy City, and especially of the Temple-worship, long continued to
be an object of pious hopes and prayers; according to *Lev. rabbah* ix.
the Messiah will Himself re-erect the Temple. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_82) In view of such hopes and expectations,
which with the building of Herod's Temple seemed to some extent
realised, one can understand what must have been the feelings of those
who, on drawing our Lord's attention to the buildings of the Temple,
heard, in reply, the words: *See ye not all these things? Verily I say
unto you, There shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not
be thrown down* (Matt. xxiv. 2).

The feature emphasises, again, the spiritual character of the Gospel
teaching.

#### §vii. *The Resurrection of the Dead*.

In the earlier literature there is ambiguity as to the time of the
Resurrection, as well as uncertainty as to who shall rise, whether it is

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

to be the good alone, or the evil as well, and whether it is to be
restricted to Israelites, or to men in general (see chaps. iii. §iv.;
vi. §iii.; vii. §v.). According to the later teaching of the Jews the
trumpet-blast which was to be the signal for the ingathering of the
dispersed Israelites (*cf.* Isaiah xxvii. 13) would also rouse the
sleeping dead (*cf.* *iv. [Esdras](errata.htm#4)* iv. 23 ff.;
*Berachoth* 15*b*); in 1 Cor. xv. 52 we read: *For the trumpet shall
sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible* . . . (see also 1
Thess. iv. 16). We are not concerned here with the doctrine of the
Resurrection, but only with the, fact of its mention in connection with
eschatological thought. According to the Gospel teaching, it is only the
Righteous who are to share in the Resurrection, for they who rise are
"as the angels in heaven" (Luke xx. 35, 36), hence also the words, "the
resurrection of the just" in Luke xiv. 14. It is, therefore, only the
Righteous who rise, the Wicked are cast down into Gehenna (Matt. x. 28;
Mark ix. 43 ff.). It must be in the light of this that we are to
understand the words in Matt. xxv. 46: *And these shall go away into
eternal punishment, but the righteous into life eternal*, although
direct mention of the Resurrection is not made here. Though it is not
specifically stated (but

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

see Matt. xxv. 32 ff.), yet the whole spirit of the Gospel teaching
shows that it knows no such distinction regarding the Resurrection of
the Dead, as is implied in the words "Jew" and "Gentile." The passage
(Matt. xxvi. 51-53) does not come into consideration here.

It may perhaps strike some as strange that the subject of the general
Resurrection receives, comparatively speaking, such small notice in the
Gospels. The reason, however, is not far to seek, for this belief was so
firmly established among the Jews prior to the Christian Era as not to
require specific treatment; it was one of those things which were
naturally taken for granted, being an almost universally acknowledged
fact; it was only on particular occasions, such as that referred to in
Matt. xxii. 23 ff., that the subject was dealt with in detail by Christ.

#### §viii. *The Messianic Banquet*.

There are some passages in the Gospels which suggest the idea of the
Messianic Banquet, or something corresponding to it; but in each case
the teaching is immeasurably more spiritual than what we read of in the
earlier literature. One may well believe that the popular conception
regarding this

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Banquet was utilised by Christ and transformed,
in order to teach a higher truth. It is possible that the thought of the
Messianic Banquet lay behind the parable of the Marriage Feast (Matt.
xxii. 1-14), see especially verse 13, where it is said that he who had
not on a wedding-garment <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) was to be
cast into the outer darkness, where there is *the weeping and gnashing
of teeth*. (*Cf.* *Ascension of Isaiah* iv. 16.) More direct reference,
however, may be discerned in Matt. viii. 11: *And I say unto you, that
many shall come from the east and the west, and shall sit down with
Abraham and Isaac, and Jacob* . . .; in the original "shall sit down"
(literally "recline") is the regular word for reclining at a meal (*cf.*
Luke xiii. 29). Significant, too, in this connection is the passage Luke
xiv. 15-24, commencing with the words: *And when one of them that sat at
meat with him heard these things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that
shall eat bread in the kingdom of God. But he said, A certain man made a
great supper* . . .; and the words in Matt. xxvi. 29 should also be

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

considered: *But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this
fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my
Father's Kingdom*.

In each of these passages the context shows that a new, a spiritual,
meaning is being applied to the old traditional conception of the
Messianic Banquet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_74"></span>[172:1](dlt11.htm#fr_74) *Cf.* 2 Cor. xii. 2

<span id="fn_75"></span>[173:1](dlt11.htm#fr_75) Probably, as Weber
suggests, this division is equivalent to Paradise, referred to by St
Paul in 2 Cor. xii. 4.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[173:2](dlt11.htm#fr_76) See further on this,
Oesterley and Box, *op. cit.* pp. 191-194.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[173:3](dlt11.htm#fr_77) Concerning this
human-divine being see Oesterley and Box, *op. cit.* pp. 170-178.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[174:1](dlt11.htm#fr_78) Allen, *St. Matthew*,
p. 259.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[174:2](dlt11.htm#fr_79) For references see
Oesterley and Box, *op. cit.* pp. 191 ff.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[175:1](dlt11.htm#fr_80) *Cf.* *Eth. Enoch*
lxii. 5. "Pain will seize them when they see that Son of Man sit on the
throne of His glory" (see also xlv. 3; lxix. 27.)

<span id="fn_81"></span>[183:1](dlt11.htm#fr_81) For this thought *cf.*
*Sibylline Oracles* iii. 194 ff., and see further above, chap. vi. §ii.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[185:1](dlt11.htm#fr_82) Prayer for the
restoration of the Temple-worship is offered in the Synagogue regularly
at the present day (see Oesterley and Box, *op. cit.* p. 223).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[188:1](dlt11.htm#fr_83) With this thought of
the "Wedding-garment" it is interesting to compare the mention of the
‘'Garments of Life" in *Eth. Enoch* lxii. 16. (See also cviii. 12.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Gospel Teaching of the Second Advent:--Contrast
with its Antecedents.](dlt12)
