[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tmmi00)  [Next](tmmi02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

# TWO MYTHS OF THE MISSION INDIANS OF CALIFORNIA. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

## by A. L. Kroeber

WHAT are to-day known as the Mission Indians are those Shoshonean and
Yuman peoples who occupy the portion of southern California which lies
between the principal mountain ranges and the sea. Our knowledge of the
mythology of these people is derived from two very different sources.
The first goes back a century, and consists of the brief but invaluable
account left by the missionary Boscana of the beliefs of two groups of
Indians in the vicinity of the Mission San Juan Capistrano. The second
source is a series of articles by several authors published in the most
recent years in this journal.

The mythology of the Mission Indians is ethnographically of interest
because it is of an entirely different type from that of the Indians of
the remainder of California. It bears certain resemblances to the
traditions of the Indians of Arizona and New Mexico, but has also much
of a distinctive character. This is the more remarkable because while
the culture of the Indians of certain parts of southern California, such
as those of the Santa Barbara islands on the one hand and those of the
Colorado valley on the other, was very different from the culture
characteristic of California as a whole, that of the Mission Indians was
much less specialized. In general status of civilization and social
conditions the Mission Indians were certainly not markedly different
from the Indians who inhabited the central and northern parts of the
State. Ethnographically they stood much nearer these people than they
did to the Pueblos and the less settled tribes of the Southwest.

Over the greater part of California the most important myth is a more or
less full account of the creation. The creators may be one or many,
human or animal. They make the world, its mountains and waters, make or
acquire the sun and moon, create plants and animals, mankind, and often
give to men their principal religious institutions. The culture-hero,
who brings culture to men but is not responsible for the existence or
workings of nature, scarcely appears. Beyond the account of the
creation, the myths of California consist of stories of the adventures
and experiences of individuals, sometimes human and sometimes animal. A
favorite story is that of the deer children whose mother was killed by
the bear, and who in revenge killed the children of the bear and then
after a hazardous flight and pursuit were finally saved. It is stories
of this type that make up

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

the bulk of Californian mythology outside of the creation. Migration
legends are entirely lacking.

In southern California there is no creator. Generally heaven and earth
are regarded as the first beings, or at least the first concrete
existences, and they produce the principal objects of nature, plants,
animals, and mankind, by a simple process of generation. The people move
in a body under the leadership of a great hero among them who is not
more than semi-divine. Only after a time do they break up, or are
separated by him, into tribes. This hero becomes sick through the
shamanistic operations of his enemies, especially the frog, and, after
for some time expecting his death, he dies. The customs and especially
the religious practices of the tribe recounting the tradition are
instituted either by him or by a second leader. Most of the fuller
accounts give two such leaders, Ouiot and Chinigchinich among the
Shoshoneans of San Juan Capistrano, Matevilye and Mastamho among the
Yuman Mohave.

Besides this account of origins, there seems usually to have been also
some form of migration tradition in which the movements and experiences
of the people, or of several bodies of people, are recounted. Such a
tradition is very fully developed among the Mohave. It has never been
obtained among the Mission Indians, but parts of the relation of Boscana
make it clear that something similar, though possibly in briefer form,
must also have existed among these tribes.

The non-creation myths of the southern California Indians are also
different from those in the north. While often quite simple in plan and
not essentially different from the northern tales recounting the
adventures of a hero or a pair of heroes, they are enormously
elaborated, so as to be of great length, and almost invariably take on a
ceremonial or ritualistic character which is not found in connection
with the much shorter and purely traditionary stories of the north. A
great number of songs form an integral portion of such traditions in the
south, and, in the form in which these myths exist and maintain
themselves among the people from generation to generation, they consist
essentially of such a series of songs. Such a body of songs, accompanied
by a greater or less amount of ritualism, of course constitute a
ceremony; and it is precisely of such singings that nearly all the
ceremonies of southern California consist. There is thus a very much
closer association of myth and ceremony than in the north. It is not
only that the myth underlies or explains the performance of the
ceremony: the ceremony itself is only a myth told in song. The two are
identified, and the composite or intermediate product can with equal
justification be called at one time a myth, at another a ceremony. The
words of the song alone may often not be sufficient to give the thread
of the story to those not

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

acquainted with it; but the thread is always there, and a person
acquainted with the series of songs is always able to relate the myth in
full. The best published examples of this form of myth-ceremonies are
the Chaup traditions of the Diegueño collected by Miss Du Bois.

The southwestern affinities of this mythology, that is to say, its
relations to tribes directly east, are evident. Both in Navaho and the
Pueblo traditions there is no real creation. Mankind emerges from the
earth as a wandering body or tribe. Sometimes a generation by heaven and
earth is related. The entire account of origins, which is always very
lengthy, is essentially nothing else than a mythical history of the
people. The migration legend is in part contained in this
pseudo-history, in which mankind and the tribe are virtually identified,
and in part appears in the form of traditions of clan wanderings. There
is no important leader of the people in the southwestern myths, but the
hero who appears later and gives to the people at least part of their
ceremonies until finally he leaves them, has some aspects in common with
Chinigchinich and Mastamho. The elaborate rituals of the Southwest
differ much from the simple singing ceremonies of southern California,
but both, in action, in songs, and in symbolic paraphernalia, always
refer to a myth. They are probably much more than mere dramatic
representations of myths; but that they should have been characterized
as such makes clear their deep-lying similarity to the myth-ceremonies
of southern California. In northern and central California as well as in
the Plains, conditions are radically different. There are ceremonial
origin myths, but these are almost always only accounts of the reason
for the existence of a ceremony which in its essence and in the majority
of its details is an independent growth not associated with any mythical
tradition. Among these peoples mythology and ceremony at times come in
contact, but in the main each goes its own way; while in southern
California, as well as in the Southwest, each contains the essential
elements of the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[309:1](tmmi01.htm#fr_0) Contributed as part of
the Proceedings of the California Branch of the American Folk-Lore
Society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pictorial Representations](tmmi02)
