[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd00)  [Next](htd02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# PREFACE.

ALL SWEETNESS, says the Rig Weda, IS COLLECTED IN THE HEIFER <span
id="fr_0"></span>[a](#fn_0): the Red One of the Dawn. And the Oriental
use of the word, *heifer*, to signify a wife or queen, is familiar to
every reader of the Hebrew Bible. If ye had not ploughed with my heifer,
said Samson, ye had not found out my riddle. Thus the meaning of the
title of this little story is at once clear: *the collected sweetness of
the heifer*: i.e., the ambrosia <span id="fr_1"></span>[b](#fn_1) of the
early morning, in a feminine form.

All know it, the nectar of dawn, who are wise enough to rise, like the
hero of this story, before the sun. And yet, perhaps it is necessary to
live in the East, properly to appreciate the meaning of morning. Love,
for example, is a very old God: as some of the ancient Greeks

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

told us, even the very oldest of all <span id="fr_2"></span>[c](#fn_2).
Why is that? Because he comes out of the East: he belongs to the Dawn.
EROS, EOS, AURORA, USHAS, ARUSHA. First comes Night, and Chaos: and
then, out of the black there arises, silently, imperceptibly,
irresistibly, the glorious, the blushing, the beautiful, amber-clouded,
opal-shredded, amethyst-bedappled Dawn. O Dawn, how I do love thee! how,
after a night of blackness and distress, has thy delicious fragrance
raised me from the dead, with its colour and its camphor and the nectar
touch of its rosy finger, softer than flowers, cooler than sandal-wood.
Yes, it is necessary to be a dweller in the East, to taste and
understand the religion of the Dawn.

And the heifer? What is the secret of the rooted affection of the Aryan
and Iranian, the Weda and Awesta, for the Cow?

Partly, no doubt, its utilitarian value. But they are deceived, who
think that this is all. There is religion <span
id="fr_3"></span>[d](#fn_3) in it, mysticism, æsthetic affection. The
Cow is an Idea. This was first brought home to the translator in the
following way.

Passing through Rajputána, he came to Jeypore. And it happened, on a hot
afternoon, that he was rambling

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

in its outskirts, ankle-deep in white dust, for Jeypore stands on the
edge of Marústhalí, 'the region of death,'--and suddenly he came upon a
cluster of *chattris*, yellow marble memorial tombs of old Kings, and he
lay down to rest in their shade. And there as he lay, blessing the old
rájá whose *umbrella* afforded a refuge for the suppliant even after his
death--there came along the blinding, glaring white way, with noiseless
footfall, a little mouse-coloured heifer, bowing its head from side to
side, as it stepped on daintily in the dust, with great, wise, black,
lustrous, beautiful eyes. On its back was a pile of red clothing: on
that again, a great bowl or basin of brass: and in the bowl sat, like a
little deity, sucking its thumb, and crooning to itself some monotonous
ditty, a tiny Hindoo child. The fierce furious glare of the sun was
collected as it were into a focus of white light on its bare head, and
glinted from its glossy, jet-black hair. Moved to adoration, the
spectator seized his opportunity as they wandered by, and offered
tribute and homage to the Mother and the Child. A pair of great eyes
stared at him with alarm, but the slender little brown fingers shut down
instinctively over the silver rupee. Then they passed on, the little
deity and its tutelary 'vehicle' <span id="fr_4"></span>[e](#fn_4)
moving delicately with that undulating hesitation which the Creator has
bestowed only upon women and cows, reached the black jaws

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

of a street narrow as a door, rounded the corner, and disappeared.

 

Since then, every heifer, and for the sake of the heifer, also even
every ox, has possessed for the writer a touch of divinity. The roast
beef of old England savours of cannibalism, as often as he looks into
their great reproachful eyes: eyes, out of which look back at you the
infinite patience, the imperturbable repose, and the stubborn
intractability of the inscrutable East.

    POONA, *Dec*. 17, 1903.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[vii:a](htd01.htm#fr_0) iii. 3O, 14. (The
translation is literally exact: wishwam swádma sambhritam usriyáyam.)

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vii:b](htd01.htm#fr_1) The feminine form,
*amritá*, is the name of one of the digits of the moon. And *apropos*:
could we penetrate into the darkness of mythological origins, we might
perhaps discover, that the *half-moon* on the forehead of Maheshwara is
related to the *horns* of his bull. And similarly, Isis, the *hornèd
moon* = Io, the *heifer*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[viii:c](htd01.htm#fr_2) As also in Rig Weda, 10.
129. 4.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[viii:d](htd01.htm#fr_3) If you like,
superstition. But it is not growing weaker. I have repeatedly suggested,
to comparatively emancipated Hindoos, that cows might be killed. The
very possibility was always repudiated with horror and disgust.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[ix:e](htd01.htm#fr_4) Every Hindoo deity has his
(or her) 'vehicle,' or *wáhana*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](htd02)
