[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd08)  [Next](htd10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LOTUS.

THEN all night long, he slept profoundly on his bed of leaves, and rose
only when the sun had arisen. And when he went out, he found the *chétí*
standing waiting for him on the edge of the pool, with a red lotus in
her hand. And she seemed in his eyes like the peace of his own mind
embodied in a visible form. And as he went towards her, she looked up,
and said: My mistress sends her lord, by these unworthy hands, a flower,
and if his slumbers have been sweet, it is well with her.

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, he sleeps well who regains his
tranquillity: and by thy favour I have slept this night as I have not
slept for many. And she said: Whence has come this new tranquillity? And
the King laughed, and said: A skilful physician administered to me
yesterday a drowsy drug. Then she said: They are fortunate,

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

who possess skilful physicians, for they are few. Then he said: The drug
that brought me sleep was compounded of the murmur of thy voice and the
nectar of the sight of thee. And I begin to hope that a cure may be
effected, for formerly I thought my case desperate. Then Madhupamanjarí
began to laugh. And she exclaimed: O King, beware! Was it not but a day
or two ago that thou wast bringing charges of variability against the
whole race of woman? And now art thou not becoming amenable to the same
charge? Then the King said: Thou malicious *chétí*, thou knowest well
that thou art saying what is not the truth, solely to torment me. Then
she said: Nay, but thou appearest to me closely to resemble the
fisherman, who lived formerly, in another age and country, by catching
fish. And one day he threw his net into the sea, and there came up in it
a beautiful fish of gold. Then he drew it up, filled with joy. But just
as he was going to take it into his hand, it jumped back into the sea.
Then he shed tears of despair, and abandoning the sea, was ready to
abandon the body. And he exclaimed: Alas! my life is over, for it was
wrapped up in that fish of gold. Nevertheless, after a while, he went
back to the sea, and threw in his net again:

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

and there came up a fish of silver. And instantly he forgot his fish of
gold, and eagerly stretched out his hand to take the fish of silver. But
that also slid from his hand into the sea. And again he gave himself up
to despair, and quitted the shore, and spent his time in bewailing his
loss. Yet after awhile, he came back again to the sea. And he threw in
his net, and to! there came up a common fish, made of the ordinary flesh
of fish; and he took it in his hand and carried it away, and was
perfectly happy, and he utterly forgot the fish of gold, and the fish of
silver, as if they had never been.

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, I would be angry with thee, if I
could, for thy roguery in comparing me to such a vile fisherman. And she
said: O King, beware! lest the parallel should turn out to be exact.
Then the King said: Thou mayst liken me rather to a fire which was all
but extinguished, and could not be rekindled, disdaining as it did every
species of common fuel: till they offered it a piece of heavenly sandal,
of which even that that grows on Malaya is but a poor copy. And then it
blazed up from its ashes with a pure flame, such as it had never put
forth before.

Then she said: King, it is time for me to go.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And she laid the lotus at his feet, and went
away; but she turned and looked back at him, before she disappeared
among the trees. And the King picked up the lotus, and said: Lotus, said
I well, that I was fire, and she the fuel? Or is it not rather I that am
the fuel, and she that is the fire? For certainly she burns me like a
flame, even more, now that she is absent, than when she was here.
Therefore, O thou red lotus, I will carry thee about all day, since thou
resemblest a piece of herself that she has left behind, to cool me in
the hot noon of her absence like a lump of snow. And he went back to the
temple, with the lotus in his hand, feeding on the future, and forgetful
of the past.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shríphala](htd10)
