[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd05)  [Next](htd07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JASMINE.

THEN he tossed all night on his bed of leaves, and in the morning rose,
and went out upon the steps, just as the young sun was flooding with
gold

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

the blue floor of the eastern sky. And as he stood watching, suddenly
the *chétí* came again towards him with twinkling feet, holding a
jasmine <span id="fr_21"></span>[h](#fn_21) blossom in her hand. And as
he looked at her, the King was pleased, against his will: for she
resembled in her movements an incarnation of the sap of the tree of
youth. And she came up to the King, and looked at him with a smile, and
said: O King, my mistress sends her lord, by these unworthy hands, a
flower, and if he has slumbered well during the night, it is also well
with her.

Then the King smiled himself, and was angry that he did so. And he said:
*Chétí*, how can he enjoy repose, that is compelled, against his will,
to deal with such a sex as thine? For whether they are good or bad,
either way they ruffle and destroy his peace of mind.

Then the *chétí* laughed. And she looked at the King with the laughter
hanging in her subtle eyes: and said: O King, thou art gaining wisdom,
by associating with those only that can teach it: for even I am not
utterly devoid of the natural cleverness of my sex, though I am only
just fifteen. And now I see, that thy opinion of us all is beginning

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

to waver: since to-day thou art willing to allow in some of us were it
only the possibility of good. And I wonder, by what cause this sudden
change can have been produced. And hearing her, the King was annoyed:
for he had determined, that he would not take pleasure in conversing
with her: and yet he could not help it. And he said: Of that which has
not happened, there is no cause: and my opinions are to-day just what
they were before, and so am I. But the *chétí* looked at him with a
smile. And she said: Nay, it is not so: the outward signs are
unmistakeable. I can read them on thee as if what was written there were
only my own name. Then the King fell into the trap. And he said: And
what, then, is thy name? The *chétí* said: I am called
Madhupamanjarí <span id="fr_22"></span>[i](#fn_22). And the King said:
Thou art well named. Then she said: How canst thou tell? Dost thou know
what I am like? Wilt thou judge the inside by the outside? Canst thou
infer its delicious content from the rough and horrid jacket of the nut?
Then the King smiled. And he said: Maiden, thy simile is not
appropriate. What resemblance

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

is there, between the exterior of an ugly nut and thine? Then the
*chétí* clapped her hands. And she exclaimed: O King, wilt thou never
learn discretion? Hast thou so soon forgotten? Dost thou not know by
experience that an outside, let it be never so sweet, may contain but a
bitter juice within? Little canst thou estimate from my outside, what
qualities there are within. And yet know, that if my mistress loves me
better than all her other maids, it is not for my husk, but for my
kernel. For I learned wisdom from a cunning master, and what I could
teach thee, thou wouldst give much to know. And I could tell thee
stories, that would make thee laugh at all thy trouble, and take thee to
a land, of which thou hast never even dreamed. Where the trees have ever
blossoms, and are noisy with the humming of intoxicated bees. Where by
day, the suns are never burning, and by night, the moonstones ooze with
nectar in the rays of the camphor laden moon. Where the blue lakes are
filled with rows of silver swans, and where, on steps of lapis-lazuli,
the peacocks dance in agitation at the murmur of the thunder in the
hills. Where the lightning flashes without harming, to light the way to
women, stealing in the darkness to meetings with their lovers,

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and the rainbow hangs for ever like an opal on the dark blue curtain of
the clouds. Where, on the moonlit roofs of crystal palaces, pairs of
lovers laugh at the reflection of each other's lovesick faces in goblets
of red wine: breathing as they drink air heavy with the fragrance of the
sandal, wafted on the breezes from the mountain of the south: where they
play and pelt each other with emeralds and rubies, fetched at the
churning of the ocean from the bottom of the sea: where rivers, whose
sands are always golden, flow slowly past long lines of silent cranes
that hunt for silver fishes in the rushes on their banks: where men are
true, and maidens love for ever, and the lotus never fades.

And as he listened, tears started from the eyes of the King. And he
exclaimed: Aye! maiden, take me, if thou canst, to the land where love
grows never old. But the *chétí* looked at him with kind eyes. And she
laid the jasmine blossom at his feet, and turned, and went away quickly
through the trees: while the King watched her, till she vanished from
his sight. And then he stooped and picked up the jasmine flower. And he
said: *Málatí*, thy fragrance is sweet beyond comparison, and yet it is
not so delicious as the music of this

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

little maiden's voice. And yet alas! she is a woman. Out, out upon these
women! For I thought I had succeeded in uprooting the very seeds of
their attraction from my heart: and now there comes this pretty *chétí*,
and destroys all my operations with a few honied words breathed through
the door of her cunning scented lips. Then he looked at the flower, and
the pool. And he said: Flower, I will not throw thee away till thou art
faded, for that would be a shame. And he went back to the temple, with
the flower in his hand, divided in his mind between the recollection of
the *chétí* and the recollection of his grief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22:h](htd06.htm#fr_21) *Málatí*.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23:i](htd06.htm#fr_22) i.e. 'a cluster of
blossoms for the honey drinkers,' the bees. (The fourth syllable rhymes
with gun.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Flowerless Dawn](htd07)
