[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd13)  [Next](htd15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### ASHÓKA.

THEN all night long, he lay tossing on his bed of leaves. And in the
morning he rose before the sun, and went out and stood before the pool,
and watched the parrots screaming in the *ashwattha* tree, with beaks
that were tipped with the colour of the dawn: till he saw the *chétí*
coming towards him with twinkling feet, holding an *ashóka* flower in
her hand. And she seemed in his eyes *like a draught of the nectar of
love longing incarnate in a feminine form* <span
id="fr_34"></span>[x](#fn_34). And she came up to the King and said: My
mistress sends her lord, by these unworthy hands, a flower, and if his
slumbers have been sweet, it is well with her.

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, can he sleep well, whose night is
passed in longing for the morn? Alas! why is it not always dawn? for
see, at dawn, how all the lotuses turn golden in the sun, and thou art
here. Could not Maheshwara of his omnipotence strike Súrya with his
trident, and fix him

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

in the sky, over the eastern mountain: so would the lotuses be always
golden, and thou wouldst be always here. Then she said: O King, they
come to evil ends who long for the impossible. As, long ago, did he, who
coveted the Spinners of the Sun. For once there was a gambler, who
having lost everything at play was wandering about the world, and by
chance came upon an Apsaras asleep. But as he ran at her, she woke up,
and sprang into the air and vanished: but he caught her by the foot, and
she left her golden sandal in his hand. Then she began to wheedle and
cajole him, saying: Give me back my sandal, for without it I cannot go
to Indra's hall, and to-night I have to dance there without fail. Then
he said: I will give it back only if thou wilt carry me to heaven, and
let me see thee dancing. So finding no escape, the Apsaras carried him
to heaven, hidden in a flower in her ear. And he saw all the Apsarases
dancing in golden robes, like a bed of golden lotuses all waving in the
wind. Then filled with greed, he said to her, whispering into her ear:
Whence come your golden robes? And she said: They are made for us by the
Spinners of the Sun, who dwell beyond the eastern mountain. And every
night they sit and spin the hair of his old rays into

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

gold, combing it out of his head, after he has washed in the lakes of
liquid amethyst that lie hidden in that mountain, where it is always
dawn, and never either dusk, or night, or noon. But when the gambler
heard her, insatiable desire filled his greedy soul. And he began to
shout and bawl: Hey! for the gold: hey! for the Spinners. And Indra
said: Who is that making discords in heaven, and throwing out the
dancers? So they hunted about, and found him hidden in the flower in her
ear. Then Indra said to Mátali: Turn this rascal out of heaven, and with
him the impudent Apsaras who has dared to smuggle him into heaven in her
ear. So Mátali threw them out. But the gambler, not being a sky-goer,
fell down to earth and was broken to pieces.

So King, beware! lest by coveting the impossible thou shouldst lose thy
heaven altogether. And she laid the *ashóka* flower at the King's feet,
and turned to go. Then the King said: Alas! dear *chétí*, canst thou not
stay longer? And she said: No. Then he said: Then canst thou not come
twice or three times in the day? For the days are long, and thou art
here but for a moment: and between every two days there is a night. Then
she said: O King, covet not the impossible: for where my mistress is,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I must be too: and now I have duties to perform,
And she went away through the trees, looking back over her shoulder at
the King, till she disappeared. Then the King stooped and picked up the
flower. And he said: *Ashóka*, thou dost torture me exactly like the
provoking *chétí* who conveyed thee: for thy beauty is such, that I
cannot bear to throw thee away, and yet thou dost not cease to remind me
of my obligation to her mistress. And he went back to the temple, with
the *ashóka* in his hand, and the image of Madhupamanjarí in his heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[53:x](htd14.htm#fr_34) These are the
expressions that are the despair of the translator. So simple, so
beautiful, so pithy in the original: so roundabout and clumsy in a
language whose genius is altogether different
(*múrtámaut-sukyamádanám*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Palásha](htd15)
