[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd11)  [Next](htd13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KADAMBA.

AND he lay all night on his bed of leaves, repenting of his doubts: and
in the morning he arose before the sun, and went out, and watched the
eastern sky changing colour like an opal as the night drove away before
the dawn: but the *chétí* never came. And as the day grew older, the
King grew paler, for he said: Can it be that she means to leave me
another day alone? And then at last, when the sun was already high in
the heaven, he looked, and saw her coming slowly towards him, with a
purple flower of the *Kadamba* in her hand. And she seemed in his eyes
like the nectar of reconciliation in feminine form. And she came up to
him and said: My mistress sends her lord, by these unworthy hands, a
flower, and if his slumbers have been light, it is well with her.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, how can he sleep who waits to be
forgiven for a sin committed? And she said: What is that? The King said:
My bark is launched, and long ago floating on the very middle of the
sea. Nothing now is wanting, save the lady of the coral tree, to bid me
to jump into the water. Then she looked at him with joy dancing in her
eyes: but she said: O King, such maidens are very rare, rarer even than
the trees on which they grow. And much I fear, that thou hast launched
thy little boat in vain, and will have to content thee with a more
earthly mistress, such as mine. Then the King said: Tell me not of thy
mistress, for I will not listen. Then she said: Nay, but surely thou art
curious to learn at least what she is like. She is far more beautiful
than I, and she is tall. Then the King said: If she is taller than thou
art, she is too tall. Then she said: Moreover, she is skilled in poetry.
And the King said: I love not ladies that are pundits. Then she said:
She dances and sings like an Apsaras in Indra's hall. And the King said:
I care for the dancing of no feet, save that of thine as they come
towards me; and for no music, save that of thy voice, which is more
delightful in my ear than the murmur of the bees. And as he spoke,

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

a bee, attracted by the flower in her hand, flew to it, and entered it.
Then she closed the petals quickly with her hand, and said: O King, I
have him here a prisoner, to convict thee of thy madness. Listen, and
tell me if thou canst, without deceiving, which is the sweeter, the real
bee, or that voice of mine which thou dost liken to its humming? And the
King put his ear close to the flower, and heard the bee inside: and he
said: I cannot tell. And he fixed his eyes upon her face, and said: Now
speak, that I may judge between him and thee. Then she laughed, and let
go the flower, and the bee flew away. And the King exclaimed: Alas! the
bee is mad, not I. For who would willingly quit a prison compounded of a
flower and thy hand, which is itself a flower? Give it me that I may
compare them. But she said: Nay; the flower is thine own, for it was a
present from my mistress: but my hand is mine, and now I must return to
her. And as she spoke, the bee came again, and buzzed about her head.
And she ex-claimed in terror: O King, this villain of a bee will sting
me. And the King said: Doubtless: he has come to avenge himself for his
imprisonment. Then she ran in agitation almost into the King's arms,
exclaiming: O King, protect her who comes

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

to thee for refuge <span id="fr_29"></span>[q](#fn_29). And in his
delight, the King exclaimed: O King of bees, come thou to me, and in
return for the favour thou hast done me, I will serve thee with honey in
lotus cups all day. But in the meanwhile the bee flew away. And
Madhupamanjarí started back in confusion, and said: O King, my mistress
is brave, and not afraid of bees. Then the King said, with emphasis: Out
upon all women, that do not fear bees! But, O Bee Blossom <span
id="fr_30"></span>[r](#fn_30), surely this bee is to be excused, if he
mistook thy lips for a flower.

Then she said: O King, this unmannerly bee has disgraced me in thine
eyes, and caused me to forget the reserve of a maiden: and now it is
time that I were gone. And she laid the flower at the King's feet, and
ran away without looking behind her, and vanished in the trees. But the
King stooped and picked up the flower. And he said: O glorious flower, I
will preserve thee for ever, even after thou art faded: for thou vast
the occasion of the onslaught of this incomparable bee, which led my
dear *chétí* to forget her caution and

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

take refuge in my arms. O beauty, thou art irresistible above all,
because thou art weak! Out, out upon all kings' daughters that are not
afraid of bees! And he went back to the temple, kissing the *Kadamba*
flower, and intoxicated with delight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[48:q](htd12.htm#fr_29) This is a formula. The
special business of kings was like that of the knight in the Middle
Ages, to protect the distressed (*sharanágata*).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[48:r](htd12.htm#fr_30) He plays upon her name:
see n. [p. 23](htd06.htm#page_23).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amaranth](htd13)
