[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SHAMÍ.

AND he lay all night, tossing on his bed of leaves: and in the morning,
he rose before the sun, and went out. And as he stood watching the fish,
raising their silver heads from the water to nibble the lotus stalks, he
saw the *chétí* coming towards him, with a yellow flower of the *shamí*
in her hand: and she resembled the very creeper itself, gifted with the
power of motion. Then she came up to the King, and said: O King, my
mistress sends her lord, by these unworthy hands, a flower, and if his
slumber has been sweet, it is well with her.

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, how can he sleep,

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

who sees just before him the end of his life? And she said: O King, is
thy life so sweet to thee? Surely this very moon was new, when life was
yet a thing of no value in thy eyes? Then the King said: Aye! but then I
had never seen thy face. And the *chétí* laughed, and said: O King, but
am I not a woman? And what are women in thy eyes? Then he said: What
thou art, I care not: sure I am, that thou art not a woman. Or if thou
art a woman, the Creator has surely formed two species of thy kind: in
one, he put all other women; and in the other, thee alone. And she
looked at him, with mischief in her eyes. And she said: And in which
class did he place my mistress? But the King exclaimed: Out on thee,
thou marble-hearted *chétí*! Canst thou not allow me to forget but for a
moment, what I remember but too well? Then she said: But, O King, thou
dost not well. Wilt thou leave my mistress for ever awaiting thy
pleasure in this matter of thy marriage? And the King winced at her
words, like a noble horse touched by the whip. And he said: *Chétí*,
poison not the nectar of my dawn. Only too well I know that thou art
right, and that my behaviour in this matter is not that of a
gentleman <span id="fr_37"></span>[a](#fn_37). And yet, for this,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

thou art thyself to blame; and so is she. Could she not have chosen some
other than thyself to do her errand? And yet, out on her, if she had!
Then should I have missed the very kernel of the fruit of my birth.
Alas! whichever way she chose, it was my ruin. Then said the *chétí*:
That which is to be is known only to the deity. But thy duty to the
Queen is very plain. And the King sighed. And he said: Hard is thy
heart, and very fair thy form: sweet is thy voice, and bitter are thy
words. To-morrow, I will do thy bidding and my duty, and pay a visit to
the Queen, and consult with the astrologers and fix a day for the
ceremony. But O! to-day let me see thee and hear thee to the full. Stay
with me till the evening, that I may draw from thee strength to nerve me
for the morrow.

Then she looked at him awhile, with kindly eyes: and then she said: O
King, that which is written on the future by the deity, no man can
erase, and no wisdom can avert. For once there was a king, with many
queens. And among these, there was one, whose name was Shrí <span
id="fr_38"></span>[b](#fn_38); and the name was not appropriate, for she
was the least beautiful of all.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

\[paragraph continues\] But she was gentle, and small, and she thought
nothing of herself: and the king loved her so passionately, that he
would have given his kingdom, and his life, and all the riches of the
three worlds, to save one hair from falling from her head. Now it
happened, that one day a criminal was apprehended in a crime: and the
king gave orders that he should instantly be put to death: and it was
done. Then after a while, the priests came to him and said: O King, this
man, that thy order put to death, was a Brahman <span
id="fr_39"></span>[c](#fn_39); and the gods are angry. And now, thy life
and thy kingdom are in jeopardy: and unless they are appeased with a
sacrifice, the gods will destroy us all. Then the king said: What
sacrifice is necessary? And they said: That of the queen that loves
thee, and that thou lovest, best. Then terror came into the king's
heart. And he lied: and said: She of all my queens that loves me, and
that I love, best, is Priyadarshiní:

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

and alas! she is the most beautiful of all. So they said: Very well.
To-morrow morning, the sacrifice shall be performed. And they went away.
And in the morning, all the people assembled in a vast crowd around the
sacrificial stone, and the king sat near, upon his throne. And they led
up the victim, covered with a veil: and the officiating priest stood
ready with a knife. Then they took off the veil from the victim, and
uncovered her: and the king looked, and saw, not Priyadarshiní, but
Shrí.

And then, in agony, he bounded on his throne. And the world vanished
from his sight, and he waved his hands, not knowing what he did. And he
cried out, with a voice like a trumpet: Ah no! ah no! not Shrí: not
Shrí. But the priest raised the knife. And as he did so, it caught in
his garments, and fell to the ground. And in a moment he regained it,
and raised it, and struck. But in that instant, the king threw himself
like a tiger upon the body of his wife. And the knife fell, and pierced
his heart.

And then Shrí rose, from under the body of the king. And she looked for
a moment at the crowd around her, and sat down upon the ground, and took
the king's head upon her lap, and fell upon

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

it, and followed him into the other world. Then dead silence fell upon
the people, and they waited in fear. And at last the priest said: The
sacrifice is complete, and the gods are appeased: for they have gained,
not a life for a life, but two for one.

Then the *chétí* stopped. And she laid the flower at the King's feet,
and turned to go. But the King shook with agitation. And his voice
trembled, as he said: What! wilt thou go so soon, almost before thou
hast arrived? O tell me another tale, that I may listen to thy voice.
Or, if thou wilt, say no-thing: stand only where thou art, and let me
watch thee: so shall thy brow, and thy smile, and the colour of thy dark
blue eyes melt deep into my soul, and remain there fixed like a
never-fading dye, to keep me from despair when thou art gone. Then she
turned and stood. And suddenly she came up close to the King, and laid
her hand upon his arm. And she said: O King, now I must go, for it is
time. But wait: it may be that my mistress will send me back again: for
there are matters to arrange for the morrow. And she smiled at the King,
and went away quickly through the wood, while he stood motionless, and
watched her as she went. And then he stooped, and picked up the flower.
And he said: *Shamí*, thou hast, like me,

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

fire in thy heart <span id="fr_40"></span>[d](#fn_40), and what thou art
to the *ashwattha*, that is she who laid thee at my feet to me. Like
thee, I needed but the touch of her hand to burst into a flame. And here
I will await her, on the edge of the pool: and if she does not come, I
will not live to see another dawn.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

And he waited by the pool, getting up and sitting down in his
impatience, and fixing his eyes on the place where the *chétí* had
vanished in the wood. And meanwhile the hours followed one another, and
the sun rose higher and higher in the sky. And the heat grew, till the
lotuses shone like silver on the lake slumbering beneath them: and the
fish slept in the water, and the birds upon the trees, and the bees grew
tired of humming and lay drunken in the flowers, and the forest hushed
as if it were buried in a swoon, and the leaves forgot to rustle on the
boughs. And suddenly as he watched, the King

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

saw Madhupamanjarí reappear in the distance, there where she had gone
away; and she stood for a moment like a picture on a wall, while the
King gazed at her in an ecstasy, listening in the silence to the beating
of his heart. Then, after a while, she broke the spell, and moved. And
she came towards him very slowly, and stood before him. But she carried
nothing in her hand. And she said: O King, my mistress wishes for a
lotus, and has sent me to fetch it from her lord.

And the King looked at her, as she stood before him, with her eyes fixed
upon the ground, and, her long lashes lying like shadows on her cheek.
And his heart rose into his mouth, and he stood silent; and he tried to
speak, but the words died upon his lips. So they two stood there in the
forest, surrounded by the stillness. And at last the King spoke. And he
said: Dear *chétí*, there is a thing that I would ask thee: but I am
afraid. Then she said: What does the King fear? And she looked at him
for a moment with a smile that vanished from her lips almost before it
had appeared; and dropped her eyes. Then he said: *Chétí*, canst thou
tell me, whether I am in love with thee, or not?

And as the King watched her, he saw the colour come and go upon her
face. And at last she said,

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

slowly: How can the physician decide, who does not know the symptoms?

Then the King went up, and stood close to her. And he put his two hands
behind him, and shut them together tight, and leaned towards her, and
said: Therefore I ask thee, because I cannot tell, whether I am in love
with thee, or not. For once before, I thought I was in love, but then I
felt not as I do now. And if then, I was in love, I am not now; and if
now, I was not, then. And it may be, thou canst tell me, for thou art
very clever, as I am not. For when I see thee coming, darkness spreads
over my eyes, and fire leaps and rushes through my frame. And the sound
of thy voice makes me faint, and burns me like the touch of ice: and a
shiver runs like a flame over my limbs, and a deafening noise booms in
my ears, and I know not what I do. And tears stand in my eyes, and yet I
wish to laugh for joy; and if I try to speak, my voice trembles, as it
does now; and there comes into my throat a struggle, and an obstacle,
and I try to breathe and cannot, and pain presses at my heart. And what
else I feel, I cannot tell; but this I know, that when thou art with me,
it is life, and when thou leavest me, it is death.

But Madhupamanjarí stood silent. And her lower

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

lip trembled, and a tear stood upon her lashes, and her breast heaved
slowly up and down. And at last she raised her eyes, and smiled through
her tears, and she said: O King, it is better that I should go: for
these are words fitter for my mistress than for me.

And then the King drew a long breath, and he stood up. And he looked
that way and this way: and he laughed. And he said: Thou hast driven me
to desperation, and I care not. Lo! I am a man and a strong man, and
thou art a woman, and but a small one. Hence thou shalt not go, for thou
earnest away my life.

And suddenly, he seized her in his arms, and held her tight. And as he
did so, she shrieked, and struggled. And half frightened, and half
laughing, she exclaimed: *Aryaputra* <span
id="fr_41"></span>[e](#fn_41), let me go. Hast thou not guessed, that I
am the Queen?

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

And the King started, and leaped into the air, as if a sword had been
run into his heart. And as he stood astounded, Madhupamanjarí looked at
him,

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

and almost against her will, began to laugh. And he stood gazing at her,
first with amazement, and then with shame, and lastly with delight. And
he exclaimed: Laugh as thou wilt, for thy laughter is music to my ear,
and I care not, so long as thou art with me. But O thou delusive
*chétí*, what is this? Was it not thou that wouldst not let me deceive
the Queen? And yet what hast thou done to me?

And instantly, Madhupamanjarí stopped laughing, and tears fell instead
from her eyes. And she looked at her husband with a smile; and suddenly
she came to him and took him by the hand. And she led him away, and sat
him down upon the steps, and said: Sit thou there, and I will tell thee.
Then she knelt beside him on the right, and put his right hand round
her, and took his left in her own. And she said: Foolish one, and didst
thou think, because one was light as stubble, that all other women were
the same? And didst thou also think, that thy life could be passed
without the nectar of a woman? Listen now, and I will tell thee, what
thou dost not know. For when my father sent to offer me to thee, I also
sent my messenger, who brought to me thy portrait, and told me all about
thee, and I loved thee long

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

before I ever saw thee. And I determined that it should be the same with
thee: and I made thee long for me, not knowing who I was. And but one
day I was weak, and that was the day I did not come to thee, and I
passed it in weeping for thee, and to keep away was almost more than I
could do. And now, I will show thee what thou hast never known, the
sweetness of thy life. For when thou art joyous, I will double all thy
joy: and when thou art sad, I will halve thy sorrow and remove it, and
it shall be a joy to thee, deeper than joy. And when thou art well, I
will surfeit thy soul with amusement and variety, and when thou art
sick, I will nurse thee: and if thou art weary, thou shalt sleep upon my
breast, and it shall be thy pillow: and night and day my spirit shall be
with thee, and my arms around thee. And when thou dost not want me, I
wit be absent; and when thou wishest me again, I will be there. And if I
should die before thee, it is well, and thou shalt miss me: but if thou
leavest me behind, then will I follow thee through the fire, for I will
not live without thee, no, not even for a day. For like a dream, and
like moonlight, and like a shadow, and the image on the surface of a
pool, I must vanish into nothing, when that which gave me substance

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

and reality is gone. For what am I, but a double and a copy and an echo
of a Being which is Thou? my duty and religion, to be thy Dhruwá and
Arundhatí, thy Rati and thy Rádhá, thy Chakrí and thy Kshetrabhúmí, thy
Shakti and thy Twin <span id="fr_42"></span>[f](#fn_42)? Churn me only
with the mountain of thy love, and like the milky ocean, I will give
thee up my essence, and show thee that a faithful wife is the butter of
beauty, and wine of youth, and syrup of pleasure, and salt of laughter,
born of the foam of the waves and the lather of the sea <span
id="fr_43"></span>[g](#fn_43). And I will be to thee a nectar and a
camphor and a lotus and a sweet, and show thee the essence and the
savour of thy life; and thou shalt own that without me

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

it was blank, and a word without a meaning, and a night without a moon.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

And then the King took her head, and held it in his hands. And he looked
into her eyes, and knew that her words were a confession of the truth.
And suddenly, with a violent effort, he tore himself away from her, and
stood up; for the passion of his joy was more than his heart could
endure. And then in an instant he returned to her. And he said: Dear
*chétí*, thou hast forgotten something. And she said: What? Then he
said: Wilt thou not take a lotus for thy mistress from the pool?

Then Madhupamanjarí laughed with delight. And she said: O King, thou
hast said well. And they turned together, and moved towards the pool.
And as they went, the King looked at her, and trembled. And he said to
himself: Still she has not kissed me: and it is still to come. Then they
drew near to the pool; and they found a lotus growing at its edge. And
the King said: Thou shalt pluck it, and I will hold thee in my arms,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

lest thou shouldst fall into the water. And he took her in his arms; and
they leaned over the pool. And Madhupamanjarí stretched out her hand to
the lotus. Then the King whispered in her ear: See, I have brought thee
to the water, that there might be two of thy faces instead of one. Now,
which shall I kiss, and which will kiss me, the *chétí* or the queen?

And Madhupamanjarí plucked the lotus. And he turned towards him, and
said: Both.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

Printed by  
MORRISON & GIBB LIMITED  
*Edinburgh*

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[61:a](htd16.htm#fr_37) *anárya*: an exact
equivalent.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[62:b](htd16.htm#fr_38) The goddess of beauty.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[63:c](htd16.htm#fr_39) The most frightful
penalties are laid, in Manu, upon those who slew Brahmans: under no
circumstances whatever could the King put them to death. (It is a total
misapprehension to ascribe these, and similar regulations, as is so
often done, to the cunning and policy of the Brahmans. They were the
repository of the religious welfare of the State, and they shared the
superstition which made the killing of them a crime.) See e.g. Moore's
Pantheon, p. 373.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[66:d](htd16.htm#fr_40) The primeval fire was
generated by the friction of the *shamí* and *ashwattha* trees. Kalidas
(*Raghuwansha* III. 9) calls the *shamí* '*abhyantaralínapáwakam*,' i.e.
that ' which has fire in its heart.'

<span id="fn_41"></span>[69:e](htd16.htm#fr_41) As much as to say, *my
husband*. The word is used by ladies in addressing their lords.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[72:f](htd16.htm#fr_42) *Dhruwá*, 'thy polar
star:' an allusion to the marriage ceremony, in which the bridegroom
points out to his bride that star, the emblem of fidelity. *Arundhatí*,
the 'patron-saint' of Hindoo marriages, the pattern of a perfect wife.
*Rati*, the wife of Káma: *Rádhá*, Krishna's darling, the lovely
milkmaid. The two last names are mystical: 'thy other half,' 'thy Self,
in feminine form.' *Chakrí*, the bird that pines and dies without its
mate: *Kshetrabhúmí*, an idea hardly intelligible save to a Hindoo. It
means an exclusive possession, a thing to use and abuse, and a home: a
sacred spot of mother earth and cultivable soil, whose memory is twined
around the heart.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[72:g](htd16.htm#fr_43) A passage full of plays
on words and mythological allusions.

 
