[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](htd09)  [Next](htd11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SHRÍPHALA.

THEN he dreamed of Madhupamanjarí, all night long, and in the morning he
rose before the sun, and went out. And as he stood listening to the
joyous cries of the *chakrawáka* and his mate, meeting in the morning
after a night of separation, the *chétí* came towards him through the
trees, holding in her hand berries of the *shríphala*. And she said: My
mistress sends her lord, by these unworthy

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

hands, berries, and if he has enjoyed sweet sleep, it is well with her.

Then the King said: Dear *chétí*, I cannot tell whether I slept last
night or lay awake: this only I know, that all night I listened to thy
voice and gazed at thee: but whether it was a dream or not, I cannot
tell. Then she looked at him with mock gravity; and said: These are
symptoms very dangerous and alarming to the physician. Thy case is
parlous, and very similar to that of the madman who was enamoured of a
stone. Then he said: Pretty *chétí*, I see no resemblance whatever
between a stone and thee. And she said: I can be to thee no more than a
stone was to him. And the King said: Tell me his story, for I care not
whether it be like my own, or not: and in the meantime I will watch
thee, and listen to thy voice. Then she said: Know that there was a
king, who hunting in the forest came to an ancient temple, and on its
wall was a stone image of the goddess of beauty. And the instant his eye
fell on it, he fell in love with it so violently, that he could not tear
himself away from it. Then sending for workmen, he caused them to
extract the image from the wall; and carrying it away with him, he had
it set up in a room in his palace. And night and day he lived before it,

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

never taking his eyes off it: and he used to kiss it, and caress it, and
upbraid it for not returning his caresses. And one night, as he lay
asleep, he thought he saw the goddess come down to him out of the wall,
no longer made of stone, but warm and living flesh and blood. But just
as he was going to clasp her in his arms, almost beside himself for joy,
suddenly a watchman in the street shouted and awoke him. Then in his
fury, the king instantly put the watchman to death, and banished every
watchman in the city. And he spent the remainder of his life vainly
trying to recover in his dreams the conclusion of his meeting with the
goddess, and yet he never could succeed: and he was filled with contempt
for everything that happened when he was awake, saying to himself: This
whole world is like the stone, a mere lifeless copy of that real
original which I found that time, by the favour of the deity, in my
dream. And surely he is mad, who pursues all his life a thing
inaccessible to him even in a dream: and such am I to thee; and thou
will surely resemble him, if forgetting my mistress, thou allowest thy
fancy to fix on an object forbidden to thee. O King, is it not true, and
is not the comparison exact?

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Then the King said: I do not know: I have not heard thy tale; for I was
wholly occupied in watching thy lips, and I marvel, that I never noticed
them before. Tell me again, and I will shut my eyes; so that thy beauty
shall not interfere, and keep me from comprehending the meaning of thy
words. And she laughed, and said: Surely I am right, and thy wits are
deserting thee. And she laid the berries at his feet, and went away,
without looking back, and was lost among the trees. But the King
stooped, and picked up the berries. And he said: Berries, ye are well
named <span id="fr_28"></span>[p](#fn_28). Did ye acquire merit in a
former birth, that ye were privileged to be plucked from the tree and
carried in her hand, while your brothers and sisters were left
disconsolate and unhappy on the tree? And he went back to the temple,
holding them in his hand, haunted by the memory of her lips, whose
colour they resembled, to wait for another dawn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[41:p](htd10.htm#fr_28) *Shríphala*; i.e. the
fruit of the goddess of beauty and good fortune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shirírsha](htd11)
