[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol05)  [Next](pol07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### FROM THE BIRTH OF ISAAC TO THE WARS OF SHECHEM.

"AND the Lord visited Sarah and she bore a son unto Abraham in his old
age."

When Isaac was born Abraham prepared a great feast in his honour, and
invited thereto all the chiefs and men of birth and position who were
his neighbours, such as Abimelech and the captains of his armies.
Therach, Abraham's father, and Nahor, his brother, journeyed also from
Charan to join in the festivities, and Shem with Eber, his son, were
likewise of the party. They were all hearty in their congratulations,
and Abraham's heart was full with gladness.

Ishmael, the son of Hagar and Abraham, was very fond of hunting and
field sports. He carried his bow with him at all times, and upon one
occasion, when Isaac was about five years of age, Ishmael aimed his
arrow at the child, crying, "Now I am going to shoot thee." Sarah
witnessed this action, and fearing for the life of her son, and
disliking the child of her handmaid, she made many complaints to Abraham
of the boy's doings, and urged him to dismiss both Hagar and Ishmael
froth his tent, and send them to live at some other place.

For some time Ishmael lived with his mother in the wilderness of Paran,
always indulging in his great passion for hunting; then they journeyed
to Egypt, where Ishmael married, and where four sons and a daughter were
born to him. But soon he returned to his favourite home in the

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

wilderness, building there tents for himself, his people and his family,
for God had blessed him, and he was the master of large flocks and
herds.

And it came to pass after many years that Abraham, yielding to a longing
which had always possessed him, determined to visit his son, and
informing Sarah of his intention he started off alone upon a camel.

He reached Ishmael's dwelling-place about noontime, and found that his
son was away from home, hunting. He was rudely treated by Ishmael's
wife, who did not know him, and who refused him the bread and water
which he asked for. Therefore he said to her, "When thy husband returns
say thus to him, describing my appearance, An old man from the land of
the Philistines came to our door during thy absence, and he said to me,
when thy husband returns, tell him to remove the nail which he has
driven in his tent and to replace it with one more worthy," with which
words Abraham rode away.

When Ishmael returned home his wife related to him the occurrence,
describing the man and repeating his words, and Ishmael knew that his
father had visited him and been treated with disrespect. For which cause
Ishmael divorced his wife, and married a maiden from the land of Canaan.

Some three years after this Abraham again visited his son's tent, and
again his son was away from home; but his wife was pleasant and
hospitable, and begged the stranger, whom she did not know, to alight
from his camel, and she set before him bread and meat. Therefore he said
to her, "When thy husband returns, describe to him my appearance, and
say, 'This old man came to thee from the land of the Philistines, and
this message he left for thee: the nail which thou hast driven in thy
tent is good and worthy,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

see that it is properly esteemed;" and blessing Ishmael and his family,
Abraham returned to his home.

When Ishmael returned he was much pleased to hear his father's message,
and he thanked God for a good and worthy wife, and after a time he and
his family visited Abraham, and remained with him in the land of the
Philistines for many days.

When Abraham had dwelt here for six-and-twenty years, he removed with
all his family and possessions to *Bear Sheba*, near Hebron. Here he
planted a grove and built large houses, which he kept always open for
the poor and needy. Those who were hungry entered freely and partook of
food according to their desire, and those who were needy were liberally
supplied with the necessaries of life. When any of the grateful ones
would seek to Abraham to thank him for his benevolence he replied to
them:

"Address thy thanks to God. To the Eternal, who created all things, all
that we receive belongs; through His bounty we are fed and clothed."

To feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to speak kindly to the
unfortunate, to act justly towards all mankind, and to be ever grateful
to the Eternal, formed the articles of the creed according to which
Abraham fashioned his life.

 

And the word of the Lord came unto Abraham, saying, "Take now thy son
whom thou lovest, and offer him for a burnt-offering upon one of the
mountains which I will tell thee of."

When this command was delivered to Abraham, chief among the many griefs
and anxieties which oppressed his mind, was the necessity of separating
Isaac from his mother. He could not tell her of his intention, and yet
the lad was

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

always with her. Finally he proceeded to Sarah's tent, and seating
himself beside her, he said:

"Thy son is growing to manhood, and he has not yet learned the service
of heaven. To-morrow I will take him with me to learn the ways of the
Lord, with Shem and Eber."

And Sarah replied:

"Go, my lord, and do as thou hast spoken; but do not take the lad too
great a distance, and keep him not a long time from my presence."

And Abraham said:

"Pray to God for the happiness of thy son, for my happiness, and for thy
own."

During that night Sarah was much troubled on account of the approaching
separation from Isaac; she was unable to sleep, and when her husband and
the lads who accompanied him appeared early in the morning, ready to
start upon their journey, she pressed Isaac to her bosom, and weeping
bitterly she sobbed:

"Oh, my son, my son! how can I allow thee to wander from me; my only
child, my pride, my hope." Then turning to Abraham she said:

"Watch carefully the lad, for he is young and tender; let him not travel
in the heat, nor journey so as to weary his frame."

She clothed Isaac in his richest garments, and she and her maidens
accompanied him on his way till Abraham bid them depart and return unto
their homes.

Abraham and Isaac journeyed on with the two lads, who were Ishmael,
Abraham's son, and Eleazer, the steward of his house.

As they journeyed Ishmael spoke to Eleazer, saying:

"My father intends to sacrifice his son Isaac for a burnt

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

offering; therefore, I will be his heir, for am I not his first-born
son?"

"Nay," answered Eleazer, "thy father drove thee forth that thou shouldst
not inherit his possessions; to me, his faithful servant, will all his
wealth descend."

As they proceeded on their way Isaac addressed his father, saying:

"Behold, my father, here is the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb
for the sacrifice?"

And Abraham answered:

"Our God hath chosen thee, my son; thee, a creature without blemish, as
an acceptable burnt-offering to His glory in place of the lamb."

And then said Isaac:

"To the will of the living God in thankfulness I bow."

"My son," said Abraham, "is there any secret evil in thy heart, or any
wrong upon thy mind; if so, dell me freely, my son, keep naught from me
in this great hour."

And Isaac answered:

"By the life of God, my father, I know no evil, I am conscious of no
regret. Blessed be the Lord who has desired me this day."

This answer of his son was very gratifying to the father's heart, and
they continued on in silence, until they reached the spot which God had
selected.

Then Abraham built an altar to the Lord, and his son handed him the
stones and assisted him in the work.

They who trust in God are ever strengthened, and though their eyes were
wet with tears their hearts were firm, confiding in their God.

When the altar was built Abraham laid the wood upon it in order, and
then he bound his son Isaac upon the wood.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

And Isaac spoke to his father, saying:

"My father, bind me well, in order that I may not, by struggling,
profane the sacrifice; be firm, my father, and sharpen well the knife.
Tell my mother that her joy is gone; the son she bore at ninety years
surrendered to the flame. When I am consumed, take with thee of the
ashes left, and say to Sarah, This is thy Isaac, who to God was
offered."

When Abraham heard these words he wept bitterly, but Isaac continued
with a firm voice:

"Now quickly, father, do the will of God." And he stretched his neck to
meet the knife which rested in his father's hand.

 

"And Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a
burnt-offering in the stead of his son."

Abraham sprinkled the ram's blood upon the altar, saying:

"May this blood be considered even as the blood of my son, offered as a
sacrifice before the Lord."

And so through the entire sacrificial service Abraham prayed:

"May this be received even as the blood of my son, offered as a
burnt-offering before the Lord."

While Abraham and Isaac were away upon this mission an old man
approached Sarah, near her tent, and said to her:

"Knowest thou that Abraham has offered up thy Isaac as a sacrifice
before the Lord. Aye, despite his struggles and his cries, thy son has
been made a victim to the knife."

Then Sarah uttered a heart-rending cry, and throwing herself upon the
ground she sobbed bitterly:

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

"My son, my son, would that I had perished this day for thee. Thee, whom
I have raised and nourished, my life and all my love was thine. Now is
my pride and gladness turned to mourning, for the fire has consumed my
joy. Take comfort, oh, my heart! the lives of all God carries in the
hollow of his hand. Blessed are they who follow Thy commands, for Thou
art righteous, and Thy words are truth; therefore, oh Lord, though mine
eyes weep bitter tears, my heart is glad."

Then Sarah rose and journeyed from *Bear Sheba* to Hebron, and she
inquired upon the road concerning her husband and her son, but she was
unable to ascertain their whereabouts.

Returning to her tents she was met by the same old man who had before
addressed her, and thus he spoke:

"Verily I did inform thee falsely, for Isaac, thy son, lives."

Sarah's heart was stronger for grief than joy. These tidings and the
revulsion in her feelings killed her; she died and was gathered to her
people.

And when Abraham and Isaac returned and found the dead body of Sarah,
they lifted up their voices in bitter lamentation, and all their
servants joined with Abraham and Isaac in grief for the departed.

 

Now Isaac was fifty-nine years of age, and his wife Rebecca was barren,
and Isaac prayed unto the Lord to visit his wife even as he had visited
Sarah, his mother, saying:

"Oh Lord, God of heaven and of earth, thou fittest both with thy
goodness and mercy. From the house of his father, and from his kindred's
home, thou didst bring my father to this place, promising to increase
his seed,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

even as the stars of the heavens, and to give to them this land as a
heritage and possession. Fulfil, oh God, these words which thou hast
spoken. To thee, oh God, we look in hope and pray for children, for
those whom thou hast promised us. Oh, my God, to thee I look, in hope."

And God hearkened to the prayer of Isaac, and his wife bore him two
sons, twins. The one, the first, she called "Esau," and the other
"Jacob."

And Esau was fond of outdoor life, while Jacob stayed at home learning
from Abraham, his grandfather, the ways and teachings of the Lord.

When the lads were about fifteen years old, Abraham died at the age of
one hundred and seventy-one years. And when the inhabitants of Canaan
learned of his decease they, with all its kings and princes, hastened to
do honour to his remains, and all his relatives, who lived in Charan,
and the sons of his concubines, came also to the funeral. And Isaac and
Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, and all who knew him
mourned for him a year.

Very few men like Abraham has the sun looked upon. From his youth he
served his Maker and walked upright before Him, and from his birth even
unto the moment of his death his God was with him. He spoke of God's
goodness to all with whom he came in contact; he built a grove for
travellers and opened his doors in wide and generous hospitality to the
needy, the weary, and all who passed his way. For Abraham's sake the
Lord looked kindly on the people of the earth, and after his death God
blessed Isaac, his son, and prospered him greatly.

And the sons of Isaac grew in strength and years. Esau was a man of evil
thoughts, of quick passions, and a lover of outdoor life, Jacob was a
shepherd, an intelligent and

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

domestic man, following in the path which Abraham had pointed out to
him.

And it came to pass that Esau went hunting in the field upon a certain
day, when Nimrod, too, was engaged in the same pursuit. Both being
mighty hunters a rivalry existed between the two, a deadly jealousy.
Esau happened to see Nimrod when all his attendants, save two men, had
left him. Esau concealed himself, and when Nimrod passed the place where
he was hiding pointed his arrow, pulled the cord, and shot Nimrod
through the heart. Then rushing from his concealment, Esau engaged in a
deadly struggle with Nimrod's two attendants, and overcame and killed
them both. Then stripping from Nimrod's shoulders the wonderful coat,
before mentioned, which God had made for Adam, Esau hastened home,
reaching his father's tent weary, hungry, tired, and faint. Then Esau
said to Jacob, his brother:

"Give me of yonder red pottage,--let me eat of it, I pray, for I am
faint."

And Jacob said:

"Sell me this day thy right of first born."

And Esau thought in his heart, "They will surely avenge upon me the
death of Nimrod," and he answered:

"Behold, I am going to die. What can the right of first born profit me?"

So Jacob bought from Esau his right of first born, and also a burial
plot for himself in the cave of Machpelah.

Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils, and Esau eat and
drank and went his way.

For money did Jacob purchase these rights, and after the bargain was
concluded, he gave his brother the food he had asked for.

The body of Nimrod was found and brought to Babel

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

and buried there, And Nimrod lived two hundred and fifteen years, and
was killed by a descendant of Abraham, even as he had foreseen in his
dream.

 

When Jacob received the blessing which was intended for Esau, Isaac was
very old, and Esau said:

"My father will soon die, and then I will take vengeance on Jacob for
this wrong which he has done me." This threat was repeated to Rebecca,
who called Jacob and bade him flee to Charan, to her brother Laban, to
tarry there until his brother's fury had abated.

Then Isaac sent messengers after Jacob, with a repetition of his
blessing and this charge: "Take not a wife from the daughters of Canaan,
for thus has said my father Abraham, in the word of the Lord, the word
which has promised this land to our seed if we obey the Lord and observe
faithfully his commands. Arise, go to Charan, to the house of Bethuel,
thy mother's father, and take heed that thou forgettest not the Lord thy
God and all His ways. Turn neither to the right nor to the left after
the vanities of the people among whom thou goest. The Almighty will give
thee grace in the eyes of the men of the land, and thou shalt take a
wife there according to thy desire, that God may grant thee the blessing
of Abraham, and make thee fruitful and multiply thee until thou becomest
an assembly in the land. That He may bring thee back to this land with
children, gladness, and prosperity."

Jacob obeyed his father and journeyed on towards Mesopotamia. He was
seventy-seven years of age when he started forth from *Bear Sheba*.

When Jacob had departed from his father's house, Esau called to him his
son Eliphas, and said to him in secrecy, "Go follow after Jacob with thy
bow in thy hand, lie in

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

wait for him, slay him upon the mountains, take for thy own what
treasure he has with him, and then return to me."

Eliphas was then but thirteen years of age, yet he was remarkably swift
of foot and understood well the handling of the bow. He obeyed his
father, and taking some men with him, followed after Jacob and overtook
him on the borders of Canaan.

When Jacob saw Eliphas coming after him he halted and awaited his
approach, thinking that his nephew carried some message from home. When
Eliphas came near he drew his sword. Jacob inquired the reason of his
pursuit, and the lad answered, "Thus and thus has my father commanded
me, and I dare not disobey his orders."

When Jacob learned Esau's intention, and saw that the lad seemed
determined to do as he had been bidden, he turned to him and the men
with him, and said:

"Take all that I have, all that my father and my mother gave into my
hands, but spare my life. Your kindness will be accounted to you as
righteousness."

The Lord gave Jacob favour in their eyes, and they allowed him to
proceed unharmed on his journey. His gold and silver, however,
everything of value that he had taken with him from his father's house,
Eliphas and his comrades seized and carried to Esau. Esau was strongly
displeased because they had listened to Jacob's pleadings, and the
treasure which they had seized he added to his own store.

Jacob proceeded on his journey towards Charan. When he reached the Mount
of Moriah he tarried there and slept that night. And the Lord appeared
to him and said, "I am the Lord, the God of Abraham and Isaac, thy
father The ground whereon thou liest will I give to thy children and
behold I will be with thee, therefore fear not. I will

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

guard thee wheresoever thou goest, and I will increase thy seed as the
stars of the heaven. I will disperse thy enemies before thee; they will
fight against thee, but they will not prevail. With gladness and great
wealth will I bring thee back to thy father's land."

Jacob awoke from his sleep enchanted with the remembrance of the
beautiful and encouraging vision which had blessed his slumbers. He
called the place *Beth El*.

When Jacob arrived in Charan he told his uncle Laban how Eliphas, the
son of Esau, had despoiled him, and bursting into tears, proclaimed
himself a beggar.

"Then," said Laban, "surely thou art my bone and my flesh. I will take
care of thee even though thou art penniless."

 

After Laban's fruitless pursuit after Jacob when he left with his wives,
children, and chattels, and God had said to the son of Bethuel, "Take
heed to thee, speak with Jacob neither good nor evil," he sent, after
parting with his son-in-law, messengers to Esau, charged to deliver
these words:

"We come from Laban, thy relative, thy mother's brother, and in his
words we say, 'Knowest thou what Jacob, thy brother, has done to me?
Faint and needy he came to me, and I received him into my house with
honours and affection. I gave him my daughters for wives, and the
handmaids of my daughters did I also give him. God blessed him for my
sake, and he accumulated much wealth. He begat children and acquired
men-servants and maid-servants, sheep, oxen, and cattle of all kinds, a
great multitude, and likewise silver and gold. With all this he left me,
fled secretly with all his possessions towards the land of Canaan, his
father's home. He denied me even the privilege of kissing my daughters;
as captives he led them with him, and worse

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

than all, my gods he stole. By the brook of Jabak I left him with all
his substance, and if thou desirest to pursue him, there will he be
found. Go, then, and do with him what is pleasing to thy heart.'"

When Esau heard these words of the messengers of Laban, all the wrong
which Jacob had done him freshened in his memory, and his anger and hate
against his brother burned once more fiercely in his heart. He gathered
together his sons and servants, and all the family of Seer, a company of
four hundred men, and at their head he set out to meet Jacob and to
smite him.

After the messengers of Laban left Esau, they journeyed to Canaan, and
there informed Rebecca of her son Esau's preparations and his intention
to waylay and punish Jacob. Rebecca immediately sent seventy-two of
Isaac's men to assist her favourite child. They met him at the brook
Jabak, and when he saw them he said, "Surely here is help from heaven,"
and he called the place *Machanayim*.

Jacob recognised his father's servitors, and asked after the wellbeing
of his parents, to which the messengers responded, "They live in peace,
and farther we bring this message from thy mother. 'I have heard, my
son, that Esau, thy brother, intends to meet thee on the road with the
men of Seer. Therefore, I pray thee, heed my words. When thou shalt see
him, be not rash nor headstrong, but greet him humbly and with a
gracious present from the abundance with which God hath blessed thee.
When he addresses thee, answer meekly, kindly, and thus will his wrath
be turned from thee. Remember, he is thy elder brother, and to him is
thy respect and honour due.'"

Jacob wept at these words of his mother, but he obeyed her request. He
sent messengers to meet Esau on the road, and to offer him such words as
his mother had directed.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These messengers
met Esau and his company, and spoke as Jacob had commanded them, but
Esau answered with pride:

"Nay, nay, the truth I have heard. I know how Jacob treated Laban; how
he repaid the kindness of the relative who gave him wives and substance;
how he fled, taking the children of Laban with him, as though they had
been captives of the sword. Not Laban only has he wronged; twice he
supplanted me. Therefore I come to meet him, and the vengeance for which
I have waited twenty years shall now be mine."

When these words were carried to Jacob he was sorely distressed. Earthly
help seemed unavailable; with a full heart he cast himself before the
Lord and prayed earnestly for deliverance from the trouble which
threatened him and all his people.

Then he divided his people and his flocks into two companies. One
detachment he placed under the command of Eleazer of Damascus, the
servant of Abraham, with his sons, and the other under Elinus, the son
of Eleazer, and his sons. And thus he commanded them:

"Travel apart, so that if one company shall perchance be smitten, the
other may escape."

Then, when he met Esau, he bowed to the ground before him seven times,
and God gave him grace in his brother's eyes. Esau's hate died away, and
natural affection gaining the mastery, he raised Jacob from the ground
and embraced and kissed him.

 

Jacob encamped with all his family before the city of Shechem, and
purchased a lot of land for a dwelling from the sons of Chamor for the
sum of fifty shekels.

Here he made his home, and lived in peace and safety for about eighteen
months.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

Then the inhabitants of Shechem made a great feast, an occasion of
joyousness, dancing, singing, and merriment of all kinds, and all the
daughters of the land joined in the general revelry. And it came to pass
that Rachel and Leah, the wives of Jacob, and Dinah, his daughter, felt
a great desire to witness this scene of enjoyment, and together they
repaired to the place where the festivities were held. All the nobles of
the city were present, and Shechem, the son of the king, was also one of
the participants.

He happened to see Dinah, and was immediately attracted by her great
beauty and modest appearance. He inquired as to who she was, and learned
that she was the daughter of Jacob the Hebrew, who had lately settled in
his father's land. His passion grew very strong, and taking advantage of
an opportunity he carried the frightened girl forcibly to his house.

Rachel and Leah hurried home and informed Jacob of the occurrence. He
immediately sent twelve servants to the house of Shechem to demand the
girl, but they were insolently met by the prince's retainers and driven
back to Jacob. He said nothing, but waited quietly until his sons should
return to their home.

Shechem, in the meantime, sent a messenger to his father, requesting him
to visit Jacob and demand Dinah as a wife for him. The king was much
displeased with the affair, and seeking his son, he said, "Canst thou
not find a wife among the daughters of our land? Why shouldst thou
desire this Hebrew damsel, a stranger among thy race?"

Shechem replied to his father, "She is pleasing in my eyes," and he
impressed his father so completely with his love for the maiden that the
king at length consented to seek the patriarch, Jacob, and gain his
consent to the marriage.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

Now when the sons of Jacob returned home, and learned of the occurrence
and the violence with which their only sister had been treated, their
hearts burned with indignation.

"The penalty for this crime is death," they exclaimed; our sister has
been sinned against with the sin which God warned Noah and his children
to shun if they desired life. Death shall be the punishment of this
violator of our home, death at our hands, to him, his family, and the
whole city."

While the sons of Jacob were thus speaking, Chamor, the father of
Shechem, entered into their presence, and addressed Jacob:

"My son Shechem desires thy daughter for a wife; give her to him, I pray
thee, and thy people may intermarry with the daughters of our land. Our
country is large, and it is all before thee to trade therein, or do
soever as thou pleasest, if thou wilt but consent to the wishes of my
son."

As Chamor concluded, his son, Shechem, entered, and continued his
father's propositions:

"Let me find grace in your eyes," he said to the men before him. "Give
me the damsel for a wife, and whatever dowry you may demand shall be
cheerfully given."

Simeon and Levi, desiring time to perfect a plan for inflicting
punishment for the wrong done their sister, replied to Shechem and his
father with a cunning tongue:

"What thou hast said to us we will consider. Our sister is in thy hands.
Give us time, however, to consult with our grandfather, Isaac; he is
wise, and knows well what should be done in a case like this; according
to his welds we will act."

Shechem acquiesced in this arrangement, and withdrew, with his father,
from Jacob's house.

When they had departed the sons of Jacob reiterated their determination
to put the man of violence to death, and

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

with him the men of the city who had encouraged him in the act.

"Listen," said Simeon, "to my advice. We will say to these men, 'Our God
hath enjoined upon us the act of circumcision, and we cannot give our
daughters and sisters to those who have not entered into this covenant.
Become like us, and then we may freely intermarry; if not, we will take
our sister and go from among you;' then when they are weak and suffering
we will fall upon them, and all their males shall die by the sword."

This advice was pleasing to his brethren, and when Shechem and Chamor
came again to them for their decision, they proclaimed this as the
counsel of Isaac, saying that their grandfather had decided that for
them to give their sister to an uncircumcised man would be a reproach to
them for ever.

Shechem and his father then gathered the people at the gates of the
city, and made known to them the proposition of the Israelites,
counselling them to accept the same.

All the citizens seemed willing to do the pleasure of their king save
Hadkam, the son of Pered, the father of Chamor, and his six brothers.
They scorned Jacob and his sons, and defended the mothers of their city
who refused to allow their children to undergo the operation.

"Shame to you that you should consider such a thing," said they. "Are
not the daughters of the Canaanites good enough for wives, that you wish
to wed the daughters of this Hebrew, this stranger among you? Beware of
this rash act, which your fathers never enjoined upon you; the
undertaking cannot be prosperous. What answer can you make to your
brethren, the Canaanites, when they demand your reason for this folly?
And how will you appear in the eyes of your brethren, the children of
Ham, when ‘tis said, 'For

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

a Hebrew woman did Shechem, his father, and all the inhabitants of his
city, commit an abomination?' Whither will ye flee? Where will ye be
able to hide your shame? We will not bend beneath this yoke, which you
take so willingly upon you; we will gather our brethren, and we will
smite you, aye to death."

Chamor and Shechem began to regret their impulsive proceeding, but they
answered:

"Think not that we did this because we love the Hebrews; no, merely to
blind their eyes, and obtain their daughter. Wait but till we have
recovered from the operation, and they and all that is theirs shall be
ours, to use according to our pleasure."

Dinah overheard the discussion, and she sent a hand-maiden to her
father's house to inform him and her brethren of the designs of Shechem.

"By the life of the Lord, the God of the universe," swore Simeon and
Levi, "to-morrow will we fall upon this people, and not a remnant shall
escape our just anger."

They carried out their intention, and coming suddenly upon the people
next day, while they were suffering from the effects of their doing, the
sons of Jacob slew Chamor, Shechem, and all the inhabitants of the city,
and carried their sister Dinah to her home.

When Jacob realised the result of their rashness he was grieved,
angered, and alarmed.

"What is this that you have done to me!" he exclaimed. "In this country
I thought I had found rest, and now when the relatives of these people
learn what you have done they will fall upon me and destroy me and my
house."

But his sons answered:

"All this lies at the door of Shechem. Wouldst thou

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

have us hold our peace and suffer quietly this immoral conduct and cruel
wrong!"

The number of men killed by the Hebrews was forty-seven. The women they
took for slaves.

And it came to pass when Simeon and Levi left the city of Shechem that
two men, who had been in hiding, hastened to the city of Thapnah and
told to its king and its inhabitants all that the sons of Jacob had
wrought in Shechem. The king refused to believe that ten men could thus
overcome a city, and he sent messengers to ascertain whether the report
was true. "Even in the time of Nimrod, when men were mighty," said he,
"such a thing would have been impossible." When his messengers returned,
however, and reported that in all Shechem they found but weeping women,
he gathered his men together, and said:

"Prepare yourselves to go and fight these Hebrews. We will do to them
even as they have done to our brethren of Shechem."

But his princes answered his words, and said:

"With our people alone we cannot prevail over these Hebrews. Ten men
destroyed a city, and not one man was able to stand up against them. Let
us send to the kings around us for help, and then perchance we may be
able to cope with them."

This advice seemed reasonable to the king, and he sent to the kings of
the Emorites who dwelt around him, informing them of the action of
Jacob's sons, and begging their assistance in dealing out punishment for
the same.

The Emorites answered his appeal, and gathered together about ten
thousand men, who started out to fight the children of Jacob.

Jacob was greatly terrified at this, and again upbraided his sons for
their rashness.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Then Judah spoke to his father, and said:

"Did we act without cause, Simeon, Levi, and the rest of us? Cruelly
they wronged our sister, violating the chastity of our house, and
transgressing the command of our God. For this reason did the Lord
deliver the city into our hands Wherefore fear? Why grieve, and find
displeasure in thy heart against thy sons? The same God who gave the men
of Shechem into our hands will deliver to us also these Emorites who
come against us. Keep thy peace, oh our father! fear not, but pray to
the Lord our God that he may protect us and deliver our enemies into our
power."

Then Judah summoned his servants and bade them go and discover what men,
and how many, were marching against them. Then he addressed Simeon and
Levi, and said to them:

"Prepare yourselves, and act like heroes. The Lord our God is with us.
Gird on each man his sword and his bow; trusting in heaven, we will
fight these Emorites and find deliverance."

The sons of Jacob and their servants and the servants of Isaac, who
lived in Hebron, then prepared themselves for battle; and Isaac, the
head of their house, prayed to God for their success in these words:

"Oh Lord God, thou didst speak unto my father and make a promise to him,
saying, 'I will increase thy seed as the stars in heaven.' To me hast
Thou reiterated this promise; and now, behold, the strength of Canaan
comes to wrestle with my son. Oh Lord God of the universe, turn the
purpose of these kings; let the dread of my children fall upon them and
humble their pride. Even that they withdraw and return to their homes
without shedding blood. Deliver my children and their servants

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

from the strength of these kings, for in Thy hand is the might, the
power, and the strength."

Jacob also uttered a solemn prayer to the same effect.

When the Emorites drew near to Jacob's sons and their hosts, the kings
and princes met to consult before beginning the attack, for their hearts
were not thoroughly rid of the fear which the prowess of the Hebrews had
cast upon them. The Lord answered the prayers of Isaac and Jacob, and
this dread and fear augmented, and at last found vent in these words
from one of their number, words which the others echoed in their hearts:

"We are acting foolishly in attempting to fight these Hebrews; we are
marching to our deaths. Ten men overcame the inhabitants of Shechem, and
now these same ten men with all their servants stand before us. Their
God delights in them, and they live under His especial protection. None
of the gods of other nations are able to perform such wonders as their
God has wrought in behalf of this, his favourite people. Did not Nimrod
endeavour to destroy their progenitor Abraham, and did not their God
deliver him even from a furnace of fire? Did not this same Abraham
defeat four kings who had carried off his relative Lot, who lived in
Sodom? Their God is powerful, He delights in them, and He will give them
the victory over us. This same Jacob He delivered from Esau and four
hundred men. Could ten men have destroyed a city without assistance from
heaven? Were we a hundred times greater in number than we are we should
meet but with defeat, for we do not fight against them, but against
their God. Let us turn back and attack them not."

One by one the kings of the Emorites withdrew and journeyed homeward
without disturbing Jacob. The Hebrews remained in position awaiting the
attack until

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

evening, but when the Emorites came not they returned unto their homes.
Then the Lord appeared to Jacob, saying, "Arise, go up to *Beth El*, and
dwell there, and raise there an altar to the God who hath delivered thee
and thy children from trouble." And Jacob and his sons journeyed to
*Beth El* according to the commands of God.

Jacob was then ninety-and-nine years of age. He had lived at *Beth El*
formerly called *Luz*, for about six months when the nurse of Rebecca,
Deborah, died, and Jacob buried her under an oak tree at *Beth El*.
Rebecca, the daughter of Bethuel, his mother, died also about this time,
and was buried in the cave of Machpelah. When Jacob was one hundred
years old the Lord appeared to him and called him "Israel." He then
journeyed with his family to Hebron, to live with Isaac, his father.
While on this journey his wife, Rachel, died, at the age of forty-five
years. And Jacob and his family lived with Isaac in the land of Canaan,
as the Lord had commanded Abraham, their father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. From Joseph's Youth to His Elevation Over
Egypt](pol07)
