[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol03)  [Next](pol05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# PART FIRST.

## BIBLICAL HISTORY

### CHAPTER I.

#### FROM CAIN AND ABEL TO THE DESTRUCTION OF BABEL'S TOWER.

AND Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bore him two sons and
three daughters.

The first-born she called "Cain," saying, "I have gotten a man from the
Lord."

Her second son she called "Abel," saying, "With nothing we come into the
world, and with nothing will we be taken from it"

When the lads grew up, their father gave to each of them a possession in
the land. Cain became a tiller of the soil, and Abel a shepherd.

And after a time it came to pass that the lads each brought an offering
to the Lord. Cain brought from the fruit of the ground, and Abel brought
from the firstlings of his flock. But while Abel selected the finest and
best-conditioned animals, Cain offered fruit of an inferior quality, the
poorest which the earth offered. Therefore Cain's offering was unheeded,
while the fire of acceptance fell from heaven, consuming the gracious
gift which his brother had presented to his Maker. Thus a feeling of
jealousy found birth in Cain's heart, and he resolved, when a good
opportunity should offer, to slay his brother.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

This time came upon an occasion when Cain was ploughing his fields.
Abel, leading his flocks to pasture, crossed the ground which his
brother was tilling.

In a wrathful spirit, Cain approached Abel, saying, "Wherefore comest
thou with thy flocks to dwell in and to feed upon the land which belongs
to me?"

And Abel answered:

"Wherefore eatest thou of the flesh of my sheep? Wherefore clothe
thyself in garments fashioned from their wool? Pay me for the flesh
which thou hast eaten, for the garments in which thou art clothed, for
they are mine, even as this ground is thine; then will I go out of it,
aye, and fly through the air, so that I may not touch it."

Then said Cain to his brother:

"Behold, thou art in my power. If I should see fit to slay thee now,
to-day, who would avenge thy death?"

"God, who has placed us upon this earth," replied Abel. "He is the judge
who rewardeth the pious man according to his deeds, and the wicked
according to his wickedness. Thou canst not slay me and hide from Him
the action. He will surely punish thee, aye, even for the evil words
which thou hast spoken to me but now."

This answer increased Cain's wrathful feelings, and, raising the
implement of his labour which he was holding in his hand, he struck his
brother suddenly therewith, and killed him.

Thus was the blood of Abel spilled by Cain his brother, and the blood
ran along the ground, even to the place where Abel's flocks were
staying.

And it came to pass, after this rash action, that Cain grieved and wept
bitterly. Then, arising, he dug a hole in the ground, and buried therein
his brother's body from the light of day.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

And after this, the Lord appeared to Cain, and said to him:

"Where is Abel, thy brother, who was With thee?"

And Cain replied unto the Lord:

"I know not! Am I my brother's keeper?"

Then said the Lord:

"What hast thou done! Thy brother's blood cries to me from the ground.
Thou thinkest I know not of thy action, of the crime which thou hast
committed, which thou wouldst now deny. Cursed be thou from the ground
which oped to swallow up thy brother's blood. No longer shall it give
its strength to thee and answer to thy efforts; no longer shall it give
thee aught but thorns. A fugitive and wanderer shalt thou henceforth be
upon the earth."

And Cain went forth a wanderer from the presence of his Maker, forth to
the land on the east of Eden.

Now, after this time, when God began to give Cain rest, his wife
conceived and bore a son. And Cain called his son "Enoch," because God
had at last given him rest upon the earth. And he began to build a city,
and this, too, he called "Enoch," for the same reason, because he was no
longer a fugitive and a wanderer as before.

 

Now, when Adam was one hundred and thirty years old, he begat another
son, whom he called "Seth."

And Seth lived one hundred and five years, and begat "Enosh."

Then the people increased and grew many upon the face of the earth. And
they polluted their souls by sin and rebellion against the Lord. Their
wickedness and their transgressions increased day by day. They forgot
the Eternal who had formed them and given them the earth as a
possession. They made images of copper and iron,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

of wood and of stone, to which they prostrated themselves in worship.

During the entire lifetime of Enosh the people continued thus
unrighteous.

Therefore God's wrath was kindled against them, and he caused the river
Gichon to overflow, and destroy and consume them. But though one-third
of the earth was thus destroyed, the remaining people did not repent;
they continued in their evil ways, displeasing in the eyes of the Lord.

During this time there was neither sowing nor reaping. There was a
grievous famine in the land, for when the people became corrupt, the
land was also corrupted, and, instead of fruit for man's sustenance, it
brought forth thorns and thistles.

 

And Enosh lived ninety years, and begat "Kenan."

Kenan was a wise man who understood all things, and when he grew to be
forty years of age, he ruled over the whole human race. Being an
intelligent man, he instructed the people, and imparted to them his
wisdom and understanding. He foresaw that the people would be punished
for their continued wickedness, and he prophesied concerning the future
and the flood which God would bring upon the earth, and he wrote down
his prophecies on stone tablets, and deposited them in the Treasury.

When Kenan was seventy years old he begat children, three sons and two
daughters. These two daughters became the wives of Lemech, the son of
Methushael, the fifth of the generations of Cain. Ada, his first wife,
bore him a son, whom she called "Jabal," and another son, whom she
called "Jubal;" but Zillah, her sister, was barren for many years.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

But it came to pass, even in her old age, that Zillah became the mother
of a son, whom she called "Tubal-Cain," saying, "After I have grown old,
Almighty God has granted me a son." Then Zillah conceived again, and
bore a daughter, whom she called "Naäma," which signifies joy and
pleasure in old age.

Now as Lemech grew old, his eyes grew very dim, and finally all sight
was taken from them, and Tubal-Cain, his son, led him by the hand when
he walked abroad.

And it came to pass, when Tubal-Cain was still quite young, that he led
his father into the fields to hunt, and he said to his father:

"Lo, yonder is a beast of prey, shoot thy arrow in that direction."

Lemech did as his son had spoken, and the arrow struck Cain, who was
walking afar off, and killed him. Thus was Cain's blood shed even as he
had shed the blood of Abel his brother.

Now when Lemech and his son drew near and saw that instead of a beast of
prey they had killed their progenitor Cain, Lemech trembled exceedingly
and clapped his hands heavily together in surprise, grief, and fright.
Being blind, he saw not his son, and struck the lad's head between his
hands, killing him instantly. When his wives discovered what their
husband had done they upbraided and despised him. And he spoke to them,
saying:

"Ada and Zillah, listen to my voice! Oh, wives of Lemech, give ear unto
my speech! I have slain a man to my hurt, a child to my wounding, but
not in cruelty or with design. Ye know that I am old and hoary, that my
eyes are sightless; accidentally I did this thing to my own wounding and
my own hurt."

Then his wives became reconciled to their husband,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

according to the advice of Adam, their father, but they bore no more
children.

 

"Mehalalel begat Jared, and Jared begat Enoch, and Enoch begat
Methusaleh."

And Enoch served the Lord and walked with him, despising the wicked ones
about him, and cleaving with knowledge and understanding to the ways of
the Most High.

Enoch did not mix with the people, but lived alone as a hermit for many
years.

And it came to pass as he was praying in his apartment an angel of the
Lord called to him from heaven, saying, "Enoch, Enoch," and he answered,
"Here am I."

Then said the angel:

"Arise, go forth from thy solitude and walk among the people of the
land. Teach to them the way they should go, and instruct them in the
actions they should perform." And Enoch did as the Lord commanded him.

He walked among the people and taught them the ways of the Creator,
assembling them together and addressing them in earnestness and truth.
And he charged his followers to proclaim in all places where men dwelt

"Who is he that desires to know the ways of the Lord and to do
righteously? Let him seek Enoch." And Enoch reigned over the human race
and the people obeyed him, and while Enoch was among them they served
God. And princes and rulers came to listen to his words of wisdom and to
make obeisance before him. And he made peace through all the land.

And Enoch reigned over the human race for three hundred and fifty-three
years. In justice and righteousness he ruled, and peace blessed the land
during all this period.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Methusaleh was the son of Enoch, and Lemech was the son of Methusaleh.
Adam died, nine hundred and thirty years old, when Lemech was sixty-five
years of age. He was buried with great honours by Seth, Enoch, and
Methusaleh, His body was placed in a cave, which according to some
authorities was the cave of Machpelah. From this time, the time of
Adam's burial, it has been the custom to perform funeral obsequies over
the dead.

Adam died because he had eaten of the fruit of the tree of knowledge,
and through his sin must all his descendants likewise die, even as the
Lord has spoken.

The year in which Adam died was the two hundred and fifty-third year of
the reign of Enoch.

And it came to pass about this time that Enoch again felt a longing for
solitude take possession of him, and he again withdrew from frequent
communion with his people. He did not separate himself from them
altogether; for three days he remained alone, and on the fourth he
appeared to exhort and instruct them. But when a few years had passed he
increased the periods of his withdrawal from the world, and separating
himself from the people for six days, he preached to them upon the
seventh. And after this he appeared before the people but one time in a
year, and though they were desirous of seeing him and hearkening to his
voice, save at this one time, they were unable to behold him.

And Enoch became so holy that the people feared him and dared not
approach when he appeared before them, for the glory of heaven rested on
his face. Yet when he spoke they assembled and listened to his words,
and learning from his knowledge, they bowed before him, and cried aloud,
"Long live the King!"

And it came to pass when the inhabitants of the world

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

had learned from Enoch the ways of the Lord, an angel called to him from
heaven, saying:

"Ascend, Enoch, ascend to heaven, and reign over the children of God in
heaven as thou hast reigned over the children of men on earth."

Then Enoch assembled the people and said to them, "I have been summoned
to heaven, but I know not the day I shall ascend. Therefore let me teach
you ere I go, reiterating the lessons which you have heard from my
lips."

And Enoch made peace and harmony among the people, and pointed out to
them the path to everlasting life. And his followers proclaimed aloud
wherever men dwelt, "Who is he that wishes to live and to know the ways
of the Lord? Let him seek Enoch and learn, ere he is taken from us and
earth."

So Enoch taught the people and united them in peace and harmony.

Then Enoch mounted his horse and rode away, and a multitude of people
followed him a day's journey.

And it came to pass on the second day that Enoch spoke to those who
followed him, saying:

"Return to your tents! Wherefore follow me? Return, lest death overtake
ye."

A number of the followers returned at these words, but others continued
to journey with him; and every day he spoke to them, saying:

"Return, lest death overtake ye."

And on the sixth day there were still some who followed after him, and
they said, "Where thou goest will we go; as the Lord liveth naught but
death shall separate us;" so when Enoch saw that they were thus
determined he spoke to them no more.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Those who went back on the sixth day knew how many they had left
following, but of those whom they left on the sixth day not one
returned.

And on the seventh day Enoch ascended to heaven in a whirlwind, with
chariot and horses of fire.

And it came to pass after Enoch had gone up to heaven that the people
started out to search for those men who had followed after him. And on
the spot where they had left them they found deep snow and ice. They cut
through the ice and they found there the dead bodies of the men for whom
they were searching, but Enoch they did not find. Therefore is this the
meaning of the words of Scripture, "And Enoch walked with God; and he
was not" (he was not where search was made), "for God had taken him"
(Gen. 5: 24).

And Enoch ascended to heaven when Lemech the son of Methusaleh was one
hundred and thirteen years old.

 

And it came to pass after Enoch had ascended to heaven that the people
appointed Methusaleh, his son, king over them. And Methusaleh lived in
the way of righteousness which his father had taught him, and he
continued to instruct the people in morality and goodness even as Enoch
had done before him. But in the latter part of his reign the people grew
regardless of his teachings. They disregarded the personal rights of one
another, and rebelled against the commands of God.

And the wrath of the Lord was again kindled against them, and the earth
brought forth thorns and thistles instead of its fruit for sustenance,
yet they repented not, nor turned from their evil deeds. Therefore did
God resolve to destroy them entirely from the face of the earth.

Now when Lemech, the son of Methusaleh, was one

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

hundred and eighty-six years old, Seth, the son of Adam, died and was
buried.

And about this time Lemech took to himself Ashmua, the daughter of
Elishua, the son of Enoch, for a wife, and he begat a son and called him
Noah.

Noah grew up in righteousness and followed zealously in the ways of
truth which Methusaleh taught him; but the others of the people
practised wickedness towards God and deceit towards one another.

Then said God:

"The whole earth is corrupt. I will destroy this man whom I have
created, the fowls of the heaven and the beasts of the earth, for the
wickedness of man proves him undeserving of life, and I repent that I
have made him."

But the Lord stayed his wrath until every man who walked in His ways was
dead, before He brought to pass the evil which He had spoken, so that
his faithful servants might not see the punishment of their fellow-man.

But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; and God selected Noah and
his family from all the people of the earth, to keep them alive through
the destruction which He designed.

And it came to pass in the eighty-fourth year of Noah's life that Enosh,
the son of Seth, died at the age of nine hundred and five years. And
when Noah was one hundred and seventy, Kenan died nine hundred and ten
years old. And Mehalel died at the age of eight hundred and ninety-five
years, when Noah was two hundred and thirty years of age; and when Noah
was three hundred and sixty, Jared died at the age of nine hundred and
sixty-two years. And also those people who fulfilled the words of the
Lord died in those days before He showed them the evil which He had
decreed.

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year of the life
of Noah, that the only righteous ones left in that generation were
Methusaleh, and Noah with his family.

Then the word of the Lord came to Methusaleh and Noah, saying:

"Go forth, proclaim to all mankind, 'Thus saith the Lord: Turn from your
evil inclinations, abandon your unrighteous ways, then may God forgive
and spare you on the face of the earth. For thus saith the Eternal, one
hundred and twenty years will I give ye to repent; if ye forsake your
evil ways, then will I forsake my intentions of destruction.'"

And Noah and Methusaleh went forth and spoke these words of the Lord to
the people. Every day, from morning until night, they addressed the
people, but the people heeded not their words.

 

Noah was a righteous man in his generation, and the Lord chose Noah's
seed to be spread over the whole earth. Then said God to Noah:

"Take thyself a wife, and beget children, for I have seen thee to be a
righteous man before me; only thyself, thy wife, and thy sons, shall
live on earth of all this generation."

And Noah did as God commanded him, and took to wife Naamah, the daughter
of Enoch; and Noah was four hundred and ninety-eight years old when he
married Naamah. And Naamah conceived and bore a son, whom she called
"Japhet," saying, "God has enlarged us through the land." And she bore a
second son, and called him "Ham." And she bore a third son, and called
him "Shem," saying, "God has given me a great *name* on earth." And Noah
was five hundred and two years old when she bore to him his third son,
Shem.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

And the lads grew up and walked in the way of God, as they were taught
by Noah and by Methusaleh. And in these days died Lemech, the father of
Noah. He was not as righteous either as his father or his son. He was
seven hundred and seventy-seven years old when he died.

And again the Lord spoke to Methusaleh and Noah, saying:

"Once more call mankind to repentance; call once again, ere my
punishment falls upon the people."

But the people listened not, and the words of warning were unheeded.

Then the Lord said unto Noah:

"The end of all flesh cometh before me, because of its evil ways;
behold, I will destroy the people with the earth. But thou, take for
thyself gopher wood, and build for thee an ark. In this manner build it:
Three hundred cubits in length, fifty cubits in breadth, and thirty
cubits in height; make a door in its side, and to a cubit finish it
above."

In the five hundred and ninety-fifth year of his age Noah commenced
building this ark, and he completed it in his six hundredth year, and
during the time of its building his three sons married the three
daughters of Methusaleh.

And it came to pass, also, during this time, that Methusaleh, the son of
Enoch, died at the age of nine hundred and sixty-nine years.

After his death the Lord spoke to Noah, saying:

"Go thou with all thy household into the ark, and, behold, I will gather
to thee all the beasts and fowls, and they will surround the ark.

"Then place thyself in the doorway of the ark, and the beasts and fowls
will place themselves opposite to thee. Those that lie down before thee
let thy sons lead into the ark, and those that remain standing thou
shalt abandon."

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

As the Lord had spoken so happened it. The animals assembled in a great
multitude opposite the ark. Those which lay down were led into the ark,
and the others were abandoned.

And at the end of seven days the thunder and lightnings of the heavens
frighted all the earth. The glory of the sun was darkened, the heavy
rain fell, and the fury of the storm exceeded all that man had heard of
or imagined.

And the people came to the ark and clung to it, and cried to Noah for
help, but he answered them:

"For a hundred and twenty years I entreated ye to follow my words; alas,
‘tis now too late."

For forty days and forty nights the rain fell, and with such violence
that even those in the ark were in trouble and agony of mind, for they
feared their vessel would not be able to withstand its might.

Each animal in the ark, according to its nature, uttered its cry of
fear, of rage, of helplessness, and the noise was loud and terrible.

Then Noah addressed the Eternal in prayer:

"O Lord, I beseech Thee, save us now! Without strength to face this
great calamity, we come to Thee. The rivers of water terrify us, and
death plays in waves about us. Lift up Thy countenance upon us, O Lord!
Be gracious to us. Redeem us, our God; deliver us, and save us!"

And God heard the voice of Noah, and remembered him.

 

"And God caused a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters were
assuaged, . . . . and the ark rested in the seventh month . . . . upon
the mountain of Ararat."

And Noah opened the window of the ark, and again called to God, saying

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

"O Lord, God of heaven and of earth, release our souls from confinement,
bring us out from the prison in which we live; verily our hearts are
weary with sighing."

And God answered Noah, saying:

"At the close of the year thou and thy family may go forth out of the
ark."

And it came to pass in the second month, on the seven-and-twentieth day
of the month, the earth was perfectly dry. Yet Noah and his family still
tarried in the ark, and they did not leave it until God called to them
and said, "Go out of the ark."

All the people and living things then departed from the vessel in which
their lives had been preserved.

Noah and his children served the Lord all the days of their lives, and
God blessed them. And the human race increased rapidly after the flood,
and the names of the generations are written in the Bible.

Cush, the son of Ham and grandson of Noah, married in his old age a
young wife, and begat a son whom he called "Nimrod," because in those
days the people were beginning to rebel again against the Lord's
command, and Nimrod signifies rebellion.

Now Nimrod grew up, and his father loved him exceedingly, because he was
the child of his old age. And there was a certain coat of skins which
God had made for Adam. When Adam died this coat became the possession of
Enoch; from him it descended to Methusaleh, his son; Methusaleh gave it
to Noah, who took it with him into the ark. And when the people left the
ark Ham stole this coat, and hid it from his brothers, giving it
secretly thereafter to Cush, his son. Cush kept it hidden for many
years, until out of his great love he gave it to Nimrod, the child of
his old age. When Nimrod was twenty years of age he put on this coat,
and it

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

gave him strength and might; might as a hunter in the fields, and might
as a warrior in the subjection of his enemies and opponents. And his
wars and undertakings prospered until he became king over all the earth.

Behold, to this day his power is a proverb among men, and he who
instructs the youthful arm in the wielding of weapons, and the youthful
mind in the secrets of the chase, wishes his pupils "even as Nimrod, who
was a mighty hunter in the land, and prosperous in his wars."

When Nimrod was forty years old his brethren, the sons of Ham,
quarrelled with the sons of Japhet. And Nimrod assembled the tribe of
Cush, and went forth to battle with the sons of Japhet. And he addressed
his army, saying:

"Be not dismayed, and banish fear from your hearts. Our enemies shall
surely be your booty, and ye shall do with them as ye please."

Nimrod was victorious, and the opposing armies became his subjects. And
when he and his soldiers returned home rejoicing the people gathered
around and made him king, and placed a crown upon his head. And he
appointed counsellors, judges, chiefs, generals, and captains. He
established a national government, and he made Therach, the son of
Nahor, his chief officer.

When Nimrod had thus established his power he decided to build a city, a
walled town, which should be the capital of his country. And he selected
a certain plain and built a large city thereon, and called it Shinar.
And Nimrod dwelt in Shinar in safety, and gradually became ruler over
all the world; and at that time all the people of the earth were of one
language and of one speech.

Nimrod in his prosperity did not regard the Lord. He made gods of wood
and stone, and the people copied after his doings. His son Mordon served
idols also, from which

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

we have, even to this day, the proverb, "From the wicked, wickedness
comes forth."

 

And it came to pass about this time that the officers of Nimrod and the
descendants of Phut, Mitzrayim, Cush, and Canaan took counsel together,
and they said to one another:

"Let us build a city and also in its midst a tall tower for a
stronghold, a tower the top of which shall reach even to the heavens.
Then shall we truly make for ourselves a great and mighty name, before
which all our enemies shall tremble. None will then be able to harm us,
and no wars may disperse our ranks."

And they spoke these words to the king, and he approved of their design.

Therefore these families gathered together and selected a suitable spot
for their city and its tower on a plain towards the east, in the land of
Shinar.

And while they were building rebellion budded in their hearts, rebellion
against God, and they imagined that they could scale the heavens and war
with him.

They divided into three parties; the first party said:

"We will ascend to heaven and place there our gods, and worship them."

The second party said:

"We will pour into the heavens of the Lord and match our strength with
His."

And the third party said:

"Yea, we will smite Him with arrow and with spear."

And God watched their evil enterprise, and knew their thoughts, yet they
builded on. If one of the stones which they had raised to its height
fell, they were sad at heart, and even wept; yet when any of their
brethren fell from the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

building and were killed, none took account of the life thus lost.

Thus they continued for a space of years, till God said, "We will
confuse their language." Then the people forgot their language, and they
spoke to one another in a strange tongue.

And they quarrelled and fought on account of the many misunderstandings
occasioned by this confusion of language, and many were destroyed in
these quarrels, till at last they were compelled to cease building.

According to their deserts did God punish the three rebellious parties.
Those who had said, "We will place our gods in the heavens," were
changed in appearance, and became like apes; those who had said, "We
will smite Him with arrows," killed one another through
misunderstandings; and those who had said, "Let us try our strength with
His," were scattered over the face of the earth.

The tower was exceedingly tall. The third part of it sunk down into the
ground, a second third was burned down, but the remaining third was
standing until the time of the destruction of Babylon.

Thus were the people dispersed over the globe, and divided into nations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. From the Birth of Abram to the Destruction of Sodom
and Gomorrah](pol05)
