[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol11)  [Next](pol13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

### III.

#### THE DEATH OF MOSES.

"*The Lord said to Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must
die*."

The death of Moses is alluded to, in the Bible, ten times.

"Thy days approach that thou must die." (Deut. 31: 14.)

"And thou shalt die on the mount." (Deut. 33: 50.)

"For I am going to die."

"For I know that after my death." (Deut. 31: 29.)

"And how much more after my death." (Deut. 31: 27.)

". . . Blessed the children of Israel before his death." (Deut. 33: 1.)

"And Moses was one hundred and twenty years old when he died." (Deut.
34: 7.)

"And it came to pass after the death of Moses." (Josh. I: 1.)

"Moses, my servant, is dead." (Josh. 1: 2.)

Moses himself thought that he had committed but a slight offence, which
would be pardoned; for ten times had Israel tempted God's wrath and been
forgiven through his intercession, as it is written, "And the Lord said,
I have pardoned according to thy word." But when he became convinced
that he would not be pardoned, he made the following supplication:

"Sovereign of the Universe, my trouble and my exertion

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

for Israel's sake is revealed and known before Thee. How I have laboured
to cause Thy people to know Thee, and to believe in Thy holy Name and
practise Thy holy law, has come before Thee. O Lord, as I had shared
their troubles and their distress, I hoped to share their happiness.
Behold now the time has come when their trials will cease, when they
will enter into the land of promised bliss, and Thou sayest to me, 'Thou
shalt not pass over this Jordan.' Oh, Eternal, great and just, if Thou
wilt not allow me to enter into this goodly land, permit me at least to
live on here in this world."

Then God answered Moses, saying:

"If thou wilt not die in this world, how canst thou live in the world to
come?"

But Moses continued:

"If Thou wilt not permit me to pass over this Jordan, let me live as the
beasts of the field; they eat of the herbs and drink of the waters, and
live and see the world; let my life be even as theirs."

And God answered:

"Let it suffice thee; do not continue to speak unto me any more on this
matter." (Deut. 3: 26.)

Yet again Moses prayed:

"Let me live even as the fowls; they gather their food in the morning
and in the evening they return unto their nests,--let my life be even as
theirs."

And again God said:

"Let it suffice thee; do not continue to speak to me any more on this
matter."

Then Moses, convinced that his death was determined on, proclaimed:

"He is the Rock; His work is perfect and His ways are just; the God of
truth, just and upright is He."

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

"*And Moses died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the
Lord*."

Holy Writ testifies to the righteousness of Moses, "And there arose not
a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to
face."

The heavens wept and exclaimed, "The pious one hath departed, there is
none upright among men."

When Joshua searched for his friend and teacher and failed to find him,
he wept bitterly and cried, "Help me, O Lord! for the pious have ceased
to be."

The angels proclaimed, "He executed the justice of the Lord;" and Israel
added, "And His judgments with Israel." And together they exclaimed:

"He shall come in peace; they shall rest in their beds every one walking
in his uprightness."

Blessed be the memory of the just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Book of Esther](pol13)
