[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol15)  [Next](pol17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Simon, the Righteous*.

Simon was performing the functions of High Priest during the triumphal
career of Alexander, about the year 3000. The sons of Judah found no
cause to oppose this warrior, and when, after his first victories over
the Persian army, he came to Syria on his way to Egypt, they joined with
the kingdoms which paid him homage.

Simon the Righteous, as representative of the nation, proceeded to the
seacoast to greet the conqueror, attired in his priestly robes, and
attended by a number of priests and nobles in the full dignity of their
costumes.

Alexander at once approached the High Priest and

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

greeted him warmly; and when his officers expressed their astonishment
at this mark of condescension, he told them that the form and feature of
this same priest, clad in the same robes he now wore, had appeared to
him in a dream and promised him success in arms.

Alexander was conducted through the Temple by Simon. On entering, he
said, "Blessed be the Lord of this house." He was charmed with the
beauty of the structure, and expressed a desire to have a statue of
himself erected as a remembrance, between the porch and the altar. Simon
informed him that it was not allowable to erect any statue or image
within the Temple walls, but promised that, as a remembrance, the males
born among his people that year should be called Alexander. That is the
manner in which the Rabbis Alexander obtained their names.

Alexander continued well-disposed towards the High Priest, and through
his intercessions granted the Jews religious freedom and release from
all tributary burden during the Sabbatic year; and the Jews entered
Alexander's army, and assisted in his conquests.

This state of affairs lasted unfortunately only until the death of
Alexander. In the quarrels among his generals, which followed and
continued for two decades, the Jewish people suffered much. The armies
of Antigonus and his son Demetrius destroyed the fertile fields, gave
wings to blessed peace, and filled the inhabitants of Judea with horror
and dismay.

’Twas on the Sabbath that Jerusalem was taken by storm. The mighty
walls, impenetrable strongholds since the days of Nehemiah, were again
breached and broken, and the city laid open to her enemies.

These occurrences Simon lived to see, and his trust in God as well as
his love for his people were sorely tried.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yet he did not
waver in his faith. He fortified the Temple, repaired its damaged
places, and raised the foundation of the five courts. He enlarged the
water reservoir in the Temple to provide against a scarcity during siege
times, and ever after that the Temple was well supplied with water; a
matter of note considering the climate and the soil of Jerusalem.

Neither did Simon neglect the spiritual interests of his people. He did
not lead them to believe that their strength and safety depended only
upon earthly means. He remembered well the teachings of his
predecessors, "Upon three things does the salvation of Israel depend: on
the observance of the law, upon reconciliation with God by means of
grace furnished by the Temple worship, and upon deeds of benevolence."

The many wars and disturbances which agitated the period of his life
were productive of much and varied evil, and the extremely pious sought,
as in the days of the prophets, to withdraw from the world and
consecrate themselves to God by Nazarean vows.

Simon did not approve of this, and protested against it in many ways. He
made an exception, however, in one case, that of a young and handsome
shepherd, whom he found to be really sincere in his desire. When the
latter came to him, desiring to become a Nazeer, the High Priest
questioned him:

"Why," he asked, "why do you, so young and handsome, with flowing,
silken ringlets, why do you wish to hide so much beauty and destroy so
much which is pleasant to the eye?"

"Because," replied the youth, "my flowing ringlets have almost enticed
me to sin from mere vanity. I saw the reflection of my face in a clear
stream, and a proneness to

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

self-deification seemed taking such hold of me, that I desire now at
once to consecrate my hair unto the Lord, through the Nazarean
vow." <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)

Simon kissed the young shepherd, and said to him:

"Would to God there were in Israel many Nazareans like to thee."

Simon is renowned for his familiarity with the law, for his services as
president and member of the great Senate, and for the efficient manner
in which he strengthened the religious fervour of the people and
participated in all their doings and institutions.

He officiated as High Priest for forty years, and himself announced the
approach of his death on completing the services on the Day of
Atonement. On entering the Holy of Holies upon this sacred day, he had
been used to perceive, every year, an apparition in white garments,
which attended all his actions in the performance of his office. On this
particular day he failed to see it, and considered this fact a harbinger
of his death. He died seven days after the holy day.

Posterity honoured him as the most holy among men, and it has been
asserted that during his life visible tokens of God's favour never
ceased.

His grandchildren, however, deserted Judaism entirely, and set the
example for those actions which brought upon Israel the troublous times
of Antiochus Epiphanes.

It was shortly after Simon's death, and in view of the degeneracy of the
people, that the pious resolved that only the priests should use the
holy name of God. The four letters of the sacred name were substituted
for the name itself, and the latter was only uttered by the priests when

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

they concluded the daily sacrificial service, and pronounced a blessing
on the people, and by the High Priest on the Day of Atonement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[212:1](pol16.htm#fr_6) The law concerning this
may be found in Numbers 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rabbi Ishmael, the High Priest](pol17)
