[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol36)  [Next](pol38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

# PART FOURTH.

## PROVERBS AND SAYINGS OF THE RABBIS, LEGENDS, &c.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

WOE to the children banished from their father's table.

A handful of food will not satisfy the lion, neither can a pit be filled
again with its own dust.

Pray to God for mercy until the last shovelful of earth is cast upon thy
grave.

Cease not to pray even when the knife is laid upon thy neck.

Open not thy mouth to speak evil.

To be patient is sometimes better than to have much wealth.

The horse fed too liberally with oats becomes unruly.

Happy the pupil whose teacher approves his words.

When the cucumbers are young we may tell whether they will become good
for food.

Do not to others what you would not have others do to you.

The ass complains of the cold even in July (Tamuz). First learn and then
teach.

Few are they who see their own faults.

A single light answers as well for a hundred men as for one.

Victuals prepared by many cooks will be neither hot nor cold.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

The world is a wedding.

Youth is a wreath of roses.

A myrtle even in the desert remains a myrtle.

Teach thy tongue to say, "I do not know."

The house which opens not to the poor will open to the physician.

The birds of the air despise a miser.

Hospitality is an expression of Divine worship.

Thy friend has a friend, and thy friend's friend has s friend; be
discreet.

Do not place a blemish on thine own flesh.

Attend no auctions if thou hast no money.

Rather skin a carcass for pay, in the public streets, than lie idly
dependent on charity.

Deal with those who are fortunate.

What is intended for thy neighbour will never be thine.

The weakness of thy walls invites the burglar.

The place honours not the man, ‘tis the man who gives honour to the
place.

The humblest man is ruler in his own house.

If the fox is king bow before him.

If a word spoken in its time is worth one piece of money, silence in
*its* time is worth two.

Tobias committed the sins and his neighbour received the punishment.

Poverty sits as gracefully upon some people as a red saddle upon a white
horse.

Drain not the waters of thy well while other people may desire them.

The doctor who prescribes gratuitously gives a worthless prescription.

The rose grows among thorns.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

The wine belongs to the master, but the waiter receives the thanks.

He who mixes with unclean things becomes unclean himself; he whose
associations are pure becomes more holy with each day.

No man is impatient with his creditors.

Make but one sale, and thou art called a merchant.

Mention not a blemish which is thy own, in detraction of thy neighbour.

If certain goods sell not in one city, try another place.

He who reads the letter should execute the message.

A vessel used for holy purposes should not be put to uses less sacred.

Ornament thyself first, then magnify others.

Two pieces of coin in one bag make more noise than a hundred.

Man sees the mote in his neighbour's eye, but knows not of the beam in
his own.

The rivalry of scholars advances science.

If thou tellest thy secret to three persons, ten know of it.

When love is intense both find room enough upon one board of the bench;
afterwards they may find themselves cramped in a space of sixty cubits.

When wine enters the head the secret flies out.

When a liar speaks the truth he finds his punishment in the general
disbelief.

The camel desired horns, and his ears were taken from him.

Sorrow for those who disappear never to be found.

The officer of the king is also a recipient of honours.

He who studies cannot follow a commercial life; neither can the merchant
devote his time to study.

There is no occasion to light thy lamp at noontide,

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

Let the fruit pray for the welfare of the leaf.

Meat without salt is fit only for the dogs.

Trust not thyself until the day of thy death.

Woe to the country which hath lost its leader; woe to the ship when its
captain is no more.

He who increaseth his flesh but multiplieth food for the worms.

The day is short, the labour great, and the workman slothful.

Be yielding to thy superior; be affable towards the young; be friendly
with all mankind.

Silence is the fence round wisdom.

Without law, civilisation perishes.

Every man will surely have his hour.

Rather be the tail among lions than the head among foxes.

Into the well which supplies thee with water cast no stones.

Many a colt's skin is fashioned to the saddle which its mother bears.

Truth is heavy, therefore few care to carry it.

Say little and do much.

He who multiplieth words will likely come to sin.

Sacrifice thy will for others, that they may be disposed to sacrifice
their wills for thee.

Study to-day, delay not.

Look not upon thy prayers as on a task; let thy supplications be
sincere.

He who is loved by man is loved by God.

Honour the sons of the poor; they give to science its splendour.

Do not live near a pious fool.

A small coin in a large jar makes a great noise.

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

Use thy noble vase to-day; to-morrow it may break.

The cat and the rat make peace over a carcass.

He who walks each day over his estate finds a coin daily.

The dog follows thee for the crumbs in thy pocket.

The soldiers fight, and the kings are heroes.

When the ox is down many are the butchers.

Descend a step in choosing thy wife; ascend a step in choosing thy
friend.

Beat the gods and their priests will tremble.

The sun will set without thy assistance.

Hold no man responsible for his utterances in times of grief.

One man eats, another says grace.

He who curbs his wrath merits forgiveness for his sins.

Commit a sin twice and it will not seem to thee a crime.

While our love was strong we lay on the edge of a sword, now a couch
sixty yards wide is too narrow for us.

Study is more meritorious than sacrifice.

Jerusalem was destroyed because the instruction of the young was
neglected.

The world is saved by the breath of school children.

Even to rebuild the Temple, the schools must not be closed.

Blessed is the son who has studied with his father, and blessed the
father who has instructed his son.

Avoid wrath and thou wilt avoid sin; avoid intemperance and thou wilt
not provoke Providence.

When others gather, do thou disperse; when others disperse, gather.

When thou art the only purchaser, then buy; when other buyers are
present, be thou nobody.

The foolish man knows not an insult, neither does a dead man feel the
cutting of a knife.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

The cock and the owl both await daylight. "The light," says the cock,"
brings me delight; but what in the world art thou waiting for?"

The thief who finds no opportunity to steal, considers himself an honest
man.

A Galilean said, "When the shepherd is angry with his flock, he appoints
for its leader a blind bellwether."

Though it is not incumbent upon thee to complete the work, thou must not
therefore cease from pursuing it. If the work is great, great will be
thy reward, and thy Master is faithful in His payments.

There are three crowns: of the law, the priesthood, and the kingship;
but the crown of a good name is greater than them all.

Who gains wisdom? He who is willing to receive instruction from all
sources. Who is the mighty man? He who subdueth his temper. Who is rich?
He who is content with his lot. Who is deserving of honour? He who
honoureth mankind.

Despise no man and deem nothing impossible; every man hath his hour and
every thing its place.

Iron breaks stone; fire melts iron; water extinguishes fire; the clouds
consume water; the storm dispels clouds; an withstands the storm; fear
conquers man; wine banishes fear; sleep overcomes wine, and death is the
master of sleep; but "charity," says Solomon, "saves even from death."

How canst thou escape sin? Think of three things: whence thou comest,
whither thou goest, and before whom thou must appear. The scoffer, the
liar, the hypocrite, and the slanderer can have no share in the future
world of bliss. To slander is to commit murder.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

Repent the day before thy death. <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)

Ten measures of wisdom came into the world; the law of Israel received
nine measures, and the balance of the world one. Ten measures of beauty
came into the world; Jerusalem received nine measures, and the rest of
the world one.

Rabbi Simon said:

"The world stands on three pillars: law, worship, and charity."

Rabbi Ada said:

"When he who attends the synagogue regularly is prevented from being
present, God asks for him."

Rabbi Simon, the son of Joshua, said:

"His enemies will humble themselves before the one who builds a place of
worship."

Rabbi Lakish said:

"He who is able to attend synagogue, and "neglects to do so, is a bad
neighbour."

Rabbi José said:

"One need not stand upon a high place to pray, for it is written, 'Out
of the depths have I called unto Thee, oh Lord'" (Ps. 30: 1). The same
Rabbi prohibits moving about or talking during the progress of prayers,
enlarging on Solomon's advice, "Keep thy foot when thou goest into the
house of the Lord, and be more ready to hear than to offer the sacrifice
of fools" (Feel. 5: 1).

Rabbi Chia, the son of Abba, said:

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

"To pray loudly is not a necessity of devotion; when we pray we must
direct our hearts towards heaven."

When our ancestors in the wilderness were saved from death by gazing
upon the brazen serpent, it was not the serpent which killed or
preserved. It was the trustful appeal to the Father in heaven.

Say the Rabbis, "Praise the Lord for the evil as for the good;" and
David is given as an example when he said, "I had met with distress and
sorrow, I then called on the name of the Lord" (Ps. 116).

Rabbi Ashi said:

"Charity is greater than all."

Rabbi Eliazar said:

"Who gives charity in secret is greater than Moses."

He finds authority for this saying in the words of Moses (Deut. 9: 19),
"For I was afraid of the anger," and the words of Solomon (Prov. 21:
14), which he presents as an answer, "A gift given in secret pacifieth
anger."

Rabbi Joshua said:

"A miser is as wicked as an idolater."

Rabbi Eliazar said:

"Charity is more than sacrifices."

Rabbi Jochanan said:

"He who gives (charity) becomes rich," or as it is written, "A
beneficent soul will be abundantly gratified."

One day a philosopher inquired of Rabbi Akiba, "If your God loves the
poor, why does He not support them?"

"God allows the poor to be with us ever," responded Akiba, "that the
opportunities for doing good may never fail."

"But," returned the philosopher, "how do you know that this virtue of
charity pleases God? If a master punishes his

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

slaves by depriving them of food and clothing, does he feel pleased when
others feed and clothe them?"

"But suppose, on the other hand," said the Rabbi, "that the children of
a tender father, children whom he could no longer justly assist, had
fallen into poverty, would he be displeased if kind souls pitied and
aided them? We are not the slaves of a hard master. God calls us His
children, and Himself we call our Father."

Rabbah said:

"When one stands at the judgment-seat of God these questions are asked:

"'Hast thou been honest in all thy dealings?'

"'Hast thou set aside a portion of thy time for the study of the law?'

"'Hast thou observed the first commandment?'

"'Hast thou, in trouble, still hoped and believed in God?'

"'Hast thou spoken wisely?'"

 

"All the blessings of a household come through the wife, therefore
should her husband honour her."

Rab said:

"Men should be careful lest they cause women to weep, for God counts
their tears.

"In cases of charity, where both men and women claim relief, the latter
should be first assisted. If there should not be enough for both, the
men should cheerfully relinquish their claims.

"A woman's death is felt by nobody as by her husband.

"Tears are shed on God's altar for the one who forsakes his first love.

"He who loves his wife as himself, and honours her more than himself,
will train his children properly; he will

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

meet, too, the fulfilment of the verse, 'And thou shalt know that there
is peace in thy tent, and thou wilt look over thy habitation and shall
miss nothing'" (Job 5: 24).

Rabbi Jose said:

"I never call my wife 'wife,' but 'home,' for she, indeed, makes my
home.

"He who [possesses](errata.htm#6) a knowledge of God, and a knowledge of
man, will not easily commit sin.

"The Bible was given us to establish peace.

"He who wrongs his fellow-man, even in so small a coin as a penny, is as
wicked as if he should take life.

"He who raises his hand against his fellow in passion is a sinner.

"Be not the friend of one who wears the cloak of a saint to cover the
deformities of a fool."

Rabbi Simon said:

"One who gives way to passion is as bad as an idolater.

"Hospitality is as great a virtue as studying the law."

"Never put thyself in the way of temptation," advised Rabbi Judah; "even
David could not resist it."

Rabbi Tyra, on being asked by his pupils to tell them the secret which
had gained him a happy, peaceful old age, replied, "I have never
cherished anger with my family; I have never envied those greater than
myself, and I have never rejoiced in the downfall of any one."

"Unhappy is he who mistakes the branch for the tree, the shadow for the
substance.

"Thy yesterday is thy past; thy to-day thy future; thy to-morrow is a
secret.

"The best preacher is the heart; the best teacher is time; the best book
is the world; the best friend is God.

"Life is but a loan to man; death is the creditor who will one day claim
it.

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

"Understand a man by his own deeds and words. The impressions of others
lead to false judgment."

Rabbi Jacob said:

"He through whose agency another has been falsely punished stands
outside of heaven's gates."

Rabbi Isaac said:

"The sins of the bad-tempered are greater than his merits."

Rabbi Lakish said:

"The man who sins is foolish as well as wicked."

Rabbi Samuel said:

"The good actions which we perform in this world take form and meet us
in the world to come.

"Better to bear a false accusation in silence, than by speaking to bring
the guilty to public shame.

"He who can feel ashamed will not readily do wrong.

"There is a great difference between one who can feel ashamed before his
own soul and one who is only ashamed before his fellow-man."

Rabbi Akiba said:

"God's covenant with us included work; for the command, 'Six days shalt
thou work and the seventh shalt thou rest,' made the 'rest' conditional
upon the 'work.'"

Rabbi Simon said, on the same subject:

"God first told Adam to dress the Garden of Eden, and to keep it (Gen.
2: 15), and then permitted him to eat of the fruit of his labour."

Rabbi Tarphon said:

"God did not dwell in the midst of Israel till they had worked to
deserve His presence, for he commanded, 'They shall make me a sanctuary,
and then I will dwell in the midst of them.'"

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

When Jerusalem was in the hands of the Romans, one of their philosophers
asked of the Rabbis:

"If your God dislikes idolatry, why does He not destroy the idols and so
put temptation out of the way?"

The wise men answered:

"Would you have the sun and the moon destroyed because of the foolish
ones who worship them? To change the course of nature to punish sinners,
would bring suffering to the innocent also."

In Ecclesiastes 9: 14, we find this verse:

"There was a little city and the men therein were few, and there came
against it a great king, and built around it great works of siege; but
there was found in it a poor wise man, and he delivered the city by his
wisdom."

The sages interpret this verse most beautifully. The "little city" is
man, and the "few men" are his different qualities. The "king" who
besieged it is evil inclination, and the "great bulwarks" he built
around it are "evil deeds." The "poor wise man" who saved the city is
the "good actions" which the poorest may readily perform.

Rabbi Judah said:

"He who refuses to teach a precept to his pupil is guilty of theft, just
as one who steals from the inheritance of his father; as it is written,
'The law which Moses commanded us is the inheritance of the congregation
of Jacob.' (lieut.) But if he teaches him, what is his reward?"

Raba says, "He will obtain the blessing of Joseph."

Rabbi Eleazer said:

"That house where the law is not studied by night should be destroyed.

"The wealthy man who aids not the scholar desirous of studying God's law
will not prosper,

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

"He who changes his word, saying one thing and doing another, is even as
he who serveth idols."

Rabbi Chamah, the son of Papa, said:

"He who eats or drinks and blesses not the Lord, is even as he who
stealeth, for it is said, 'The heavens are the heavens of the Lord, and
the earth hath He given to the children of men.'"

Rabbi Simon, the son of Lakish, said:

"They who perform one precept in this world will find it recorded for
their benefit in the world to come; as it is written, 'Thy righteousness
will go before thee, the glory of the Lord will gather thee in.' And the
same will be the case, in contrast, with those who sin. For the Bible
says, 'Which I commanded thee this day to do them,' to 'do them,' the
precepts, to-day, though the reward is not promised to-day; but in the
future, ordinances obeyed, will testify in thy favour, for 'thy
righteousness will go before thee.'"

The Rabbis pronounced those the "friends of God," who being offended
thought not of revenge; who practised good through love for God, and who
were cheerful under suffering and difficulties. Of such Isaiah wrote,
"They shall shine forth like the sun at noonday."

Love thy wife as thyself; honour her more than thyself. He who lives
unmarried, lives without joy. If thy wife is small, bend down to her and
whisper in her ear. He who sees his wife die, has, as it were, been
present at the destruction of the sanctuary itself. The children of a
man who marries for money will prove a curse to him.

He who has more learning than good deeds is like a tree with many
branches but weak roots; the first great storm will throw it to the
ground. He whose good works are

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

greater than his knowledge is like a tree with fewer branches but with
strong and spreading roots, a tree which all the winds of heaven cannot
uproot.

 

Better is the curse of the righteous man than the blessing of the
wicked. Better the curse of Achia, the Shelonite, than the blessing of
Bil’am, the son of Beor. Thus did Achia curse the Israelites, "And the
Lord will smite Israel as the reed is shaken in the water" (Kings 14:
15). The reed bends but it breaks not, for it groweth by the water, and
its roots are strong. Thus did Bil’am bless Israel, "As cedar trees
beside the waters." Cedars do not grow beside the waters; their roots
are weak, and when strong winds blow they break in pieces.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[292:1](pol37.htm#fr_8) The Rabbi who said,
"Repent the day before thy death," was asked by his disciples how they
could follow his advice, as man was unable to tell upon what day his
death would occur. He answered, "Consider every day thy last; be ever
ready with penitence and good deeds."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Desert Island](pol38)
