[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pol60) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002F9NQVE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Talmud: Selections*, by H. Polano, \[1876\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Purim*.

This festival, occurring on the fourteenth day of the twelfth month,
Adar (March), is to commemorate the deliverance of the Hebrews from the
wiles of Haman, through the God-aided means of Mordecai and Esther.

Although the Holy One threatens the Israelites, in order that they may
repent of their sins, He has also tempted them, in order to increase
their reward.

For instance, a father who loves his son, and desires him to improve his
conduct, must punish him for his misdeeds; but it is a punishment
induced by affection which he bestows.

A certain apostate once said to Rabbi Saphra:

"It is written, 'Because I know you more than all the nations of the
earth, therefore I visit upon you your iniquities;'

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

how is this? If a person has a wild horse, is it likely that he would
put his dearest friend upon it, that he might be thrown and hurt?"

Rabbi Saphra answered:

"Suppose a man lends money to two persons; one of these is his friend,
the other his enemy. He will allow his friend to repay him in
instalments, that the discharge of the debt may not prove onerous; but
from his enemy he will require the amount in full. The verse you quote
will apply in the same manner, 'I love you, therefore will I visit upon
you your iniquities;' meaning, 'I will punish you for them as they
occur, little by little, by which means you may have quittance and
happiness in the world to come.'

The action of the king in delivering his signet ring to Haman had more
effect upon the Jews than the precepts and warnings of forty-eight
prophets who lectured to them early and late. They clothed themselves in
sackcloth, and repented truly with tears and fasting, and God had
compassion upon them and destroyed Haman.

Although the reading of the Book of Esther (*Megilah*) on Purim is not a
precept of the Pentateuch, ‘tis nevertheless binding upon us and our
descendants. Therefore the day is appointed as one of feasting and
gladness, and interchange of presents, and also of gifts to the poor,
that they too may rejoice. As in the decree of Haman, no distinction was
made between rich and poor, as all alike were doomed to destruction, it
is proper that all should have equal cause to feel joyful, and therefore
in all generations the poor should be liberally remembered on this day.

THE END

 

 
