[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch11)  [Next](bk01ch13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter XII**

 

**On the birth of Pururavâ**

 

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

 

1-53. Sûta said :-- O Mahâr<u>s</u>is! The son of the above mentioned
Budha is the greatly religious Pururavâ, of a very charitable
disposition, and always ready to perform sacrificial acts; he was born
of a kshattriya woman named Ilâ; and I will now describe how this
Pururavâ was born of Ilâ and Budha, kindly listen.

 

In days of yore there was a king named Sudyumna, very truthful and
highly capable in keeping his senses under control. Once on a time,
wearing beautiful ear-rings, with extraordinary bow named Âjagab and
holding the arrow-case full of arrows on his back, he went out on hunt
to a forest, riding on a horse, born of the country Sindhu, surrounded
by a few of his ministers. Going about in the regions of forest, the
king got for his shikâr, buck, hare, boar, rhinoceros, bison, buffalo,
young elephant, Srimar deer, wild fowl and various other animals fit for
sacrificial purposes; thus he went on deep into the interior of the
forest. This divine forest was adorned with rows of Mandâra trees and
situated at the bottom of the mount Sumeru. Various trees and flowers
were spreading the beauty of the forest all around; at places were Asoka
creepers, Vakula, Sâl, Tâl, Tamâl, Champak, Panasa, mangoe, Nîp,
Madhûka, pomegranate, cocoanut, Yûthikâ, plantain, kunda creeper, and
various other trees and flowers; at some other places the bowers formed
of Mâdhavi creepers enhanced the beauty and shed the lustre all around.
There were tanks and reservoirs of water in the forest filled with
swans, kâra<u>nd</u>avas, and other aquatic birds. The bamboo trees on
their banks becoming filled with air were emitting sweet musical sounds;
and at many places of that all blissgiving forest, there were bees
humming sweetly and delighting the minds of people there. Now the
Râjar<u>s</u>î Pradyumna became highly gladdened in his heart to see
this interior of the forest, resonated with the cooing of the cuckoos
and beautified by various lovely flowers; and no sooner he entered there
than he was turned into a female and his horse, also, turned

 

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

 

into a mare; the king, then, became seriously anxious. He began to think
over and over again “What is this? How has this come to pass?” and
became very ashamed and sorry and pondered over thus :--“What am I to do
now? How can I in this woman condition go back to my house and how shall
I govern my kingdom? Alas! Who has deceived me thus!” Hearing these
astounding words of Sûta, the Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O Sûta! You have
mentioned that the king Sudyumna equal to god has been turned into a
woman; this is very strange indeed! Therefore, O Suvrata! What is the
reason of his being turned into a mare? Kindly describe fully what that
beautiful king did in the forest?”

 

Sûta, said :-- Once on a time, Sanaka and other Ri<u>s</u>is went to
this forest to pay a visit to S'ankara, illuminating the ten quarters by
their holy aura. But then Bhagavân S'ankara was in amorous dealings with
S'ankarî. The beautiful Devî Ambikâ was then naked and sitting on the
lap of S'ankara and therefore became very much ashamed at their sight;
She got up hurriedly, and putting on her cloth, remained there
shuddering, with great shame and sensitiveness. The Ri<u>s</u>is, also,
seeing them engaged in amorous dealings, went away quickly to the
hermitage of Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a.

 

Then Bhagavân S'ankara, seeing S'ankari too much sensitive, said :--
“Why are you so much bashful and shy? I am doing just now what will give
you pleasure. O Beautiful one! Whoever male will enter from to-day and
hereafter, within the precincts of this forest, will be instantly
converted into a woman.” O Munis! Though the forest gave all delights to
all, yet, having this defect, all the persons that know of this curse,
carefully avoid the forest. No sooner did the King Sudyumna enter into
the forest, out of ignorance, than he, as well as his attendants, were
instantly turned into women; there could be no doubt in this. The king
became overpowered with great care and anxiety and did not go back, out
of shame, to his palace; but he began to wander to and fro on the outer
skirts of that forest. He became known afterwards as the woman Ilâ. Now,
once on an occasion, Budh, while he was wandering at his will, came up
there and seeing the beautiful Ilâ with gestures and pastures and
surrounded by women, became passionately attached towards her; and Ilâ,
too, seeing the beautiful Budh, the son of Chandra deva, became desirous
to have him as her husband. They became so very much tied in love
towards each other, that intercourse took place there. Thus Bhagavân
Budh generated, in the womb of Ilâ, Pururavâ; and Ilâ gave birth, in due
time, the son Pururavâ in that forest. She then, with an anxious heart,
recollected, while in the forest, her (rather his), family priest
Va<u>s</u>i<u>st</u>ha Deva. Now then Va<u>s</u>i<u>st</u>ha Deva,
seeing the distressed condition of the king Sudyumna

 

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

 

became affected with pity and pleased Mahâdeva, S’ankara, the most
auspicious Deva of all, by hymns and praises. When Bhagavân S’ankara
wanted to grant him the boon that he desired, Va<u>s</u>i<u>st</u>ha
Deva wanted that the king would be turned again into man as before. At
this Bhagavân S’ankara said, in recognition of His promise, that the
king Sudyumna would be alternately one month a man and the second month
a woman and so on. Thus, by the favour of Va<u>s</u>i<u>st</u>ha Deva,
the king Sudyumna got this boon and returned to his kingdom and began to
govern it. When he used to be turned into a woman, he used to remain in
the interior, and when he used to become a man, he governed his kingdom.
At this the subjects became very anxious and did not welcome the king as
they used to do before. Some days passed away in this way when the
prince Pururavâ grew up into manhood. Then the king Sudyumna gave over
to him the kingdom and made him the king of the new capital named
Prati<u>st</u>hân; and started out to an hermitage to perform tapasyâ.
He went to a beautiful forest, variegated with all sorts of trees, and
got from the Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada the excellent mantra of the Bhagavatî
Devî, consisting of nine letters. He began to repeat it incessantly,
with an heart filled with love. Thus some days passed away when the
all-auspicious Devî Bhagavatî, the Saviour of the whole Universe, became
pleased with the king and appeared before the king, assuming the divine
beautiful form, composed of attributes, intoxicated with the drink, and
with eyes rolling with pride, and riding on vâhana, the lion. Seeing
this divine form of the Mother of the Universe, the king Ilâ (in this
form) bowed down before Her with eyes filled with love and gladly
praised Her with hymns thus :-- “O Bhagavatî! What a fortunate being I
am! That I have seen today the extraordinary world renowned benignant
form of Thine granting grace and benefit to all the Lokas, I, therefore,
bow down to Thy lotus-feet, granting desires and liberation, and served
by the whole host of the Devas. O Mother! What mortal is there on this
earth, who can fully comprehend Thy glories when all the Devas and Munis
get bewildered in trying to know of them.

 

O Devî! I am thoroughly astonished to see Thy glories and Thy compassion
towards the distressed and poor and helpless people. How can a human
being, who is devoid of attributes comprehend Thy attributes when
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'vara, Indra, Chandra (moon), Pavana (wind),
Sûrya, Kuvera, and the eight Vasus know not Thy powers. O Mother!
Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, of unrivalled brilliancy, knows Thee as a part of
Thine only, as Kamalâ of Sattva Gu<u>n</u>as and giving one all one's
desires; Bhagavân Brahmâ knows Thy part only as the form made of Rajo
gu<u>n</u>a and

 

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

 

Bhagavân S’ankara knows Thee as Umâ only made of Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a; but,
O Mother! none of them knows Thy turîya form, transcending all the
Gu<u>n</u>as.

 

O Mother! where is my humble self, that is of very dull intellect and
powerless, and where is Thy extremely propitious serenity and
graciousness! Indeed such a gracious favour on me is certainly beyond
expectation. Therefore, O Bhavâni! I have come to realise, in
particular, that Thy heart is full of unbounded mercy; for Thou dost
certainly feel compassion for these Bhaktas that are full of Bhakti
towards Thee. O Mother! what more shall I say than this, that Bhagavân
Madhusûdan Vi<u>sn</u>u, though married to Kamalâ, born from only a part
of Thine, considers Himself unfit of Her and is therefore not happy;
then the fact that He, the Âdi Puru<u>s</u>a gets his feet shampooed by
Kamalâ merely corroborates the fact that He wants His feet to become
pure and all auspicious to the world by the holy touch of Kamalâ's
hands. O Mother! It seems to me that the ancient Puru<u>s</u>a Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u wants gladly to be kicked by Thee like As'oka tree, for his
own improvement and pleasure; and therefore it is that Thou dost want,
as if Thou hast become angry to kick (beat with one's legs) Thy husband,
stricken by Smara (cupid, love) and worshipped by all the Devas, who
lies prostrate below Thy feet.

 

O Devî; when Thou always residest on the calm broad chest, as if on a
great cot, adorned beautifully of Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, as lightning in
deep dense blue clouds, then it is without doubt that He, becoming the
Lord of the Universe, has surely become Thy vâhan (vehicle) (on account
of carrying Thee on His breast), O Mother! If Thou forsakest
Madhusûdana, out of wrath, He becomes at once powerless and is not
worshipped by any body; for it is seen everywhere that persons, though
calm and serene, if devoid of S’rî (wealth and power) are forsaken by
their relatives as reduced to a state having no qualities. O Mother! I
am not to be ignored by Thee, on account of my being a woman, for was it
not the fact, that Brahmâ and the other Devas who always take shelter of
Thy lotus feet, had not all to assume once youthful feminine forms,
while in Manidvîpa, and I know this surely that Thou again didst make
them of male forms. Therefore, O Thou of unbounded power! What shall I
describe about Thy power? Indeed, there is great doubt in my mind
whether Thou art masculine or feminine? O Devî! Whoever Thou mayst be,
whether with attributes on transcending the attributes, whether male or
female, I always bow down to Thee, with heart full of devotion towards
Thee. O Mother! I want that I may have one unflinching devotion, towards
Thee in my final state.”

 

Sûta said :-- Thus praising the Devî, the king Sudyumna, in the form of
the feminine Ilâ, took refuge of the World Mother; and the Devî,
becoming greatly pleased, gave to the king, then and there, union with
Her own

 

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

 

Self. Thus the king got the highest steady place, so very rare even to
the Munis, by the grace of the Prime Force, the Devî Brahmâmayî.

 

Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of the first Skandha on the birth of
Pururavâ, in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâs.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](bk01ch13.md)
