[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch05)  [Next](bk01ch07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VI**

** **

**On the preparation for war by Madhu Kai<u>t</u>abha**

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

 

1-44. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O Saumya! Just now you have spoken of
the fight for five thousand years, in that great ocean, between Bhagavân
S’auri and Madhu Kai<u>t</u>abha. How was it that the two greatly
powerful Dânavas, invincible of the Devas came to be born there? And why
did Bhagavân Hari kill them? O highly intelligent one! Kindly describe
that greatly wonderful event. We all are extremely eager to hear it, and
you are the great Pundit and speaker, present before us. It is our good
luck that we have come across you here. As the contact with the
illiterate is very painful, so the contact with the literate is very
happy like nectar. The animals in this world live like illiterates; they
eat, call for their nature, void urines and faeces, and know wonderfully
well the sexual intercourse. Only they want discriminative knowledge of
right and wrong, of the real

 

 

and unreal, and a knowledge of discrimination, leading to Mok<u>s</u>a
or final liberation; this is the only point of difference. Therefore the
persons that have no liking to hear of Bhâgavata and books like it, are
like beasts; there is no doubt in this. Behold! Deer and some other
animals can enjoy well the sense of hearing like men; and the serpents,
though wanting in the organ of hearing, become charmed quite like men,
as if tasting the pleasure of hearing sweet sounds. Verily out of the
five organs of perception the organ of hearing and the organ of sight
are benefitting, for the knowledge of things arises from hearing and the
heart is pleased by seeing. Therefore the Pundits divide in three
classes, the objects of hearing, as :-- (1) Sâttvik, (2) Râjasik and (3)
Tâmasik. The Vedas and other S’âstras are Sâttvik; the literature
Sahitya is the Râjasik and war news and finding fault with others is
Tâmasik. The wise persons again sub-divide the Sâttvik in three
sub-classes :-- good, middling and worst. That which gives Mok<u>s</u>a
is good or excellent; that which gives Heavens is middling and that
which gives this worldly pleasure is worst. In the same way, the
literature Sahitya is of three kinds :-- That which describes the people
to live with their legitimate wives is the best; which describes about
prostitutes is the middling; and that which makes people live with
other's wives is the worst.

 

The seers of Sâstras, the learned men divide the subjects of the Tâmasik
hearing into three classes :-- That in which fight with the enemies is
described is best; where the fight, as of the Pandavas, with the enemies
out of hatred, ill-feeling, is described is middling; and that where
fighting is described without any cause is worst. Therefore, O highly
intelligent one! Hearing the Purâ<u>n</u>as is far superior to hearing
other S’âstras, for thereby sins are destroyed, intellect is increased
and Pu<u>n</u>yam (good merits) is stored. So, O intelligent one! Kindly
describe to us, the Purâ<u>n</u>as, fulfilling all the requirements of
life, that you heard before from the mouth of Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyana”.
Hearing these words of the Ri<u>s</u>is, Sûta said :-- “O highly
fortunate ones! When you all are desirous to hear the Purâ<u>n</u>as and
I am ready to tell them, then both of us are blessed on the surface of
the earth”.

 

In days of yore, in the time of Pralaya (universal dissolution) when the
three lokas and the entire universe dissolved in water, when the
Devadeva Janârdana was lying asleep on the bed of Ananta, the thousand
headed serpent, arose from the was of the ear of Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u,
the two very powerful Daityas Madhu and Kaitabha; they grew in the
waters of the ocean and played around in the waters and thus passed some
of their time. Once, on a time, when the two huge bodied Dânavas were
playing with each other like two brothers, they thought that the general

 

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

 

rule of the universe is that no effect takes place without a cause and
nothing can rest without the receptacle thereof. But we cannot
understand what is our receptacle or who is resting on us. Whereon rests
this pleasant expanse of wide ocean? Who was it that created this? How
was this created? Why are we living here merged within the water? Who
created us? and who are our father and mother. Nothing of a these we
know. Thus thinking, when they could not come to any conclusion,
Kaitabha spoke to Madhu, beside him, within the waters :-- “O Brother!
It seems to me the great immoveable force that makes us rest in this
water is the cause of all. This whole mass of water, too, pervaded by
that force, rests on that; that Highest Devî must be the Cause of us”.

 

When the two Asuras, merged in this thought, understood this, they heard
in the air the beautiful Vâgvîja (the seed mantra of Vâk, the speech,
the Devî Sarasvatî). They then began to pronounce repeated the Vâgvîja
mantra and practised it with the great steadfastness. Next they saw,
risen high up in the air, the auspicious lightning and thought that
certainly our mantra that we are repeating has made Herself visible in
this form of light and thus we have seen certainly in the air, the
sagu<u>n</u>a form (form with attributes) of Sarasvatî, the goddess of
Speech. Thus thinking in their minds they, without any food, with their
minds controlled, constantly thought of that, with their whole mind
collected on that, and repeating and meditating the mantra became one
with that. Thus they passed one thousand years in practising that great
tapas; when the Highest Âdyâ S’akti became pleased with them and seeing
the two Dânavas, steadfast in the practice of Tapas, tired, address
them, invisibly in the way of celestial voice thus :-- “O two Dânavas! I
am exceedingly pleased with your tapasyâ; so ask boon whatever you
desire; I will grant it.” Hearing, then, the celestial voice, thus the
two Dânavas said :-- “O Devî! O Suvrate! Grant us that we will die when
*we* will.” Hearing this, Vagdevî said :-- “O two Dânavas! Certain by My
grace, you two will die when you will and you two brothers will be
invincible of all the Suras and Asuras. There is no doubt in this”.

 

Sûta said :-- When the Devî granted them this boon, the two Dânavas,
puffed up with pride, began to play with the aquatic animals in the
ocean. O Brâhmins! Some days thus passed away when the two powerful
Dânavas saw the Brahmâ, the Prajâpati, seated on the lotus of navel of
Hari. Doubt came on their minds and they told him with a view to fight
:-- “O Suvrata! Either fight with us, or leave off this lotus seat and
go any where you like. If you be so weak, this auspicious lotus seat not
fit for you. For this should be enjoyed by the heroes. So if you

 

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

 

be a coward, leave it quickly”. Hearing these words of the Dânavas,
Prajâpati, engaged in the practice of Tapasyâ, saw the two great
powerful heroes and began to think anxiously “What should be done now”
and waited there.

 

Thus ends the sixth chapter of the first Skandha on the preparation for
war by Madhu Kaitabha in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam
by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](bk01ch07)
