[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch03)  [Next](bk01ch05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

 

**On the excellency of the Devî**

 

1-3. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- O Saumya! How was S’uka Deva born? Who
studied these Purâna Samhitâs; by which wife of Vyâsa Deva? And How? O
highly intelligent one! You have just spoken that S’uka Deva was not
born from womb, in the natural way; he was born of the dry pieces of
wood for Homa sacrifice. But we heard before that the great ascetic was
Yogi even in his mother's womb, so a great doubt comes to our minds. You
better remove that to-day; how he studied also these Purânas, as vast in
their nature; say this.

 

4-5. Sûta said :-- In long-past days, Satyavati's son Vedas Vyâs, while
in his own hermitage on the banks of the river Sarasvati, was greatly
wondered to see a pair of Châtakas (Sparrows). He saw the pair putting 
the beak of their young one, just born of the egg, of beautiful body,
red mouth, and greasy body. They do not care at all for their own hunger
and toil; all they are caring for is to nurture their young one. He said
also that the pair are rubbing their bodies over the body and kissing
lovingly the mouth of the young one and feeling the highest pleasure.
Seeing this wonderful affection of the two sparrows towards their young,
Veda Vyâs became very anxious and thought over the following in his
mind.

 

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

 

9-14. Oh! What wonder is there, when the birds have so much filial
affection towards their child, that men, who want services from their
sons, would show their affection towards their sons! This pair of
sparrows will not perform the happy marriage of their young one and will
not see the face of their son’s wife; nor when they will grow old, that
their child would become very religious and serve them to attain great
merits in Heaven. Nor do they expect that their child would earn money
and satisfy them nor the child would perform when they die, their
funeral obsequies duly and help them in their sojourn in the next world;
nothing of all these. Nor will the child perform the S’râdh ceremony at
Gayâ; nor will the child offer the oblation of a blue bull on the day of
offering the sacrifice to its ancestor (the bull is then let loose and
held sacred); yet the pair of sparrows have so much affection towards
their young one! Oh! in this world to touch the body of the son,
especially to nurture the sons, is the highest happiness in life.

 

15-27. There is no prospect in the after birth of the sonless; never,
never will Heaven be his. Without son, there is none other who can be of
help in the next world. Thus in the Dharma S’âstras, Manu and other
Munis declare that the man who has sons goes to Heaven and the sonless
one can never go to Heaven. The man possessing a son is entitled to the
Heavenly pleasures can be vividly seen, rather than imagined. The man
with son is freed from sins; this is the word of the Vedas. The sonless
man becomes very much distressed even at the time of death and while
lying on bed that is ground at that time, mournfully thinks. “This all
my vast wealth, various things, this my beautiful house, who will enjoy
all these?”

 

When the sonless man is thus perplexed in his mind at the time of his
death and becomes restless, then it is sure that his future career is
full misfortunes; unless one’s mind is calm and serene at the time of
death, can never attain a good goal. Thus thinking variously, the
Satyavati's son Veda Vyâs sighed heavily and became unmindful. He
thought of various plans and at last, coming to a definite conclusion,
went to the Sumeru mountain to perform Tapasyâ. On reaching there, he
thought which Deva he will worship! Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’iva, Indra, Brahmâ,
Surya, Ganes’a, Kârtikeya, Agni, or Varu<u>n</u>a? Who will grant him
boon quickly and thus satisfy his desires. While thus cogitating in his
mind, came there the Muni Nârada, of one mind with lute in hamd,
accidentally in his course of travels. Seeing Nârada, the Satyavati’s
son Veda Vyâsa gave him a hearty welcome, with great gladness, offering
him Arghya and Âsan (seat) and asked about his welfare. Hearing this
question of welfare, Nârada Muni spoke :-- “O Dvaipâyan! Why do you look
so care worn! First speak this out to me”.

 

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

 

28-30. Veda Vyâsa said :-- “ The sonless man has no goal; therefore
there is no happiness in my mind; I am always anxious to get a son and
therefore I am very sorry. To-day my mind is sorely troubled with the
one idea, which Deva I may satisfy by my tapasyâ, who will grant me my
desires; now I take your refuge. O merciful Mahar<u>s</u>i! You are
omniscient; say this quickly; which Deva I will take for my refuge, who
will grant me a son”.

 

31-37. Sûta said :-- Thus questioned by Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyan Veda
Vyâsa, the high souled Nârada Muni, well versed in the Vedas, became
very glad and spoke thus :-- O highly fortunate Parâs'arâ’s son. The
question that you have asked me to-day was formerly asked by my father
to Nârâyana. At this, Nârâyana Vasudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the
Creator, Preserver and Destroyer of the Universe, the husband of
Lak<u>s</u>mî, the four armed, wearing yellow garment, holding
conchshell, discus, club and with the mark S’rîvatsa (a mark or curl of
hair on the heart of Vi<u>sn</u>u) adorning His breast and decorated
with  Kaustuvagem, the Divinity Himself, became merged in great Yoga; at
this my Father became greatly surprised and said :-- “O Janârdana! Thou
art the Deva of the Devas; the Lord of the Present, the Past and the
Future, the Lord of this Universe; why art thou meditating in Yoga? And
what is it that Thou art meditating? O best of the Devas! Thou art the
Lord of the entire Universe and yet Thou art now merged in deep
meditation. At this I am greatly surprised (my surprise is not without
foundation; Thou canst Thyself see). What more wonderful than this can
happen?

 

38-43. O Lord of Rama! I am sprung from the lotus from thy navel and
have become the Lord of this whole universe; who is there in this
universe that is superior to Thee; kindly say this to me. O Lord of the
world? Thou art the Origin of all, the Cause of all causes, the Creator,
Preserver and Destroyer and the capable Doer of all actions. O Maharaja!
at Thy will, I create this whole universe and Rudra destroys iu due time
this world. He is always under Thy command. O Lord! By Thy command the
Sun roams in the sky; the wind blows in various auspicious or
inauspicious ways and the fire is giving heat and the cloud showers
rain. I don’t see in the three Lokas any one superior to Thee. Then whom
art Thou meditating while being questioned by his very intelligent son
S’uka Deva! not born in the usual way from womb, Dvaipâyana expounded
all the secret excellent meanings of the Purâ<u>n</u>a and thereby I
also came to know them also. O saintly persons! Thus S’uka Deva,
sincerely earnest to cross this endless bottomless ocean of S’amsara,
tasted of the wonderful traits of the Veda, the Kalpa tree, this S’rimad
Bhâgavata with its numerous stories and anecdotes with great eagerness
and intense pleasure.

 

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

 

38-43. Oh! Who is there in this world that is not freed from this terror
of Kali, after he has heard this Bhâgavata. Even if the greatest sinner,
void of the right ways of living and Achara as ordained in the Vedas,
hears on a pretence this excellent Devî Bhâgavata, the chief of the
Purâ<u>n</u>as, he enjoys all the great enjoyments of this world and in
the end attains the eternal place occupied by the Yogis. She who is
rare, in Her Nirguna aspect, to even Hari and Hara, who is very dear as
Tattva Vidya to the Jñanins whose real nature can be realised only in
Samâdhi, She resides always in the cavity of the heart of the hearers of
the Bhâgavata Purâ<u>n</u>a. He who getting the all qualified human
birth and getting the reciter of this Purâ<u>n</u>a, the boat to cross,
as it were, this world, does not hear this blissful Purâna, he is
certainly deprived by the Creator. How is it that the way-ward
dull-headed persons, getting the vicious ears, can hear always the
faults and calumnies of others, that are entirely useless, and cannot
hear this pure Purâ<u>n</u>a that contains the four Vargas :-- Dharma,
Artha, Kama, and Mokh<u>s</u>a?

 

This is my main point of doubt. O One of good vows! I am Thy devotee; be
merciful to me and speak this to me. There is almost nothing that is
secret to Mahâpuru<u>s</u>as; this is a well-known fact”.

 

44-50. Thus hearing Brahmâ's words, Bhagavan Nârâyana spoke :-- “O
Brahmân! I now speak out my mind to you; listen carefully. Though the
Devas, Dânavas and men and all the Lokas know that You are the Creator,
I am the Preserver and Rudra is the Destroyer, yet it is to be known
that the saints, versed in the Vedas, have come to this conclusion by
inference from the Vedas that the creation, preservation, and
destruction are performed by the creative force, preservative force and
destructive force. The Rajasik creative force residing in you, the 
Sattvik preservative force residing in me, and the Tamasik destructive
force residing in Rudra are the all-in-all. When these Saktis become
absent, you become inert and incapable to create, I to preserve and
Rudra to destroy.

 

O intelligent Suvrata! We all are always under that Force directly or
indirectly; hear instances that you can see and infer. At the time of
Pralaya, I lie down on the bed of Ananta, subservient to that Force;
again I wake up in the time of creation duly under the influence of
Time.

 

51-54. I am always subservient to that Maha S’akti; (under Her command)
I am engaged in Tapasyâ for a long time; (By Her command) some time I
enjoy with Lak<u>s</u>hmî; some time I fight battles, terrible to all
the Lokas, with the Dânavas, involving great bodily troubles. O Know of
Dharma! It was before Your presence that I fought hand to hand fight for
five thousand  years before Your sight on that one great ocean

 

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

 

in long-past days with the two demons Madhu and Kaitabha, sprung from
the wax of my ear, maddened with pride; and by the grace of the Devî,
successfully killed the two Dânavas.

 

55-61. O highly fortunate one! you realised then the great S’akti,
higher than the highest and the cause of all causes; then why are you
asking again and again that question. By the will of that S’akti, I have
got this idea of man and roam on the great ocean; in yuga after yuga, I
assume by Her will, the Tortoise, Boar, Man-Lion, and Dwarf
incarnations. No one likes to take birth in the womb of inferior animals
(especially birds). Do you think that I willingly take unpleasant births
as in the womb of boars, tortoise, i.e., certainly not. What independent
man is there who abandons the pleasurable enjoyment with Lak<u>s</u>mi
and takes birth in inferior animals as fish, etc. or leaves his seat on
the seat of Ga<u>d</u>u<u>d</u>a and becomes engaged in great
war-conflicts. O Svayambhu! In ancient days you saw before your eyes
that my head was cut off when the bowstring suddenly gave way; and then
you, brought a horse's head and by that help, the divine artist
Visvakarma, stuck that on to my headless body. O Brahmâ! Since then I am
known amongst men by the name of  “Hayagrîva”. This is well-known to
you. Now say, were I independent, would such an ignominy have happened
to me? Never. Therefore I am not independent; I am in every way under
that S’akti. O Lotus-born! I always meditate on that S’akti; and I do
not know any other than this S’akti”.

 

62-66. Nârada said :-- Thus spoke Vi<u>sn</u>u to Brahmâ. O Muni
Vedavyâs! Brahmâ spoke these to me. So you, too, better meditate the
lotus feet of Bhâgavati calmly in the lotus of your heart for the
success of your idea. That Devî will give you all that you wish. Sûta
said :-- At these words of Nârada, Satyavati's son Veda Vyâsa went out
to the hills for Tapasyâ, trusting the lotus feet of the Devî as the
all-in-all in this world.

 

Thus ends the fourth chapter of the first Skandha on the excellency of
the Devî in the Mahapurâna S’rimad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk01ch05.md)
