[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch18)  [Next](bk01ch20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIX**

 

**On the description of the marriage of S’ûka**

 

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

 

1-4. S’rî S’ûka said :-- O king! This great doubt arises in my mind how
a man can be free from desires and the rewards of their actions, when he
lives in the midst of this Samsâra, that is all full of Mâyâ? When even
by the acquiring of wisdom of the S’âstras and the capability to judge
which is real and which is unreal, the delusion of the mind is not
dispelled until one resorts to the practice of Yoga, how then can
freedom from desires and liberation come to a householder? The darkness
of a room is not destroyed by the mere mention of lamp, light; so the
wisdom acquired by reading the S’âstras can never dispel the darkness of
delusion that reigns in the inside of a man. O lion of kings! If one
wants Mok<u>s</u>a, one ought not to commit any act of revenge or injury
or killing any being; how can this be possible to a householder?

 

5-17. Your desires to acquire wealth, to enjoy royal pleasures and to
get victory in battle have not yet subsided; how then can you be a Jivan
mukta? O king! You consider yet a thief, thief and a saint, saint; you
consider a man as your relative or other than that; these ideas have not
vanished from you; how then can you be called Videha? O king! You feel
the pungent, bitter, astringent, sour tastes and the like; you feel good
and bad rasas respectively; you become glad when success comes to you
and you feel sorrow when you happen to fail; and you experience the
three states, waking, dreaming, and deep sleep as an ordinary man does,
how then can you be called to attain the Turîya (fourth) state? May I
ask :-- Whether you cherish this idea that all these infantries,
cavalries, chariots, and that all these elephants are mine; I am the
lord of all the wealth and things? Or whether you do not cherish this
idea? O king! I think you eat sweet and good things, and, at times, feel
pleasure

 

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

 

and, at other times, feel pain! So, O king! How can you look on the
garland of flowers and the snake as one and the same? O king! He who is
a Muktapuru<u>s</u>a considers a lump of earth, a piece of stone, and
gold as of one and the same value; he considers everything to be the
same Âtmân and does good to all the beings. Whatever that may be, I do
not find any pleasure at present with houses, wife, etc., or with
anything, in fact. What my heart’s desire is that I roam alone always
without any desires in my heart. Therefore I like not to have any
companion; to be free from any attachment and to be peaceful, and calm;
I do not wish to accept anything from anybody; I will forego all
pleasures and pains from cold, warmth, etc., and I will sustain my life
on roots, fruits, and leaves, obtained without any effort and will roam,
as I like, like a deer. When I have not got the least attachment to the
household life and when I am beyond all the attributes, what necessity
have I then of house, wealth or a suitable wife? And when you think of
various things with loving heart, and yet say that you are a Jivan
mukta, that is nothing but a mere vanity of yours! O king! When you
think and become anxious about your enemies, about your wealth or
sometimes about your army, how then can you be said to be free from
cares? What more can be said than the fact that many Munis, eating
moderately and controlling their senses, and leading an anchorite's
life, and knowing the unreality of the world, fall victims to the Mâyâ!

 

18-27. Then what need there is to talk of you? O king! know that the
hereditary title “Videha” to your line of kings indicates downright
insincerity; nothing can be other than this as the name “Vidyâ Dhara”
(holder of knowledge) is applied to an illiterate man; as the name
“Divâkara” (sun) is given to a born-blind man, as the name
“Lak<u>s</u>mîdhara” (holder of wealth) is given to even a poor man, as
these names are quite useless to me. I have heard that the kings of your
family who were your predecessors were called “Videha” in name only and
not in deed. O king! In your family there reigned a king named “Nimi.”
Once on a time that royal sage invited his Guru Va<u>s’</u>i<u>st</u>ha
to perform a sacrifice, when Va<u>s</u>'i<u>st</u>ha said :-- “I am
already invited by Indra, the lord of the Devas, to perform his
sacrifice; so O king! let me first finish his work; I will then take up
your work. Better go on collecting the sacrificial materials till my
that work is complete.” Thus saying, Va<u>s</u>'i<u>st</u>ha went away
to perform Indra's sacrifice; on the other hand, the royal sage Nimi
selected another priest and made him his Guru and began his sacrifice.
Hearing all this, Mahar<u>s</u>i Va<u>s</u>’i<u>st</u>ha became angry
and cursed him thus :-- “O forsaker of your Guru! For the crime of
forsaking your Guru, let thy body be destroyed today!” At this, the
royal sage, too, cursed Va<u>s</u>'i<u>st</u>ha in his turn “Let your
body fall off also.” Then the bodies of both the

 

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

 

persons fell. But, O king! this curiousity came to my mind, how the
royal sage, whose body fell before, cursed his own Guru afterwards.

 

28-35. Janaka said :-- O Lord of Brâhmins! what you have said is, in my
opinion, all quite true; nothing is false. Still hear. Know what my most
worshipful Guru Deva has spoken to me is, in fact, true (and nothing
else). You are now intending to quit the company of your father and go
to the forest; well and good! but even then you will undoubtedly have
the company of deer, etc.; see, also, that when the five elements,
earth, water, air, etc., are present, encompassing everywhere, how,
then, can you expect to be free from all companions? So, O Muni! when
you will have to think always of your food, how, then, can you be said
to be free from all cares? Again, even if you go to the forest, you will
have to think there also for your staff, deer skin, etc.; so you can
take my case, too, of thinking of my kingdom, whether I think or not, as
your thinking of staff, deer skin, etc., your heart is tainted with
Vikalpa Jñân (knowledge of doubt, duality, etc.); and therefore you have
come here from a far-off country. But my heart is free from any such
doubt and I am remaining quite cheerful here. O best of Brâhmins! I have
got no doubt whatsoever on any point, and therefore I take my food and
go to sleep with great pleasure. “I am not bound up by this world” this
idea gives me constant happiness of the highest degree. But you consider
that you are bound and therefore you feel always constant pain. So leave
off your idea that you are bound, and be happy. “This body is mine” this
knowledge leads to my bondage; and “This body is not mine” this
knowledge leads to freedom so know this verily that all this wealth,
kingdom, etc., are not mine.

 

36-45. Sûta said :-- Hearing these words of the royal sage, S’ûka Deva
became exceedingly glad and pronounced “Sadhu” “Sâdhu” (true saint,
indeed a true saint, well said) and went away without any delay to the
pleasant Âs’rama of Vyâsa. Vyâsa, too, seeing his son come back, became
very glad and embraced him and took the smell of his head and asked
about his welfare again and again. Then S’ûka Deva, well conversant with
the S’âstras and ever ready in studying the Vedas, sat by the side of
his father, with an enlightened mind, in his lovely Âs’rama and thinking
of the state of the highsouled Janaka in his kingdom, began to feel the
highest peace. Though S’ûka adopted the path of Yoga, yet he married the
daughter of a Muni, named Pivarî, very beautiful, fortunate, enhancing
the glory of her father's family. Then were born first the four sons
named Krishna, Gauraprabha, Bhûri, and Devas'ruta out of the sperm of
S’ûka and the ovum of Pivari; and next a daughter was born named Kîrti
of them. Vyâsa's son S’ûka, endowed with the fire of asceticism gave the
daughter Kîrti in marriage in due time with the high-souled

 

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

 

Anûha, the son of Vibhrâja. As time passed on, a son was born of the
womb of Kîrti and the sperm of Anûha, a son who became the powerful king
Brahmadatta, the knower of Brahmâ and endowed with wealth and
prosperity. Some time elapsed when Anûha, the son-in-law of S’ûka Deva,
getting from Nârada the Mâyâvîja and highest knowledge of Yoga handed
over his kingdom to his son and went to the hermitage of Vadarikâ and
became liberated.

 

The Devar<u>s</u>î Nârada gave him the mantra, the vîja of Mâyâ; and by
the influence of that mantra and by the grace of the Devî, the knowledge
of the Supreme Brahmâ, arose in him without any obstacle and gave him
liberation.

 

46-51. On the other hand S’ûka Deva, always averse to any company, left
his father and went to the beautiful mountain Kailâs'a. He began to
meditate on the unmoving Brahmâ and thus remained there. After some time
the highly energetic S’ûka Deva attained Siddhi (supernatural powers)
Animâ, Laghimâ, etc., rose up high in the air from the top of the
mountain and began to roam there, and then he appeared like a second
Sun. When S’ûka arose from the peak, it severed into two and various
ominous signs became visible. When S’ûka Deva, appearing like a second
Sun by the dazzling brilliancy of his body, suddenly vanished away like
air and became diluted in the Paramâtman, entering into everything and
became invisible, then the Devar<u>s</u>is began to chant hymns to him.
On the other hand, Vyâsa Deva became very much distressed with the
separation from his son and cried out frequently “Oh, my son! Alas! my
son Where are you gone?” and went to the summit of the mountain where
S’ûka did go and wept bitterly. Then S’ûka Deva, who was then residing
as the Paramâtman, the Internal controller of all the beings and with
all the beings, knowing Vyâsa Deva as very much fatigued, distressed,
and crying, spoke out as an echo from the mountains and trees thus :--
“O Father! There is no difference between you and me, considered in the
light of Âtman; then why are you weeping for me?”

 

52-59. Even today the above echo is clearly heard (almost daily). Seeing
Vyâsa Deva grieved very much for the separation from his son and always
crying “Oh! my son! Oh! my son!” Bhagavân Mahes'vara came there and
consoled him saying “O Vyâsa Deva! your son is the foremost of the
Yogis; he has attained the highest state, so very rare to the ordinary
persons that are not self controlled. So do not be sorry any more. O
Sinless One! when you have realised the Brahmâ-tattva, then you ought
not to express any sorrow for your S’ûka who is now stationed in that
Brâhman. Your fame is now unrivalled, only on account

 

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

 

of your having got a son like him.” Vyâsa Deva said :-- “O Lord of the
Devâs! O Lord of the world! What am I to do now? My grief does not quit
my heart anyhow or other. My eyes are as yet satisfied in seeing my son;
they like still to see the son.” Hearing these sorrowful words of Vyâsa,
Bhagâvan Mahâdeva said :-- “O Muni Sârdula! I grant this boon to you
that you will see the form of your son abiding in shadow, very
beautiful, by the side of you. O Destroyer of enemies! Now abandon your
grief by seeing that shadow form of your son.” When Bhagavân Mahes'vara
said so, Vyâsa began to see the bright shade form of his son. Granting
thus the boon, Bhagavân Mahâdeva vanished then and there. When He
vanished away, Vyâsa became very much distressed with sorrow for the
bereavement of his son and returned with heavy heart to his own
hermitage.

 

Thus ends the nineteenth chapter of the first Skandha on the description
of the marriage of S’ûka in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](bk01ch20.md)
