[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch15)  [Next](bk01ch17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On S’ûka’s desiring to go to Mithilâ to see Janaka**

 

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

 

Vyâsa spoke :-- Then the Devî Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, seeing the Deva
Janârdana lying on a banyan leaf and surprised, spoke to him, smiling
:-- O Vi<u>sn</u>u! Why are you becoming so much astonished? Before
this, since times immemorial (without any beginning) there had been many
dissolutions (Pralayas); and many Sri<u>st</u>is (creations); and at the
beginning of every creation You came first into existence and every time
I was united with You; but now You have forgotten me under the spell of
that Mahâ S'akti.

 

That Highest Mahâ S'akti is transcendent of all the Gu<u>n</u>as; but
you and I are with Gu<u>n</u>as. Know me as the S’akti, all of Sattva
Gu<u>n</u>a who is widely known as Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî. After this the
Prajâpati Brahmâ, full of Rajo Gu<u>n</u>as, the creator of all the
Lokas, will come into existence from your navel lotus and will create
the three worlds. Then he will perform severe tapasyâ and acquire the
excellent power to create, and will create the three worlds by his Rajo
Gu<u>n</u>a. That highly intelligent Prajâpati will create first, the
five Mahâ bhûtas (great elements), all endowed with Gu<u>n</u>as and
then create mind with sensory organs and the presiding deities of the
senses, and thus with all the ingredients, fit for creation, will create
all the worlds. Therefore He is denominated by all as the Creator of
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a. O highly fortunate one! You will be the Preserver of
this Universe. When the Prajâpati Brahmâ will be angry at the beginning
of the creation on his four mind-born sons, Rudra Deva will appear.

 

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

 

He will appear then from the centre of his eye brows. On being born this
Rudra Deva will practise very severe tapasyâ and will get the Samhâra
S’akti, who is all of Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a and at the end of the Kalpa will
destroy all this universe of five elements. O highly intelligent one! So
I have come to you for this work of creation, etc. So take me to you as
your Vai<u>sn</u>avî S’akti full of Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a. O Madhusûdana! I
will take refuge at your breast and will remain always with you. Hearing
all this, Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u spoke :-- “O beautiful Devî! The half
stanza was ere long heard by me, in clear words; by whom was that
spoken? Kindly speak to me on this great auspicious secret first. For a
great doubt has come and possessed my mind. What more shall I say than
this that as a poor man always thinks of wealth, so I am thinking of
that again and again.” Hearing these words of Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Devî
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî smilingly said, with great affection :-- “O Strong
and Energetic one! I am now speaking in detail on this; listen. O
Four-armed one! It is because I have come to you with form and endowed
with Gu<u>n</u>as that you have come to know me; but you have not known
that Âdya S’akti, the Prime force, transcending all the Gu<u>n</u>as,
though She is the substratum of all the Gu<u>n</u>as. O highly fortunate
one! That Devî Bhâgavatî, transcendant of all the Gu<u>n</u>as, uttered
that all auspicious, highly sanctifying semistanza, the essence of all
the Vedas. O destroyer of the enemies! I think that there is the highest
grace of that Highest S’akti on you, that She spoke the greatest secret
to you for your benefit. O one performing good vows! know those words
uttered by Mahâvidyâ, as the essence of all the S’âstra. So firmly
retain them within your heart; never forget them. There is no other
thing, save that, worth being known in earnest. Because you are most
beloved by the Devî! that She has spoken this to you.” Hearing the words
of the Devî Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, the four-armed Bhagavân took that semi
stanza as a Mantra to be repeated in right earnest within his mind and
cherished that for ever within his heart. After some time, Brahmâ born
of the lotus of the navel of Vi<u>sn</u>u, became afraid of the two
Daityâs Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>abha, took refuge of Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u;
Vi<u>sn</u>u killed the two demons and began to do distinctly the japam
of the semi-stanza. Brahmâ, born of the lotus, then asked Vi<u>sn</u>u
with a gladdened heart :-- “O Lord of the Devas! what japam are you
doing? Lotus eyed! Is there any other body more powerful than you? O
Lord of the Universe! whom do you think and thus feel yourself so
happy?” Hearing Brahmâ, Bhagavân Hari said :-- “O highly fortunate one!
Think out yourself once of the Primordial Force, the auspicious
Bhâgavatî Âdya S’akti who is reigning everywhere as the cause and effect
and you will be able to understand everything. My presiding Deity is
that immeasurable eternal Mahâ S’akti

 

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

 

Brahmamyî; on whose S’akti, as a receptacle with form on this ocean
rests the whole Universe; I am thinking of that, by which is created
(often and often) this entire Universe, moving and non-moving. When the
Devî Bhâgavatî, the giver of boons, become graciously pleased, the human
beings become freed of this bondage of Samsâra; and again that highest
Eternal Wisdom, the cause of Mukti, becomes the source of bondage to
this world, of those who are deluded by Her.

 

She is the Îs'varî of the Îs'varas of this universe. O Brahmâ! You, I
and all other things of the entire Universe are born of the Chit S’akti
(the power of consciousness) of Her and Her alone; there is no manner of
doubt in this. The semi-stanza by which She has sown within me the seed
of Bhâgavata will get expanded by the beginning of the Dvâpara Yuga.
While Bhagavân Brahmâ was resting on the navel lotus of Vi<u>sn</u>u, He
got the seed of Bhâgavata. Then He gave it to His own son Nârada, the
best of the Munis. Nârada gave it to me and I have expanded that into
twelve Skandhas. Therefore, O Mahâbhâga! You now study this Bhâgavata
Purâ<u>n</u>a, equal to the Vedas and endowed with five characteristics.
In this the wonderful glorious deeds and life of the Devî Bhâgavatî, the
hidden meanings of the Vedas and the wisdom, the truth are all
described; hence this is the best of all the Purâ<u>n</u>as and
sanctifying like the Dharma S’âstra. It is the substratum of Brahmâ
Vidyâ; therefore if men study this, they will easily cross this sea of
world; and those that are stupid and deluded get pleasure in hearing the
death of Vritrâsura and many other narrations that are interspersed

in this book. Therefore, O Mahâbhâga! hear this sanctifying Bhâgavata
Purânam and retain it firmly within your heart. O best of persons! You
are the foremost of those that are intelligent; so you are worthy to
read this Purâ<u>n</u>a. Eighteen thousand S'lokas are in that
Purâ<u>n</u>a and you better get them by heart; for if anybody reads or
bears this Purâ<u>n</u>a, fit to be praised in every way,
all-auspicious, capable to increase posterity by the addition of sons
and grandsons, giving long life, happiness and peace, he sees the Sun of
Wisdom, resting in his breast and dispelling all darkness of ignorance.
Thus speaking to his son S’ûka Deva, Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyan, my Guru,
studied us the Purâ<u>n</u>a and thought it was voluminous. I got the
whole of it by heart. S'ûka studied the Purâ<u>n</u>a and stayed in
Vyâsa's Âs'rama. But he was naturally dispassionate like Sanat Kumâra,
etc., the mind-born sons of Brahmâ; therefore he could not get peace in
studying the contents of the Purâ<u>n</u>a which deal with
Karma-Kân<u>d</u>a (actions) fit for the house-holders. He remained in a
solitary place, his heart being troubled very

 

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

 

much. He appeared, as if, with his heart void. He did not mind much for
his food and he did not fast also. Once Vyâsa Deva seeing his son
S'ûkdeva so thoughtful, said :-- “O Son! What do you think constantly?
And why are you troubling yourself so much? Like an impoverished man,
entangled in debt, you are always disturbed by your thoughts. O child!
When I your father is living, what for do you care? Leave aside your
inmost sorrows and be happy. Cast off all other thoughts and think of
the wisdom contained in the S’âstras and try your best to acquire
Vijñâna, the essence of wisdom. O Suvrata! If you do not get peace by my
words then go, at my word to Mithilâ, the city of the King Janaka. O
Mahâbhâga! That king Janaka, who is liberated while living, whose soul
is religious and who is the ocean of truth will cut asunder the net of
your delusion. O Son! Go to the king and question him on Varnâs'ram
Dharma (Dharma relating to caste and stages of life) and remove your
doubts.

 

That royal sage Janaka, the greatest Yogi, the knower of Brahmâ and
liberated while living, is of pure soul, truthspeaking, of a calm and
quiet heart and always fond of Yoga.” Hearing these words of Vyâsa Deva,
the highly spirited S’ûka deva of unrivalled energy replied :-- “O
virtuous one! Your word can never turn out false; but when I hear that
the king Janaka is gladly governing his kingdom still he is liberated
while living, and disembodied while he has body -- this your word
appears to me quite contradictory like light and darkness at one and the
same place and time, and seems that these two epithets simply indicate
vanity and nothing else. O Father! This is my greatest doubt how can the
royal sage Janaka govern his kingdom, being disembodied. It appears that
your word about Janaka is quite false as the son of a barren woman. O
Father! I have now got a desire to see the disembodied king Janaka; for
my mind is plunged in great doubt how can he remain in samsâra
unattached like a lotus leaf in water? O Greatest Orator! Is the
liberation of Janaka according to Buddhistic doctrines or like the
opinions of the materialistic Chârvâkas! O highly intelligent one! How
can the royal sage Janaka, in spite of his being a householder, quit the
usages of his senses? I cannot comprehend this. How can the things
enjoyed by him appear to him, as if, unenjoyed and and how can his
doings be his non-doings? How can the ideas of mother, wife, son,
sister, prostitutes and various persons having different relations,
arising within him vanish again altogether? And if that be not the case,
how can his Jivanmuktahood be possible? If his taste be present of
pungent, sour, astringent, bitter, and sweet things, then it is clear
that he is enjoying all the most excellent things, O Father! This is my
greatest

 

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

 

wonder and doubt, that if he has got the sense of heat and cold,
pleasure and pain, how can he be a Jivanmukta? That king is thoroughly
expert in reigning his kingdom; how then the ideas of enemy, friend,
taste and distaste, remaining absent in him, he can govern his state?
How can he look with the same eyes a thief and an ascetic? And if he
makes any distinction, how then is his liberation effected? I have never
seen such a man, that is liberated while living and at the same time an
expert king in governing his subjects. For these reasons, great doubt
has arisen in me. I cannot understand how can the king Janaka be
liberated, while he is remaining in his house? Whatever it be, I desire
now greatly to see him after his Jivanmuktahood; so I desire to go to
Mithilâ to solve my doubts.”

 

Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of the first Skandha on S’ûka's desiring
to go to Mithilâ to see Janaka, in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a S’rîmad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk01ch17.md)
