[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch13)  [Next](bk01ch15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIV**

 

**On the birth of S’ûka Deva and on the duties of householders**

 

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

 

1-70. Sûta said :-- O Mahar<u>s</u>is! (Now hear the main topic). Seeing
the dark-blue lady looking askance at him, Vyâsa Deva thought :--
“Indeed! What is to be done now? This Devakanyâ Apsarâ Ghritâchî is not
fit for my household.” Then, seeing Vyâsa Deva thus thoughtful, the
Apsarâ thought that the Muni might curse her and got terrified.
Confounded by terror, she assumed the form of a S’ûka bird and fled
away; Vyâsa, too, became greatly surprised to see her in the form of a
bird. The moment Vyâsa saw the extraordinary beautiful form of
Ghritâchî, the Cupid entered then, into his body, and his mind was
filled with the thought of sweet feminine form and was gladdened and all
his body was thrilled with pleasure so that the hairs of the body stood
on their ends. The Muni Vyâsa Deva tried his best and exerted his power
of patience to its utmost, but failed to control his restless mind to
enjoy the woman. Though he was very energetic, and he tried repeatedly
to control his heart, enchanted with the beautiful form of Ghritâchî,
yet he could not, as due to a state of things pre-ordained by God,
control his mind. At this state, when he was rubbing the fire sticks to
get the sacred fire, the two pieces of wood used in kindling the fire,
his seed (semen) fell upon the Ara<u>n</u>î (the two pieces of wood used
in kindling the sacred fire). But he did not take any notice of that,
and he went on rubbing the firesticks when arose from that Ara<u>n</u>î
the wonderfully beautiful form of S’ûka deva, looking like a second
Vyâsa. This boy, born of Ara<u>n</u>î fuel, looked there brilliant like
the blazing fire of the sacrificial place, whereon oblations of ghee are
poured. Seeing that son,Vyâsa Deva was struck with great wonder and
thought thus :-- “What is this? How is it that my son is born without
any woman.” Thinking for a while, he came to the conclusion, that this
had certainly come to pass as the result of boon granted to him by
S'iva. No sooner the fiery S’ûka Deva, was born of Ara<u>n</u>î, he
looked brilliant, like fire, by his

 

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

 

own tejas (spirit). At that time Vyâsa Deva began to look with one
steady gaze the blissful form of his son as a second Gârhapatya Fire,
brilliant with the Divine fire. O hermits! The river Ganges came there
from the Himalayas and washed all the inner nerves of the child S’ûka
Deva, by her holy waters and showers of flowers were poured on his head.

 

Vyâsa Deva next performed all the natal ceremonies of the high-souled
child; the celestial drums were sounded and the celestial nymphs began
to dance and the lords of the Gandharvas Visvâvasu, Nârada, Tumburu and
others began to sing with great joy for the sight of the son. All the
Devas and Vidyâ Dharas began to chant hymns with gladdened hearts at the
sight of the Divine form, the son of Vyâsa, born of ara<u>n</u>î. O
twice born ones! Then were dropped down from the sky the divine rod
(Da<u>nd</u>a), Kaman<u>d</u>alu, and the antelope skin. No sooner the
extraordinarily brilliant S’ûka Deva was born than he grew up, and
Vyâsadeva, who is master of endless learning and how to impart them to
others, performed the son's Upanayana ceremony. No sooner the child was
born than all the Vedas with all their secrets and epitomes began to
flash in the mind of S’ûka Deva, as it reigned in Vyâsa Deva. O Munis!
Bhagavân Vyâsa Deva gave the name of the child as S’ûka as during the
moment of his birth he saw the form of Ghritâchî in the form of the
S’ûka bird. S’ûka then accepted Brihaspati as his guru and began
devotedly, with his whole head and heart to perform duly the
Brahmacharya vow (the life of studentship and celebacy). The Muni S’ûka
remained in the house of his Guru and studied the four Vedas with their
secrets and epitomes and all the other Dharma S'âstras and gave
Dak<u>s</u>inâ to the Guru duly according to proper rules, and returned
home to his father Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyan. Seeing his son S’ûka,
Vyâsadeva got up and received him with great love and honour and
embraced him and took the smell of his head. The holy Vyâsa asked about
his welfare and about his studies and requested him to stay in that
auspicious Âs'rama. Vyâsa then thought of S’ûka's marriage and he became
anxious and began to enquire where a beautiful girl of a Muni can be
found. And he spoke to his son :-- “O highly intelligent one! You have
now studied all the Vedas and Dharma S'âstras. Therefore, O sinless one!
better marry now. O son! Take a beautiful wife, and leading a
householder's life, worship the Devas and Pitris, and free me from debt.
There is no other way of issueless persons; he can never go to heaven;
so O highly fortunate son of mine! Now enter into the life of a
householder and make me happy. O highly intelligent one! I have big
expectations from you; now try to fulfill them. O greatly wise S’ûka!
After a very severe asceticism, I have got you who are

 

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

 

verily a Deva born without any womb. I am, therefore, your father; save
me.” When Vyâsa spoke thus to S’ûka, making him sit close by, the highly
dispassionate Sûka at once made out that his father was terribly
attached to the world and replied :-- “O knower of Dharma! you have, by
the power of your great intelligence, divided Veda into four parts; why
are you therefore advising me so now? I am your disciple; so give me
true advice. Certainly I will obey your order.” At this Vyâsa deva said
:-- “O son! I have got you after I had performed very severe tapasyâ,
for one hundred years, and worshipped Bhagavân S'ankara in the sole
object of having you. O highly wise one! I will ask some king and will
give you sufficient wealth for your family expenses. So that you, having
attained this much desired youth, enjoy the householder's life.” Hearing
these words of the father, S’ûka Deva said :-- “O father! Kindly say
this to me what pleasure is there in this earth that is not mixed with
pain. The happiness, that is mixed with pain, is not called happiness by
the wise. O highly fortunate one! when I will marry, I will become
certainly submissive to that woman; see then how happiness can be
possible to one who is dependent; especially to one, dependent on one's
wife. Rather freedom can be obtained one day when one is tied to an iron
or wooden pillar; but never freedom will come to that man who is tied by
his wife and children. As the body of man is full of urine and faeces,
so is the body of the woman. The more so, when I am born of no womb, how
can I find happiness there; not only in this birth, but in my previous
birth, too, I had no desire to be born of any womb. How can I desire now
to enjoy the pleasure of urine and faeces in the face of the bliss of
self that has got no other bliss equal to it? The high-souled persons,
that find pleasure in their selves, never go after the sensual pleasures
of the objects of enjoyments? When I studied first, the Veda in detail,
it struck me that the Vedas dealt with the S'âstra of Karma mârga (the
way of action); and it is all full of Himsâ (injury to others). Then I
took Brihaspati as my Guru to shew me the way to true wisdom; but soon I
found that he, too, was attacked with the dreadful disease Avidyâ
(ignorance) and plunged in the terrible ocean of world, full of Mâyâ. So
it became quite clear to my mind, how could he save me? If the physician
be diseased himself, how can he effect cures to other diseases? When I
am desirous of liberation, how can I get it from a Guru who is himself
deeply attached to the world; how can such a one treat my case to free
me, from the disease of attachment to this world? It would be merely a
farce. I bowed down to the Guru and now I am come to you to save me,
frightened by this terrible serpent of Samsâra. Day and night the Jîvas
travel in this awful wheel of Samsâra, this constellation of Zodiac;
they are moving like the Sun and never get any rest. O father! If

 

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

 

we discuss about the truth of Âtman, we will at once find that there is
no trace of happiness in this Samsâra. As the worms enjoy pleasures in
the midst of faeces, so the ignorant persons find pleasures in this
Samsâra. Those who have studied the Vedas and other S’âstras and yet are
attached to the world, are certainly deluded and blind like horses, pigs
and dogs; no one is more stupid and ignorant than those persons. Getting
this extremely rare human birth and studying the Vedanta and other
S’âstras, if they be attached to this world, then who are the men that
will attain freedom? What more wonder can you find in this world than
the fact that persons, attached to wives, sons and houses; are
denominated as Pundits? That man who is not bound by this Samsâra,
composed of the three Gu<u>n</u>as of Mâyâ, is Pundit; that man is
intelligent and he has understood the real import of the S’âstras. What
use can there be in studying the S’âstras, in vain, that teach how to
bind men more firmly in this Samsâra, full of Mâyâ.

 

That S’âstra ought to be studied, which tells how a man would be
liberated. The house is called "Griha" because it catches hold of a man
firmly. So what happiness can you expect from the house which is like a
prison? O father! I am therefore afraid. Those Pundits are certainly
stupid and they are certainly deceived by the Creator, who having the
birth even of men, become again imprisoned.” Hearing these words of
S’ûka, Vyâsa spoke as follows :-- “O Son! The house is never a prison,
nor is it the cause of any bondage; the householder whose mind is
unattached, can get Mok<u>s</u>a, in spite of his being such. Truthful,
holy, earning wealth by just means and performing, according to rules
the rites and ceremonies, as stated in the Vedas and doing S'râddhas
duly, a householder can certainly get Mok<u>s</u>a. See a man who is a
Brahmachâri, who is an ascetic, who is a Vânaprasthî or follows any
other method or vow, all have got to worship the householder after
mid-day. The religious householder, too; welcomes them all, with sweet
words, and gives them food, with great love and respect, and thus does
them an amount of good. For this reason the householder's stage is the
most excellent of all; and I have not seen or heard of any other Âs'rama
superior to it. For this reason Vas'i<u>st</u>ha and other Âchâryas
resorted to householder's life, in spite of their being endowed with
great wisdom O highly fortunate one! If one performs duly the rites and
ceremonies of the Vedas, there is nothing that is impracticable to him.
Be it the birth in a good family, or the enjoyment of heavens say, or be
it Mok<u>s</u>a, whatever desires, it is fructifled to success. Also
there is no such rule that one will have to remain in one and in the
same Âs'rama throughout his life. The Pundits who know Dharma say that
pupils can go from one Âsrama to another, Therefore, O child! accept
Agni (the

 

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

 

householder's fire) and try your best to do unremittingly your duties. O
Son! Enter into a householder's life and appease the Devas, Pitris and
men; procreate sons and enjoy the pleasures of household life. When old
age will come, quit the house and take up the Vânaprasthâshram (the
third stage) and go to a forest and perform the excellent vows and then
take up the dharma of the Sannyâsa (renunciation of everything).

 

O Fortunate one! He who does not take a wife, is certainly maddened by
these indomitable five organs of action, five organs of senses and mind.
Therefore, the makers of the S’âstras say, that to save one self from
the pernicious influences of these vicious senses, one is to take wife
during his youth time and then be engaged in performing tapasyâ during
his old age. O fortunate one! In days of yore, the fiery Râjar<u>s</u>i
Vis'vâmitra practised very severe tapasyâ without any food for three
thousand years, and thought he was very strong and shining like fire, he
was fascinated by the charm of the celestial nymph Menakâ. And an
auspicious daughter was born from the womb of Menakâ by Vis'vâmitra. My
father Parâs'ara, though a great ascetic, was struck with Cupid's arrows
at the sight of the daughter of a fisherman, named Kâli and accepted her
in the boat. What more than this, that Brahmâ seeing his  own daughter
Sandhyâ was struck by passion and ran after her, when Bhagavân Rudra
Deva made him unconscious by his Humkâr sound and made Brahmâ desist
from the attempt.

 

 So, O fortunate one! Take my word pregnant of good issues and marry a
lady, born of a good family, and follow the path presented in the
Vedas.”

 

Thus ends the fourteenth Chapter of the 1st Skandha, on the birth of
S’ûka Deva and the duties of householders in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>a
S'rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Vedavyâs.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](bk01ch15.md)
