[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](db03)  [Next](bk01ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

 

**On the questions by S’aunaka and others**

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

 

1\. I meditate on the beginningless Brahmâvidyâ who is
Sarvachaitanyarûpâ, of the nature of all-consciousness;  May She
stimulate our buddhi to the realisation of That (or who stimulates our
buddhi in different directions).

 

2\. S’aunaka said :-- “O highly fortunate Sûta! O noble Sûta! You are
the best of persons; you are blessed inasmuch as you have thoroughly
studied all the auspicious Purâ<u>n</u>as.

 

3\. O sinless one! you have gone through all the eighteen Purâ<u>n</u>as
composed by Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyana; these are endowed with five
excellent characteristics and full of esoteric meanings.

 

*Note* :-- The characteristics are to make the mantras reveal to one's
own self, to realise, to transfer to others the S’akti, force thereof,
to prove the various manifestations of the several effects thereof, etc.

 

4-5. O Sinless one! It is not that you have read them like a parrot, but
you have thoroughly grasped the meaning of them all as you have learnt
them from Vyâsa himself, the son of Satyavati. Now it is our good merits
that you have come at this divine holy excellent Vis'vasan Ksettra
(place), free from any defects of the Kali age.

 

6-10. O Sûta! These Munis assembled here are desirous to hear the holy
Purâ<u>n</u>a Samhitâ, that yields religious merits. So describe this to
ns with your mind concentrated. O all-knowing Sûta! Live long and be
free from the threefold sorrows of existence. O highly fortunate one!
Narrate to us the Purâ<u>n</u>a equivalent to the Vedas. O Sûta! Those
persons that do  not hear the Purâ<u>n</u>as, are certainly deprived by
the Creator, though they have apparently the organ of hearing, of the
power of tasting the sweet essence of words; because, the organ of
hearing is gratified then and then only when it hears the words of the
wise men, just as the organ of taste is satisfied then and then only
when it tastes the six kinds of rasas (flavour, taste) (sweet, sour,
pungent, bitter, salty, and astringent). This is known to all. The
serpents that are void of the organ of hearing are enchanted by sweet
music; then why should not those persons that have the organs of hearing
and are averse to hear the Purâ<u>n</u>as, be thrown under the category
of the deaf?

 

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

 

11-18. O Saumya! Hence all these Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, being distressed with
the fear of this Kali, have come here to this Naimisâra<u>n</u>ya, eager
to hear attentively the Purâ<u>n</u>as, and are staying here with this
one object. Time must be spent away anyhow or other; those that are
fools while away their times in sports and other evil practices and
those that are learned pass away their times in meditating on the
S’âstras; but these S’âstras are too vast and very varied; they contain
Jalpas (debates or wrangling discussions to win over the opposite
party), Vadas (sound doctrines to arrive at just conclusions), and
various Arthavâdas (explanations and assertions, recommending Vidhis or
precepts by stating the good arising from its proper observance and
evils arising from its omission and also by adducing historical
instances for its support; praises and eulogies) and filled with many
argumentations. And, amongst these S’âstras again, the Vedânta is the
Sâttvik, the Mimâmsas are the Râjasik and the Nyâya S’âstras with
Hetuvâdas, are the Tâmasik; so the S’âstras are varied. Similarly, the
Purâ<u>n</u>as are of three kinds :-- (1) S’attvik, (2) Râjasik and (3)
Tâmasik. O Saumya! (one of gentle appearance) you have recited those
Purâ<u>n</u>as endowed with five characteristics and full of many
narratives; of these, the fifth Purâ<u>n</u>a, equivalent to the Vedas
and with all the good qualities, the Bhâgavata yields Dharma and Kâma
(religion and desires), gives liberation to those who desire for
emancipation and is very wonderful; you mentioned this before but
ordinarily; you did not dwell on this specially. Now these
Brâhma<u>n</u>as are eager to hear gladly this divine auspicious
Bhâgavata, the best of the Purâ<u>n</u>as; so kindly describe this in
detail.

 

19-25. O knower of Dharma! By your faith and devotion to your Guru, you
have become Sâttvik and thus have thoroughly known the Purâ<u>n</u>a
Samhitâs spoken by Veda Vyâs. O Omniscient one! Therefore it is that we
have heard many Purâ<u>n</u>as from your mouth; but we are not satisfied
as the Devas are not satisfied with the drinking of the nectar. O Sûta!
Fie to the nectar even  as the drinking of nectar is quite useless in
giving Mukti. But hearing the Bhâgavata gives instantaneous Mukti from
this Samsâra or round of birth and death. O Sûta! we performed thousands
and thousands of Yajñas for the drinking of the nectar (Amrita), but
never we got the full peace. The reason being that Yajñas lead to heaven
only; on the expiry of the period of punya (good merits, the heavenly
life ceases and one is expelled, as it were from the Heavens. Thus
incessant sojourns in this wheel of Samsâra, the constant rounds of
births and deaths never end. O Knower of every thing! Thus, without
Jñâna (knowledge, wisdom) Mukti never comes to men, wandering in this
wheel of Time (Kâlachakra) composed

 

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

 

of the three Gu<u>n</u>as. So describe this holy Bhâgavata, always
beloved of the Mumuk<u>s</u>as (those that desire Mukti), this secret
work yielding liberation, holy and full of all sentiments (rasas).

 

Thus ends the first chapter of the first Skandha on the questioning
about the Purâ<u>n</u>a by Saunaka and other Rishis in the Mahâpurâna
S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

Here ends the First Chapter of the First Skandha of S’rîmad Devi
Bhâgavatam on the questions by S’aunaka and other Risis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk01ch02)
