[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch10)  [Next](bk01ch12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter XI**

 

**On the birth of Budha**

 

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

 

1-86. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O Sûta! Who is that King Pururavâ? and
who is the Deva girl Urvas'î? And how did that high-souled King Pururavâ
come into trouble? O son of Lomahar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a! Kindly describe
now all these to me. We are now desirous to hear sweet words from the
lotus of your mouth. O Sûta! Your words are sweeter and more full of
juice than nectar even; so we are not satiated by hearing them as gods
are not satiated with the drink of nectar.”

 

Hearing this Sûta said :-- O Munis! I am now telling you, as far as my
intelligence goes, what I heard from the mouth of S'rî Vyâsa. Now hear
that beautiful divine incident.

 

Once on a time the exceedingly beautiful dear wife of Brihaspati, named
Târâ, full of youth and beauty, of the most beautiful limbs and
intoxicated with pride went to the house of Chandra Deva (the Moon), the
yajamân (Employer of priest Brihaspati at any sacrifice) of Brihaspati.
Seeing Târâ of beautiful face like Moon, the Moon became very
passionate; Târâ also fell amorous at the sight of Moon. Thus both of
them became very much passionately attached to each other. Then they,
the Moon and Târâ, being smitten by the arrows of Cupid and intoxicated
with amorous passions began their sexual intercourse with reciprocal
feelings of passionate love. Some days passed in this state. Brihaspati,
then, being distressed with the pang of separation from his wife, sent
his pupil to bring back Târâ; but Târâ was then submissive of Chandra
and therefore refused to come. Brihaspati sent over and over again his
pupil and when Chandra Deva returned the messenger, Brihaspati became
very angry and went personally to Chandra's house and spoke angrily to
the Moon who was puffed up with arrogance and somewhat smiling :-- “O
Moon! Why are you committing this vicious act, contrary to Dharma? Why
are you keeping my beautiful wife in your house? I am your Guru; you are
my client; O stupid! why are you enjoying your Guru's wife and keeping
her in custody in your house? Do you not know that he who kills a
Brâhman, who steals gold, who drinks, who goes to wife of one's Guru are
Mahâpâtakis (great sinners) and those who keep company of these are the
fifth Mahâpâtakis? Therefore if you had enjoyed my wife, you are
exceedingly vicious, blameable and a Mahâpâtaki (great sinner); you are
not fit to live amongst the Devas. O wicked

 

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

 

one! Now I say that even now you better forsake Târâ, who is of a blue
colour and whose look is askance; I won't go from here without having
Târâ. And if you do not give back Târâ, then you are certainly with her
and undoubtedly I will curse you. When Brihaspati said so, Chandra, the
husband of Rohi<u>n</u>î, spoke to his Guru Deva, who was very angry,
sorry and afflicted at the separation from his beloved wife, thus :-- In
this world, the Brâhmins that know the Dharma S'âstras, that are devoid
of anger, are fit to be worshipped; and those that are not so, they are
objects of disrespect and not to be worshipped by all for their anger. O
sinless one! The beautiful one will surely go to your house; what harm
is there to you, if she waits here for a few days?

 

She is staying here of her own accord to enjoy pleasures and will go
back of her own will. One word more :-- You gave out before this opinion
of the Dharma S'âstras that as a Brâhman though guilty of committing
vicious deeds, becomes pure again by the practice of Karmas as enjoined
in the Vedas, so a woman, too, though guilty of adultery, becomes pure
again when she is again in the period of her menstruation. At these
words of Chandra Deva, Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, became
exceedingly sorry and anxious and went back immediately to his own
house, with a grievous heart, full of amorous feelings. After staying in
his own house for some days Brihaspati, worn out with anxiety, came
again quickly to the house of Chandra; but, no sooner he was to enter
the gate, he was stopped by the door-keepers; he became very angry and
stopped at the gate way. And when he saw that Chandra did not make his
appearance, he became exceedingly angry and thought :--  “Oh! What a
wonder is this? this irreligious Chandra, being my disciple, has done
this vicious act and took by violence the wife of his Guru, who is
reckoned as the mother; and I will now teach him a good lesson.”

 

Standing on the entrance gate way Brihaspati began to speak aloud :-- “O
stupid, vicious, vilest of the Devas! Why do you now sleep in your inner
room? Do return quickly my wife; else I will curse you at once. In case
you do not bring me back my wife at once, I will now reduce you to
ashes.” Hearing these foul words of Brihaspati, Chandra Deva the king of
the Dvijas, quickly came out of the house and said smiling :-- “O
Brâhmin! Why are you spending your stock of words for nothing? That
all-auspicious lady, of a blue colour and looking askance, is not fit
for you; therefore take another comparatively uglier woman for your use.
Exceedingly youthful and lovely woman like her is not fit for a beggar's
house. O stupid one! I see, you don't know anything about the Kâma
S'âstra (the book that dwells

 

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

 

on amorous passion); those wise men who are skilled in this S'âstra
assign for the women, their lovers equivalent to their beauty in matters
of amorous dealings. So, O stupid man! go away wherever you like. I
won't give you back your wife. Do whatever lies in your power. I won't
return your wife. When you have become passionate, your curse won't
affect me in any way. This I say finally unto you :-- “O Guru! I will
not give you back your wife; do what you wish.” Thus spoken by Chandra,
Brihaspati became vary anxious and angry; he then went away quickly to
the Indra's house.

 

Seeing Guru Deva morose and sorry, the very liberal minded Indra Deva
worshipped him duly with pâdya, arghya, and Âchamanîya and asked :-- “O
highly fortunate one! Why do you look so anxious? O great Muni! Why are
you grievous and sorry? You are my Guru; is it that you are insulted by
any one in my kingdom; say freely. All the Regents of the several
quarters (the Lokapâlas) and all the Deva armies are under your command.
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes'var and other Devas are ready to lend
you every assistance, no doubt. So say what is the cause of your
anxiety?” Hearing these words of Indra, Brihaspati said :-- “Chandra has
stolen my beautiful-eyed wife. I asked for her, again and again, but
that wicked soul is not returning me my wife at all. O Lord of the
Devas! What am I to do now? You are my help and guide. O S'atakratu! You
are the lord of the Devas; therefore I pray to you with a very grievous
heart, help me in this matter.” Hearing this, Indra said :-- “O knower
of Dharma! Do not be sorry. O Suvrata! I am your servant. O highly
intelligent one! Surely I will bring you back your wife. I will send a
messenger and even then if Chandra, mad with pride, do not return your
wife, I will wage war with him and fight against him, with all our Deva
armies.” Thus consoling Brihaspati, Indra sent a very clever man, who
was a good speaker and wonderful in his capabilities, to Chandra. The
clever and wise messenger went to the Chandra Loka (the region of the
Moon) and spoke to Chandra, the husband of Rohi<u>n</u>î, thus :-- “O
Mahâbhâga! Indra has sent me to you to communicate his message to you.
So O intelligent one! I will tell you what he has ordered me; hear.” He
said :-- “O highly fortunate one! You know well Dharma and Nîti S'âstra
(the science of morals); the more so, because the virtuous
Mahar<u>s</u>i Atri is your father. Therefore, O Suvrata! You ought not
to commit such blameable act. See, all beings should protect their own
wives always without remaining idle to the best of their powers;
therefore, no doubt, quarrels would ensue necessarily on that point. O
Sudhânidhi! as far as this point of protecting one's wife is concerned,
your Guru Deva ought also to do his best. You ought to consider all
persons like your own self.

 

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

 

O Sudhâkara! You have got twenty-eight exceedingly beautiful wives, who
are the daughters of Dak<u>s</u>a; why then do you desire to enjoy the
wife of your Guru? The beautiful Apsarâs (celestial nymphs) Menakâ and
others are always residing in the Heavens; you can enjoy them to your
heart's content; leave off the wife of your Guru. In case any powerful
man commits an unworthy act out of egoism, the illiterate ones would
follow them; so the Dharma will decline. Therefore, O highly lucky one!
Do such as does not lead, for nothing, quarrels amongst the gods and
leave your Guru's wife, even beautiful.” Hearing these words from the
messenger, the Moon (Chandra Deva) became somewhat angry and, making
gestures, replied to the messenger, as if to Indra, thus :--

 

O mighty armed one! As you yourself are the lord of the Devas and the
knower of Dharma, so your priest, too, has become like you; the head of
both of you are the same. You will find many that can show their
learning and give advice to others, but you will find always very rare
such persons as will act themselves to their own advices when occasion
arises and wants them to fulfil their own words. O Lord of the Devas!
All the persons take the opinion of the S'âstras framed by Brihaspati
then why the quarrel would ensue with me and the Devas when I an
enjoying, according to his dictates, a woman who is herself willing? See
also, that the rule in this world is might is right; all things go to
the powerful man who can take by force; nothing falls to the lot of the
weak; moreover this woman is mine and that woman is of another, this
false notion comes to those whose brains are weak. When Târâ, is so much
attached to me and is not at all attached to Brihaspati, the above rule
applicable to me all the more; how then can I quit the lady so much
attached to me, according to the laws of Dharma and the morals? You can
see also, that happiness reigns in that family where the wife is
according to the will of the husband; how, then, can the household
happiness exist when the lady of the house is always dissatisfied?
Therefore the household happiness of the Guru is impossible as Târâ is
dissatified with Brihaspati since he enjoyed the wife of his younger
brother Samvarta. Then the result comes to this, O thousand eyed one!
How have you come to be thousand eyed! However that may be, you are the
lord of the Devas; you can do whatever you like. O messenger! go and
tell your lord of the Devas all that I have spoken; I will not return by
any means that beautiful Târâ.

 

When Chandra spoke thus, the messenger went back to Indra and
communicated to him all that Chandra Deva had spoken. Hearing this,
Indra became angry and ordered all the Deva forces to be ready at once.
Hearing this news of war, S'ukrâchârya, out of enmity to Brihaspati,
went to

 

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

 

Chandra and spoke thus :-- “O highly intelligent one! never return Târâ;
in case if war ensues between you and Indra, I will help you by my
Mantra-S'akti.” On the other hand, Bhagavân S'ankara, hearing of the
vicious act of Chandra's, taking his Guru's wife, and knowing that
S'ukrachârya was the enemy of Brihaspati, came to the assistance of the
Devas. The great war, then, ensued between the Devas like the terrific
war of Târakâsura; it continued for many years. Then the grandfather
Brahma, seeing the great havoc in the lives of the Devas and Asuras,
came there on his vâhan Hamsa, to secure peace and talked to Chandra :--
“Quit the Guru's wife; if not, I will call Vi<u>sn</u>u and destroy all
of you party.” He also desisted the son of Bhrigu, S'ukrâcharya,  saying
:-- “O highly intelligent one! why has this wicked idea possessed your
mind? Is it due to the bad association?” Then S'ukrâchârya also told
Chandra, the lord of the medicinal plants, not to wage war and said :--
“Better quit you now the Guru's wife. Your father Mahar<u>s</u>i Atri
has sent me to you for this purpose.” Chandra, then, hearing the strange
words of S'ukrâchârya, returned to Brihaspati his wife Târâ, though she
was not satisfied with him and became herself pregnant.

 

Brihaspati returned with joy to his house, accompanied by his wife; the
Devas and Dânavas went away to their respective places. Brahmâ went to
Brahmaloka and S'ankara went to Kailâs'a.

 

Brihaspati began to pass his time happily with his beautiful wife; Some
days went away when the wife of Brihaspati, Târâ, gave birth to an
all-auspicious son, having all the qualities of Chandra, on an
auspicious day and under the influence of an auspicious star; seeing
this new-born child, Brihaspati gladly performed the natal ceremonies of
the child. Hearing that a son is born to him, Chandra sent a messenger
to Brihaspati saying that “That the child is not his; but it is born out
of the semen of mine; why, then, have you performed the natal ceremonies
out of your own will?” Hearing these words of Chandra's messenger,
Brihaspati said :-- “No, this child is mine, no doubt, as he resembles
quite like me.” When Brihaspati said this, war again ensued. The Devas
and Dânavas met each other again in battle field; and councils of war
were held. Then, for the preservation of peace, Prajâpati Brahmâ went
there; and before all desisted the Devas; and Dânavas, mad for war, and
ready to fight against each other. Brahmâ, then, asked Târâ :-- “O
auspicious one! say truly whose child is this? O beautiful one! if you
say truly, then this war resulting in the loss of so many lives, will
cease.” The handsome Târâ, looking askance, lowered her head with shame
and gently spoke to Brahmâ :-- “This is the Chandra's child” and went
inside. Chandra Deva, then, became very glad and took the child, put
down its name as Budha and carried it, to his own house. Bhagavân

 

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

 

Brahmâ, Indra and the other Devas went back to their respective places.
All the spectators went also to their own places whence they came. O
Munis! I have now described the birth of Budha, as the son of Chandra
and in the womb of Brihaspati's wife, as I heard it from the mouth of
Vyâsa Deva, the son of Satyavatî.

 

Thus ends the eleventh chapter of the 1st Skandha on the birth of Budha
in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâs.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk01ch12.md)
