[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch09)  [Next](bk01ch11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On S’iva’s granting boons**

 

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

 

1-37. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O Sûta! You told before, that Vyâsa
Deva, unrivalled spirit, composed all the Purâ<u>n</u>as and taught them
to his own S’uka Deva; but how did Vyâsadeva, who was incessantly
engaged in tapasyâ,

 

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

 

procreate S’uka? Describe to us in detail what you heard direct from
Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyana Vyâsa”. Sûta said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>is! Hear how
S’uka Deva, the best of the Munis and the foremost of the Yogis, was
born of Vyâsa Deva, the Satyavati's son.

 

On the very beautiful summit of Mount Meru, Vyâsa, the son of Satyavati,
firmly determined, practised very severe austerities for the attainment
of a son. Having heard from Nârada, he, the great ascetic, repeated the
one syllabled mantra of Vâk and worshipped the Highest Mahâmayâ with the
object of getting a son. He asked, Let a son be born to me as pure and
as spirited and powerful as fire, air, earth, and Âkâs’a. He thought
over in his mind that the man possessed of S’akti is worshipped in this
world and the man devoid of S’akti is censured here, and thus came to
the conclusion that S’akti is therefore worshipped every where; and,
therefore,worshipped Bhagavân Mahes'vara coupled with the auspicious
Âdyâ S’akti and spent away one hundred years without any food. He began
his tapasyâ on that mountain summit which was ornamented with the garden
of Karnikâr, where all the Devas play, and where live the Munis highly
ascetic, the Âdityas, Vasus, Rudras, Marut, the two As'vîns, and the
other mindful Ri<u>s</u>is, the knowers of Brahmâ and where the Kinnaras
always resound the air with their songs of music, etc.; such a place
Vyâsa Deva preferred for his tapasyâ.”

 

The whole universe was pervaded with the spirit of asceticism of the
intelligent Parâsara's son Vyâsa Deva; and the hairs of his head were
clotted and looked tawny, of the colour of flames. Seeing the fire of
his asceticism, Indra, the lord of S’achi became exceedingly terrified.
Bhagavân Rudra, seeing Indra thus afraid, fatigued and morose, asked him
:-- “O Indra, why do you look so fear-stricken to-day? O Lord of the
Devas! What is the cause of your grief? Never show your jealousy and
anger to the ascetics; for the mindful ascetics always practise severe
asceticism with a noble object and worship Me, knowing Me to be
possessed of the all powerful S’akti; they never want ill of any body”.
When Bhagavân Rudra said this, Indra asked him :-- “What is his object?”
At this S’ankara said :-- For the attainment of a son, Prasâra's son is
practising so severe austerities; now one-hundred years is being
completed; I will go to him, and give him to-day the auspicious boon of
a son. Thus speaking to Indra, Bhagavân Rudra, the Guru of the world,
went to Vyâsa Deva and, with merciful eyes, said :-- “O sinless Vâsavi's
son! Get up; I grant to you the boon, that you will get a son very
fiery, luminous and spirited like the five elements fire, air, earth,
water and Âkâs'a, the supreme Jñânî, the store of all auspicious
qualities, of great renown, beloved to all, ornamented with all Sattvik
qualities, truthful and valorous.

 

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

 

Hearing these sweet words of Bhagavân S’ûlapâ<u>n</u>i Mahar<u>s</u>i
Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyana bowed down to Him and went back to his own
hermitage. Tired with the labour of penance for many years, he wanted to
kindle fire by rubbing two fuels (Ara<u>nî</u>) with each other. While
doing this the high souled man suddenly began to think strongly in his
mind about procreating a son. He thought :-- “Will it be that my son
will be born as this fire is produced by the friction of the two
churning sticks? I have not got the wife, which the Pundits designate a
“Putrârani”, the youthful wife endowed with beauty, born of a noble
family, the chaste one I have not got with me. But the wife, though
chaste and fit to beget a son, is undoubtedly a chain to both the legs
so how can I get such a one for my wife? This is known to all that a
chaste wife, though clever in doing all household duties, beautiful and
giving happiness to one's desires, is yet always a sort of bondage. What
more than this, that the ever Bhagavân Mahes'vara is always under the
bondage of woman. How, then, knowing and hearing all these I can accept
this difficult householder's life? While he was thinking thus, the
extraordinarily beautiful Apsarâ Ghritâchi fell to his sight close to
him in the celestial air.

 

Though Vyâsa Deva was a Brahmâchâri (holding in control the secret power
of generation) of a very high order, yet seeing suddenly the agile
Apsarâ (a celestial nymph) coming close to him and looking askance at
him, he became soon smitten with the arrows of cupid and feeling himself
distressed, began to think what shall I do in this critical moment.

 

Unbearable amorous feelings now have come over me; now if I take this
celestial nymph, knowing that Dharma is everywhere looking, and woman
has come to take away my precious fire of spirit acquired by my tapasyâ,
then I will be laughed at by the high souled ascetic Munis who will
think that I have lost my senses altogether. Alas! Why I who have
practised for one hundred years the most terrible ascetism, have become
so powerless by the mere sight of this Apsarâ! The Pundits declare the
household life as the source of getting son, one's heart’s desire and
the source of all happiness; so much so that it leads all the virtuous
souls to the pleasures of Heaven, and ordains Mok<u>s</u>a (liberation)
to those who are Jñânins; and if I get such unrivalled happiness from
this householder's life, I can have this Deva Kanyâ (the celestial
nymph) though blameable. But again that happiness will not occur to me
through her; there is no doubt in this. So how can I take her. I heard
from Nârada how, in ancient days, a king name Pururavâ fell under the
clutches of Urvas'î and ultimately felt great pain, being defeated by
her.

 

Thus ends the tenth chapter on S’iva's granting boon in the
Mahapurâ<u>n</u>a S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâs.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk01ch11.md)
