[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch02)  [Next](bk01ch04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

 

**Chapter III**

 

**On praising the Purâ<u>n</u>as and on each Vyâsa of every Dvâpara
Yuga**

 

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

 

1-11. Sûta said :-- “O best of the Munis! I am now telling you the names
of the Purâ<u>n</u>as, etc., exactly as 1 have heard from Veda Vyâsa,
the son of Satyavati; listen.

 

The Purâ<u>n</u>a beginning with "ma" are two in number; those beginning
with “bha” are two; those beginning with “bra" are three; those
beginning with "va” are four; those beginning respectively with “A”,
“na”, “pa”, “Ling”, “ga”, “kû” and “Ska” are one each and “ma” means
Matsya Purâna, Mârkandeya Purâna; “Bha” signifies Bhavi<u>s</u>ya,
Bhâgavat Purâ<u>n</u>as; “Bra” signifies Brahmâ, Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a and
Brahmâvaivarta Purâ<u>n</u>as; “va” signifies Vâman, Vayu, Vi<u>sn</u>u
and Varaha Purâ<u>n</u>as; “A” signifies Agni Purâ<u>n</u>a; “Na”
signifies Narada Purâna; “Pa” signifies Padma Purâna; “Ling” signifies
Linga Purânam; “Ga” signifies Govinda Purâ<u>n</u>am; Kû signifies Kurma
Purâna and “Ska” signifies Skanda Purânam. These are the eighteen
Purâ<u>n</u>as. O Saunaka! In the Matsya Purâ<u>n</u>a there are
fourteen thousand slokas; in the wonderfully varied Markandeya Purânam
there are nine thousand slokas. In the Bhavisya Purâ<u>n</u>a fourteen
thousand and five hundred slokas are counted by the Munis, the seers of
truth. In the holy Bhâgavata there are eighteen thousand S’lokas; in the
Brahmâ Purâ<u>n</u>a there are Ajuta (ten thousand) S’lokas. In the
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a Purâ<u>n</u>a there are twelve thousand one hundred
S’lokas; in the Brahmâ Vaivarta Purâ<u>n</u>am there are eighteen
thousand S’lokas. In the Vaman Purâ<u>n</u>a there are Ajuta (ten
thousand) S’lokas; in the Vayu Purâ<u>n</u>am there are twenty-four
thousand and six hundred S’lokas; in the greatly wonderful Vi<u>sn</u>u
Purâna there are twenty-three thousand S’lokas; in the Agni
Purâ<u>n</u>am there are sixteen thousand S’lokas; in the Brihat Narada
Purâ<u>n</u>am, there are twenty-five thousand S’lokas, in the big Padma
Purâ<u>n</u>a there are fifty-five thousand s'lokas; in the voluminous
Linga Purâ<u>n</u>a eleven thousand s’lokas exist; in the Garu<u>d</u>a
Purâ<u>n</u>am spoken by Hari nineteen thousand s'lokas exist; iu the
Kurma Purâ<u>n</u>a, seventeen thousand s'lokas exist and in the greatly
wonderful Skanda Purâ<u>n</u>a there are eighty-one thousand s'lokas, O
sinless Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus I have described

 

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

 

to you the names of all the Purâ<u>n</u>as and the number of verses
contained in them. Now hear about the Upa Purâ<u>n</u>as.

 

12-17. The first is the Upapurâ<u>n</u>a narrated by Sanat Kumâra; next
comes Narasimha Purâ<u>n</u>a; then Naradiya Purâ<u>n</u>a, S’iva
Purâ<u>n</u>a, Purâ<u>n</u>a narrated by Durvasa, Kapila Purâ<u>n</u>a,
Manava Purâ<u>n</u>a, Aus’anasa Purâ<u>n</u>a, Varu<u>n</u>a
Purâ<u>n</u>a. Kalika Purâ<u>n</u>a, Samva Purâ<u>n</u>a, Nandi Kes’wara
Purâ<u>n</u>a, Saura Purâ<u>n</u>a, Purâ<u>n</u>a spoken by Parâs’ara,
Âditya Purâ<u>n</u>a, Mahesvara Purâ<u>n</u>a, Bhâgavata and
Vasi<u>st</u>ha Purâ<u>n</u>a. These Upa Purâ<u>n</u>as are described by
the Mahatmas.

 

After compiling the eighteen Purâ<u>n</u>as, Veda Vyâsa, the son of
Satyavati composed Mahabharata, that has no rival, out of these
Purâ<u>n</u>as.

 

18-24. At every Manvantara, in each Dvâpara Yuga, Veda Vyâsa expounds
the Purâ<u>n</u>as duly to preserve the religion. Veda Vyâsa is no other
person than Vi<u>sn</u>u Himself; He, in the form of Veda Vyâsa, divides
the (one) Veda into four parts, in every Dvâpara Yuga, for the good of
the world. The Brahmâ<u>n</u>as of the Kali age are shortlived and their
intellect (Buddhi) is not sharp; they cannot realise the meaning after
studying the Vedas; knowing this in every Dvâpara Yuga Bhagavân expounds
the holy Purâ<u>n</u>a Samhitas. The more so because women, S’udras, and
the lower Dvijas are not entitled to hear the Vedas; for their good, the
Purâ<u>n</u>as have been composed. Tne present auspicious Manvantara is
Vaivasvata; it is the seventh in due order; and the son of Satyavati,
the best of the knowers of Dharma, is the Veda Vyâsa of the 28th Dvâpara
Yuga of this seventh Manvantara. He is my Guru; in the next Dvâpara,
Yuga Asvatthama, the son of Drona will be the Veda Vyâsa. Twenty-seven
Veda Vyâsas had expired and they duly compiled each their own Purâna
Samhitas in their own Dvâpara Yugas.

 

25-35. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O highly fortunate Sûta! kindly
describe to us the names of the previous Veda Vyâsas, the reciters of
the Purâ<u>n</u>as in the Dvâpara Yugas.

 

Sûta said :-- In the first Dvâpara, Brahmâ Himself divided the Vedas; in
the second Dvâpara, the first Prajapati Vyâsa did the same; so S’akra,
in the third, Brihaspati, in the fourth, Surya in the fifth; Yama, in
the sixth, Indra, in the seventh, Vasi<u>st</u>ha, in the eighth;
Sarasvata Ri<u>s</u>i in the ninth, Tridhama, in the tenth;
Trivri<u>s</u>a, in the eleventh, Bharadvâja, in the twelfth; Antariksa,
in the thirteenth; Dharma, in the fourteenth; Evaruni in the fifteenth;
Dhananjaya, in the sixteenth; Medhatithi in tba seventeenth; Vrati, in
the eighteenth; Atri, in the nineteenth; Gautama in the twentieth,
Uttama, whose soul was fixed on Hari, in the twenty-first, Vâjasravâ
Vena, in the twenty second; his family descendant Soma

 

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

 

iu the twenty-third; Trinavi<u>n</u>du, in the twenty-fourth; Bhârgava,
in the twenty-fifth; Sakti, in the twenty-sixth, Jâtûkar<u>n</u>ya in
the twenty-seventh and Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyana became the twenty-eighth
Veda Vyâs in the Dvâpara Yugas. Thus I have spoken of the 28 Veda
Vyâsas, as I heard. 1 have heard the holy S’rimad Bhâgavat from the
month of Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipayana. This removes all troubles, yields all
desires, and gives Moksa and is full of the meanings of the Vedas. This
treatise contains the essence of all the S’astras and is dear always to
the Mamuksas (those who want Moksa or liberation).

 

36-43. O best Munis! Thus, compiling the Purâ<u>n</u>as Veda Vyâsa
thought this Purâ<u>n</u>a to be the best; so (without teaching it to
other persons) he settled that his own son the high-sould S’uka Deva
born of the dry woods used for kindling fire (excited by attrition),
having no passion for the worldly things, would be the fit student to be
taught this Purâ<u>n</u>a and therefore taught him; at that time I was a
fellow student along with S’aka Deva and I heard every thing from the
mouth of Vyâsa Deva and realised th« secret meanings thereof. This has
happened through the grace of the merciful Guru Veda Vyâsa.

 

Here ends the Third Chapter of S’rimad Devi Bhâgavatam on praising the
Purâ<u>n</u>as and on each Vyâsa of every Dvâpara Yuga.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](bk01ch04)
