[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch07)  [Next](bk01ch09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIRST BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On deciding who is to be worshipped**

 

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

 

1-7. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O highly fortunate one! A great doubt
has arisen on your statement. This is ascertained by all the wise men as
written in the Vedas, Purânas and other Sâstras that Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'var, these three Devas are eternal. None is
superior to them in this Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a. Brahmâ creates all the
beings, Vi<u>sn</u>u preserves and Mahes'var destroys all in due time.
These are the causes of creation, preservation and destruction. The
Trinity Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'a are really one form, indeed,
Trinity in Unity and Unity in Trinity.

 

Being endowed respectively with Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gu<u>n</u>as they
do their respective works. Amongst these, again, Purushottam Âdideva
Jagannâth Hari, the husband of Kamalâ is the best; for he is capable of
doing all the actions; no other than the Vi<u>sn</u>u, of unrivalled
prowess is so capable. How is it, then that Yogamâyâ has overpowered
Hari with sleep and made him altogether senseless? O highly fortunate
one! whither did, then, go that extraordinary self knowledge and power,
etc., of Hari while alive? This is our greatest doubt; so kindly advise
us that our this doubt be removed and our well-being be thus ensured.

 

8-30. What is that S’aktî? Which you mentioned to us before; as well by
whom Vi<u>sn</u>u is conquered? Whence is She born? What is the power of
that S’aktî and what is Her nature? O Suvrata! explain to us these
fully.

 

How was it that Yogamâyâ overpowered with sleep the Highest Deity
Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u who is everlasting-intelligence bliss! who is the
God of all, the Guru of the whole world, the Creator, Preserver and
Destroyer, who is omni-present, an incarnate of purity and holiness and
beyond Rajogu<u>n</u>a; how was such a personage brought under the
control of sleep? O Sûta! You are very intelligent and the pupil of
Vyasa Deva; destroy our this doubt by the sword of wisdom.

 

Hearing this, Sûta said :--“O highly fortunate Munis! There is none in
the three Lokas who can clear your this doubt; the mind-born sons of
Brahmâ, Nârada, Kapila and other eternal sons get bewildered by these
questions; what can I, then, say on this very difficult point! See, some
persons call Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u omnipresent, the preserver of all and
the best of all the Devas; according to them all this universe moving
and non-moving, is created by Vi<u>sn</u>u; they bow down before

 

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

 

the Highest Nârâyan Hrisikes'a Janârdana Vâsudeva and worship Him,
whereas others worship Mahâdeva S’ankara, having Gauri for the other
half of his body, endowed with all powers, residing in Kailâs'a,
surrounded by hosts of bhutas, that destroyed the Daksha's sacrifice,
who is mentioned in the Vedas as S’as'is'ekhara (having moon on his
forehead), with three eyes and five faces and holding trident in his
hand and known as Vri<u>s</u>adhaja and Kaparddi. O highly intelligent
ones! There are some other persons, that know the Vedas and worship the
Sun everyday in the morning, mid-day and in the evening with various
hymns.

 

In all the Vedas, it is stated that the worship of the sun is excellent
and they have named the high-souled sun as Paramâtmâ (the Highest
Deity). Whereas there are other Vedavits (the knowers of the Vedas) who
worship the Devas, Fire, Indra, and Varu<u>n</u>a. But the
Mahar<u>s</u>is say, that as Gangâ Devi (the river Ganges), though one,
is expressing Herself by many channels, so the one Vi<u>sn</u>u is
expressing in all the Deva forms. Those who are big Pundits, declare
perception, inference, and verbal testimony as the three modes of
proofs. The Naiyâyik Pundits add to the above three, a fourth proof
which they call upamâ, resemblance, similitude and some other
intelligent Pundits add another fifth proof called Arthâpatti, an.
inference from circumstances, presumption, implication. It is deduction
of a matter from that which could not else be; it is assumption of a
thing, not itself perceived but necessarily implied by another which is
seen, heard or proved; whereas the authors of the Purâ<u>n</u>as add two
other, called Sâksî and Aitijhya, thus advocating. seven modes of
proofs. Now the Vedânta S’âstra says that the supreme being (Param
Brahmâ), the Prime cause of the Universe, cannot be comprehended by the
above-mentioned seven proofs. Therefore, first of all, adopt the reason
leading to sure belief, the Buddhi, according to the words of the Vedas
and discriminate and discuss again and again and draw your inference
about Brahmâ. And the intelligent person should adopt what is seen by
perception as self-evident and what is inferred by the observance of
good conduct. The wise persons say, and it is also stated in the
Purâ<u>n</u>as, that the Prime Force is present in Brahmâ as the
Creative Force; is present in Hari as the Preservative Force; is present
in Hara as the Destructive Force; is present in Kurma (tortoise) and in
Ananta (the thousand headed Snake) as the earth supporting Force; is
present in fire as the Burning Force, is present in air as the moving
Force, and so is present everywhere in various manifestations of forces.

 

31-51. In this whole Universe, whoever he may be, all are incapable of
any action if he be deprived of his force; what more than this, if S’iva
be deprived of Kula Kundalinî S’aktî, He becomes a lifeless corpse; O
great

 

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

 

ascetic Ri<u>s</u>is! She is present everywere thus in every thing in
this universe from the highest Brahmâ to the lowermost blade of grass,
all moving and non-moving things. Verily everything becomes quite inert,
if deprived of force; whether in conquering one's enemies, or in going
from one place to another or in eating -- one finds oneself quite
incapable, if deprived of force. Thus the omnipresent S’aktî, the wise
call by the name of Brahmâ. Those who are verily intelligent should
always worship Her in various ways and determine thoroughly the reality
of Her by every means. In Vi<u>sn</u>u there is the Sattviki S’aktî;
then He can preserve; otherwise He is quite useless; so in Brahmâ there
is Rajasi S’aktî and He creates; otherwise He is quite useless; in
S’iva, there is Tamasi S’aktî and He destroys; else He is quite useless.
Thus, arguing again and again in one's mind, everyone should come to
know that the Highest Âdya S’aktî by Her mere will creates and preserves
this Universe and She it is who destroys again in time the whole
Brahmânda, moving and non-moving; no one is capable to do his respective
work be he Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'var, Indra, Fire, Sun,
Varu<u>n</u>a or any other person whatsoever; verily all the Devas
perform the respective actions by the use of this Âdya S’aktî. That She
alone is present in cause and effect and is doing every action, an be
witnessed vividly. The intelligent ones call that S’aktî twofold; one is
Sagu<u>n</u>â and the other is Nirgunâ. The people, attached to the
senses and the objects, worship the Sagu<u>n</u>â aspect, and those who
are not so attached worship the Nirguna aspect. That conscious S’aktî is
the Lady of the fourfold aims of life, religion, wealth, desires, and
liberation. When She is worshipped according to due rules, She awards
all sorts of desires. The worldly persons, charmed by the Mâyâ of this
world, do not know Her at all; some persons know a little and charm
others; whereas some stupid and dull-deaded Pundits, impelled by Kali,
start sects of heretics, Pâ<u>s</u>a<u>nd</u>as for the sustenance of
their own bellies. O highly fortunate Munis! In no other Yugas were
found acts as prevalent in this Kali Yuga, based on various different
opinions and altogether beyond the pale of the Vedic injunctions. Behold
again, if Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a be the supreme Deities, then
why do these three Devas meditate on another One beyond speech, beyond
mind and practise, for years, hard austerities; and why do they perform
Yajñas (sacrifices) for their success in creation, preservation, and
destruction? They know, verily, the Highest Supreme Being, Brahmâni Devî
S’aktî eternal, constant and therefore they meditate Her always in their
minds. Therefore the wise man, knowing this firmly, should serve in
every way the Highest S’aktî. O Munis! This is the settled conclusion of
all the Sâstras. I have heard of this great hidden secret from Bhagavân
Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyan. He heard it from Nârada, and Nârada heard it
from

 

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

 

his own father Brahmâ. Brahmâ heard this from Vi<u>sn</u>u. O Munis it
is well that the wise even should not hear or think anything to the
contrary from other sources; they should with their concentrated heart
serve the Brahmâ Sanâtanî S’aktî. It is clearly witnessed in this world
that if there be any substance wherein this conscious S’aktî does not
exist, that becomes inert, quite useless for any purpose. So know this
fully that it is the Highest Divine Mother of the Universe that is
playing here, residing in every being.

 

Thus ends the eighth chapter of the first Skandha on deciding who is to
be worshipped in the Mahapurâ<u>n</u>a Sri Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Vedavyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk01ch09)
