[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk02ch03)  [Next](bk02ch05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

** **

**On the birth of the Vasus**

 

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

 

1-8. Sûta said :-- On the king Pratîpa, ascending to the Heavens, the
truly hero-king S’antanu went out a hunting tigers and other forest
animals. Once, while he was roaming in a wild wilderness, on the banks
of the Ganges, he saw a fawn-eyed well decorated beautiful woman. No
sooner the king S’antanu saw her than he became addicted to her and
thought within himself thus :-- “Certainly my father spoke of this
beautiful faced woman who is looking like a second Lak<u>s</u>mî,
endowed with beauty and youth.” The king could not rest satisfied simply
with seeing the lotus-like face. The hairs on his body stood on their
ends and his heart was very much attracted to her. Gangâ Devî, too, knew
him to be the king Mahâbhisa and became, in her turn, very much attached
to him. She then went smiling towards the king. Seeing the blue-coloured
lady looking askance at him, the king became very happy and consoled her
in sweet words and said :-- “O, one of beautiful thighs! Are you Devî;
Mânusî (human kind) Gandharvî; Yakshî, the daughter of Nâgas (serpents),
or a celestial nymph? Whoever you may be, O beautiful one! be my wife;
your sweet smiles, it seems, are brimful of love; so be my legal wife
to-day.”

 

9-26. Sûta said :-- The king S’antanu could not recognise the lady to be
Gangâ; but Gangâ knew that he is the king Mahâbhisa and is born as
S’antanu. Hearing the above words of the king, Gangâ, out of her
previous affections, spoke out to the king, smiling :-- “O king! I know
that you are the son of the king Pratîpa. Behold! Though it is
inevitable that woman will get their husbands, yet who is that beautiful
lady that does not husband according to her liking and qualifications?
But I can take you as my husband, if you make a certain promise to me.
Hear my resolve afterwards I will marry you. O king! Whatever I will do,
be it good or bad, auspicious or inauspicious, you must not hinder or
interrupt me

 

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

 

nor ever say that is not to your liking and satisfaction. Whenever you
will break this my resolve, I will instantly quit you and go to another
place wherever I like. The king S’antanu, then, said :-- “Well! That
will be” and promised to the above effect; then Gangâ Devî recollected
within herself Vasus' words and thought of the attachment of the king
Mahâbhisa and accepted S’antanu as her husband. Thus married to the king
S’antanu, the beautiful Gangâ in human form went to his abode. The king,
on having got possession of her, began to enjoy in pleasant gardens. The
lady, too, appreciated his mental feelings and began to serve him to his
satisfaction. Thus many years elapsed in lovely enjoyments and
intercourses between the couple who looked like Indra and his pair
Sachî; and they did not feel at all how the time passed. The lady
endowed with all qualities and the clever king, well-versed in the art
of loving, began to enjoy incessantly like Laksmî and Nârâyana, in their
divine palace.

 

Thus many years passed when the lovely eyed lady became pregnant of the
king S’antanu's sperm and, in due time, gave birth to a son who was a
Vasu. No sooner the son was born than Gangâ Devî threw it in the waters
of the Ganges. Thus the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh
sons were threwn successively on the waters. Then the king became very
anxious and thought within himself :-- “What am I to do now? How my
family be preserved? This my wife, incarnate of sin, has killed my seven
sons; if I now desist her, she will instantly leave me and go away. Now
this is the eighth pregnancy as desired by me. Now if I do not interrupt
her, she will certainly throw my son in the Ganges. Whether a son will
be born again or not is doubtful; and even if that be born, it is
doubtful whether she will preserve that child; now what am I to do in
this doubtful point? However I will try my best to continue the thread
of my family line.”

 

27-46. Now, in due time, the Vasu who, having been influenced by his
wife had stolen Vas’istha's cow Nandini, became born as the eighth son
of Gangâ Devî; the king S’antanu, seeing this son fell unto Gangâ's feet
and said :-- “O thin-bodied woman! I pray to you to give my life to-day;
better nourish this my one son. O beautiful one! You killed in
succession my seven exceedingly beautiful sons. O one of beautiful hips!
I now fall at your feet. O beautiful one! save the life of this child of
mine. If you ask from me any other thing to day, even that be very rare,
I will give it to you; but you better now keep the thread of my family
line. The Pundits, versed in the Vedas, say that he who has no issues
cannot go to Heaven; so, O Beautiful one! To-day I pray to you to keep
the life of this my eighth son.” Though thus spoken by S’antanu,

 

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

 

Gangâ Devî was eager to take away the son to throw in the waters; the
king became very sorrowful and angrily spoke out “O vile and vicious
woman! What are you going to do? Do you not fear hell! of what villain
are you the daughter, that you are always doing this vicious deed? O
Sinner! go away wherever you will or remain here as yon like, it matters
little; but my son will remain here. When you attempt to bring my family
to extinction, what use is there in living with you?” When the king thus
spoke to the woman who was ready to take away the son she angrily spoke
as follows :-- O King! When you have acted against my promise, my word
is broken and my connection with you has stopped from to-day. Therefore
I will take this son to the forest, where I will nourish him. I am
Gangâ; to fulfil God's work I have come here. The high-souled
Vas'i<u>st</u>ha cursed before the eight Vasus :-- “Better be born as
men”; they became very anxious; and seeing me they prayed :-- “O Sinless
one! let you be mother of us all.” O best of kings! I granted them what
they desired; and then for the purpose of serving god's ends, I became
your wife. Know this my history. The seven Vasus already were born and
were freed; now this is the last Vasu and he will remain here for
sometime as your son. O S’antanu! now take this son offered by Gangâ.
Know this to be the Deva Vasu and enjoy the pleasure of having a son. O
highly fortunate one! This son will be famous by the name of Gângeya
(Gangâ's son) and will be the most powerful of all. O King! To-day I
will take this son to the place where I chose you as my husband; I will
nourish him and when he attains his youth, I will return him to you.
For, this son, if deprived of mother, will not be happy nor will he
live.” Thus saying, Gangâ vanished with the son; the King S’antanu
became very sorrowful and passed away his time in his palace. The king
thought always of the separation from his wife and son and thus
painfully governed his kingdom.

 

47-69. Thus some time passed on, when, once on an occasion, the king
S’antanu went out a hunting and killed, with arrows, buffaloes, boar,
and other wild animals and came to the banks of the Ganges. Here he saw
with great wonder that a boy was playing with a great bow and was
shooting arrows after arrows. The king's attention was more attracted
towards the boy, but whether that boy was his or not, did not at all
come to his mind. Looking at his extraordinary feats, his agility in
shooting arrows with ease and quickness, his learning that can have no
equal and his beautiful form, as if of Cupid, he became greatly
surprised and asked him :-- “O Sinless one! whose son are you?” The hero
boy did not reply anything but went away shooting his arrows. The king
thought within himself “Who is this boy? Whose son is he? What to do
now? To whom

 

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

 

shall I go now?” Thus pondering, he recollected within himself and began
to recite verses in praise of Gangâ; Gangâ, assuming her beautiful form
as before, became visible to the king. Seeing her, the king said :-- “O
Gangâ! Who is this boy that has just gone? Will you show him once more
to me now?” Hearing these words of S’antanu, Gangâ said :-- “O king of
kings! He is your son, he is that eighth Vasu. So long I have nourished
him and now I hand him over to you. O Suvrata! This is the great ascetic
Gângeya. He is the illustrious scion of your family. The glory of your
line will be enhanced. I have taught him the whole science of archery.
This pure son of yours dwelt in the hermitage of Vas'i<u>st</u>ha and
has become versed in all the Vidyâs and skilled in all the actions. Your
this son knows everything that Jamadgni Paras'urâm knew. So, O king of
kings! Take now your son and be happy. Thus saying, Gangâ gave him his
son and vanished; the king also became very glad and embraced his son;
he smelled his head and took him to his chariot and drove towards his
own city. On returning to Hastinâpur, the king held a great festival
(utsab) in honor of the arrival of his son; he called all his
astrologers and enquired what day was auspicious. He then called all his
subjects and ministers and installed Gângeya as the Crown Prince. The
religious S’antanu became very happy on making Gângeya, the Crown
Prince; he forgot the pains due to Gangâ's bereavement. Sûta said :--
“Thus I have described to you the cause of the curse on Vasus, the birth
of Bhîsma from the womb of Gangâ, the union of Gangâ and S’antanu, etc.,
He who hears in this world this holy story of Gangâ's birth and the
birth of the Vasu, is freed of all sins and gets mukti. O Munis! I have
described these meritorious holy accounts, as I heard from the mouth of
Vyâsa. Any body who hears this holy S’rîmad Bhâgavatam, endowed with
five characteristics and filled with various anecdotes, that came out of
the mouth of Vyâsa, finds all his sins destroyed and attains peace and
blessedness. O Munis! Thus has been described completely to you this
holy history.

 

Thus ends the fourth Chapter on the birth of the Vasus in the Mahâpurâna
S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk02ch05.md)
