[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk01ch20)  [Next](bk02ch02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On the birth of Matsyagandhâ**

 

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

** **

1-5. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O Sûta! Your words sound wonderful to us
indeed! but you have not as yet definitely spoken to us the original
events in detail; so a great doubt has arisen in our minds. We know that
the king S’antanu married Vyâsa's mother, Satyavatî. Now say, in detail
in how Vyâsa became her son? How such a chaste woman Satyavatî,
remaining in her own house, came to be married again by S’antanu? and
how the two sons came to be born of S’antanu's sperm and Satyavatî's'
ovum? Now O highly fortunate Suvrata? Kindly describe in detail this
highly sanctifying historical fact. These Ri<u>s</u>is, who are
observing vows, are desirous to hear of the birth of Veda Vyâsa and
Satyavatî.”

 

6-23. Sûta said :-- I bow down with devotion to the Highest Primordial
Force, the bestower of the four fold aims of existence of human life,
who grants to all, their desires when so prayed by the help of the
Vâgbhava Vîjamantra with their heart and soul, for the success of all
their desires. The above vîja is so potent in its effect that even
pronounced very lightly, even under a pretext, it grants all siddhis. So
the Devî should be remembered by all means; and now saluting Her, I
begin my narration of the auspicious Purâ<u>n</u>ic events. In days gone
by there reigned a king, named Uparichara; he ruled over the Chedi
country and respected the Brâhmins; he was truthful and very religious.
Indra, the lord of the Devas, became very pleased by his asceticism and
presented him an auspicious celestial car (going in the air) made of
pearls, and crystals, helping him in doing what he liked best. Mounting
on that divine chariot, that religious king used to go everywhere; he
never remained on earth; he used to remain always in the atmosphere and
therefore be had his name as “Uparichara Vasu” (moving in the upper
regions). He had a very beautiful wife, named Girikâ; and five powerful
sons, of indomitable vigour, were born to him.

 

The king give separate kingdoms to each of his sons and made them kings.
Once on an occasion, Girikâ, the wife of the Uparichara Vasu, after her
bath after the menstruation and becoming pure came to the

 

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

 

king and informed him of her desire to get a son; but that very day his
Pitris (ancestors) requested him also to kill deer, etc., for their
Srâddha (solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of deceased
ancestors). Hearing the Pitris, the king of Chedi became somewhat
anxious for his menstruous wife; but thinking his Pitris words more
powerful and more worthy to be obeyed, went out on an hunting expedition
to kill deer and other animals, with the thought of his wife Girikâ in
his breast. Then while he was in the forest, he remembered his Girikâ,
who was equal in her beauty and loveliness to Kamalâ, and the emission
of semen virile took place. He kept this semen on the leaf of a banyan
tree and thought “How the above semen be not futile; my semen cannot
remain unfruitful; my wife has just now passed her menstruous condition;
I will send this semen to my dear wife.” Thus thinking the time ripe, he
closed the semen under the leaves of the banyan tree and charging it
with the mantra power (some power) addressed a falcon close by thus :--
“O highly fortunate one! Take this my semen virile and go to my palace.
O Beautiful one! Do this my work: take this semen virile and go quick to
my palace and hand it over to my wife Girikâ for to-day is her
menstruation period.”

 

24\. Sûta said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus saying, the king gave that leaf
with the virile therein to the falcon, who is capable of going quick in
the air, took it and immediately rose high up in the air.

 

25-26. Another falcon, seeing this one flying in the air with leaf in
his beak, considered it to be some piece of flesh and fell upon him.
Immediately a gallant fighting ensued between the two birds with their
beaks.

 

27\. While the fighting was going on, that leaf with semen virile fell
down from their beaks on the waters of the Jumnâ river. Then the two
faIcons flew away as they liked.

 

28-39. O Ri<u>s</u>is! While the two falcons were fighting with each
other, one Apsarâ (celestial nymph) named Adrikâ came to a Brâhmin, who
was performing his Sandhyâ Bandanam on the banks of the Jumnâ. That
beautiful woman began to bathe in the waters and took a plunge for
playing sports and caught hold of the feet of the Brâhma<u>n</u>a. The
Dvija, engaged in Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma (deep breathing exercise), saw that
the woman had amorous intentions, and cursed her, saying :-- “As you
have interrupted me in my meditation, so be a fish.”

 

Adrikâ, one of the best Apsarâs, thus cursed, assumed the form of a fish
Safari and spent her days in the Jumnâ waters. When the semen virile of
Uparichara Vasu fell from the beak of the falcon, that fish Adrikâ came

 

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

 

quickly and ate that and became pregnant. When ten months passed, a
fisherman came there and caught in a net that fish Adrikâ. When the
fish's belly was torn asunder, two human beings instantly came out the
the womb. One was a lovely boy and the other a beautiful girl. The
fisherman was greatly astonished to see this. He went and informed the
king of that place who was Uparichara Vasu that the boy and the girl
were born of the womb of a fish. The king also was greatly surprised and
accepted the boy who seemed auspicious. This Vasu's son was highly
energetic and powerful, truthful and religious like his father and
became famous by the name of the king Matsyarâj. Uparichara Vasu gave
away the girl to the fisherman. This girl was named Kâli and she became
famous by the name of Matsyodarî. The smell of the fish came out of her
body and she was named also Matsyagandhâ. Thus the auspicious Vasu's
daughter remained and grew in that fisherman's house.

 

The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- The beautiful Apsarâ, cursed by the Muni,
turned into fish; she was afterwards cut asunder and eaten up by the
fisherman. Very well! What happened afterwards to that Apsarâ? How was
she freed of that curse? and how did she go back to the Heavens?

 

Thus questioned by the Ri<u>s</u>is, Sûta spoke as follows :-- When the
Apsarâ was first cursed by the Muni, she was greatly astonished; she
began to weep and cry like one greatly distressed and afterwards began
to praise him. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>, seeing her weeping, took pity on her
and said :-- “O good one! Don't weep; I am telling you how your curse
will expire. As an effect of having incurred my wrath, you will be born
as a fish and when you will give birth to two human children, you will
be freed of your curse.”

 

The Brâhmin having spoken thus, Adrikâ got a fish-body in the waters of
the Jumnâ. Afterwards she gave birth to two human children and became
freed of the curse when she, quitting the fish form assumed the divine
form and went up to the Heavens. O Ri<u>s</u>is! The beautiful girl
Matsyagandhâ thus took her birth and was nourished in the fisherman's
house and grew up there. When the extraordinarily lovely girl of Vasu,
Matsyagandhâ attained her youth, she continued to do all the household
duties of the fisherman and remained there.

 

Thus ends the first chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth of
Matsyagandhâ in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk02ch02.md)
