[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk02ch09)  [Next](bk02ch11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On the death of king Parîk<u>s</u>it**

** **

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

 

1-3. Sûta said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>is! On that very day when the
Brâhmi<u>n</u> Kas'yapa went out of his house, Tak<u>s</u>ak, knowing
the king Parîk<u>s</u>it cursed, assumed an aged Brâhmi<u>n</u>'s form
and went out of his abode.

 

 

The serpent Tak<u>s</u>ak met the Brâhmi<u>n</u> Kas'yapa on the way.
Seeing the Brâhma<u>n</u>a, versed in the Mantras, Tak<u>s</u>ak asked
him “Where are you going so in haste, and what for are you taking this
trouble?”

 

4-17. Thus questioned, Kas'yapa replied :-- I heard that the serpent
Tak<u>s</u>ak will bite the king Parîk<u>s</u>it; therefore I am going
in haste to the king Parîk<u>s</u>it to cure him of the serpent's
poison. I know the mantra (mystic verse) that can destroy the effect of
poison. If his life-period is not exhausted, I will certainly give him
back his life. Tak<u>s</u>ak then. Said :-- “O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! I am
that Tak<u>s</u>ak; I will bite him and take away his life. So you
better desist. Will you be able to treat him whom I bite; certainly you
will not.” Kas'yapa said :-- “O chief of snakes! When you will bite the
king who has been cursed by the Brâhma<u>n</u>, I will no doubt make him
alive by the power of my mantra.” Tak<u>s</u>ak said :-- “O chief of
Brâhma<u>n</u>as! If you have so thought that you will make the king
alive after I bite him, then shew me your strength before hand. O
sinless one! I will bite this Nyagrodha tree (the Indian fig-tree); just
now make it alive.”

 

Kas'yapa said :-- “Certainly I will make this tree alive, that will be
burnt away by the venom of your teeth.” Sûta said :-- “The snake
Tak<u>s</u>ak then bit the tree, which was reduced to ashes; and asked
Kas'yapa to bring back that tree to life.” Seeing the tree reduced to
ashes by the fire of venom of the snake, he collected all the ashes and
said :-- “O highly venomous serpent. See to-day the power of my mantra.
Behold! While you are witnessing, I will enliven this tree. Thus the
great mantra-knower Kas'yapa took water in his hand, and impregnating it
with his mantra power, sprinkled the water on the ashes. Immediately, on
the sprinkling of the mantra saturated water, the Nyagrodha tree got
back its life as before. Tak<u>s</u>ak became greatly astonished to see
the tree enlivened again and said to Kas'yapa :-- “O chief of
Brâhma<u>n</u>s! What is your object in taking so much pains? Speak out
what you want and I will fulfil your desires.” Kas'yapa said :-- “O
chief of serpents! Knowing the king cursed, I am going to do good to him
by my knowledge and to get in return abundant wealth.” Hearing this,
Tak<u>s</u>ak said :-- “I will give you the amount of wealth that you
desire; take that and go back to your house, and let my desire be also
fulfilled.”

 

18-26. Kas'yapa, the knower of the highest state, heard Tak<u>s</u>aka's
words and pondered in his mind again and again. “What is to be done now?
If I take this wealth and go back to my house, my name and fame will not
be known in this world, simply for my greed; but if the king be made
alive again, my undying fame, abundant wealth, and greater

 

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

 

Pu<u>n</u>yam will accrue to me. Again fie to that wealth with which
there is no fame; so one must try one's best to preserve one's fame. The
king Raghu, in ancient days, gave away everything of his to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as for fame; the king Hari<u>s</u>chandra and Kar<u>n</u>a
did not hesitate a bit to give away endless property. There is one point
again to take into account, how can I trifle away the matter, seeing the
king burnt up by the venomous fire?

 

If I can bring back the king's life, everyone will become happy. If the
kingdom be without its king, the subjects will, no doubt, be ruined. So,
following the king's death, sin will also incur on me due to the ruin of
the subjects; and infamy will come on my head that I am a very greedy
man.” Thus meditating in his mind, the highly intelligent Kas'yapa began
to meditate, and plunged himself in Dhyân; he thereby came to know that
the king's life period was spent up. Thus knowing the king's death
imminent, the virtuous Kas'yapa took the desired wealth from
Tak<u>s</u>ak and returned home.

 

27-48. Thus making Kas'yapa to retire to his house on the seventh day
Tak<u>s</u>ak went on to Hastinâpur to bring death and destruction on to
Parîksit. When he went close to the city, he heard that the king
Parîksit was staying on the upper story of the palace; and the palace
had been preserved by various gems, mantras, herbs and plant.
Tak<u>s</u>ak became very anxious; and fearing, lest the curse of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, will fall on his head, became very much agitated and
thought. “How shall I now enter the palace? How can I cheat this stupid
hypocrite vicious king, cursed by the Brâhma<u>n</u>a, who causes
troubles to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Not a single man has taken birth in
the Pa<u>nd</u>ava family ever since that he coiled a dead serpent round
the neck of an ascetic Brâhmi<u>n</u>. The king has committed a very
heinous crime and knowing the course of time to be in fallible, has
placed sentries on all sides of the palace and has ascended to the
top-most story of the building, thinking thereby to deceive Death and is
staying in a peaceful mind. How can then he be smitten, in accordance
with the Brâhma<u>n</u>a's word? The king, of dull intellect, knows not
that death cannot be prevented; for that reason he has placed guards and
sentinels round the building, and himself has got up the house and is
happily whiling away his time; but he is quite ignorant that when Fate
who can never be violated, ordains the death, how can it be prevented
though thousands of attempts are made to thwart it? This scion  of
Pa<u>n</u>du family knows that his death is at hand and yet wants to
live and therefore is staying in his own place with a tranquil mind. The
king ought now to make charities and other meritorious works; it is only
by acts of Dharma that disease is destroyed and life is prolonged.

 

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

 

And if that be not the object then a dying man ought to take bath, to
make charities and to await his time of death; he thereby attains
heaven; otherwise hell is inevitable. The king committed great sin in
the act of causing pains and trouble to the Brâhmi<u>n</u> or other
similar acts and therefore death is so close that the Brâhmi<u>n</u>
curse has fallen thus on his head. Is there no such Brâhmi<u>n</u> who
can make him understand this; or the Creator has ordained his death now
as inevitable.” Thus meditating, the chief serpent made other serpents
following him assume then form of ascetic Brâhma<u>n</u>as and gave them
roots and fruits to be taken to the king. The serpent Tak<u>s</u>ak
himself entered within the fruits in the form of an insect. Then the
ascetic serpents took the fruits and quickly went out of the place. They
came to the palace where Parîksit was resting. Seeing them, the guards
asked :-- “What for have you come here?” Hearing this, “We are coming
from the hermitage to prolong the life of the hero king, the son of
Abhimanyu and the son of the Pâ<u>nd</u>ava family, by chanting the
mantras of the Atharvavedas, and we want to have an interview with the
king; now you better go and inform the king that some Munis have come to
see you. We will sprinkle water on him and give him some sweet fruits
and then depart. We have never come across such gatekeepers in the
family of Bharat as disallow the ascetic Muni visitors to go and see the
king. We will ascend to the place where the Parîksit is staying and we
will bless him, and wish him long life; we will communicate to him our
orders and then depart to our own places.”

 

49-68. Sûtâ said :-- Hearing these words, the sentinels spoke as
previously ordered by the king, as follows :-- “O Brâhma<u>n</u>as! We
think verily you won't be able to have an interview with the king
to-day; you, all ascetics can come to-morrow to this palace. O Munis!
Owing to the Brâhma<u>n</u>a's curse, the king has built this place;
then it follows, as a matter of course, that the Brâhma<u>n</u>as are
not allowed to get up to the palace.” Then the serpents, in the form of
the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, spoke :-- “O good sentinels! Then take these roots
and fruits and offer them to the king and communicate to him our
blessings.”

 

The sentinels went to the king, and informed him of the arrival of the
ascetic Brâhma<u>n</u>as. The king replied :-- “Bring here the roots and
fruits offered by them and ask what for they have come. Give them my
pranâms; to-day I cannot meet with them; let them come to-morrow
morning.” The sentinels went to the ascetics and got from them their
roots and fruits and offered them with great respect to the king. When
the serpents in the guise of the hypocrite Brâhmi<u>n</u>s went away,
the king took those fruits and spoke to his ministers :--

 

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

 

“Take these fruits and let all my friends eat them. I will take only
this one fruit given by the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and will eat it.” Saying
this, the Uttarâ's son Parîksit gave away fruits to the friends and took
one ripe fruit for himself, broke it and saw within it a very fine
copper-coloured black eyed insect. At this the ministers were
astonished; the King spoke to them :-- “The sun has set; so there is no
further chance of any fear from any poison to-day. I speak then to-day,
fearing the Brâhma<u>n</u>'s curse, let this insect bite me.” Thus
saying the king took that insect and placed it on his neck. That
Tak<u>s</u>ak in the form of an insect, when placed, during the sun-set,
on the neck by the king, immediately assumed the form of the terrible
Kâla (Death), coiled round the king and beat him. The Ministers were
greatly surprised and began to weep and cry with great pain and sorrow.
Seeing that terrible serpent, the ministers, overwhelmed with terror,
fled away on all sides. The guards cried out loudly. The terrible
out-cry was raised on all sides. Then Uttarâ's son, the king Parîksit,
coiled by the serpent, saw that all his efforts were rendered fruitless,
and remained silent and held fast to his patience. From the mouth of the
serpent Tak<u>s</u>ak the terrible venomous flames came out burning all
and immediately killed the king. Thus taking away the life of the king,
Tak<u>s</u>ak went up in the celestial atmosphere; the people then saw
that the serpent was ready as if to burn the world. The king fell down
lifeless like a burnt tree; and all the persons cried out seeing the
king dead.

 

Thus ends the tenth Chapter of the Second Skandha on the death of the
king Parîksit in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk02ch11)
