[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk02ch07)  [Next](bk02ch09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On the extinction of the family of Yadu and on the anecdote of
Parîk<u>s</u>it**

 

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

 

1-23. Sûta said :-- On the third day after the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas had
returned to Hastinâpur, the king Dhritarâstra was burnt up together with
Gândhari and Kunti, by the conflagration of fire in the forest. Sanjaya
went away at that time, leaving Dhritarâstra in the forest, on a tour on
pilgrimage. The king Yudhisthira heard all this from Nârada and was very
sorry. Now after thirty six years after the Kuru family had become
extinct, all the descendants of Yadu in the Prabhâs tîrtha were
destroyed by the Brâhma<u>n</u>a's curse. The high-souled descendants of
Yadu, intoxicated by drinking wine, fought against each other and were
extirpated in the presence of Kri<u>sn</u>a and Balarâm. Balarâm then
quitted his mortal coil; the lotus-eyed Bhagavân Kri<u>sn</u>a quitted
his life, struck by the arrows of a hunter, to pay respect to a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>'s curse. Vasudeva heard of Hari's quitting his mortal
coil, and meditated the Goddess of the Universe within his heart and
left his holy life. Arjuna became very sorry; he went to Prabhâsa and
performed the funeral obsequies of all duly. Seeing the dead body of
Hari, Arjuna collected fuel and burnt his body together with his eight
principal wives; he burnt also Balarâm's body with that of his wife
Revatî. Arjuna, then, went to the Dvârakâ city and removed all the
inhabitants of the city when the whole Dwârkâ city of Vâsudeva was
drowned in the waters of the ocean. While Arjuna was taking all the
persons with him after getting out of Dwârkâ, he felt himself very weak
on the way; and therefore a band of robbers, known by the name of
Âbhîras plundered all the wealth and all the wives of Kri<u>sn</u>a.
Arjuna, of indomitable valour, after his arrival at Indraprastha made
Vajra, Aniruddha's son, the king of the place.

 

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

 

Then the highly powerful Arjuna informed Vyâsa of his powerlessness when
Vyâsa said :--“O highly intelligent one! When Hari and you will
reincarnate in another Yuga, then your heroic strength will again be
manifested. Hearing all these words, Prithâ's son Arjuna returned to
Hastinâ with a sorrowful heart and informed everything to Yudhisthira,
the Dharmarâja. Hearing the extinction of the Yâdavas and Hari's
quitting His mortal coil, Yudhisthira wanted to go to the Himâlayâs. He
installed Parîksit, Uttarâ's son who was then thirty six years old on
the throne and went out of his palace in company of his brothers, and
Draupadi to the forests of the Himâlayâs. Thus the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas,
Prîtha's son, reigned for thirty six years in Hastinâ and quitted their
mortal coils in the Himâlayâs. Here the greatly religious sage-king
Parîksit governed with vigilance all his subjects for sixty years. After
this, Parîksit went once on an hunting expedition to a dense forest and
shot a deer. He then searched for the deer and it became noon and he
felt very thirsty, hungry, quite fatigued with his body, perspiring,
when he saw a Muni merged in meditation; he asked the Muni “Where can
water be had?” But the Muni held at that time the vow of silence; so he
did not answer anything. Seeing this, the thirsty king, influenced by
Kali, became angry and raised a dead serpent by the fore-end of his bow
and coiled it round the Muni's neck. Even thus coiled with a snake round
his neck the Muni remained as before motionless in his state of
enlightenment and spoke nothing. The king also returned home.

 

24-49. Then the Muni's son, born from the cow's womb, S’ringî, a great
ascetic, a fiery devotee of Mahâs'akti, heard of the above event, while
he was playing in the forest. His friends spoke to him :-- “O Muni! Some
body has now enclosed a dead serpent around the neck of your father.”
Hearing their words, S’ringî became very angry and taking water in his
hands, cursed thus :-- “He who has coiled to-day a dead serpent around
my father's neck, let that villain be bitten by the serpent
Tak<u>s</u>ak within one week from this day”. One disciple of the Muni
then went to the king in his house and informed him of the Muni's curse.
Abhimanyu's son Parîksit heard of the curse pronounced by a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, and knowing infallible, spoke to the aged councillors
:--

 

"O Ministers! Certainly it is through my fault that I have been cursed
by a Brâhmi<u>n</u>'s son. Now find out and settle what is to be done
though the persons versed in the Vedas say that death is inevitable
under these circumstances; yet the wise ones should try their best to
thwart this according to the S’âstras. Many sages who are the advocates
of taking steps to redress any act, say that all the actions of wise
persons are fructified by proper means; their solution does not remain
unsolved.

 

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

 

Therefore I am saying that the powers of ma<u>n</u>is, mantrams and
herbs (o<u>s</u>adhis) are indescribable; if applied duly, do you think
that they will bear no fruit in this case? I heard that when a Muni's
wife died out of snake-bite, the Muni gave away the half of his life to
his wife Apsarâ and made her alive again. It is not proper for the
learned to depend on the maxim that what is inevitable must come to
pass; one must try one's best to act for the living present. O
Ministers! Have you seen any person in the Heavens or in the world who
remains idle, depending on fate alone? The Sannyâsins have renounced the
world; but they must have to go to the houses of the house-holders,
whether they be invited or not invited. See again. supposing that the
food of a person is brought to him unasked and suppose it is thrown into
the mouth by some one, can you conceive that food would go down into the
belly, from the mouth without one's effort? Therefore one should exert
one's own prowess from the very outset; though the intelligent ones
should be satisfied with the thought “What can be done? It is not
ordained in my fate.” When Parîksit said thus, the ministers asked :--
“Which Muni made his dead wife alive again, by giving her half his own
life? And how did his wife die? Kindly describe all these in detail to
me.” The king said :-- Bhrigu Muni had a very beautiful wife Pulomâ. In
her womb the world renowned Chyavana Muni was born. Sukanyâ, the
daughter of S’aryâti was the wife of Chyavana. In her womb was born a
beautiful son named Pramati; he was very famous. Pramati had his famous
beautiful wife Pratâpî. In her womb was born the great ascetic son Ruru.
At this time a person named Sthûlakes'a, a religious truthful man of
great name, was practising tapasyâ. O Ministers! In the meanwhile, the
chief Apsarâ Menakâ held sexual intercourse with Visvâvasu Gandharva on
the banks of a river and became pregnant. She went out from that place
to the hermitage of Sthûlakes'a on the river bank and gave birth to a
very beautiful daughter. Seeing this girl quite an orphan and very
beautiful, the Muni Sthûlakes'a began to rear up her and named her
Pramadvarâ. This all-auspicious girl Pramadvarâ attained youth in due
course when the Muni Ruru saw her and became smitten with passion.

 

Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Second Skandha on the extinction of
the family of Yadu and on the anecdote of Parîksit in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgâvatam of 18,000 verses.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk02ch09.md)
