[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk02ch02)  [Next](bk02ch04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK**

** **

**Chapter III**

** **

**On the description of the curse on Gangâ, Mahâbhi<u>s</u>a and Vasus**

 

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

 

1-8. The Ri<u>s</u>is said :-- “O Sinless Sûta! You have described to us
in detail the birth of Vyâsa, of unrivalled fire, and of Satyavatî; but
we have one great doubt in our minds though, O Knower of Dharma! which
is not being removed by your words. O Sinless one! First, as regards the
mother of Vyâsa, the all auspicious Satyavatî, we have this doubt how
she came to be united to the virtuous S’antanu? The king S’antanu, of
the family of Puru is a greatly religious man; how could he have married
Satyavatî knowing her to be a fisherman's daughter and born of a low
family? Now say who was the first wife of S’antanu and how Bhîsma, the
intelligent son of S’antanu came to be born of the parts of Vasu? O
Sûta! You have told before that Bhîsma, of indomitable valour, made the
Satyavatî's son, the brave Chitrângada, king; and subsequent to his
death made his younger brother Vichîtravîrya king. But when the elder
brother Bhîsma, the greatly religious and beautiful was present, how was
it that Chitrângada and Vichîtravîrya having been installed by Bhîsma
himself could have reigned.”

 

9-12. Again on the demise of Vichîtravîrya, Satyavatî became very much
grieved and got two sons born of her two son's wives by Vedavyâsa? How
can we explain this fact? Why did she do this? Why did she not give to
Bhîsma the kingdom? Why did Bhîsma not marry? And how was it that the
elder brother Vyâsa Deva, of indomitable valour, did such an irreligious
act as to beget two (Goloka) sons from the wives of the brothers? Vyâsa
composed the Purâ<u>n</u>as and knew everything of religion; how then
did he go to other's wives, especially, of his brother's wives?

 

13-14. O Sûta! Why did Vyâsa Deva do such a hateful act, in spite of his
being a Muni? The actions of Vedas are inferred from their subsequent
good conducts; how can this act of Vyâsa be calculated as one amongst
them? O Intelligent one! You are the disciple of Vyâsa; therefore you
are the best man to solve our doubts. We all of this Dharmakshettra
Naimi<u>s</u>âra<u>n</u>ya are very eager to hear this.

 

15-39. At this Sûta said :-- In ancient days there reigned a king named
Mahâbhi<u>s</u>a**,** in the family of Ik<u>s</u>âku endowed with all
the qualities of a great king; he was the foremost of all the kings,
truthful and religious. That highly intelligent king performed thousand
horse-sacrifices (Asva

 

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

** **

medhas) one hundred Vâjapeya sacrifices and thereby satisfied Indra, the
king of the Devas and went to Heavens. Once, on an occasion, that king
went to the abode of Brahmâ; the other gods also went there to serve
Prajâpati. The great river, Gangâ Devî, too, assuming the feminine form,
went to Brahmâ to serve him. Now, in the interval, violent winds arose
and the clothing of Gangâ Devî went off; at this the Devas did not look
at her; rather kept their faces downwards; but the king Mahâbhi<u>s</u>a
continued gazing at her. Gangâ also came to know the king and that he
had become attached to her. Brahmâ, seeing that both of them are
love-stricken and are shameless, became angry and cursed them
immediately :-- O king! you better take your birth again in the human
world and practise great meritorious deeds and come again to this
Heaven. Thus saying, Brahmâ looked at Gangâ, who was attached to the
king, and addressed her :-- “You too better go to the human world and
become his wife.” Both of them, the king as well as Gangâ, came out of
Brahmâ's abode, very much grieved in their hearts. The king
Mahâbhi<u>s</u>a thought of coming to this world and reflected on the
kings thereof and settled to make the king Pratîpa of Puru's family his
father. At this time the eight Vasus with their wives wandering in
various places and enjoying as they liked came to the hermitage of
Vas'i<u>st</u>ha. Amongst the aforesaid eight Vasus Prithu and others,
one Vasu Dyau's wife seeing Nandini, the sacrificial cow (Kâmadhenu) of
Vas'i<u>st</u>ha asked her husband :-- “Whose is this excellent cow that
I see?  Vasu then replied as follows :-- “ O Beautiful one! This is
Vas'i<u>st</u>ha's cow. Whoever, be he a man or woman drinks her milk
gets his longevity extended to ten thousand years and his youth never
ends.” Hearing this, the Vasu's wife said :-- “There is a very beautiful
comrade (Sakhî) of mine, the daughter of the Rajarsî-Us'îna in the
world, of auspicious qualities. O Mahâbhâga! Kindly bring to me from
Vas'i<u>st</u>ha's hermitage that auspicious sacrificial milch cow
Nandini together with her calf that yields all desires; my Sakhî will
then drink her milk and be thereby free from disease, old age and become
the chief amongst all mankind. Hearing thus, his wife's word, the Vasu
Dyau, though sinless, stole away together with Prithu and the other
Vasus the cow Nandini in utter defiance to the self-controlled Muni
Vas'i<u>st</u>ha. When the cow Nandini had been stolen, the great
ascetic Vas'is<u>t</u>ha came quickly to the hermitage with
**a**bundance of fruits.

 

The ascetic Muni Vas'i<u>st</u>ha, not finding, in his hermitage, his
cow with her calf, searched for her in many forests and caves; but he,
the son of Varu<u>n</u>a, could not find out his cow even after
prolonged searches; he, then, took recourse to meditation and came to
know that the Vasus had stolen the cow and became angry. He expressed
:-- “When the Vasus have stolen this my cow in utter defiance to my
self, they must be born

 

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

** **

amongst men.” When the religious Varu<u>n</u>a's son Vas'i<u>st</u>ha
thus cursed the Vasus, they became very sorry and absent-minded; all of
them went to Vas'i<u>st</u>ha's hermitage and saw him there; they began
to supplicate him as much as they could; and took refuge under him.
Seeing the Vasus standing before him in an extremely distressed
condition, the virtuous Muni Vas'i<u>st</u>ha said :-- “You all will be
free from the curse within one year; but the Vasu Dyau will dwell
amongst men for a long, long period as he had stolen direct my Nandini
with her calf.”

 

40-60. While the Vasus, thus cursed, were returning, they saw on the way
the chief river Gangâ Devî also cursed and therefore distressed; all of
them bowed down to her simultaneously and said: “O Devî! A serious
thought is troubling our minds, how can we, who live on nectar, take our
birth in human wombs; so, O best river! You better be a woman and give
birth to us. O Sinless one! You better be the wife of the sage King
S’antanu and no sooner we be born of your womb, kindly throw us in the
river Gangâ (your water). If you do thus, O Gangâ we will certainly be
freed of our curse.” Gangâ Devî replied “Well; that will be.” Thus
spoken, the Vasus went to their respective places; and Gangâ Devî, too,
thinking on the subject again and again, went out of that place. At this
time Mahâbhi<u>s</u>a became born as a son of the king Pratîpa and
became known as S’antanu. He was exceedingly religious and true to his
promise. One day while the King Pratîpa was praising the Sûrya Devî (the
sun) of unequalled energy, Gangâ Devî assumed an extraordinarily
beautiful feminine form and came out of the waters and sat on the right
thigh, resembling like a sâl tree, of the king Pratîpa. The sage king
Pratîp spoke out to the lady sitting on his right thigh, thus :-- “O
beautiful faced one! Why, unasked, have you sat on my auspicious right
thigh?” The lovely Gangâ then replied :-- “Hear why I have sat here. O
best of Kurus! O king! Becoming attached to you, I have sat on your
thigh; so please accept me.” At this the king Pratîpa spoke to the
beautiful lady, full of youth and beauty, “I never go, simply out of
passion to another's wife. There is another point; you have sat on my
right thigh; that is the seat of sons and son's wives; so, when my
desired son will be born, you will then, be my son's wife. And
certainly, by your good will, my son will be born.” The lady, of divine
form, said, Well; that will be done! and went away. The king returned to
his palace, thinking of the lady. After some time, he had **a** son born
to him and when the son attained his teens, the king desired to lead a
forest life and communicated this matter to his son. He said also, if
the aforesaid beautifully smiling girl comes to you to marry, then marry
her. And I am also ordering you not to question her anything “who are
you” and so forth. If you take her as your legal wife, you will
certainly be happy. Thus

 

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

 

saying to his son, the king Pratîpa handed over all his kingdom to his
son and gladly retired into the forest. The king practised tapasyâ in
the forest and worshipped Ambikâ; on quitting his mortal coil, he went
by his sheer merit to the Heavens**.** The highly energetic king
S’antanu, on getting his kingdom, began to administer justice according
to the laws of Dharma and governed his subjects.

 

Thus ends the third Chapter of the Second Skandha on the description of
the curse on Gangâ, Mahâbhi<u>s</u>a and Vasus in the Mâhapurâ<u>n</u>am
S**’**rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](bk02ch04.md)
