[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk02ch01)  [Next](bk02ch03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On the birth of Vyâsa Deva**

 

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

 

1-10. Once on an occasion, the highly energetic Muni Parâs'ara went out
on pilgrimage and arrived on the banks of the Yamunâ, and spoke to the
religious fisherman who was taking his food then thus :-- “O fisherman!
Take me on your boat and carry me to the other side of the river.”
Hearing this, the fisherman spoke to the beautiful girl Matsyagandhâ :--
“O beautiful smiling one! This religious ascetic intends to cross the
river; so take the boat and carry him to the other bank.” Thus ordered
by her father, the exceedingly beautiful Vasu girl Matsyagandhâ began to
steer the boat whereon sat the Muni. Thus while the boat was sliding on
the waters of the Yamunâ; the Muni Parâs'ara saw the beautiful-eyed
damsel Matsyagandhâ and became as if under the command of the great
destiny, greatly enamoured of her. He desired to enjoy Matsyagandhâ,
full of youth and beauty and with his right hand caught hold of her left
hand; the blue coloured Matsya looking askance spoke out smilingly in
the following words :-- O knower of Dharma! What are you going to do,
pierced by the arrows of Cupid? What you desire now, is it worthy of
your family or your study of the S’âstras or worthy of your Tapasyâ;
see, you are born in the line of Vas'i<u>st</u>ha and you are well known
as of good character. O best of Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! You are quite aware
that the attaining of a man-birth in this world is very rare; and over
and above this the attainment of Brâhminhood is, as far as my knowledge
goes, particularly difficult.

 

11-14. O Prince of Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! You are the foremost and best as far
as your family, goodness, and learning in the Vedas and other S’âstras
are concerned; you are well versed in Dharma; how is it, then, that you
are going to do this act, not worthy of an Ârya, though you see me
possessed of this bad smell of fish throughout my body. O one of
unbaffled understanding! O best of twice-born! What auspicious sign do
you see in my body that you are stricken with passion on my account that
you have caught hold of my hand to enjoy me? Why have you gotten your
own Dharma? Thus saying, Matsyagandhâ thought within herself :-- “Alas!
This Brâhmi<u>n</u> has certainly lost his brains in order to enjoy me;
certainly he will be drowned just now in his attempt to enjoy me in this
boat; his mind is so much agitated with the arrows of Cupid that no
body, it seems, can act against his will.” Thus thinking Matsyagandhâ
spoke again to the Muni :-- “O highly fortunate one! Hold patience! let
me first take you to the other side of the river; then you may do as you
please.”

 

15-19. Hearing these reasonable words, the Muni let loose of her hand
and took his seat on the boat and gradually got down on the other bank
of the

 

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

 

river. But the Muni, becoming again extremely passionate caught hold of
Matsyagandhâ; when the young woman spoke to Parâs’ara, in front of her,
shuddering :-- “O best of Munis! My body is emitting very bad smell; do
you not feel this? You know very well that the sexual intercourse
between male and female of similar types brings in happiness and
comfort.” Thus spoken to, Parâs’ara made Matsyagandhâ emit sweet scent
like that of musk to a distance of one Yojana (8 miles) and her body
exceedingly lovely and beautiful and, becoming extremely passionate,
again caught hold of her right hand.

 

20-34. Then the auspicious Satyavatî addressed Parâs’ara Muni, resolved
to enjoy her, thus :-- “O Muni! Behold! all are looking at us; my father
too, is there on the bank of the Yamunâ; so, O Muni! wait till night
this beastly act before all is highly unsatisfactory to me. The wise
persons declare it a great sin to commit sexual intercourse during day
they have ordained night time as the best time of intercourse for men
not the day time; the more so that many person's eyes are in this
direction. So, O intelligent one! hold on your passion for a while; for
the blame pronounced by the public is horrible.” Hearing these
reasonable words, the liberal minded Parâs'ara created, by his influence
of Tapasyâ, a dense fog so that both the banks of the Yamunâ became
covered with darkness. Then Matsyagandhâ gently spoke to the Muni :-- “O
best of Dvîjas! I am not as yet married; I am now a girl; you will go
away after enjoying me; your semen virile is not fruitless; so
Brâhma<u>n</u>! What will be my fate? If I be pregnant today, what shall
I say to my father? and what will be my future state? There is no doubt
that, after enjoying me, you will go away; what will I do afterwards;
kindly say.” Hearing these words of Matsyagandhâ, Parâs'ara said :-- “O
beloved! after you have done my pleasant duty, you will remain a girl as
you are now; yet, O timid one! ask from me any boon you like; I will
grant it to you.” Satyavatî then said :-- “O best Brâhma<u>n</u>, O
giver of one's honour! grant me these things :-- That my father and
mother do not know anything of this affair and that my virginity be
again as ever the same. Also let an extraordinarily powerful energetic
son be born to me like you; let this nice smell continue to remain
always in my body and let my youth and beauty remain afresh and increase
ever more. Hearing this, Parâs'ara said :-- “O beautiful one! a son,
very pure and holy, will be born to you, from Nârâyana's part! his name
will be famous in the three worlds. O beautiful one! never before my
heart was agitated with such passion. I do not know why I have become so
much passionate for you. I saw the unrivalled beauties of Apsarâs but I
never lost my patience; but seeing you, I have become attracted to you;
it must be under the

 

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

 

direction of Providence; know it certain that there must be some
mysterious cause in this. However Fate is unavoidable to all; otherwise
you are full of so bad smell; why shall I be fascinated by your sight? O
beautiful one! your son will be famed in the three worlds; will compose
the Purâ<u>n</u>as and will sub-divide the Vedas.

 

Thus saying, the Muni Parâs'ara enjoyed Matsyagandhâ, who became quite
submissive; and after bathing in the Yamunâ, quickly went away. On the
other hand, the chaste Satyavatî, too, became pregnant and immediately
gave birth on the island of Yamunâ to a son beautiful, as if the Second
Kâmadeva, the god of Love, Kâmadeva. No sooner that son, very fiery and
highly potent, was born than he devoted his mind to tapasyâ and spoke to
his own mother Satyavatî thus :--“O Mother! now go wherever you like; I
will also go to perform tapasyâ. O highly fortunate one; No sooner you
remember me, I will come to you. O Mother! where you will have any
onerous duty, remember me and I will instantly come to you. Let all good
be unto you; now I go. Avoid all cares and live happily. Thus saying,
Vyâsadeva went out. Matsyagandhâ, too, went back to his father. Vyâsa
was named also Dvaipâyan (born in an island, a Dvîpa) in as much as
Satyavatî gave birth to him in a Dvîpa island); and as he was born of
Vi<u>sn</u>u's parts, he grew up no sooner he was born.

 

The Muni Dvaipâyana bathed in every Tîrtha and performed the highest
asceticism. Thus Dvaipâyan Vyâsa was born of Parâs'ara in Satyavatî’s
womb. Seeing the advent of Kali Yuga, he adorned the tree of the Vedas
with many S’âkhâs (branches). It is because he expanded the Vedas many
S’âkhâs, that he is denominated also as VedaVyâs; he composed eighteen
Purâ<u>n</u>as, Samhitas, the excellent Mahâbhârat, subdivided the Vedas
and made his disciples Sumantu, Jaimini, Paila, Vaisâmpâyan, Asita,
Devala and his son S’uka to study them.

 

Sûta said :-- “O Munis! Thus I have described to you the birth of the
holy Vyâsa, the son of Satyavatî and all the causes. O Munis! Do not
allow any doubt enter your mind as regards his birth; for it is always
advisable to take up only the good things as far as the lives of great
persons and Munis are concerned. There must be some extraordinary
mysterious cause owing to which Satyavatî was born of a fish, and she
was first united to Parâs'ara and then to Sântanu. Otherwise how can one
account for the fact of the Muni Parâs’ara being so much agitated by
passion and why he would behave like a mean low person in the committal
of a a grossly blameable act? Now has been spoken the wonderful birth
story of Vyâsa Deva together with all incidents, and enveloped under the
great mystery. If any man hears this holy narrative, he will be freed
from sins and will never fall into difficulties and will always be
happy.

 

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

 

Thus ends the Second Chapter of the Second Skandha on the birth of Vyâsa
Deva in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk02ch03.md)
