[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch19)  [Next](bk03ch21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XX**

 

**On the Svayamvara hall and the kings’ conversation there**

 

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O Noble minded one! The king Yudhâjit replied to the
address of the king of Keral, thus :--

 

2-3. O King! You are truthful and have restrained your passions. What
you have told just now in this assembly of kings is all correct and
approved by morality. O best of the kings! You are born of a high
family; you better say how can this take place that when so many fit
persons are present here to become the bridegroom, can an unworthy
person take away the offer?

 

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

 

4\. As a jackal never becomes fit to enjoy what are the dues of a lion,
so this Sudars’ana is also unfit to acquire this bride elect.

 

5\. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as have the Vedas as their strength; the
K<u>s</u>attriya kings take bows and arrows to be their source of
strength; this is ordained everywhere. Therefore O King! What wrong have
I done in my statement. Kindly explain.

 

6-7. The power of the kings is the befitting money given to the parents
of a bride; according to this, the strongest man is to acquire the
bride, a jewel. The K<u>s</u>attriyas that are weak can never acquire
that. Make this the rule in this marriage. This earth is fit to be
enjoyed by the heroes only and not by the cowards and intriguing
persons. Otherwise quarrels are sure to ensue amongst the kings.

 

8\. The dispute thus arose in that Svayamvara hall; and the king Subâhu
was called in.

 

9\. The kings that could see the reality of things then addressed the
king Subâhu. “O king! You are requested to establish a golden rule in
this marriage ceremony.

 

10\. What is your object in calling this Svayamvara. Better give it out
after a mature consideration. Please be explicit whom have you intended
to give over your daughter in this marriage?”

 

11-12. Subâhu said :-- “My daughter has mentally selected Sudars’ana; I
prevented her repeatedly from doing this; but she did not accept my
word. What shall I do now? The mind of my daughter now is not at her
will. Sudars’ana, too, though uninvited, has come here singly and is
residing calmly, without any signs of disturbance in his mind.”

 

13-14. Vyâsa said :-- Then the chief kings all invited Sudars’ana there;
Sudars’ana, too, came there quietly, and the princes, seeing his quiet
nature, asked him, “O one, engaged in practising vows! Who has invited
you here? Why have you come here singly, in this assembly of kings?

 

15\. You have no force, no ministers, no help, no wealth, and no army. O
intelligent! Then explain why have you come here alone?

 

16\. In this assembly of kings you see that the powerful monarchs are
ready to fight with each other for the sake of this princess. What do
you intend to do under those circumstances?

 

17\. Your brother, too, is come here to have the princess; he has got
his army and is also marked with his strength and valor. The powerful
Yudhâjit has come here also to help him.

 

18\. O observer of good vows! Seeing you without any army, we have
narrated to you all the facts. Now think and do accordingly. If you
please, remain here or go anywhere else.”

 

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

 

19-20. Sudars’ana replied :-- “True, I have no army, no help, no wealth,
no forts, no friends or no kings to protect me. Hearing that Svayamvara
will be held here, I have come here to witness it. But there is one
particularity here; it is this :-- The Devî Bhagavatî has ordered me in
my dream to come here. Under Her command I have come here; there is no
doubt in this.

 

21\. I have got no other object in view; I have obeyed what the
Bhagavatî Bhuvanes’varî has ordered me to do. Today will happen, no
doubt, what She has ordained.

 

22-23. O kings! I am seeing everywhere the Supreme Goddess Bhagavatî
Bhavânî. Therefore there is no enemy of mine in this world; but he who
will turn out an enemy of mine, will be duly punished by the Mahâ Vidyâ
Mahâ Mâyâ. I do not know what is enmity?

 

24\. O kings! What is inevitable will surely come to pass. There will be
nothing otherwise. I am always depending on Fate, Destiny. What is the
use, then, in thinking what will be the result?

 

25\. Everywhere in the Devas, in the spirits, in men, in all the beings,
the Devî’s power is existent; it cannot be otherwise.

 

26\. O kings! Whenever She wishes, She makes kings, masters of wealth or
devoid of wealth. What is, then, the use of bothering my head in this?

 

27\. When even the Gods Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes’a without Her
presence, become powerless enough to move their hands or feet, then why
shall I be anxious for the result?

 

28\. O kings! Whether I am unable or able or an ordinary person, you
have nothing to consider; I have come here in this assembly hall under
the command of the Supreme Bhagavatî.

 

29-30. What She has willed, She will do that. I am not to care for that.
O high minded ones! You need not be afraid at all in this. I have told
you all truth. Victory or defeat, I feel no shame in either of them. For
I am always under the control of Bhagavatî; therefore if there be any
shame here, it is all Hers.”

 

31-33. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing thus his words, and seeing that his mind
is firmly devoted to Bhagavatî, the kings saw each other and said thus
:-- “O Sudars’ana! What you have said is quite true; it is never
otherwise; still Yudhâjit, the king of Ujjain is intent on killing you.
O intelligent! O sinless! we have all come to know that there is no
trace of evil in you. We were all overcome with pity for you; hence we
have informed you; now think and do the needful?”

 

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

 

34\. Sudars’ana said, “You are all kind and large hearted; what you all
have said is quite true. What shall I tell you, being a minor as yet!

 

35\. O kings! No one can cause the death of another. All this world,
moving and unmoving, is under the control of Fate.

 

36-38. No soul is independent; every one is under the effects of one’s
own Karma. The Pundits that have realised the Truth, say that Karma is
of three kinds, Accumulated, Present, and Prârabdha? This whole world is
due to Kâla (Time), Karma (action) and Svabhâva (Nature); unless the
proper time comes, even the Devas cannot kill men. The men are killed on
account of some cause, immediate; but the Great Time is the real
Destroyer.

 

39\. My father, though a destroyer of many others, was himself killed by
a lion and my mother’s father was slain by Yudhâjit in the battle.

 

40\. The Jîvas, though caring hard to preserve their lives, are killed
by Fate in spite of all their cares; and they live thousand years though
there is none to protect them.

 

41\. O religious kings! I do not fear a bit from Yudhâjit. I consider
Fate as the Supreme and I therefore remain always undisturbed, calm and
quiet.

 

42\. Daily and constantly I remember Bhagavatî, Who is the Mother of all
this Universe. She will look after my welfare.

 

43\. Behold! One will have certainly to bear the burden of one’s past
Karma, whether it be good or it be bad; one’s own actions must bear
their fruits. Then why shall he be sorry, who has come to know this?

 

44\. The less intelligent deluded persons, on getting pain from their
own actions, turn out enemies on very trifling matters.

 

45\. I do not grieve nor do I fear on account of such enemies. I am
staying here in this assembly of kings, cool-minded.

 

46\. Under the order of Chandikâ, I have come here to see this
Svayamvara; whatever is inevitable will surely come to pass.

 

47\. The words of the Bhagavatî are the best proof; I do not know any
other. My mind is entirely given up to Her. There will be nothing
otherwise than what She has ordained; whether it is good or whether it
is bad.

 

48\. O kings! Let Yudhâjit remain in peace. I have no enmity with him.
He, who will deal inimically with me, will certainly reap his reward.
There is not the least doubt in this.”

 

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

 

49\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! When Sudars’ana addressed them thus, all the
kings became very glad and they all remained there for the Svayamvara.
Sudars’ana, too, went to his camp and remained also calm and quiet.

 

50\. Next day the king Subâhu invited all the kings present in his city
to their respective seats in the Svayamvara hall.

 

51\. The princes and kings, decorated with best ornaments, came and took
their seats on their respective platforms, covered with valuable carpets
of best workmanship.

 

52\. The kings then looked like the celestial Devas, wearing divine
ornaments and apparels, blazing with the lustrous light of gems, and
remained to see the Svayamvara affair.

 

53\. Every one there had this foremost thought in his mind when will the
princess, the bride elect, would come there; and who will be the man so
fortunate as to be blessed with garlands offered by her (as a token of
selection of the bridegroom)!

 

54\. If, accidentally, she offers the garland to Sudars’ana in this
Svayamvara assembly, then will ensue, no doubt, desperate struggles
amongst the kings.

 

55\. While they were thus meditating, sounds of drums were loudly
sounded.

 

56-58. Then Subâhu, the king of Benares, went to her daughter and found
that S’as’ikalâ had just taken her bath and put on her silken clothes,
and adorned herself with various ornaments and sweet garlands. Thus,
dressed in complete marriage dress, she began to shine like another
Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî, the Goddess of wealth. The king, on seeing his
daughter dressed in silken cloth, afflicted with anxious thoughts, just
smiled and said, “Child! Rise and take the beautiful garlands by your
hands and go to the the Svayamvara hall and just look at the assembly of
kings.

 

59\. O lean bodied one! Whoever, well-qualified, beautiful, and of noble
birth, amongst the kings is reigning in your mind, better select him.

 

60\. O graceful! The kings from various quarters are adorning their
respective seats; better go and see and select whomever you like.”

 

61\. Vyâsa said :-- When Subâhu had spoken thus, S’as’ikalâ, who
generally talked little, replied with sweet sonorous words, impregnated
with religious truth.

 

62\. “Father! I won’t go before the kings who are inspired by lust;
women like me never go there; it is those that are dissolute that attend
those places.

 

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

 

63\. Father! I have heard from the religious texts that women should
cast their glances on their husbands only and not on any other.

 

64\. The woman that goes to many persons is mentally claimed by all;
each of them contemplates strongly “Let this woman be mine.” Thus her
chastity is destroyed.

 

65-66. Desirous of selecting her husband, when the woman holding in her
hands, the garland for her would-be-husband, goes to the Svayamvara
hall, then she turns out like an ordinary unchaste woman. As a
prostitute going to a public shop looks on many persons and judges of
their merits and demerits according to her own power of judgment, the
maid that goes in the Svayamvara hall does exactly the same.

 

67\. How can I behave myself in the hall of the assembly of kings like a
prostitute, who does not attach her feelings firmly on a single
individual but glances constantly at many lustful persons.

 

68\. Though this system of Svayamvara is approved by the elderly
persons, I am not going to follow that now. I will take the vow of a
chaste woman and act up to that doctrine as perfectly.

 

69\. I will never be able to act like an ordinary woman going in the
Svayamvara hall, mentally determining many and finally selecting one.

 

70\. Father! From the very beginning I have given myself up to
Sudars’ana in mind, word and deed. I have not the least inclination to
leave him and select another in his stead.

 

71\. O King! If you want to have my welfare, then give your daughter on
an auspicious day and in an auspicious lagna to Sudars’ana, according to
the prescribed rites.”

 

Thus ends the 20th Chapter on the Svayamvara hall and the kings’
conversation there in S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](bk03ch21)
