[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch01)  [Next](bk03ch03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On Rudras going towards the heavens on the celestial car**

 

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

 

1-19. Vyâsa said :-- O mighty armed Kuru! What you have asked me just
now, I also asked the same thing to Nârada, the lord of the Munis and he
gave me the following reply :-- O Vyâsa! What shall I say to you on this
point more than this that a doubt occurred to me also in my former days.
The question that you have put to me today rose in my mind before; and I
went to my father Brahmâ, of endless energy and asked to him thus :-- O
Lord! O Father! Whence is this whole Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a born? Have You
created it? Or is it Vi<u>sn</u>u or Mahes'vara? O all pervading soul!
Who is there in this Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a fit to be worshipped? O Lord of
the world! Who is the top-most Lord ruling over everything? Kindly say.
O Brahmâ<u>n</u>! I am plunged in this sea of Maya and perils; my heart
is agitated with doubts; hence it is not appeased in any place of
pilgrimage ; or in thinking any Deva or in practising any Sâdhan or in
any other object. O Sinless one! Give me the answers duly and thus
remove my doubts. O Tormentor of foes! Unless the highest truth is not
known, peace is not found. This heart, distracted in various ways,
cannot rest fixed on one subject. Whom am I to remember? Whom to
worship? Where to go? Whom to praise? Who is the Supreme God this
Universe? I do not understand these things. O Satyavatî's son! Hearing
these my serious queries, Brahmâ, the grand-Sire of beings, replied to
me as follows :-- O highly illustrious son! What more shall I say to you
than this that even Vi<u>sn</u>u is unable to answer your questions; so
difficult are they indeed! O great intelligent one! Nobody that is
attached to the world knows anything about this. Those who are
unattached to this world, who are free from any envy, these who are
without desires and calm, those highsouled ones know the secret of all
this. In former days when all was water, water everywhere and all
things, moving and non-moving were destroyed, when five elements were
sprung, then I was also born from the lotus navel of Vi<u>sn</u>u. Then
not seeing Moon, Sun, trees, or mountains or anything and sitting on the
centre (Kar<u>n</u>ikâ) of the lotus thought thus :-- When I am born in
this great ocean of waters? Who has created me? Who is now my protector?

 

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

 

And Who will be my Destroyer when this cycle ends? There is no earth
distinctly visible anywhere here; on what, then, this mass of water
rests? Lotus is termed Pankaja because it springs from mud and dirt; so
unless there exists the earth underneath with mud and dirt, how this
lotus will come out here! Now let me try and find out where is the root
of this lotus, where is the mud and dirt? If this be found, then the
earth will be also certainly there. Thus thinking, I dived underneath
the water and searched for one thousand years but could not find earth
anywhere, when the celestial voice entered my ears “Practise tapasyâ
(austerities).” Hearing this celestial voice, I sat on the lotus, my
birth place, and practised tapasyâ for one thousand years.

 

20-30. Next, the celestial voice came again “Create.” Hearing this, I
became quite confounded and began to think within myself “now what am I
to create? What to do?” After this, the two terrible Daityas Madhu and
Kaitabha came to me and affrighted me saying “Fight with us.” I became
quite terrified and holding the stem of the lotus, I got down within the
water. There I saw a wonderful person, sleeping on the Ananta serpent.
He was of a deep blue colour like a rain-cloud, wearing yellow clothes,
four-armed, garlanded with forest flowers, and the Lord of this whole
Universe. On the four arms of this Mahâ Vi<u>sn</u>u there were
conch-shells, disc, club, and lotus and other weapons. I saw this
Achyuta Puru<u>s</u>a, sleeping on the Ananta serpent bed, motionless
and under the influence of Yoga Nidrâ. I then thought within myself
“What am I to do?” Not being able to find out any other way, I
recollected the Devî who was then of the nature of sleep and began to
praise Her. The auspicious Devî Yoga Nidrâ, whose form could not be
determined, immediately left the body of Vi<u>sn</u>u and decorated with
divine ornaments, began to shine in the air. After She left the body of
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Vi<u>sn</u>u immediately got up. And He fought terribly
for five thousand years with the Dânavas Madhu Kaitabha; then by the
grace of the Bhagavatî, He extended His own thighs and then, on those
thighs, He slew the two demons. Where Vi<u>sn</u>u and myself were
standing, Rudra Deva came also and joined with us. Then we three saw the
beautiful Devî in the celestial space.

 

31-40. We three, then, commenced to chant hymns to Her and She gladdened
our hearts by Her gracious look and said :-- “O Brahmâ! O Vi<u>sn</u>u!
O Rudra! The two great Daityas are slain. Now forsake your laziness and
do your respective works of creating, preserving, and destroying the
Universe; create your own abodes, and live in happiness; create by your
respective lordly powers, the fourfold beings.” Hearing the Devî's
gentle sweet words, we spoke :-- “O Mother! There is no wide earth here;
all is one mass of infinite ocean. No five elements, no five tanmâtrâs,

 

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

 

no sensual organs, no Gu<u>n</u>as, nothing exist here; how can we then
execute the works of creation, etc. Hearing our words, the Devî smiled.
Immediately there came from the sky overhead a beautiful aerial car. The
Devî said :-- “O Brahmâ! O Vi<u>sn</u>u! O Rudra! Get in this car
without any fear. To-day I will show you one wonderful thing.” At Her
word, we got into the beautiful car without any fear. It was decorated
with various gems and jewels, bedecked with pearls, emitting sweet
tinkling sounds of bells and looking as the abode of the celestials.
Seeing us seated without any fear, She made the car get high up in the
sky by Her force.

 

Thus ends the second chapter of the third skandha on Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Rudra's going towards the heavens on the celestial car,
given by the Devî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>a S'rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâs.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk03ch03)
