[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch29)  [Next](bk04ch01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXX**

 

**On the narration of the Navarâtra ceremony by Nârada and the
performance of that by Râma Chandra**

 

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

 

1-2. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Râma and Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a, discussing
thus, remained silent; when the Ri<u>s</u>i Nârada appeared there from
the sky above, singing the Rathântara Sâma Veda hymns in tune and
musical gamut with his renowned lute.

 

3-4. Râmachandra, of indomitable prowess, on beholding him rose up from
his seat and gave him quickly an excellent seat and offerings of water
for washing his feet. Then he worshipped the Muni and stood with folded
hands. When the Muni ordered him, he took his seat close by Nârada.

 

5-8. On Râmachandra taking his seat there with Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a
with a grievous heart, Nârada asked him in a sweet tone “O Descendant of
Raghu! Why are you being afflicted with sorrows like an ordinary mortal?
I know that the evil minded Râva<u>n</u>a has stolen Sîtâ Devî. I heard
while in the heavens that Râva<u>n</u>a, the descendant of Pulastya,
stole away Jânakî, out of fascination, could not know that would be the
cause of his death. O Descendant in the family of Kâkutstha! It is for
the killing of Râva<u>n</u>a that your birth has taken place; and for
that purpose Jânakî has been stolen now.

 

Note :-- The real Jânakî was not stolen; Her shadow form was stolen.

 

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

 

9-12. O Râghava! The Devî Jânakî, in her previous birth, was the
daughter of a Muni and practised asceticism. While engaged in her
austerities, in her holy hermitage, Râva<u>n</u>a came and looking at
her, prayed that beautiful woman to become his wife. Hearing this, she
gave a good reproach to Râva<u>n</u>a, when he perforce caught hold of
her hairs. That ascetic woman got very angry, and, considering her body
polluted by the devil’s contact, resolved to put an end to her life and
cursed Râva<u>n</u>a, thus :-- “O Villain! I will be born on the surface
of the earth, not from any womb but simply for your destruction and
ruin.” Thus saying, she parted with her life.

 

13\. O Tormentor of the foes! Râva<u>n</u>a, the king of the
Râk<u>s</u>asas, mistook a garland for the extremely poisonous serpent
and has stolen away Sîtâ Devî, the part incarnation of Lak<u>s</u>mî, in
order to root out his race.

 

14\. O Kâkutstha! When the Devas prayed for the destruction of that
wicked insolent Râva<u>n</u>a, difficult to be subdued, you are born on
this earth, in the family of Aja, as a part incarnate of Hari, beyond
birth, old age and death.

 

15\. O mighty-armed! Have patience; Sîtâ Devî is meditating you, day and
night.

 

16-17. Indra himself, the king of the Devas, sends the nectar and the
Heavenly Cow’s Milk in a pot to Her daily; and She subsists on that,
alone.

 

O Lord! On drinking the Heavenly Cow’s Milk, the lotus eyed Sîtâ Devî is
living without any hunger or thirst! I use to see Her daily.

 

18\. O Descendant of Raghu! I am now telling how that Râva<u>n</u>a can
be killed. Perform, in this very month of Âs’vin, the vow with devotion.

 

19\. Fasting for nine nights, the worship of the Bhagavatî, and
repeating the Mantram silently and performing the Homa ceremony,
observing all the rules, will certainly fulfill one’s all the desires.

 

20\. O the best in the race of Raghu! You should offer the sacrifice
before the Goddess of a sacred and unblameable animal, perform Japam and
Homa ceremony equivalent to one-tenth of Japam. If you do all this, you
will certainly be able to release Sîtâ.

 

21\. In days of yore, Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’iva and Brahmâ and the Devas in
the Heavens all performed this worship of the Goddess.

 

22\. Therefore, O Râghava! Every person desiring happiness, specially
those that have fallen under great difficulties, ought to do this
auspicious ceremony, without the least hesitation.

 

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

 

23-24. O Kâkutstha! Vis’vamitra, Bhrigu, Vas’i<u>st</u>ha and Kas’yapa
all of them did this worship before. When some stole away the wife of
Brihaspatî, the Guru of the Devas, he, too, by the force of this
worship, got his wife back. Therefore O king! dost thou also celebrate
the Pûjâ for the destruction of Râva<u>n</u>a.

 

25-26. O high minded one! This vow was practised before by Indra for the
destruction of Vritra, by S’iva for killing the demon Tripurâ, by
Nârâya<u>n</u>a for the killing of the demons Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>ava;
so you should also firmly resolve to perform duly this vow with your
whole heart.”

 

27\. Râma replied :-- “O Ocean of Knowledge! Who is that Devî? What is
Her influence; whence has She sprung? What is Her Name? And how is that
vow to be duly observed? Kindly describe all these to me in detail.”

 

28\. Nârada answered :-- “Listen, O Râghava! That Goddess is Eternal and
Ever Constant Primordial Force. If you worship Her, all your
difficulties will be removed and all your desires will be fulfilled.

 

29.  She is the source of Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and others and of all
these living beings. Without Her force, no body would be able even to
move their limbs.

 

30\. That Supreme Auspicious Goddess is the preserving energy of
Vi<u>sn</u>u, is the creative power of Brahmâ, and is the destroying
force of S’iva.

 

31\. Whatever there exists in this infinite Universe, whether Temporal
or Eternal, She is the Underlying Force of all; how, then, can She have
an origin!

 

32-33. Her origin is not Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’a, Sun, Indra, or
the other Devas, not this Earth nor this Upholder of the Earth; She is
devoid of any qualities, the Giver of Salvation of all, the Full
Prakriti. In the time of the final dissolution of this Universe, She
lives with the Supreme Puru<u>s</u>a.

 

34\. She is also Sagu<u>n</u>a, full of qualities, and is the Creatrix
of Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a, and has empowered them, in every
way, to create the three Lokas.

 

35\. She is the Supreme Knowledge, existing before the Vedas, and the
Originator of the Vedas. The individual souls, knowing Her Nature,
become able to free themselves from the bondages of the world.

 

36\. She is known by endless names. The Brahmâ, and the other Devas
might choose to call Her according to their actions and qualities. I am
unable to describe those names.

 

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

 

37\. O descendant in the race of Raghu! Her endless names are formed by
the various combinations of the various vowels and consonants from the
letter ‘A’ to the letter ‘K<u>s</u>a.’”

 

38\. Râma said :-- “O best of the Munis! Describe briefly all the rules
and regulations as to how that vow and worship are to be performed. With
my heart, full of devotion and faith, I will worship the Goddess today.”

 

39\. Nârada said :-- “O Râghava! On a level plot of ground, prepare an
altar. Place the Goddess there and fast for nine days.

 

40\. O king! I will be your priest and I will, with great energy, carry
out this yajña to fullfil the work of the Gods.”

 

41-42. Vyâsa said :-- Then the powerful Bhagavân Hari, hearing all from
the Muni, believed them to be true; and, on the approach of the month of
Âs’vin, prepared the altar on the top of a hill and placed the
Auspicious Goddess, the World Mother and, observing all the rules,
performed the vow and worshipped the Goddess.

 

43\. Fasting for nine days, Râma celebrated the vow and duly offered
sacrifices, performed the worship and Homa ceremonies.

 

44-46. When, on the grand night of the Eighth lunar day, the two
brothers completed the vow as told by Nârada, the Supreme Bhagavatî was
pleased with the worship and appeared before them, mounted on a lion,
and remaining there on the mountain top, addressed Râma and
Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a, in a sweet grave tone, like the rumbling of a
rain cloud, thus :-- “Râma, I am satisfied with your worship; ask from
me what you desire.

 

47\. Râma! You are sent by the gods for the destruction of Râva<u>n</u>a
and are born as a part incarnate of Nârâya<u>n</u>a, in the pure and
stainless family of Manu.

 

48\. It is You that, in ancient times, incarnated as a fish for serving
the purpose of the Devas and preserved the Vedas by killing the terrible
Râk<u>s</u>asas for the welfare of the Universe.

 

49\. It is You that incarnated as a tortoise and held aloft the Mandara
mountain, churned the ocean and nourished the Devas.

 

50-51. O Râma! It is You that incarnated, in days of yore, as a boar and
held aloft on your teeth this earth. It is You that assumed the form of
a Man-Lion and preserved Prahlâda, by tearing asunder the body of
Hira<u>n</u>ya Kas’ipu, by Your sharp nails.

 

52\. O Descent of Raghu! It is You that assumed, in ancient times, the
form of a dwarf and served the purpose of the Devas, by deceitfully
cheating Balî, the younger of Indra.

 

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

 

53\. O son of Kaus’alya! You incarnated as the son of Jamadagni in the
Brâhmi<u>n</u> family, extirpated the line of K<u>s</u>attrîya kings and
gave over this whole earth to Bhagavân Kas’yapa Ri<u>s</u>i.

 

54\. So You are now born as the son of Das’aratha, in the stainless race
of Kâkutstha, at the request of the Devas, harassed by Râva<u>n</u>a.

 

55-56. These powerful monkeys, born as Deva incarnates, all endowed with
great power by Me, will help you. Your younger Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a is
the incarnate of S’e<u>s</u>a serpent; this indomitable man will kill
undoubtedly Indragit, the son of Râva<u>n</u>a.

 

57\. You will kill Râva<u>n</u>a; then you would worship Me, with great
devotion, in the vernal season and then enjoy your kingdom according to
your liking.

 

58\. O best of the Raghus! For full eleven thousand years you will reign
on this earth; and after that reenter your heavenly abode.”

 

59\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Thus saying, the Devî disappeared. Râma
Chandra became very glad and, completing that most auspicious ceremony,
performed the Bejoyâ Pûjâ on the tenth day and gave lots of presents to
Nârada and made him go towards the ocean.

 

60-61. O king! Thus stimulated by the Supreme Energy, the Highest
Goddess brought front to front, Râmachandra, the husband of Kamalâ, went
to the shores of the ocean, accompanied by Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a and
the monkeys. Then he erected the bridge across the ocean and killed
Râva<u>n</u>a, the enemy of the gods. His unparalleled fame spread
everywhere throughout the three Lokas.

 

62\. He who hears with devotion this excellent account of the Devî, will
get the greatest happiness in this world, and, in the end, will get the
final beatitude. There is no doubt in this.

 

63\. O king! There are extant many other Purâ<u>n</u>as, but none is
equal to this S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam. Know, this is my firm belief.

 

Here ends the thirtieth chapter on the narration of the Navarâtra
ceremony by Nârada and the performance of that by Râma Chandra in the
3rd Adhyâya in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa. Here ends the Third Book.

 

The Third Skandha completed.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk04ch01.md)
