[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch08)  [Next](bk03ch10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IX**

** **

**On the characteristics of the Gu<u>n</u>as**

 

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

 

1-2. Nârada said :-- Father! You have described to me the characteristic
of the three qualities; though I have drunk the sweet juice from your
lotus like mouth, still I am not quite satisfied. Kindly describe to me,
in detail, in due order, how I can recognise clearly the three qualities
so that I can get the highest peace of mind.

 

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

 

3\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Creator of the world, Brahmâ, originated
from the Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a, asked by his high minded son Nârada, began to
speak in the following terms.

 

4\. O Nârada! I myself do not possess fully the complete knowledge of
the three qualities; but, as far as I know, I am telling that to you.

 

5\. The pure Sattva quality is not found alone to exist anywhere; it
manifests itself always, in mixed condition, in combination with the
other qualities.

 

6-9. As a beautiful woman, well decorated with ornaments and endowed
with amorous gestures, gives delight, on the one hand, to her husband,
father, mother and friends; and, on the other hand, becomes a source of
pain and delusion to her rival wives, so the Sattva quality, personified
as a beautiful woman, engenders the Sâttvic happiness of the mind to
some individual, at one time, and at another time becomes a source of
pain to the same individual (or at one and the same time becomes a
source of happiness to one and a source of pain to another.) Thus the
Rajas or the Tamas quality, personified respectively as a beautiful
woman becomes a source of pain or delusion to an individual at one time,
and at another time, a source of happiness to the same man. So it is
easily seen that one quality cannot remain single; it remains in union
with the other qualities.

 

Note :-- It is very possible that a man, possessing the Sâttvic quality
at any time, can be said not to possess only the Sâttvic quality but
also the Rajas and the Tamas to a certain degree. At any subsequent time
the Rajas might get preponderance, and that man may be in circumstances
requiring money or so forth; but, due to his Sattva quality before hand
he did not collect money and therefore he feels pain afterwards. So with
the Rajas. Or it may be thus :-- Suppose an earning member is Sâttvic.
He earns just sufficient to meet his wants. But his family members
require more money, for they are Râjasic. Therefore the earning member
is happy for his Sâttvic quality; but the other members are unhappy for
his Sâttvic quality. A man is, as it were, wedded to the three wives,
Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas.

 

10\. O Nârada! When the three qualities remain each in their own real
natures, then the effects produced by them also remain always the same;
no changes are perceived owing to the difference of time or person. But
when they get combined, then each of them produces effects sometimes
counter to their natures.

 

11-13. A young beautiful woman, shy, modest and of sweet qualities, well
versed in her religious learning, and full of good behaviour, skilled in
love practices and full of sweet sentiments becomes a source of loving
delight

 

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

 

to her beloved and also a source of pain to her rival wives so each of
the three qualities assume no doubt, different aspects according to
differences in time and in the nature of the person.

 

O Nârada! As one woman gives pain and delusion to her rival wives and
gives pleasure to her husband and friends, so the Sattva quality, when
perverted, gives pain and delusion to the persons.

 

14-19. As the police sepoys and constables are, on the one hand, delight
to the saints, troubled by thieves, and, on the other hand, sources of
pain and confusion to the thieves and robbers; again as the heavy shower
of rain in a pitch dark night, in the rainy season, when the sky over
clouded, and when there are flashes of lightning and thunder, is on the
one hand, a source of highest delight to a farmer, who has all seeds and
necessary things and implements, and, on the other hand is a source of
pain to the unfortunate householder, whose house is not yet completely
thatched with grass or who has not been able to collect his beams and
grass for necessary roofing, and a source of utter bewildering confusion
to the young woman, whose husband is abroad expected back at that time,
so the three Gu<u>n</u>as produce contrary results when perverted by
contact with the remaining Gu<u>n</u>as, instead what they would have
produced, had they not been perverted so.

 

20-25. O Child! Again I speak to you of the characteristics of the the
Gu<u>n</u>as. The Sattva gu<u>n</u>a is pure, clear, illumining, light
(not heavy) white. When the senses, eyes, etc., and the limbs are felt
very light (without any heaviness) and the heart and brain clear, when
there is dispassion towards the Râjasic and the Tâmasic enjoyments, know
then that the Sattva quality has grown in preponderance in a body. When
there is a tendency to yawn, when there is rigidity and suppression of
the functions of faculties and when one feels drowsiness, consider that
the Râjasic quality has gone to excess. Again, when one seeks after
quarrels and goes to another village, one is always restless and ready
to fight, when one feels heaviness in body, as if wrapped by a very
heavy darkness, when one's limbs and senses are heavy and obscure, when
one's mind is vacant, and when one does not like to go to sleep, know
that the Tamas has increased too much, Nârada!

 

26\. Nârada said :-- O Father! You have described the different
characteristics of the three Gu<u>n</u>as; but I cannot understand how
they act all in conjunction?

 

27\. As those who are enemies to one another do not work united, so
these Gu<u>n</u>as, of opposite characteristics, are enemies, as it
were, to one another; how can, then, they act in unison? Kindly explain
this to me.

 

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

 

28-30. Brahmâ said :-- O Nârada! The three Gu<u>n</u>as may be likened
to a lamp. As a lamp manifests a certain object, so these three
qualities united do manifest or reveal a certain thing. See the wick,
oil, and flame are all of different characteristics; though the oil goes
against fire, still it unites with the fire. The oil, wick and fire
though running against each other, all these united, serve the one
common purpose of illumining, revealing a certain object.

 

31\. So, O Nârada! All the three qualities, though of contrary natures,
go to prove the same thing.

 

Nârada said :-- O Son of Satyavatî! The lotus born Brahmâ thus described
the three qualities, as born of Prakriti; and they are the causes of
this Universe. What I heard of you about the nature of Prakriti, I have
now described before you.

 

32\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! What you asked me, I asked before the same
to Nârada and he described thus (as I told you above) to me about the
characteristics and the effects of the three Gu<u>n</u>as in regular
order and in detail.

 

33\. O King! Wherever in the S’âstras whatever is said, the essence of
all that is this -- that the Highest Energy, the Supreme Force, the
Great Goddess who is pervading the Universe, is always with qualities
and without qualities, according to the differences in the
manifestation. This Supreme Force is to be worshipped with the highest
devotion.

 

34\. The Brahmân, the Puru<u>s</u>a (the Supporter, the Ultimate
Substratum) the Highest Energy considered as the Male Principle though
It is Undecaying, Supreme and Full, is still without any desires or
emotions. It is not able to accomplish any action (without the help of
its inherent force); this Mahâmâyâ, the Supreme Force is doing all the
functions, real and unreal, of the universe.

 

35-37. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra, the Sun, Moon, Indra, the twin
Asvins, the Vasus, Visvakarmâ, Kuvera, Varu<u>n</u>a, Fire, Air, Pûsâ,
the Sadânan, and Gane<u>s</u>a all are united with S’akti and can do
their respective functions; else they are unable to move themselves.
Therefore O king! Know that Supreme Goddess Mahâmâyâ as the cause of
this Universe.

 

38\. O Lord of men! You worship this Goddess, perform sacrifices in
honour of Her and worship Her with the highest devotion.

 

39\. O king! That Mahâmâyâ is Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, She is Mahâ Kâlî, She
is Mahâ Sarasvatî; She is the Goddess of all the bhûtas and She is the
Cause of all causes.

 

40\. That all peaceful, easily worshipped and the ocean of mercy, when

 

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

 

worshipped, fulfills all the desires of Her devotees; what to say, the
mere utterance of Her name is sufficient for the granting of the
desires.

 

41\. In days of yore Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'vara and all the Devas
and many other self controlled ascetics worshipped Her to attain
liberation.

 

42\. O king! What shall I speak now about Her more than this :-- If one
takes Her name even with indistinctness, She grants the desired
purposes, even if they are quite unattainable.

 

43\. In the midst of forest, on the sight of tigers and other ferocious
animals, if one becoming afraid, cries aloud Her seed mantra (twice)
“Ai, Ai” without the Vindu (incorrectly) instead of “Aim, Aim” She
grants immediately his desires.

 

44-45. O best of kings! There is an example of Satyavrata on this point.
That the mere utterance of the name of Bhagavatî gives unforeseen
results, has been witnessed by us and other high minded Munis. Also in
the assembly of the Brâmanas I have heard fully many sages quoting in
detail many instances on the above point.

 

46-47. O king! There was a Brahmân, named Satyavrata, quite illiterate,
a thorough block-head. Once he heard the letter “Ai, Ai” being uttered
by a pig; and in course of a talk he himself uttered incidentally that
letter and thereby became the one of the best Pundits.

 

N. B. – “Aim” is the seed mantra of Sarasvatî, the Goddess of learning.

 

48\. The Goddess Devî, the Ocean of mercy, hearing the letter “Ai” being
pronounced by that Brahmi<u>n</u>, became very glad and made him the
best of the poets.

 

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the 3rd Skandha on the characteristics of
the Gu<u>n</u>as in S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](bk03ch10.md)
