[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch14)  [Next](bk03ch16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XV**

 

**On the battle between Yudhâjit and Vîrasena**

 

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! When the war was declared, the two kings,
excited by greed and anger, took up arms; and a dreadful encounter
ensued.

 

2\. On one side the king Yudhâjit of long arms, surrounded by his own
army, with bows and arrows came ready to fight.

 

3\. On the other hand, the fiery Vîrasena, the second God of the Devas
appeared in the battle, following a true K<u>s</u>attriya custom, on
behalf his daughter’s son.

 

4\. Then that truthful king Vîrasena, seeing Yudhâjit in battle, became
very angry and hurled arrows on him, as a cloud rains on the mountain
tops.

 

5\. On being covered, as it were, by the sharp and swift arrows,
sharpened on a stone slab hurled at him by Vîrasena, Yudhâjit, too,
quickly, shot arrows at Vîrasena and cut off all his arrows.

 

6\. O King! A dreadful fight then ensued between the cavalries, the
warriors on the elephants; and the Devas, men, and Munis began to
witness this terrible battle with wonder and astonishment. Birds,
vultures and crows, desirous to eat the flesh of the dead soldiers, flew
in the air.

 

7\. Blood of elephants, horses and warriors, the bodies that lay dead,
flowed in torrents awfully like rivers in that deadly battle ground. The
torrent of blood excited fear amongst those who came to see it, as the
river Vaitara<u>n</u>i on the way to hell (the Lord of Death) is very
fearful to the sinners.

 

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

 

8\. The human skulls were driven ashore by the current and they look
like so many hollow shells of gourds scattered there for the play of the
boys on the banks of the Jumnâ.

 

9\. When any warrior lay dead on the field, the vultures began to fly
about in the air for devouring his flesh. It seemed then that the soul
of the warrior beholding his beautiful body tried to reenter into his
body, though he thought that it had become very inaccessible to him.

 

10\. Some warriors on being slain in the battle instantly arose in a
celestial car to the heavens and was seen addressing the celestial
nymph, who came already within his embrace, thus “O one of beautiful
thighs. Behold! how my beautiful body is lying on the earth below!”

 

11\. Another warrrior thus slain got up in the heavens on a celestial
car, came in possession of a celestial nymph and when he was sitting
with her in the car, his former wife in the earth made herself a sati
and burnt herself up in the funeral pyre, thus got a celestial body,
came up to the heavens; and that chaste virtuous woman drew away
perforce her own husband away from that celestial nymph.

 

12\. Two warriors, went up, slew each other and lay down dead at the
same time. They went up in the heavens at the same time and there began
quarrel with each other and fight with their weapons for one and the
same celestial nymph.

 

13\. Some hero got in the heavens a nymph more lovely and beautiful than
himself and he thus became very much attached and devoted her. He began
to describe his own heroic qualities and also to copy dotedly the
qualities of his lover so that she might remain faithfully attached to
him.

 

14\. The dust, arising from the dreadful encounter of the soldiers in
battle field, rose up in the air and covered the sun. It appeared night.
After a while that dust became absorbed in the blood below, and the sun
appeared very red, reflected with the colour of the blood.

 

15\. Some Brahmachârî fought in the battle and was slain. He went up to
the heavens; instantly a lovely eyed Devakanyâ, a celestial nymph
desired to select him as bridegroom with great devotion. But that clever
man did not accept the offer, thinking that his vow of Brahmacharya
would be thus broken.

 

16-17. O King! Thus when the battle was deadly, the king Yudhâjit shot a
sharp, dreadful arrow at Vîrasena and severed his head from body.
Vîrasena lay dead on the battle field and his army was routed. The
soldiers fled away from the battle.

 

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

 

18-19. Hearing that her father was slain in the battle, Manoramâ became
very terrified and anxious. She then began to think that the vicious
wicked king Yudhâjit will surely slay her son, for kingdom's sake and to
satisfy his enmity with her father.

 

20\. What shall I do now? My father is slain in the battle. My husband
is no more. My child is a minor to-day. Where shall I go?

 

21\. Greed is very sinful; who is there that cannot be bought over by
love of gold? and what vicious act can there be, that cannot be done
when actuated by covetousness?

 

22\. A greedy man does not hesitate to kill his father, mother,
spiritual guide, friends and others. There is no doubt in this.

 

23\. It is the inordinate love of worldly things that makes a man eat
what is held unclean in society, that makes a man approach a woman who
is unapproachable, and it is greed that makes a man discard his own
religion and become an apostate.

 

24\. In this city I find none so powerful as I can remain there under
his shelter and be able to rear up my child.

 

25\. What can I do if the king Yudhâjit slay my son? There is none in
this world who can save me, and, counting on whose shelter, I can stay
here without any anxiety.

 

26\. And this my co-rival wife Lîlâvatî will always practise enmity with
me. She will never shew mercy on my son.

 

27\. When Yudhâjit will arrive in this city, I will never be able to go
out of it and he will to-day put my son in the prison on the pretext
that he is a minor.

 

28-29. I heard that, in days of yore, Indra entered into the womb of his
pregnant step mother with a small thunderbolt in his hand and divided
the foetus into seven parts with that weapon, again each of these seven
into seven parts again, thus the forty nine Maruts were born in the
Heavens.

 

30-31. I heard also that in ancient times one queen gave poison to
destroy the foetus in the womb of her rival wife. When the child came
out of the womb, he was celebrated by the name of Sagara (with poison)
in this earth.

 

32\. The husband was alive, and still his queen Kaikeyi banished the
eldest son of his king, S’rî Râmchandra to the forest; and the king
Das’aratha sacrificed his life for that very reason.

 

33\. The ministers no doubt wanted before to install my son as the king;
but now they are not independent; they have now yielded themselves to
the king Yudhâjit.

 

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

 

34\. There is no brother of mine powerful enough to release me from my
bondage; I see I have fallen into a great difficulty by the combination
of unforeseen circumstances.

 

35\. Though the success depends on Fate, still one should make an
earnest effort. If one does not make any effort, fate also remains
asleep. I will therefore soon make out a plan to save my son.

 

36-38. O King! Thinking thus, that woman Manoramâ called in private the
best and very respectable minister Vidalla, who was intelligent and
expert in everything, and holding the hands of her son and weeping, said
humbly in a depressed spirit “O Minister! My father is slain in the
battle field, this my son is a minor, and Yudhâjit is a powerful king;
consider all these and tell me what I should do now?”

 

39-40. The venerable minister Vidalla then said to the queen Manoramâ
“It is never advisable for us to stay here. Soon we will go into the
forests of Benares. There I have got my powerful uncle Subâhu. He is
prosperous and has got a strong army. He will protect us.”

 

41\. “I will make the pretext that I am become very anxious for the king
and therefore I am going out to see the king Yudhâjit and will go out of
the city in my chariot. There is no doubt in this.”

 

42-43. Hearing, thus, the Vidalla's words, the queen Manoramâ went to
Lîlâvatî and said “O faireyed! To-day I am going to see the father
Yudhâjit.” Thus saying, she went out of the city in a chariot,
accompanied by her son, attendants and Vidalla.

 

44-45. Grieved at the loss of her father, fearful, distressed, and
fatigued, Manoramâ saw Yudhâjit and performed the cremation of her
father Vîrasena; and, trembling with fear, got to the banks of the
Ganges after two days’ swift journey.

 

46-48. There the robbers, the Nisâdas plundered all their riches and
took the chariot and went away. Manoramâ had only her clothings, that
she wore, left to her. She began to weep, and, holding the hands of her
attendant, went to the Ganges shore, and being afraid crossed the river
on a raft and went to the Chitrakû<u>t</u>a mountain.

 

49\. That terrified Devî went to the hermitage of Bhâradvâja as early as
possible. There she saw the ascetics and was relieved of her fear.

 

50\. Bhâradvâja asked, “O lotus eyed! Who are you and whose wife are
you? Why have you taken so much trouble to come here? Answer all these
truly.”

 

51\. “O beautiful one! are you a Devî or a human being? your son is a
very minor. Why have you come in this dense forest? It seems, as if you
are deprived of your kingdom.”

 

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

 

52\. Thus asked by the best of the Munis, the beautiful Manoramâ became
very much afflicted with grief and began to weep; she could not speak
anything herself and ordered Vidalla to inform the Muni all what had
happened.

 

53-54. Vidalla then said :-- There was a king of Kosala, named
Dhruvasandhi. She is the legal wife of that king. Her name is Manoramâ.
That powerful king of the Solar Dynasty was killed by a lion in a
forest. This boy Sudars’ana is his son.

 

55\. The father of this Manoramâ was very religious. He died fighting
for the cause of his daughter's son. Now the present queen has become
much afraid and has therefore come to this wild forest.

 

56\. The son of this woman is now a minor; he is now taking your refuge.
O best of the Munis! Protect them.

 

57\. To give protection to any distressed person is to acquire merits
higher than performing a sacrifice. Therefore to protect one who is very
much afflicted with fear and who is helpless will have still higher
merits.

 

58\. Bhâradvâja said :-- “O beautiful one! Remain in this hermitage
without any fear; rear up your son here. O auspicious one! There is no
cause of fear here from your enemies.

 

59\. Better nourish and support your child. Your son will surely be a
king and if you remain in this hermitage, no sorrow or grief will
overtake you.”

 

60\. Vyâsa said :-- When the great Muni Bhâradvâja said thus, the queen
Manoramâ became peaceful. The Muni gave them a cottage to live in and
there they dwelt without any sorrow.

 

61\. Thus Manoramâ dwelt obediently with her maid servant, liked by all.
Vidalla also remained there and Manoramâ began to nourish her child.

 

Here ends the Fifteenth chapter on the Devî Mâhâtmya and the battle
between Yudhâjit and Vîrasena and the going away of Manoramâ to the
forest in the 3rd Adhyâya of S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk03ch16.md)
