[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch16)  [Next](bk03ch18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On the story of** **Vis’vâmitra**

 

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

 

1-3. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the Mahar<u>s</u>i
Bhâradvâja and seeing that he made a firm resolve, the King Yudhâjit
called his prime minister quickly and asked, “O intelligent one! What am
I to do now? I want to carry away by force this boy with his mother
sweet Manoramâ; no one desirous of one’s welfare won’t trifle away his
enemy, be he even a very weak one; if he does so, that enemy

 

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

 

will get stronger day by day, as the disease consumption becomes
stronger; and will ultimately become the cause of death.

 

4\. There is no warrior, nor any soldiers here of the other party; no
one will be able to resist me; I can take away, as I like, the enemy of
my daughter’s son and can kill him.

 

5\. I will try to-day to carry him away by force, and Sudars’ana being
killed, my daughter’s son will reign fearlessly without an enemy; there
in no doubt in this.”

 

6\. The prime minister said :-- No such hazardous courage need be shewn
now; you have heard the Maharshi's words; he quoted you the example of
Vis’vâmitra.

 

7\. O King! In days of yore, Vis’vâmitra, the son of the King Gâdhi, was
a celebrated monarch; one day while roaming, he accidentally reached the
hermitage of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha.

 

8\. The powerful king Vis’vâmitra bowed down before the Muni, and the
Muni gave him a seat. The king took his seat there.

 

9\. Then the high souled Vas'i<u>st</u>ha invited the king to a dinner.
Vis’vâmitra, the king, went there with his whole army.

 

10-12. There was a cow, named Nandinî, of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha. The Muni
prepared all sorts of eatables from her milk and entertained them all.
The king with his whole army was very much pleased; and, coming to know
of the divine power of the cow, asked Vas’i<u>st</u>ha to give his cow
Nandinî over to him and said “The udder of your cow Nandinî is like a
big jar. I will give you thousand cows like that; I pray you to let me
have your cow Nandinî.”

 

13\. Vas'i<u>st</u>ha said “O King! This is my sacrificial cow; I cannot
give you this cow in any way, let your thousand cows be yours.”

 

14\. Vis'vâmitra said :-- “O Saint! I will give you cows lakhs or tens
and hundreds of lakhs or any number you like. Please give me your cow;
in case you be unwilling, I will carry her away perforce.”

 

15\. Vas'i<u>st</u>ha said :-- “O King! As you like, better take it
perforce; I will never be able to give you my cow Nandinî from my
house.”

 

16\. O King! Hearing thus the Vas'i<u>st</u>ha's words, Vis’vâmitra, the
King, ordered at once his powerful followers to carry the cow Nandinî
away by fastening a cord round her neck per sheer force.

 

17-19. The followers, obeying the order at once bound the cow with ropes
and began to carry her away by force. At this Nandinî, trembling and
with tears in her eyes, began to say to the Muni “O One! whose wealth
consists only in asceticism! Are you going to leave me? Otherwise

 

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

 

why these fellows are binding me with a cord and dragging me away?” At
this the Muni replied “O Nandinî! I have never parted with you; I
perform all my sacrifices through your milk. O auspicious one! I
honoured this king, my guests, with eatables prepared from your food and
for that reason he is carrying you away from me by sheer force. What can
I do? O Nandinî! I have not the least desire to part with you.”

 

20\. Hearing these words from the Muni, the cow became very angry and
bellowed loudly and terribly.

 

21\. At once came out from her body, on that very spot, the terrible
demons wearing coats of armour, and holding various weapons; and they
uttered aloud, “Wait; you will soon meet with vengeance.”

 

22\. They then destroyed all the forces of the king. And the king alone
was left and he went away alone, much dejected and sorrowful.

 

23\. Oh! That wicked king then cursed with great humility the
K<u>s</u>attriya S’akti; and thinking the Brâhmanic power  would be
attained with great exertion, began to practise asceticism and penance.

 

24\. Performing penance and tapasyâ, very hard indeed, in the great
forest, Vis'vâmitra, the son of Gâdhi, succeeded at last in becoming a
Ri<u>s</u>i and then he renounced his K<u>s</u>attriya Dharma.

 

25\. Therefore, O King! Dost Thou never quarrel with these ascetics and
be involved in wars resulting in great enmity and causing the extinction
of the race.

 

26\. Better dost thou appease the Muni and now go back to your own
kingdom. Let Sudars'ana remain here at his pleasure.

 

27\. O King! This minor boy has no wealth; what harm can he do to you?
It is useless to show your enmity towards an orphan, a weak minor boy.

 

28\. This world is under the control of Destiny; therefore one should
shew mercy to all. O king! What use is there to shew one’s jealousy?
What is inevitable will surely come to pass.

 

29\. O king! The thunderbolt comes sometimes like a blade of grass; a
blade of grass acts sometimes like a thunderbolt.

 

30\. O king! You are very intelligent; consider that by, combinations of
circumstances, a hair can kill a powerful tiger and a gnat can kill an
elephant. Therefore dost thou forsake this rashness and hear my
beneficent advice.

 

31\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The best of kings, Yudhâjit hearing the
prime minister's advice bowed down humbly at the feet of the Muni and
returned to his own city.

 

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

 

32\. Manoramâ, too, became free from anxiety, and, remaining peaceful in
the hermitage, began to nourish and support her child, engaged in vows.

 

33\. The lovely son of the king began to grow daily like the phases of
the waxing moon and sport fearlessly with the boys of the Munis,
altogether, wherever they liked, a sight very auspicious.

 

34\. One day the minister Vidalla came there and the sons of the Munis
seeing him began, in the presence of Sudars’ana, to address him “Klib,”
“Klib.”

 

35\. Sudars’ana, too, hearing them pronounce “Klib,” “Klib” took up the
one letter, “Kli” and uttered this only repeatedly, which is, in fact
the prince of the root mantras of Kâma, with anusvâra omitted.

 

36\. Then the son of the king took that mantram and silently repeated
this in his mind.

 

37\. O King! Thus that boy Sudars'ana was initiated in this root mantra
of Kâma (desire) spontaneously, out of his original Samskâra (innate
tendency) owing to the unavoidable destiny of Fate.

 

38-39. The son of the king, when he was five years old, got this most
excellent mantra, though without its Ri<u>s</u>i (seer), meditation,
without its chhanda (metre) and without Nyâsa (assignment of the various
parts of the body to different deities, accompanied with prayers and
corresponding gesticulations), and considered this as the quintessence
of all, therefore meditated this always in his mind spontaneously and
never forgot it.

 

40-41. When the king's son grew eleven years old, the Muni performed his
Upanayana (sacred thread) ceremony and made him begin the study of the
Vedas. The son, with that mantra power, soon mastered all the studies
about archery, all the moral and political sciences in conformity with
proper rules, within a very short time.

 

42-43. One day Sudars'ana got a vision of the form of the Supreme
Goddess, of a red colour, wearing red apparel and decorated with red
ornaments, mounting on Garu<u>d</u>a and with Her wonderful
Vai<u>sn</u>avî powers and Her face, fully opened like the budding of a
lotus flower.

 

44\. Thus, expert in many branches of learning, Sudars’ana served his
Mother in that forest and began to wander on the banks of the Ganges.

 

45\. One day the Mother of the Universe gave the bows, sharpened arrows,
quiver and a mail coat of armour to that boy in that forest.

 

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

 

46-47. O King! At this time the extraordinary beautiful and lovely
princess S’as’ikalâ, endowed with all auspicious qualities, the daughter
of the king of Kâshi, came to hear that a beautiful prince named
Sudars’ana, a second Kandarpa, full of heroism and endowed with all
auspicious qualities is dwelling in a forest.

 

48\. The princess, hearing this from a soothsayer, mentally loved and
desired him and wanted finally to accept him as her legal husband.

 

49-50. Thus, on one occasion, at the end of a night (night-fall), the
Goddess appeared in her dreams before her and consoled her and said “O
fair one! ask a boon from me; Sudars’ana is my devotee; he will fulfill,
at my word, all your desires.”

 

51\. Thus seeing the beautiful figure of the Goddess in her dreams and
hearing Her sweet words, the honoured S’as’ikalâ was drowned in the
ocean of bliss.

 

52\. When the princess awoke, her face beaming with gladness, her mother
perceived her joy and inferred that her daughter must have been
internally very glad, and asked her repeatedly, but S’as’ikalâ was too
much abashed and did not give vent to the cause of her satisfaction.

 

53\. The princess, remembering her dreams, began to laugh repeatedly on
account of her excessive joy. At last she spoke out in detail all about
her dreams to one of her lady friends, or companions.

 

54\. On one occasion, that large eyed S’as’ikalâ went out for enjoyment
to a nice garden beautified with champaka flowers, attended by her
companion.

 

55\. While the King’s daughter seated under a champaka tree, was
collecting flowers, she saw a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, coming towards her in
great haste.

 

56\. After bowing down before him, that beautiful princess, endowed with
all auspicious qualifications, addressed him in sweet words “O blessed
one! whence are you coming?”

 

57\. The Brâhma<u>n</u>a said :-- “O girl! I am coming on an errand from
the hermitage of Bhâradvâja Muni. Please mention what you are going to
ask me?”

 

58\. S’as’ikalâ replied “O Noble one! What beautiful thing is therein
that hermitage that is extraordinary and worth describing.”

 

59\. The Brâhma<u>n</u>a said “O fair one! There is staying the most
lovely Sudars’ana, the son of the King Dhruvasandhi. He is the loveliest
of all men.

 

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

 

60\. O fair one! He who has not seen him, I think, has his eyes given to
him in vain.

 

61\. O auspicious one! It appears as if the Creator, with a view to see
how it looks, has invested him with all the qualities.

 

62\. O beautiful one! what shall I say more to you, suffice to say that,
that prince is fit to become your husband. I think that the Creator has,
no doubt, settled already the union between you two, as a happy union of
two congenial things (gold in union with Jewel).”

 

Thus ends the seventeenth chapter on the story of Vis’vâmitra and on the
getting of the root mantra of Kâma by the son of the King in S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk03ch18.md)
