[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch11)  [Next](bk03ch13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XII**

 

**On the Ambâ Yajña rules**

 

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

 

1\. The king spoke :-- O Lord! Kindly describe the rules and regulations
as to how the Devî Yajña (sacrifice) is performed with its duly
prescribed rites and ceremonies. Hearing it I will unwearied perform it,
as far as it lies in my power, with as little delay as possible.

 

2\. How the worship is done, what are the mantras, what are the articles
required for oblations, how many Brâhmi<u>n</u>s are required and what
Dak<u>s</u>inâs are to be paid to them, describe in detail all these.

 

3-5. Vyâsa said :-- O king! I am telling you duly how the Yajña is
performed, hear. The actions are always threefold according as the
preparations are made and according as they are practised with regard to
the observed rules. The threefold divisions are Sâttvik, Râjasik and
Tâmasic. The Munis do the Sâttvik Pûjâ, the kings celebrate Râjasic and
the Rakshasas do the Tâmasik Pûjâs. There is another Pûjâ which is
devoid of qualities and which is performed by the liberated ones. I will
describe to you all these in detail.

 

6-7. O king! The Yajña is then called Sâttvik, when it is performed in a
Sâttvik country, like Benares, etc., in Sâttvik time, e.g., in
Uttarâya<u>n</u>a, when the materials collected are earned rightly, when
the mantras are those of the Vedas, when the Brâhmi<u>n</u> is Srotriya,
where there is Sâttvik faith, void of any attachment towards the sensual
objects, when all these happen to coincide. O king! When all the above
takes place and there is purification of materials, actions, and
mantras, i.e., when the

 

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

 

materials are all right, when the actions are done as they ought to be,
and where there is no error or omission, etc., in the mantras, etc.,
then and then only the Yajña becomes perfect and no doubt yield full
results; there would be nothing contrary to this.

 

8-9. If the Yajña is performed with articles not rightly earned, then
there is no fame either in this world nor there is any reward in the
next world. Therefore it is necessary that the Yajña should be performed
with rightly earned materials; then there is fame in this world and
better state in the next world; and happiness is also acquired; there is
no doubt in this.

 

10\. O king! It is before your eyes, as it were, that the
Pân<u>d</u>avas performed the Râjasûya Yajña, the king of sacrifices,
and, on the completion whereof, the excellent Dak<u>s</u>inâs were paid
to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s and others.

 

11\. In that Yajña the highly intelligent S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a Himself,
the Lord of the Yâdavas was present, as well as many other
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, like Bhâradvâja and other fully enightened souls.

 

12\. But within three months after completing the sacrifice, the
Pân<u>d</u>avas suffered extreme hardships and had to live, with extreme
difficulty, as exiles in the forest.

 

13\. Consider the insult shown towards Draupadî, the Pân<u>d</u>ava's
defeat in the play of gambling, their going away to dwell in the forest;
these hardships were borne by the Pân<u>d</u>avas. What rewards did then
the Pân<u>d</u>avas derive from the Râjasûya Yajña?

 

14-15. All the high-souled Pân<u>d</u>avas had to work as slaves of
Virâta; and Draupadî, the best of women, was very much troubled and
insulted by Kichaka. When all these occurred, any one can easily ask
where were the ashirvâdas of the pure souled Brâhma<u>n</u>as? Also what
result did they derive from their unflinching devotion towards S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a when they were involved in the above critical state?

 

16\. No one protected Draupadî, the chaste and the best, the daughter of
Drupada, when she was drawn by her hair on her head into the hall of
assembly where gambling was being played?

 

17\. O king! How could all these happen in a place where S’rî Bhagavân
Kesava Himself and the high souled Yudhis<u>th</u>îra were present? If
one argues, one would conclude “there must have been something wrong in
that Yajña.”

 

18\. If you say that nothing wrong happened in the Yajña, all these were
caused by Fate; then it comes to this :-- that the Vedic mantras, Âgamas
and the other Vedic rites are all fruitless.

 

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

 

19\. If it be argued that though the Vedic mantras are powerful enough
to bear fruits, yet whatever is predestined to come to pass, will surely
pass, then the proposition resolves into this :-- that all the means,
expedients, and appliances lead to meaningless conclusions.

 

20\. Then the Âgamas, the Vedas merely recommend a vidhi or precept by
stating the good arising from its proper observance and the evils
arising from its omission and also by adducing historical instances as
its support; in other words, they are powerless as far as bearing fruits
is concerned; all the acts are meaningless, asceticism to attain Heaven
comes as useless and the peculiar duties of caste are fruitless. O king!
This view is exceedingly culpable; it is never fit for acceptance by the
highsouled persons.

 

21\. O King! If what is laid by God in the womb of futurity (a state of
things preordained by God in which it is sure to take place in the
fullness of time), be taken as the first-hand proof, then all the other
proofs are rendered null and void. Therefore Fate and human exertion
both are to be undoubtedly taken into account to ensure success.

 

22\. Human exertions being applied, if the results come otherwise, the
wise Pundits would infer that some defects, omissions or imperfections
crept into the work.

 

23\. All the Pundits, very learned and instituters of sacrifices have
classed Karmas under different headings according as the agents,
mantras, and articles employed in the worship vary.

 

24\. Once on an occasion Vis’varûpa, ordained as a Guru by Indra (in a
Yajña) (intentionally) did things contrary so as to benefit the Daityas,
who belonged to his mother's side.

 

25\. Vis’varûpa uttered repeatedly the mantrams beneficial to the gods,
while they were present; and, during their absence, prayed heartily for
the welfare of the Daityas; and, in the long run, protected the Daityas.

 

26\. On seeing the Asuras gaining strength, Indra, the Lord of the
Devas, became very much enraged and instantly cut off Vis’varûpa's head
by his thunderbolt.

 

27\. O King! This is then the instance where the contrary fruits were
borne out by the agent employed in performing the Yajña; there is no
doubt in this. This is not possible in the other cases.

 

28\. See, again, the king of Pânchâla performed his sacrifice to get a
son to kill Dro<u>n</u>a, the son of Bhâradvâja; and though he did this
out of angry motives, still Dhri<u>st</u>adyumna was born out of fire;
and Draupadî sprang out of the altar.

 

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

 

29\. Again, in days of yore, Das’aratha, the king of Kosala, was
sonless; and he instituted a sacrifice to get one son; and lo! be got
four sons.

 

30\. Therefore O King! If the Yajña be performed according to proper
rules and regulations, it yields fruits in all respects; again if it be
done unrighteously, without any regard for the rules, etc., it yields
results just the contrary; there is no doubt in this.

 

31-32. Therefore, there must have been some defects in the Yajña of the
Pân<u>d</u>avas; hence contrary effects ensued, and therefore the
truthful king Yudhis<u>t</u>hîra and his powerful brothers and the
chaste Draupadî were all defeated in the play at dice.

 

33\. It might be that the materials were not of a good stamp; they were
all earned by killing the kings, good many in number, and earned thus
unrighteously; or it might happen that the Pân<u>d</u>avas did their
Yajña with too much egoism. However, this is certain that there had
crept in some defects in their actions.

 

34\. O King! The Sâttvik Yajña is rare; it can be done only by the
Sâttvik Munis who live in the 3rd order of the household life or who
live as hermits.

 

35-36. The ascetics that eat daily the Sâttvik food, the roots and
fruits, collected from forests and obtained rightly, that is good to the
Munis and that is well cleaned and purified, are the only ones that can
perform with full devotions the Sâttvik Yajñas, where no animals are
sacrificed (where there are no sacrificial posts to which the victim is
fastened at the time of immolation) and where offerings of cakes of
ground rice in vessels are given. These are the best of all the Sâttvik
Yajñas.

 

37\. The K<u>s</u>attriyas and the Vai<u>s</u>yas perform the Yajñas
with Abhimân (self-conceit and egoism) where many presents are given,
animals are sacrificed, and all things are well cleansed, purified and
elaborately decorated. This Yajña is called Râjasic.

 

38\. That Yajña is according to the sages, Tâmasik, where the Dânavas,
puffed up with arrogance, infatuated with anger, jealousy and wickedness
perform their acts with the sole object of killing their enemies.

 

39\. That Yajña is called Mânas Yâg or mânasic (mental) where the
high-souled Munis, void of worldly desires, collect mentally all the
necessary articles and perform the Yajña with the sole object of
liberation from the bondages of the world.

 

40\. In all the other Yajñas (than the Mânas Yâg) some imperfections or
other naturally arise, due to some defects in the materials, or want of
faith, or in the performance or in the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s.

 

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

 

41\. No other Yajñas can be so complete as the Mânasa Yajña; the reason
being that in the other Yajñas some, imperfections come out due to time,
place, and separate ingredients to be collected.

 

42-43. Now hear who are the persons fit to undertake this mental Yajña
in honour of the Great Goddess. First this mind is to be purified, by
making it void of the Gu<u>n</u>as; the mind being pure, the body
becomes also pure, there is no doubt. When the mind becomes completely
pure, after it has abandoned all sensual objects, fit for enjoyment,
then that man is entitled to perform the Mother's Yajña.

 

44-45. There he should build mentally the big hall for sacrifice, many
Yojanas wide, decorated with high polished pillars out of the materials
brought for the purpose (e. g., fortitude, etc.). Within the hall he
will imagine a wide and spacious altar and place the Holy Fire on it
mentally according to due rules and regulations.

 

46-47. He is to select mentally the Brâhmi<u>n</u> priests and
consecrate them as Brahmâ, Adharyu, Hotâ, Prastotâ, Udgâtâ, Pratihatrâ
and other assistants. He is to worship mentally all these priests.

 

48\. Then he will have to imagine the five Vâyus, Prâ<u>n</u>a, Apâna,
Vyâna, Samâna, and Udâna, as the five fires and locate them duly on the
altar.

 

49-50. Prâ<u>n</u>a Vâyu stands for Gârhapatya; Apâna, for Âhavanîya;
Vyâna for Dak<u>s</u>inâ; Samâna for Avasathya; and Udâna for Sabhya
Agni. These fires are all very terrible; then one should place these
carefully on the altar with great concentration of mind. He is to
collect then all the other necessary materials and think that all are
very pure and free from any defects.

 

51-57. In the Mânasic Yajña, mind is the offerer of oblations and mind
the Yajamâna, the performer of the Sacrifice; and the Presiding Deity of
the Sacrifice is the Nirgu<u>n</u>a Brahmâ. The Great Goddess, the
Nirgu<u>n</u>a Energy, who is always auspicious and gives the feeling of
dispassion and indifference to worldly objects is the awarder of fruits
in this Yajña. She is the Brahmâ Vidyâ, She is the substratum of all and
She is all pervading. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> is to take the Devî's name and
offer oblations in the fire of Prâ<u>n</u>a, the necessary articles for
the Devî's satisfaction. Then he is to make his Chitta and Prâ<u>n</u>a
void of any worldly thought, or any worldly support and to offer
oblations to the Eternal Brahmâ through the mouth of Kun<u>d</u>alinî
(the Serpent Fire.) Next, within his Nirvikalpa mind, by means of
Samâdhi, be should meditate own Self, the Mahes'varî Herself by his
consciousness. Thus, when he will see his own self in all the beings and
all the beings in his own self, then

 

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

 

the Jîva will get the vision of the Goddess Mahâvidyâ, giving auspicious
liberation (Mok<u>s</u>a). O King! After the high souled Munis have seen
the Goddess, of everlasting intelligence and bliss, then he becomes the
knower of Brâhma<u>n</u>. All the Mâyâ, the cause of this Universe
becomes burnt up; only, as long as the body remains, the Prârabdha Karma
remains.

 

58\. Then the Jîvas become liberated, while living; and when the body
dissolves, he attains to final liberation. Therefore, O Child! Whoever
worships the Mother becomes crowned with success; there is no doubt in
this.

 

59\. Therefore follow the advice of the Guru, the Spiritual Teacher; and
with all attention, hear, think and meditate on the Great Goddess of the
World.

 

60\. O King! Liberation is sure to ensue of this Mânasa Yajña. All the
other Yajñas are Sakâma (with some object in view) and therefore their
effects are temporary.

 

61-62. He who wants enjoyments in Heaven, should perform the
Agni<u>st</u>oma Yajña, with due rites and ceremonies; such is the Vedic
injunction. But when the acquired merit expires, the sacrificer will
have to come again into this world of mortals. Therefore the Mânasa
Yajña is eternal and best.

 

63-65. This Mânasa Yajña is not fit to be performed by kings intent on
getting victory. The Yajña that you performed, the serpent Yajña, is
Tâmasic, for you wanted to take vengeance on your enemy, the serpent
Tak<u>s</u>aka; and millions of serpents were made to be burnt in that
sacrifice.

 

O King! Hear now about the Devî Yajña, that was performed by
Vi<u>sn</u>u in the beginning of the creation. You better now do that
Devî Yajña with due rules.

 

66-67. I will tell you all about the rules; there are Brâhmi<u>n</u>s
that know the rules and know best also the Vedas; they know also the
seed mantrams of the Devî, as well as the rules of their application;
they are clever in all the mantrams. These will be your priests and you
yourself will be the sacrificer.

 

68\. O King! Do this sacrifice duly and deliver your father from hell by
the merits that you will acquire thereby.

 

69\. O Sinless One! The sin incurred on account of insulting a
Brâhmi<u>n</u> is serious and leads the sinner to hell. Your father
committed that sin and incurred the curse from a Brâhmi<u>n</u>.
Therefore he has gone to the hell.

 

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

 

70\. Your father died also out of a snake bite which is not a
meritorious one. The death occurred also in a palace built high up in
the air (on a pillar), instead of taking place on the ground on a bed of
Kus'a grass.

 

71\. O best of the Kurus! The death did not occur in any battle nor on
the banks of the Ganges. Void of proper bathing and charities, etc., he
died in a palace.

 

72\. O best of Kings! All the ugly causes, leading to hell, were present
in the case of your father. See, again, there is also one thing which
done will lead to one’s liberation; but that was absent too with your
father.

 

73-76. That is this :-- Let a man remain, wherever he may, whenever he
comes to learn that his end is approaching, even if he had not practised
before any good practices or meritorious deeds, and even if he becomes
senseless in the trial time of death, when dispassion comes to an
individual whose mind gets, for the time being, clear and free from any
worldly thoughts, then he should think thus :-- “This my body, composed
of five elements, will soon be destroyed; there is no cause whatsoever
in having any remorse for it; let whatever come, that it may; I am free,
void of qualities; and I am the Eternal Puru<u>s</u>a; death is not
capable to do any harm to me. All the elements are liable to decay and
destruction; what remorse can overtake me? I am not a man of the world,
I am always free, Eternal Brahmâ; I have got no connection with this
body that is merely the outcome of actions.

 

77\. Before I did meritorious or unmeritorious acts, leading to
happiness and pain; therefore I have got this mortal coil and am
enjoying the fruits of my past auspicious or inauspicious Karma.”

 

78\. Whoever thinks thus and dies, even if he does not take proper
purificatory bath or make any charity, he gets himself freed from the
awful Samsâra and never comes to see himself again born in this world.

 

79\. O King! This method of parting from one’s body is rarely attained
even by the Yogins; this is the acme, the highest height of all the
human efforts towards liberation.

 

80\. But your father, hearing even the curse from a Brâhmi<u>n</u>,
retained his attachment towards his body; therefore he did not attain
dispassion.

 

81\. He thought thus :-- “My body is now free from any disease; my
kingdom is free from enemies or any other source of danger; how can I
now get myself saved from this untimely death.” Thinking thus, he
ordered to call the Brâhma<u>n</u>s, who know the mantrams.

 

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

 

82\. Then that king ascended to the palace, with medicines, many mantras
and many other instruments.

 

83-84. He considered his fate to be the strongest and therefore did not
take his bath in any holy place; he did not perform any charities, did
not sleep on the ground or remember any mantram of the Devî. Due to Kali
entering into his body, he committed the sin of insulting an ascetic and
plunged himself in the ocean of delusion and died bitten by the
Tak<u>s</u>aka snake on the top of a palace.

 

85\. The King has now fallen undoubtedly to the hell, on account of
those vicious deeds. Therefore, O King! dost Thou deliver your father
from the sin.

 

86\. Sûta said, O Ri<u>s</u>is! Hearing these words from the fiery
Vyâsa, the king Janamejaya became very sad and tears came from his eyes
and flowed down his cheeks and throat.

 

He then exclaimed in a suffocating voice “Fie on me! my father is still
in the hell. I will now do at once whatever leads my father to heaven.”

 

Thus ends the twelfth chapter on the Ambâ Yajña rules in the 3rd Adhyâya
of S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses
composed by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](bk03ch13.md)
