[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch18)  [Next](bk03ch20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIX**

 

**On the going to the Svayamvara assembly of Sudars’ana**

 

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

 

1-2. Vyâsa said :-- After the king Subâhu had spoken thus, the Queen
made her daughter S’as’ikalâ, who had always sweet smiles on her lips
sit on her lap and after consoling her with sweet words, began to say “O
fair eyed! You always practise vows and other religious performances;
why are you, then, speaking these unpleasant words? The King has heard
all what you wanted to say and has been very sorry.

 

3-5. That Sudars'ana is very unfortunate, deprived of his kingdom,
helpless, void of wealth and army, abandoned by his friends, exiled with
his mother in the forest, subsisting on roots and fruits, lean and thin.
Thus he is not worthy of becoming the husband of yours. There are many
learned, beautiful, approved of all, qualified with all royal marks,
princes fit to become your husband. They all will come in this
Svayamvara.

 

6\. There is one brother of this Sudars'ana, who is endowed with all
kingly qualifications, beautiful, and qualified  in various other ways.
He is the king of the Kosala country.

 

7\. There is another point worth consideration; please hear it. The King
Yudhâjit is trying his best to kill Sudars'ana on a befitting
opportunity.

 

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

 

8\. He already counselled with his ministers and killed in a desperate
fight the king Vîrasena and installed his daughter’s son on the throne.

 

9\. Even he came up so far as the hermitage of Bhâradvâja to kill
Sudars'ana; afterwards he was prevented by the Munis from doing so then
he returned home.”

 

10-11. S’as’ikalâ replied :-- “Mother! That prince, though staying in
the forest, is approved of by me; under the advice S’aryâti, the chaste
Sukanyâ married Chyavana Muni and served her husband all along; so I
will marry this king’s son and will always be engaged in serving him.
The women are able to attain heaven and emancipation, if they serve
their husbands; therefore if we be sincere in serving our husbands, we
will no doubt be happy.

 

12\. I have seen in my dream that the Goddess Bhagavatî has ordained him
to be my husband; how can I now accept any other body as my husband than
him?

 

13\. The Devî Bhuvanes’varî has pictured his frame firmly in my heart; I
will never be able to leave my dearest beautiful husband and to contract
marriage with any other person.”

 

14\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus the mother, the daughter of the King of Videha,
found many signs and at last desisted. She then reported to the King all
the words of S’as’ikalâ.

 

15-16. When S’as’ikalâ, on the day before the marriage day, became very
anxious and, sent in a great hurry, one trustworthy Brâhmi<u>n</u>,
versed in the Vedas to the hermitage of Bhâradvâja with this message “O
Brâhma<u>n</u>, go in such a way to Sudars’ana, as my father be not able
to know about it and tell Sudars'ana all my words.

 

17-18. My father has called in for my marriage a Svayambara ceremony;
many powerful kings will attend with their armies; O Deva! The Goddess
Bhagavatî has ordered me in dream and accordingly I, with full gladness
of my heart, have become yours already in my heart.

 

19\. Rather I will take poison or I will jump in a blazing fire, than I
can obey my father’s and mother’s words and marry another.

 

20\. By my mind, word, and deed, I have selected you my husband; and
pleasure and happiness is sure to attend on us by the blessings of the
Bhagavatî.

 

21\. Please depend unto Her, at Whose command this whole universe,
moving and unmoving is resting, unto that Great Destiny and come to this
place without fail.

 

22\. What the Goddess, whose commands S’ankara all the other Devas obey,
has ordered, can never turn out false.

 

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

 

23\. O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! You the foremost amongst the virtuous; do
therefore call on that King’s son in privacy and speak out all there to
him. What shall I say more to you. Do all that my object may be
fullfilled.”

 

24\. Thus saying, she gave the Brâhmi<u>n</u> his Dak<u>s</u>inâ and
sent him to Sudars’ana. He went there and reported all the matter duly
to him and quickly returned back.

 

25\. On coming to know all this, Sudars’ana determined to start; and the
Mahâr<u>s</u>i Bhâradvâja, with gladness, sent him.

 

26\. Vyâsa said :-- Seeing her son ready to start, the mother Manoramâ
became very sorry and, trembling and shedding tears, thus spoke to her
son.

 

27-28. “Sudars’ana! Where are you going now? How do you dare to go there
in the Svayamvara alone, where are present kings and all your terrible
enemies. O Son! You are as yet a boy. The King Yudhâjit will certainly
go there with the object of killing you; there will then is no other
body to help you. So you should never go to that place.

 

29\. You are my only son; I am very poor and helpless; I have no other
to lean upon than you; therefore you ought not to throw me in despair at
this moment.

 

30\. See Sudars’ana! The King Yudhâjit who had slain my father, that
uncontrollable king will come there; if you go there alone, he will
certainly kill you.”

 

31\. Sudars'ana replied “Mother! What is inevitable will certainly come
to pass; there is no need to discuss further on the subject. I will go
at the command of the World Mother to that assembly hall

Svayamvara.

 

32\. O Auspicious one! Do not give vent to sorrow; I do fear none by the
grace of the Bhagavatî.”

 

33\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus saying, Sudars’ana mounted on his chariot and
was ready to start. Seeing this Manoramâ began to bless him and so cheer
him.

 

34-37. O Son! Let Ambikâ Devî protect your front; Padmalochanâ protect
your back; Pârvatî, your two sides; S’ivâ Devî, all around you; Vârâhî,
in dreadful paths; Durgâ, in royal forts, Kâlikâ, in terrible fights;
Parames'varî, in the platform hall; Mâtamgî, in the Svayamvara hall;
Bhavanî, the Avertress of world, amidst the kings; Girijâ, in mountain
passes; Chamun<u>d</u>â, in the sacrificial ground, and let the eternal
Kâmagâ, protect you in the forests.

 

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

 

38\. O Descendant of Raghu family! Let the Vai<u>s</u>navî force protect
you in quarrels; let Bhairavî protect you in battles and amongst your
enemies.

 

39\. O Son! Let the Mahâ Mâyâ Jagaddhâtrî Bhuvanes’varî protect you
everywhere and at all times.

 

40\. Vyâsa said :-- Then Manoramâ, speaking thus to him, trembled with
fear and again said :-- “O Sudars’ana, I will also accompany you; there
will not be otherwise.

 

41\. I will never be able to remain anywhere without you and even for
the twinkling of an eye. O Son, carrry me thither where you are desiring
to go.”

 

42\. Thus saying, his mother with her attendants was ready to start. The
Brâhma<u>n</u>as pronounced their blessings. All then went out.

 

43\. Sudars’an, the descendant of the Raghu family, mounted then alone
on his chariot and reached Benares. There the King Subâhu, hearing that
he had come, welcomed him and worshipped him with various presents.

 

44\. He gave him, the house for his residence, and made arrangements for
his food and drink and other necessary requirements and gave order to
his servants to wait on the prince.

 

45\. Then, from various quarters, the kings assembled together; and
Yudhâjit, too, came there accompanied by his daughter’s son, S’atrujit.

 

46-48. The King of Karû<u>s</u>a, the King of Madra, the King of Sindhu,
the King of Mâhîsmatî, the valiant warriors, the King of Pânchâla, the
kings of the mountainous tract, the King of Karnat, the powerful King of
Kâmarûpa, the King of Chola, and the very powerful King of Vidarbhas
with 180 Ak<u>s</u>auhinî soldiers all arrived and assembled there.
Benares was then crowded all over with soldiers and soldiers.

 

49\. Many other kings came there on their beautiful elephants to witness
the Svayamvara ceremony.

 

50\. Then the princes began to talk amongst them “The King’s son
Sudars’ana, too, had come there and is staying unconfused and calm.

 

51\. Is it that the high minded Sudars’ana, born of the Kâkutstha
family, had come there on a chariot, helpless, to marry?

 

52\. Can it be that the princess will overlook these Kings with soldiers
and weapons, and select the long armed Sudars’ana?”

 

53\. Then the King Yudhâjit addressed all the other kings “I will slay
Sudars’ana for the sake of the daughter; there is no doubt in this.”

 

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

 

54-55. Hearing Yudhâjit's words, the king of Keral, the foremost of
those who know morals, began to say :-- “O king! In this Ichchhâ
svayamvara, it is not proper to fight. Here there will be no marriage
for the prowess; there is no arrangement fixed to steal away the bride
elect by force; here the bride will select of her own free choice; what
cause can then there crop up here for quarrels?

 

56\. Before, you had driven him out of his kingdom; and though you are
the superior king, you have taken his kingdom by force and installed
your daughter’s son on the throne.

 

57\. O King! This Sudars’an is born of the Kâkutstha family and the son
of the King of Kosala. Why would you kill this innocent boy?

 

58\. O Long lived! Better be sure that there is some God of this
Universe; He is governing all; and if you commit anything wrongful know
that you will get the fruit of that due to you; there is no doubt it

this.

 

59\. O King! There is victory everywhere of the Truth and Dharma, always
you find Adharma and Falsehood defeated. Therefore dost thou forsake
your evil and mean intentions and pacify your vile mind.

 

60\. Your daughter's son is also present here; he is beautiful and
prosperous and is reigning a kingdom. Why will not that bride elect him
as bridegroom?

 

61-62. Consider again that there are many other powerful princes and
kings in this Svayamvara; the princess may select them also. Therefore
let all the kings assembled here say that if the selection of the
bridegroom be performed in that way, what cause of a quarrel can there
crop up? Knowing all these, you ought not to quarrel here.”

 

Thus ends the Nineteenth Chapter on the going to the Svayamvara assembly
of Sudars’ana and the other kings in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses, by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](bk03ch20.md)
