[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch06)  [Next](bk03ch08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On the creation and the Tattvas and their presiding deities**

 

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

 

1.O Brahmâ said :-- Nârada! Thus we three I, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahâdeva
saw that highly effulgent Goddess: we also saw separately Her attendant
goddesses, one after another, that form, as it were, a veil to her? Who
were also preeminently grand.

 

2-3. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Nârada, the foremost of the Munis, hearing
thus his father's words, was exceedingly pleased and asked :-- O
Grandsire of all the Lokas! Now describe in detail that ancient and
indestructible undecaying, unchangeable, eternal Puru<u>s</u>a, that is
Nirgu<u>n</u>a (free from Prâkritic qualities) that you have seen and
realised.

 

4\. Father! You have seen the S’akti (the Prime Energy) personified the
Sagu<u>n</u>a energy, the Supreme Goddess, having hands and feet; but
cannot understand of what kind is that Nirgu<u>n</u>a S’akti which
cannot be seen and which is devoid of all Prâkritic qualities.

 

O Lotus-born! Be good enough to describe to me the real nature of that
Prakriti and Puru<u>s</u>a and thus satisfy me.

 

5-6. O Lord of Creation! I practised severe austerities in the
Svetadvîpa (white island), so that I might realise and see the
Nirgu<u>n</u>a Highest Self and the Nirgu<u>n</u>a S’akti, the Supreme
Goddess; I saw there many other Mahatmâs (high class spiritual persons)
who attained siddhis (supernatural powers) practise Tapasyâ with their
passions and anger conquered. But I did not realise nor did I see
anything about that Nirgu<u>n</u>a Highest Self. Father, I was not
despaired; again and again I continued with my ascetic practices; but
still I failed.

 

7\. Father, you have been so successful as to see that beautiful S’akti
with qualities; I have heard about Her from you, but how and of what
sort, is that invisible attributeless energy as well as that
Nirgu<u>n</u>a Purusa. Please narrate and explain all these and satisfy
my desires that always reign in my breast.

 

8\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus asked by Nârâda, the Lord of creation,
the grandsire of the Lokas, smiled, and began to speak the truth in the
following words :--

 

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

 

9\. O best of Munis! The form of the Nirgu<u>n</u>a Purusa (the Supreme
Spirit beyond the Prâkritic qualities) cannot exist or be visible; for
everything that comes within the range of sight is transitory. How can,
then, that Eternal Spirit have form and how can He become visible!

 

10\. O Nârada! The Nirgu<u>n</u>a Energy or Nirgu<u>n</u>a Puru<u>s</u>a
comes not easily within the range of knowledge; but both of them can be
realised by the Munis in their meditation in their consciousness.

 

11\. Prakriti and Puru<u>s</u>a have no beginning nor end; they can be
realised only through faith; those that have no faith can never realise
them.

 

12\. Nârada! The universal consciousness, that is felt in all the
beings, know that as the Highest Self; the Energy that is universal and
is seen always in all the beings, know that as the Highest Self.

 

13\. O blessed one! That Puru<u>s</u>a and Prakriti pervade everywhere
and exist in all the things; in this Universe nothing can exist without
the presence of both of them.

 

14\. Both of them are the highest intelligent self, nirgu<u>n</u>a (free
from all material qualities), without any tinge of impurity, and
undecaying. The one form that is a combination of these two is always to
be meditated in the heart.

 

15\. What is S’akti (energy) is the Highest Self; what is the Highest
Self is the Highest S’akti. O Nârada! Nobody can ascertain the subtle
difference between these two.

 

16\. O Nârada! Merely the study of all the S’âstras and the Vedas with
their Amgas without renunciation does not enable one to ascertain the
difference between these two.

 

17\. O Child! This whole universe, moving and non-moving, comes out of
Ahamkâra (egoism). How can one ascertain the above difference even if he
tries for one hundred kalpas, unless one frees oneself from Ahamkâra.

 

18\. The Jîvas are Sagu<u>n</u>a (with qualities), how can the
Sagu<u>n</u>as see the Nirgu<u>n</u>a One with their physical eyes?
Therefore O Intelligent one! try to see the Sagu<u>n</u>a (Brahmâ) only
within your heart (until you free yourself from the material qualities
and thus be fit to realise the Nirgu<u>n</u>a Brahmâ).

 

19-20. O best of Munis! If the tongue (organ of taste) and eyes (organ
of sight) be affected with over biliousness, the pungent taste and the
yellow colour do not appear what it appeared before; so the hearts of
Jîvas, overpowered with material qualities, are quite unfit for
realisation of the Nirgu<u>n</u>a Brahmân. O Nârada! That heart again
has come

 

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

 

out of Ahamkâra; how can then that heart be free from Ahamkâra?

 

21\. Until one becomes able to cut asunder all connections with
qualities, the seeing of that Nirgu<u>n</u>a Brahmâ is impossible. No
sooner one is totally free from Ahamkâra, than the Nirgu<u>n</u>a Brahmâ
is at once seen by him within his heart.

 

22-24. Nârada said :-- O best of the Devas! Ahamkâra is three-fold,
Sâtvik, Râjasik and Tâmasik; describe in detail the differences between
these three sub-divisions as well the real nature of the Gu<u>n</u>as.
Also describe to me about that knowledge, knowing which will lead to my
salvation. Also describe, in detail, the characteristics of the several
Gu<u>n</u>as, in due order.

 

25-26. Brahmâ said :-- O Sinless one! The energy of Ahamkâra is of three
kinds :-- Jnâna S’akti, Kriyâ S’akti, and Artha or Dravya S’akti. The
power by which knowledge is produced or obtained is the Sâttvic
Ahamkâra; the power by which action or activity or motion is produced is
the Râjasic Ahamkâra; and that by which the material things or objects
of have senses are generated is called the Tâmasic Ahamkâra. O Nârada!
thus I described to you, in due order, the threefold Ahamkâra.

 

27-30. Now I describe to you their merits and workings in detail; hear.
Out of the Dravya S’akti of the Tâmasic Ahamkâra come sound, touch,
form, taste and smell. From these five qualities, the five Tanmâtrâs or
the five subtle-elements (primary atoms) are produced.

 

Sound is the quality of Âkâ'sa (ether); touch is the quality of Vâyu
(Air); the form is the quality of Agni (fire); the taste is the quality
of Jala (water); and the smell is the quality of earth.

 

O Nârada, these ten gross and subtle materials can, when combined,
become endowed with power to work out results in the shape of earth,
water, fire, etc., and when the Panchîkara<u>n</u>a process is combined,
the building of the whole cosmos takes place as a natural consequence of
the Tâmasa Ahamkâra, endowed with the energy of generating material
substances.

 

31-34. Now hear what are produced by the Râjasic energy. The five organs
of hearing, touch, taste, sight, and smell (ears, skin, tongue, eyes and
nose) called the five Jñânendriyas (organs of senses); mouth, hands,
feet, anus and the organs of generation called the five Karmendriyas
(organs of action); and Prâna, Apâna, Vyâna, Samâna, and Udâna, the five
Vâyus. The creation out of these fifteen substances is called the
Râjasic energy. Nârada! All these organs of senses and actions endowed
with the Kriyâ S’akti, called the Kara<u>n</u>as and the materials
fashioned out of them are called the chidanuvritti or Mâyâ.

 

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

 

35-38. O Nârada! From the S'âttvik Ahamkâra are produced the five
presiding rulers of the five internal organs named Dik (quarters), Vâyu,
Sun, Varu<u>n</u>a, and the twins Asvini Kumâras and the four presiding
rulers of the four fold divisions of Antahkara<u>n</u>a (Buddhis, manas,
Ahamkâra and chitta) named Moon, Brahmâ, Rudra, and Ksetrajña. Thus the
above five organs of senses, the five organs of action, the five Vâyus
and mind, these sixteen substances are reckoned as the Sâttvic creation.

 

39-40. O Child! The Highest Self has two forms; one gross and the other
subtle. The formless Self; the Consciousness incarnate, as it were, is
the first form. The Seers consider this formless self to be the primary
cause (the ultimatum) of all this phenomenal cosmos. (This is only for
the best qualified Jñânis, not for others).

 

The Second Form is the Gross Form for the meditation of the second class
qualified persons; thus the sages say. This second form of the Supreme
Goddess is conditioned by inherent Mâyâ (time, space and causation);
this is also divided into gross and subtle, according as it is the outer
or inner body of the second form (and the form suited for the meditation
of the third class and the second class devotees).

 

41\. My body is called Sûtrâtmâ; I will now tell you the gross body of
Brahmân, the Highest Self.

 

O Nârada! This my body and soul having the nature of a string or thread
is called Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha; this is also the gross body of the
Paramâtman; therefore the Paramâtman together with the Sûtrâtmâ, should
also be worshipped. O Nârada! I will now describe to you the outer gross
body of Brahmân, the Highest Self; hear it attentively; if one hears it
with faith and devotion, one is sure to get salvation.

 

42-43. I have mentioned to you before the five subtle elements, called
the five Tanmâtrâs; these, now, when the Panchî Kara<u>n</u>a process is
done, are converted into the five gross elements. Now hear what the
Panchî Kara<u>n</u>a process means :--

 

44-46. Suppose you are to create the gross element of water. Divide into
two equal parts the subtle element of water; divide also the other 4
elements into two equal parts respectively. Now set apart the first half
of each of the five elements; divide the second half of each of the
elements into four equal parts. Mix the first half of each of the
elements with each of the fourth part of the other four elements; and
you get one gross element. Similarly you get the other four gross
elements. For example :-- You want to get the gross element of water :--
With the half of the subtle

 

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

 

element (½) of water mix the fourth part, of the halves of the other
elements of ether, fire, air and earth; you get the gross element of
water and so on.

 

The Panchîkara<u>n</u>a process is clearly illustrated in the following
table.

 

                                                              TABLE

|               |       |          |      |       |       |
|---------------|-------|----------|------|-------|-------|
|               | Ether |      Air | Fire | Water | Earth |
| Ether         | 1/2   | 1/8      | 1/8  | 1/8   | 1/8   |
| Air           | 1/8   | 1/2      | 1/8  | 1/8   | 1/8   |
| Fire          | 1/8   | 1/8      | 1/2  | 1/8   | 1/8   |
| Water         | 1/8   | 1/8      | 1/8  | 1/2   | 1/8   |
|      Earth    | 1/8   | 1/8      | 1/8  | 1/8   | 1/2   |
| Gross element | 1     | 1        | 1    | 1     | 1     |

 

 

When the five gross elements are thus produced, consciousness then
enters into these elements as their presiding deities; next comes the
feeling of egoism (I ness) identifying itself with the body thus created
out of the five elements. (I am this body and so forth).

 

47\. This great “I”, the great consciousness, creating and considering
the Cosmos as its body is called the Bhagavân, Âdideva, Nârâyana or
Vâisvanara.

 

48\. When, by the Panchîkara<u>n</u>a process, the five gross elements,
earth, ether, air, etc., are solidified and get their clear definite
forms, one, two, three, four, five, qualities are seen to exist in
ether, air, fire, water, and earth, respectively.

 

49-51. Thus ether has one quality only - that is sound: the air has got
two qualities - sound and touch; the fire possesses three qualities -
sound, touch, and form; the water has got four qualities - sound, touch,
form and taste; the earth has got five qualities - sound, touch, form,
taste and smell, and by the various combinations of these five gross
elements, is produced this grand Cosmos, the great body of Brahmân.

 

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

 

52\. Similarly the sum-total of Jîvâs is produced from the several parts
of the whole Brahmân<u>d</u>a; these Jîvâs are eighty four lakhs; so the
sages say.

 

Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of the Third Skandha of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses, on the creation
and the Tattvas and their presiding Deities.

 

Note :Of these Jîvâs, those who are the best qualified, the
Uttamâdhikâris, are known as the Brahmâ<u>n</u>as, Jânaghana Tûrîyas, as
denoted by Om Hrîm; the middlings have their gross, subtle and causal
bodies and are called as Brahmâ Vais'vânara, Sûtra,
Hira<u>n</u>yagarbhas; and the third class is known as Vis'va, Taijasa.
and Prâjñas and forms the body, as it were, of the Brahmân. There are
others also, animals, etc., in the lowest class.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk03ch08.md)
