[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch12)  [Next](bk03ch14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIII**

 

**On the Devî Yajña by S’rî Vi<u>sn</u>u**

 

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

 

1-3. The King spoke :-- O Grandfather! How did Vi<u>sn</u>u, the
Powerful, the Cause of the world, perform the Devî Yajña? Whose help did
he receive and what priests with their knowledge of the Vedas did he
engage, kindly tell all these to me in special details. I will very
attentively hear first this Devî Yajña, performed by Vi<u>sn</u>u; and
then I will make arrangements to do that myself accordingly.

 

4\. Vyâsa said :-- O noble one! Hear in detail that very wonderful
thing, how Vi<u>sn</u>u celebrated the Devî Yajña comformably to the
rules laid down in the S’âstras.

 

5\. When Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes’a were each given powers by the
Devî, the Goddess of the Universe, and when they parted, these three
Devas became free from their womanhood, while they were coming back in
their aerial cars and turned out men, as they were before.

 

6\. These three Devas, found the great ocean before them. They brought
out world from it; and built, in that world, dwelling abodes; and they
themselves began to live in some of them.

 

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

 

7\. That world became fixed, steady and the supporter of all beings when
the Goddess imparted the power of fixture, steadiness, and the power of
supporting to the world. The earth, filled with marrow, then, became
fixed and the great supporter by Her power.

 

8-10. O King! The name of this earth is Medinî, since it was made out of
the marrow of the two Asuras Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>abha. This earth is
termed Dharâ because it supports all; is termed Prithvî because it is
very capacious; and it is called Mahî because it is great, since it
supports so many beings. O King! the Ananta serpent is holding it on her
thousand-hoods. To make the earth remain solid and compact, Brahmâ built
at places mountains. As iron nails in a log of wood, so these hills and
mountains within this earth made it fixed. Therefore the Pundits call
these mountains “Mahîdhara,” holder of the earth.

 

11\. O King! Thus the golden Meru, the great mountain, many Yojanas
wide, adorned with many golden mountain peaks was created.

 

12\. Next Marîchi, Nârada, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Dak<u>s</u>a,
and Vas’i<u>st</u>ha were created by Brahmâ; these are the Brahmâ’s
mental sons (sons created by the sheer power of mind).

 

13\. The son Kas’yapa was born to Marîchi and thirteen daughters were
born of Dak<u>s</u>a. From these daughters and out of the seed of
Kas’yapa, various Devas and Daityas were born.

 

14\. Then human beings, animals, serpents and many other classes were
created. This is called the Kâsyapî S’rî<u>st</u>i or the Kas’yapa’s
creation.

 

15\. Next Svâyambhava Manu sprang from the lower half of Brahmâ; and the
daughter named S'atarûpâ came out of the left hand side of the Brahmâ’s
body.

 

16\. The two sons Priyavrata and Uttânapâda were born of Manu in the
womb of S’atarûpâ and the three daughters, very beautiful and fair
complexioned, were also born of him.

 

17\. Creating then, the Bhagavân, the lotus born Brahmâ built the
beautiful Brahma-loka, on the top of the Meru mountain.

 

18\. Then the Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u built the Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha city on
the top of all the lokas or worlds to dwell with his consort
Lak<u>s</u>mî.

 

19\. Mahâdeva, too, built the exceedingly beautiful Kailâs’a and stayed
there with his Bhûtas and played with them at his will.

 

20\. The third Loka termed Heaven was built on the top of Meru,
decorated with various precious gems and jewels and stones. It was fixed
as the abode of Indra.

 

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

 

21-22. When the great ocean was churned, Pârijâta, the best of all the
trees, the elephant Airâvata with four tusks, the Heavenly cow yielding
the milk of all desires, the Uchchais’ravâ horse and Apsarâs, Rambhâ and
others, arose and were taken by Indra. These became the ornaments of
Heaven.

 

23\. The Moon and Dhanvantarî, the great phyisician also came out of the
churning of the ocean. These surrounded with many other members began to
shine, being situated above the Heavens.

 

24\. O King! Thus the three varieties, human beings, Devas, and Tiryakas
(birds, etc.) and their great subvarieties sprang up.

 

25\. The four classes of Jîvas, A<u>nd</u>aja (born from the eggs),
Svedaja (born out of sweats), Udbhija (plants, etc.) and Jarâyujâ (men,
etc.) were created, being endowed with the fruits of their past
auspicious or inauspicious Karmas, as the case may be.

 

26\. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes’a began to play and walk about at
their leisures in their respective spheres, after they finished all
their creations.

 

27\. Thus the wheel of creation being started, the Great God Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u Achyuta remained in sport with Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî in His
own sphere Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha.

 

28\. Then Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, while sitting one day in
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, got in his mind the memory of that beautiful island,
called Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa, adorned with precious stones, gems and jewels.

 

29-33. O King! In this Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa, the Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u got
the vision of the Mahâ Mâyâ and the auspicious mantra. He now thought to
celebrate a Yajña in honour of the Devî, when he recollected the highest
Energy, the Great Goddess. He then went out of his abode and invited
Brahmâ, Mahes’vara, Kuvera, Indra, Varu<u>n</u>a, Fire, Yama,
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, Kas’yapa, Dak<u>s</u>a, Vâmadeva, Brihaspati and
others and began to collect lots of materials necessary for the Devî
sacrifice. Selecting a site Sâttvik, beautiful, and possessing great
spiritual powers, Vi<u>sn</u>u erected, with the help of the great
artists and engineers, a wide capacious sacrificial hall, and for the
due celebration and fulfilment of it, appointed twenty seven priests;
who pledged a solemn vow to complete it duly.

 

34\. When the big altar and chiti (pile of wood for burning, stack of
sacrificial bricks) were finished, the Brâhma<u>n</u>as began to recite
slowly the Devî mantrams with their root mantrams.

 

Note :-- Chiti, lit pile of wood for burning, is perhaps the Mûlâdhâra,
the sacral plexus, where the fire called Kundalinî is first kindled by
processes of Yoga.

 

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

 

35-37. Then the profuse quantities of ghee were offered as oblations to
to the Sacred Fire. Thus when the Homa, (offering oblations of ghee to
the fire) ceremony was finished elaborately and conforming to the rules
of the S’âstras, the sweet and melodious Heavenly voice was heard in the
air, addressing Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân, thus :-- O Vi<u>sn</u>u! Let You
be the supreme amongst the gods; honour and worship shall be Thine
first; and you would be the most powerful of the Devas. Indra together
with Brahmâ, and the other Devas, all will worship You.

 

38-39. O Achyuta! (O Infallible One!) Those men on the earth that will
be devoted to you, will certainly be endowed with power and you shall be
the bestower of boons and all their desires. O Vi<u>sn</u>u! you will be
the Supreme of the Devas and you will be the God of the gods; you will
be the first and foremost in all the sacrifices and you will be
worshipped by the sacrificers.

 

40-41. People will worship you; and you will favour them with the boons.
O best of the Puru<u>s</u>as! When the Devas will be troubled by the
Asuras, they will come and take refuge in Thee. You will be the
Protector of all, there is no doubt in this. In all the Purâ<u>n</u>as
and all this vast Vedas, You will be first worshipped.

 

42\. O Kes’ava! Wherever there will be decay and decline in religion,
You will incarnate in your parts and preserve the religion.

 

43-44. O Mâdhava! Avatâras, renowned in all the worlds, will come down
on earth as Your part incarnations in all sorts of wombs, in due order,
and will be respected by all the high souled personages. O Madhusûdana!
Those Avatâras will be the best of all the Avatâras and will be famous
all the Lokas, the worlds.

 

45\. In all your Avatâras, you will get your attendants, the S’aktis
(females) drawing their energies from My parts; and they will serve your
purposes.

 

46-47. Vârâhî, Nârasimhî, etc., and various other S’aktis of auspicious
appearances, endowed with various weapons and decked with all the
ornaments will serve as your attendants; no doubt in this. O
Vi<u>sn</u>u! Always with their help and under the influence of My
favour, you will no doubt be quite competent to serve the purposes of
the Devas.

 

48\. You should respect and worship all those powers by all means and
with very great attention; never shew the slightest trace of pride to
them; never do you thus insult them.

 

49\. These S’aktis, capable of bestowing all the desires, will be
worshipped in Pratimâs (images of clay, etc.) in the whole of India.

 

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

 

50\. O Deva of the Devas! The fame of all these S’aktis, as well as of
You will be spread in the seven worlds and in the whole Universe.

 

51\. O Hari! The human beings on this earth will constantly worship with
selfish ends these powers and you, for the fructification of their
desires.

 

52\. Having various desires, men will, in your worship, present various
offerings, recite the Veda mantrams, and repeat the names of you and the
powers.

 

53\. O Vi<u>sn</u>u! You will be the God of the Immortals and your glory
will be enhanced by the worship offered by the human beings in the world
as well as in the heavens.

 

54\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The heavenly voice, thus, bestowing boons on
Vi<u>sn</u>u, ceased. Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân became very glad to hear
this.

 

55-58. Then Hari, the God of Gods, completed duly the sacrifice and
dismissed the Devas and the Munis, the sons of Brahmâ. Then ascending on
Garu<u>d</u>a, (His Vâhana), He went up to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha with his
followers. The Devas also went to their own respective places. The Munis
also retired gladly to their own hermitages, all thunderstruck to see
these things, conversing with each other about this sacrifice.

 

59\. O king! All were filled with best devotion towards the Supreme
Force, on hearing this clear beautiful, sonorous heavenly voice; then
the Dvîjas, the Munis, and Munîndras began to worship with devotion,
according to the Vedas, that Highest Force, the Supreme Goddess, giving
all desired objects profusely in all the details.

 

Here ends the thirteenth chapter on the Devî Yajña by S’rî Vi<u>sn</u>u
in the third Adhyaya in S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam; the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am
by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](bk03ch14)
