[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch27)  [Next](bk03ch29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVIII**

 

**On the incidents connected with Navarâtri**

 

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- O Muni! How did Râmchandra celebrate the Devî’s
Pûjâ, that leads to happiness? Who was He! And how was stolen away His
Sîtâ? How was He deprived of His kingdom? Please satisfy me by narrating
all these incidents to me.

 

2\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! There lived, in days of yore, in the city of
Ayodhyâ, a prosperous king of the solar dynasty named Das’aratha. He
always worshipped the Devas and Brâhma<u>n</u>as.

 

3-5. He had four celebrated sons Râma, Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a, Bharata
and Satrughna. These four sons were equally learned and beautiful and
they always did actions agreeable to the king. Of these, Râmachandra was
the son of the Queen Kaus’alya, Bharata was the son of Kaikeyî, and the
good looking Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a and Satrughna were the twin sons of
Sumitrâ. While young, they learned the art of archery and began to play
with bows and arrows in their hands.

 

6-7. Thus educated and purified, the four sons began to give delight
more and more to the king; one day the Mahar<u>s</u>i Vis’vâmitra came
to Ayodhyâ and aked from the king Das’aratha the help of his son
Râmachandra for the protection of his sacrificial ceremonies. The king
could not cancel the Vis’vâmitra's request and sent with him Râma,
accompanied by Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a.

 

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

 

8-11. The lovely Râma and Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a accompanied the Muni on
his way back. There lived a terrible looking Râkh<u>s</u>asî, named
Tâ<u>d</u>akâ, in a forest on their way, who used to give great troubles
to the ascetics; and Râma killed her with only one arrow. Next he killed
Subâhu and shot arrows at another night-wanderer Mârîcha and made him
senseless, almost dead and threw him at a great distance and thus saved
Vis’vâmitra from all the obstacles troubling him in his sacrificial
ceremonies. Thus fulfilling the great work, protecting the sacrificial
ceremonies, Râma, Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a and the Muni Cowsick, the
three, started for the kingdom of Mithilâ. On his way, Râma Chandra
rescued Ahalyâ from the curse that she was suffering from.

 

12-13. At last the two brothers, accompanied by the Muni, reached the
city Videhanagar. Just at this time the king Janaka of Ayodhyâ made a
vow to give in marriage Sîtâ to anybody who will be able to break the
bow of S’iva; Râma broke that bow into two and married Sîtâ, born of
Lak<u>s</u>mî’s parts. The king Janaka gave in, marriage, to
Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a his own-daughter Urmilâ.

 

14\. The good and auspicious Bharata and Satrughna married respectively
Mândavi and S’rutakîrti, the two daughters of Kus’adhvaja.

 

15\. O king! Thus, in the great city of Mithilâ, the four brothers
performed their marriage ceremonies, according to the prescribed rules
and rites.

 

16\. The king Das’aratha, then seeing Râma well qualified to take charge
of the kingdom, proposed to install him on the throne of Ayodhyâ.

 

17\. The queen Kaikeyî, seeing that various articles were being
collected for the installation of Râma, asked for the two boons,
promised before, from her husband Das’aratha, who was completely under
her control.

 

18\. The first request was her own son, Bharata’s becoming the king of
Ayodhyâ; and the second request was the banishing of Râma to the forest
for fourteen years.

 

19\. Thus Râmachandra went accompanied by Sîtâ and
Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a to the Dan<u>d</u>akâ forest, frequented by the
Râk<u>s</u>asas.

 

20\. The high souled king Das’aratha felt very much due to bereavement
of his son, remembered the curse given to him by Andhaka Muni and left
his mortal coil.

 

21\. Bharata, seeing that his father died solely on, account of his
mother, refrained from becoming the king of Ayodhyâ, the prosperous city
and wanted the welfare of his brother Râma.

 

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

 

22\. Râmachandra went to the forest Pañchava<u>t</u>î. One day the
youngest sister of Râva<u>n</u>a, named Sûrpanakhâ became very
passionate and came to Râma; whereon Râmachandra disfigured her by
cutting off her nose and ears.

 

23\. Seeing her nose thus cut away, the Râk<u>s</u>asas Khara,
Dû<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a, and others fought very hard against the powerful
Râmachandra.

 

24\. The truly powerful Râma killed Khara, Dû<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a and all
other powerful Râk<u>s</u>asas, for the welfare of the Munis.

 

25\. Then Sûrpanakhâ went to Lankâ and informed Râva<u>n</u>a of her
nose having been cut and of the death of Khara, Dû<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a and
others.

 

26\. The wicked and malignant Râva<u>n</u>a, hearing of their death,
became filled with anger and, mounting on a chariot, quickly went to the
forest of Mârîcha.

 

27\. Râva<u>n</u>a expressed his desire to take away Sîtâ; so ordered
that magician Mârîcha to assume the form of a golden deer and go to Râma
and entice him away.

 

28\. The magician Mârîcha assumed the form of a golden deer and reached
the sight of Jânakî. Then that variously spotted deer began to move
about near the Sîtâ Devî.

 

29\. Looking at the beautiful golden splendour of the body of that
golden deer, Sîtâ Devî, prompted as it were by the great Fate, spoke to
Râmachandra like other independent women “O Lord! Bring me the skin of
the deer.”

 

30\. Râma too, not judging at all, as if it was the work of Destiny,
asked Lak<u>s</u>ama<u>n</u>a to remain there and protect Sîtâ, took
hold of his bows and arrows and went after the deer.

 

31\. Infinitely skilled in magic, the deer seeing Hari in the shape of
Râma sometimes came and sometimes came not within his sight and
travelled from one forest to another.

 

32\. When Râma saw that He had come very far away from His place, He
became angry and drew his bow and shot sharp arrows at that deer, the
transformed Mârîcha.

 

33\. The deceitful conjuror Râk<u>s</u>asa, being thus shot very
violently and pained intensely, cried out “O brother
Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a! I am killed” and breathed his last.

 

34-35. This loud awful cry reached Jânakî’s ears. She took that voice
for Râma's voice and told to Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a in a grieved tone
“Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a, go quickly. I fear Râma is killed; hear the
voice ‘O Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a! come quickly and deliver me’ is calling
you to go there.”

 

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

 

36\. Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a then replied “Mother! You are alone in this
forest; therefore I cannot leave you thus even if Râmchandra be killed.

 

37\. O daughter of Janaka! Râma has ordered me to remain here. Now if I
leave you and go elsewhere, then I will be charged with having disobeyed
his order. Fearing that, I am unable to leave this place.

 

38\. It seems to me, moreover, that some magician has carried Râma away
from here; I am therefore unable to move a step from here and leave you
alone.

 

39\. Hold patience; let me consider; I find no such man as can kill
Râma; I am unable to leave you by any means alone here and to go away,
disobeying Râma’s orders.”

 

40\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Then the young wife of Râma, having handsome
teeth, began to cry aloud, fearfully, as if made to do so by Destiny,
and uttered the cruel words to the pure Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a.

 

41\. “O son of Sumitrâ! I know why you are so much attached towards me?
I know very well that you have been sent here by Bharata to accompany us
simply to obtain me.

 

42\. O vile K<u>s</u>attriya, skilled in magic! I am not that sort of
woman acting to my wanton will; never I will accept you of my will as my
husband in case S’rî Râmchandra be dead.

 

43\. In case S’rî Râma does not return, I will certainly commit suicide;
without him I would be very much grieved and afflicted with sorrows; and
I would not be able to hold on my life.

 

44\. O Saumitrî! Whether you remain here or do not remain, I won’t
request anything more to you; for I am quite unaware of your mind; but
this much I like to say to you, where has your intimacy towards your
religious elder brother now gone?”

 

45-46. Hearing thus the Sîtâ Devî’s words, Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a became
exceedingly sorry; and, being suffocated with heaving sighs on account
of the internal pain told Sîtâ “O! One born from without any womb! Why
are you uttering so cruel and malignant words; I clearly see when you
are speaking such unworthy words, that some great evil is sure to befall
on you very soon.”

 

47\. O king! Thus saying, the spirited Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a left Sîtâ
and went out weeping very much, and, being very much afflicted with
grief, traced the footsteps of his elder and went on in search of him.

 

48\. When Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a thus departed, Râva<u>n</u>a entered
into the hermitage in the guise of a deceitful beggar (Bhik<u>s</u>u
wearing a red garb).

 

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

 

49\. Jânakî took that villain Râva<u>n</u>a to be a Yogi and
respectfully gave him offerings of worship and forest fruits.

 

50-52. That villain asked Sîtâ humbly, in a gentle tone, “O beautiful!
Your eyes are beautiful like Palâsa lotus leaves; therefore it seems
that you are not an ordinary woman; how is it that you are here thus
alone in a wild forest? O fair one! Who is your father? who is your
brother and who is your husband? Being such a beautiful one, how is it
that you are in this forest here like an ordinary woman, dumbfounded? O
good looking one! You are worthy to live in a palace filled with nectar;
why are you living, in this hovel, in this wild forest like an ordinary
Muni’s wife, when your beauty is shining in lustrous beams like a Deva
girl?”

 

53-55. Vyâsa said :-- The daughter of Jânakî, hearing the words of
Râva<u>n</u>a, the husband of Mandodarî, unfortunately took him to be a
good Yogi and replied in the following way :-- “Perhaps you have heard
that a prosperous king Das’aratha is reigning in the Ayodhyâ city. He
has four sons; the eldest of these, S’rî Râm Chandra, is my husband. The
king offered two boons to Kaikeyî; due to which Râm Chandra has been
exiled in this forest and is with his brother Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a.

 

56\. I am the daughter of the King Janaka; my name is Sîtâ; Râm Chandra
has broken the bow of S’iva and has married me.

 

57\. Resting under his prowess of arms, I am resting here fearlessly in
this wild forest; seeing a golden deer, he has gone out to kill that for
me.

 

58\. Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a, too, hearing his voice has gone just now. O
Yogi! I am living here depending on the strength of these two brothers.

 

59\. Thus I have told you all about our living in this forest; shortly
they will come and worship you duly.

 

60-61. The man who has controlled his passions and has become a Yati is
like Vi<u>sn</u>u incarnate; therefore I have worshipped you. O Yogi!
Our Âs’ram is in the midst of this terrible forest, surrounded by
Râkh<u>s</u>asas. Therefore I am asking you how is it that you have been
able to come here in this dress of Trida<u>nd</u>i (a Sannyasi Yogi);
please speak in the name of Truth before me.”

 

62\. Râva<u>n</u>a said :-- “O askance looking one! I am the king of
Lankâ, the husband of Mandodarî. O beautiful one! it is for you that I
have put on this dress of Yati.

 

63\. O beautiful! My two brothers Khara and Dû<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a have
been killed in this forest; and being urged by my sister I have come
here.

 

64-65. Now leave your this man-husband, residing in the forest as a
pauper, devoid of fortune and wealth; and worship me as a husband. O
fair one! I am Râva<u>n</u>a, the king of kings; you now become my lord.

 

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

 

66\. O daughter of Janaka! I am the lord of the Regents of the quarters;
and yet I bow my head down to your lotus feet; better accept me and
fulfil my desires today.

 

67-68. Formerly I asked of you from your father, the king Janaka; but he
then said, that he had laid a pledge, ‘Whoever will break the S’iva’s
bow will marry my daughter.’ The Bhagvân Rudra is my Guru; hence I
feared to break his bow, and therefore I was not present in your
Svayamvara. But from that time my mind is always thinking of you and is
in a state of bereavement for you.

 

69\. O beautiful one! Hearing now that you are residing in this forest,
I, impelled by my previous fascination for you, have now come hither;
and you better now crown my labour with success.”

 

Thus ends the 28th Chapter on the incidents connected with the Navarâtri
and the description of Râmaya<u>n</u>am in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa in the 3rd Adhyâya.

 

Note: The story about the origin of Sîtâ Devî runs thus :--
Râva<u>n</u>a, the king of Ceylon (Lankâ) practised very severe
austerities and got extraordinary powers. He brought the three worlds
under his subjection, levied taxes from all. The Devas and all the other
inhabitants of the several worlds paid their taxes, as imposed by
Râva<u>n</u>a. Râva<u>n</u>a sent messengers to the Ri<u>s</u>is and the
Munis, the ascetics, dwelling in forests and asked them to pay their
taxes. The Ri<u>s</u>is replied that they had no property. But
Râva<u>n</u>a insisted. The Ri<u>s</u>is gave, then, blood, cutting
their thighs, in a jar that was carried to Lankâ. Râva<u>n</u>a kept
that jar under the custody of his queen Mandodarî, and instructed her
that the jar contained poison and that she should not eat that.
Mandodarî, however, ate a portion of that, out of curiosity, and became
pregnant and gave birth to a daughter. Fearing Râva<u>n</u>a, she
floated the jar with the daughter, in the ocean, which, floating through
oceans and rivers, came and touched the lands of the King Janaka. The
peasants while tilling, found that and took the girl to the king, who
reared her as his daughter. Thus Sîtâ, born out of the blood of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, took away subsequently the kingdom, life, and all of
Râva<u>n</u>a.

 

Another version is this :-- As before, the messengers advised the Munis
to give something; otherwise Râva<u>n</u>a would insist and put them to
various troubles. So the Munis cut their thighs and gave blood as their
tax, saying that that blood in the jar would cause ruin and desolation
to the country where it will be kept. Râva<u>n</u>a, hearing this,
ordered the jar to be carried to the kingdom of the king Janaka, thus
causing ruin to him. The jar was brought and placed in the fields of
Janaka.

 

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

 

Now it happened that there was a very severe drought; rains were
absolutely wanting; and a dire famine was imminent. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>
Pundits informed the king that if the king and his wife ploughed
themselves the fields, rains would fall. So the king with his wife did
that, the king holding the plough and the queen holding the hand of the
king. The fore end of the plough accidentally hit upon that jar, out of
which came out Sîtâ Devî with two women Riddhi and Siddhi, waving
chowries on her two sides. The two ladies disappeared and Sîtâ Devî
looked like a girl. The king Janaka reared her, as if his daughter. Sîtâ
Devî used to lift daily with her left hand the bow of S’iva, kept in the
king’s house, and daily worshipped that, and thus cleansed the place.
Seeing this, the king Janaka pledged the vow that, whoever would break
the S’iva’s bow, would marry Sîtâ.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](bk03ch29.md)
