[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch05)  [Next](bk03ch07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VI**

** **

**On the description of the Devî’s Vibhutis (powers)**

 

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

 

1-10. Brahmâ said :-- When I thus asked with great humility, the Devî
Bhâgavatî, the Prime S'akti, She addressed me thus in the following
sweet words :-- There is oneness always between me and the
Puru<u>s</u>a; there is difference whatsoever at any time between me and
the Puru<u>s</u>a (Male, the Supreme Self). Who is I, that is
Puru<u>s</u>a; who is Puru<u>s</u>a, that is I. The difference between
force and the receptacle of force is due to error. He who knows the
subtle difference between us two, is certainly intelligent; he is freed
from this bondage of Samsâra; there is no manner of doubt in this. The
One Secondless Eternal ever-lasting Brahmâ substance becomes dual at the
time of creation. As a lamp, though one, becomes two by virtue of
adjuncts; as a face, though one, becomes two, as reflected in a mirror;
as one man becomes double by his shadow, we become reflected into many,
by virtue of different Antah Kara<u>n</u>as (mind, buddhi, and ahankâra)
created by Mâyâ. The necessity of creation, again and again, after the
Prâkriti Pralayas is due to the fructification of those Karmas of the
Jîvas, whose fruits were not enjoyed before the Pralayas ; so when
creation again commences, the above said dif-

 

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

 

ferences are found to appear; Brahmâ is the material cause of these
changes; without Brahmâ as the basis, the existence of Mâyâ is simply
impossible. It is therefore that in Mâyâ and Mâyâ's action, Brahmâ is
interwoven. For this reason as many differences are found in Mâyâ, so
many differences exist in Brahmâ.

 

The Mâyâ and Brahmâ appear as two and hence all the differences, visible
and invisible, have come forth. Only during creation are these
differences conceived. When everything melts away, i.e., there comes the
Pralaya or general dissolution, then, I am not female, I am not male,
nor I am hermaphrodite. I then remain as Brahmâ with Mâyâ latent in it.
During the time of creation I am S’rî (wealth), Buddhi (intellect),
Dhriti, (fortitude). Smriti (recollection), Sraddhâ (faith), Medhâ
(intelligence), Dayâ (mercy), Lajjâ (modesty), Kshudhâ (hunger), Trishnâ
(thirst), Kshamâ (forgiveness), Akshamâ (non-forgiving), Kânti (lustre),
Sânti (peace), Pipâsâ (thirst), Nidrâ (sleep) Tandrâ (drowsiness), Jarâ
(old age), Ajarâ (non old-age), Vidyâ (knowledge), Avidyâ
(non-knowledge), Sprihâ (desires), Vânchhâ (desires), S'akti (force),
As'akti (non-force), Vasâ (fat), Majjâ (marrow), Tvak (skin),
Dri<u>st</u>i (sight), Satyâsatya Vâkya (true and untrue words) and it
is I that become Parâ, Madhyamâ, Pas'yanti, etc., the innumerable Nâdis
(tubular organs of the body, e. g., arteries, veins, intestines, blood
vessels, pulses, etc.); there are three koti and a half Nâ<u>d</u>is (35
millions of Na<u>d</u>is).

 

11-13. O Brahmâ! See what substance is there in this Samsâra, that is
separate from Me? And what can you imagine with which I am not
connected? So know this as certain that I am these all forms. O Creator!
Say, is there any such thing, where you will not see my above mentioned
positive form? So, in this creation, I am one, and I am many as well, in
various forms. Know this as certain that it is I, that assuming the
names of all the various Devas, exist in so many forms of S'aktis. It is
I that manifest power and wield strength.

 

14-27. O Brahmâ! I am Gaurî, Brâhmî, Raudrî, Vârâhî, Vaisnavî, S’iva,
Vâruni, Kauverî, Nâra Sinhî, and Vâsavî S'aktis. I enter in every
substance, in everything of the nature of effect. Making that
Puru<u>s</u>a the instrument, I do all the actions (rather Puru<u>s</u>a
is the efficient cause, the immediate agent). I am the coolness in
water, the heat in fire, the lustre in the Sun, the cooling rays in the
Moon; and thus I manifest my my strength. O Brahmâ! Verily, I tell you
this as certain that this universe becomes motionless, if it be
abandoned by Me. If I leave S'ankara, he will not be able to kill the
Daityas. A very weak man is declared to be as without any strength; he
is not said to be without

 

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

 

Rudra, or without Vi<u>sn</u>u, nobody says like this; everyone says, he
is without strength, without S'akti. Those who get fallen, tumbled,
afraid, quiet, or under one's enemies are called powerless; no one says
that this man is Rudraless and so forth. So the creation that you
perform, know S’akti, power to be the cause thereof. When you will be
endowed with that S’akti, you will be able to create this whole
Universe. Hari, Rudra, Indra, Agni, Chandra, Sûrya, Yama, Vis'vakarmâ,
Varu<u>n</u>a Pavana, and other Devas all are able to do their karmas,
when they are united respectively with their S'aktis. This Earth, when
united with S’akti, remains fixed and becomes capable to hold all the
Jîvas and beings. And if this Earth be devoid of force, She cannot hold
an atom even.

 

Thus Ananta, Kurma and all the other elephants of the eight points of
the compass, become able to do their respective works, only by My help
(when united with Me, the Force). O Lotus born! If I wish I can drink
all the fire and waters today and I can hold wind in check. I do
whatever I wish. If I say that I am creating this world then the
inconsistency arises thus :-- “When I am everything, then I am being
eternal, all this universe, made up of Prapancha, becomes eternal.”
(Whereas this universe is not eternal in the sense that it is changing.)
If it were said that this universe is different from Me, then My saying 
that I am everything becomes inconsistent. Thinking thus, do not plunge
yourself in the doubt as to the reality and origin and separateness of
the non-eternal universe. For what is unreal, how can that come into
existence? The unreal substances can never come into existence; as the
child of a barren woman, the flowers in the sky are simply absurd. What
is real can only be born. In discussing about origin, birth, etc., the
appearance and disappearance of real things is called their birth and
dissolution. In the cold of earth there exists the previous existence of
the jar and this is the cause of the appearance of the jar; the
disappearance of the jar exists in the jar; hence this disappearance is
the cause of the destruction of the jar. Thus the appearance and
disappearance of the causal eternal things are called the Origin and
Pralaya. Similarly in discussing on the causal nature, there does not
arise an inconsistency in My being everything.

 

28-48. So there is nothing to fear. In discussing about the reality of
effects, this is to be conceived, that today there does not exist here
the earth in the form of jar, if it is destroyed, where it has gone? The
conclusion is that the earth in the form of jar exists in atoms. O
Brahmâ! All substances eternal, existing for a moment only, the void,
and the substances of the nature, real and unreal both, all are due to a
cause.

 

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

 

Ahankâra is born first among them. Thus substances are of seven kinds:
Mahat, etc. O Unborn One! Mahattattva first arises from Prakriti; from
Mahattattva springs Ahamkâra; and from Ahamkâra arises other substances.
Thus, in this order, you go on creating this Universe. O Brahmâ! Now you
better go to your respective places, and after creating the Universe,
remain there and perform your respective functions ordained by
Prârabdha. Take this beautiful great S’akti Mahâ Sarasvatî, full of
Rajogu<u>n</u>a, and of a smiling nature. This S'akti, wearing white
clothes, adorned with divine ornaments and sitting on Varâsana, will
always be your playmate. This beautiful woman will always be your boon
companion; consider Her as My bibhuti (manifestation of power), and so
most worshipful. Never show any sort of disrespect towards Her. Take Her
and go immediately to Satyaloka; and from the seed of Mahattattva,
create the fourfold beings from these. The subtle bodies (Linga sarîra)
and Karmas are remaining mixed up with each other. Separate them, as
before, duly, in due time.

 

Now go on as before and according to Kâla (time), Karma, and Svabhâva
(nature), join them with their respective attributes (sounds and other
qualities); in other words bestow fruits according to their gu<u>n</u>as
and Karmas (Prârabdhas), and to the time when these fruits are due.

 

Vi<u>sn</u>u is prominent in Sattvaguna and hence superior to You. So
You should always respect and worship Him. Whenever any difficulty will
come to you, Vi<u>sn</u>u will come down on earth to fulfil your ends.
Janârdan Vi<u>sn</u>u will sometimes be born in the wombs of birds and
animals, be sometimes in the wombs of men and destroy the Dânavas. The
highly powerful Mahâ Deva, too, will help you. Now create the Devas and
enjoy as you like. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as, Kshattriyas, and Vaisyâs will
worship you, with devotion, in various sacrifices, endowed with due
sacrificial fees. All the Devas will be always satisfied when my name
“Svâhâ” will be uttered in the sacrificial oblations and ceremonies.

 

S’iva, the incarnate of Tamo gu<u>n</u>a will be revered and worshipped
by all persons in every sacrifice. When the Devas will be frightened by
the Daityas, then Vârâhî, Vaisnavî, Gaurî, Nara Simhî, S’achî, S'iva and
My other S’aktis will take excellent bodies and destroy your fear. So, O
Lotus-born! Be at your ease and do work. You utter and repeat my
nine-lettered mantra with Vîja and Dhyân and do your work.

 

O highly intelligent one! This nine-lettered mantra is the best of all
the mantras. You are to keep this mantra, within your heart, for the
accomplishment of all your ends.

 

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

 

Thus saying to me, Bhagavatî smiled and began to say to Vi<u>sn</u>u :--
O Vi<u>sn</u>u! Take this beautiful Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>'mî and go. She will
always reside within your breast; there is no doubt in this. This all
auspicious giving S’akti I give to you for your enjoyment.

 

You should always shew respect to Her; never show hatred or contempt.
For the good of the world, I unite thus Lak<u>s</u>'mî and Nârâyan. For
your sustenance I create Yajña. You three will act together in harmony
unanimously.

 

You, Brahmâ and S’iva are my three Devas, born of my Gunas. You three
will undoubtedly be respected and worshipped by the world.

 

The stupid man who will find any difference between you three, will go
to hell; there is no doubt in this. He who is Hari, is S’iva; He who
S’iva is Hari; to make difference between these will lead one to hell.
So Brahmâ is one and the same with S’iva and Vi<u>sn</u>u; there no
manner of doubt in this. O Vi<u>sn</u>u! But there are other differences
in their Gu<u>n</u>as; I will tell this; listen, as far as meditation of
the Supreme Self is concerned you will have Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a
predominant within you; and Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a and Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a will
be secondary. In various other pursuits and Vikâras (changes) better
have Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a with Lak<u>s</u>'mî and always enjoy Her.

 

49-85. O Lord of Ramâ! I give you Vâkvîja, Kâmavîja, and Mâyâvîja that
will lead you to the highest end. Take this Mantra and repeat it and
enjoy as you like. O Vi<u>sn</u>u! By this, the danger of death, caused
Kâla, will never come to you. When the creation of this Universe will be
completely done I will then destroy this whole thing, moving and
non-moving. You all will then be dissolved in Me. You should add
pra<u>n</u>ava this mantra with Kâmavîja leading to Mok<u>s</u>a and
repeat it always with auspicious motives. O Puru<u>s</u>ottama! Build
your Vaikun<u>t</u>hapurî; live there and think of this My Eternal Form
and enjoy as you like.

 

Brahmâ said :-- Saying thus to Vâsudeva, that Higher Prakriti Devî who
is all of the three Gu<u>n</u>as and yet transcending them, began to
address Mahâ Deva, the Deva of the Devas, in sweet words, thus :-- O
Sankara! Accept this beautiful Mahâ Kâlî Gaurî, build a new Kailàs'a
city and live there happily. Your primary Gu<u>n</u>as will be Tamas;
Sattva and Rajas will be your secondary Gu<u>n</u>as. Have recourse to
Rajo and Tamo Gu<u>n</u>as while you slay the Asuras and thus wander.

 

O sinless S’ankara! Have recourse to peaceful Satto Gu<u>n</u>a, when
you reflect on the Supreme Self and practise austerities. You all are
for creating, preserving and destroying the Universe and you are all of
the three

 

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

 

Gu<u>n</u>as. There is no such thing in this world as are devoid of
these three Gu<u>n</u>as. Everything, that is visible, is endowed with
the three Gu<u>n</u>as, and whatever will be or was before cannot exist
without them. Only the Supreme Self is without these Gu<u>n</u>as; but
He is not visible. O Sankara! I am the Parâ Prakriti; at times I appear
with Gu<u>n</u>as; and at others I remain without any Gu<u>n</u>as. O
S’ambhu! I am always of the causal nature; never I am of the nature of
effect. When I am causal, I am with Gu<u>n</u>as; and when I am before
the Highest Puru<u>s</u>a, I am, then, without any Gu<u>n</u>as on
account of my remaining in the state of equilibrium (Sâmyâ vasthâ).
Mahattattva, Ahamkâra, and sound, touch, etc., all the Gu<u>n</u>as
perform the work of Samsâra, day and night, each preceding one being the
cause and each subsequent one being the effect; never do they cease in
their activities.

 

From the Reality (Sat vastu) springs Ahamkâra (Avyakta); therefore I am
of the nature of causality; again Ahamkâra is embodied with the three
Gu<u>n</u>as, and so the Pundits call it as an effect of mine. From
Ahamkâra arises Mahattattva; this is denominated as Buddhi. So
Mahattattva is the effect and Ahamkâra is its cause. From Mahattattva
arises again another Ahamkâra; from this second Ahamkâra arise the five
Tanmâtrâs or the subtle elements. From these five Tanmâtrâs, the five
gross elements arise after a process called Panchîkara<u>n</u>a. From
the Sâttvika part of the five Tanmâtrâs, arise the five organs of
perception; from their Râjasik part, the five organs of action come;
from their Panchîkara<u>n</u>a, came the five gross elements; from the
Sâttvika portion of all the five elements comes mind. Thus sixteen
things come into existence. These organs of perception, etc., and other
effects together with the Mahâ bhûtas form one Ga<u>n</u>a, composed of
the sixteen categories. The original Puru<u>s</u>a is the Supreme Self;
He is neither cause nor is He any effect. O S’ambhu! At the beginning of
the creation, all the above things are born in the way already
indicated. Thus I have described to you, in brief; about the creation. O
Devas! Now get up in your aeroplane and go to your respective places and
fulfil your respective duties. Whenever you get into any dire distress,
then remember Me; I will appear before you. O Devas! You should remember
always the Eternal Supreme Self and Me. When you will remember us both,
all your actions, will, no doubt, be crowned with success.

 

Brahmâ said :-- Bhagavatî Durgâ gave us S’aktis, full of Divine beauty
and lustre; She gave Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî to Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahâ Kâli to
S’iva, and Mahâ Sarasvatî to me and bade good bye to us. Thus given
farewell to by the Devî, we three went to another place and were born as
males. We thought of the very wonderful nature and influence of the Devî
and

 

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

 

we got upon our divine aeroplane. When we ascended, we saw there was no
Manidvîpa, there was no Devî, there was no ocean of nectar, nothing
whatsoever. Save our aeroplane, we did not see anything. We then got
into our wide aeroplane and reached there where Vi<u>sn</u>u killed the
two indomitable Daityas, in the great ocean, where I was born from the
lotus.

 

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of the Third Skandha on the description of
the Devî's Vibhutis (powers) in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rîmad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>î Veda Vyâs.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](bk03ch07.md)
