[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch17)  [Next](bk03ch19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVIII**

 

**The Svayambara of S’as’ikalâ**

 

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- The King's lovely daughter was very glad on hearing
the words of the Brâhma<u>n</u>a, and drowned herself in ecstacy of
love. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> also departed, thinking of the whole affair.

 

2\. The daughter was already attached to the prince, and now she became
the more merged in love for him and became very anxious. Now, on the
departure of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>, she felt herself struck by the arrows
of love.

 

3-4. Then S’as’ikalâ, oppressed by love, addressed her dear companion,
who followed her inclinations thus :-- “O my companion! I have not as
yet had any knowledge of the king's son; still the signs of love have
sprung up in my body and mind, from the moment that I heard about him
from the Brâhmi<u>n</u>. The love is giving me much trouble; tell, my
companion what am I to do now? and whither shall I go?

 

5\. O dear companion! I saw him like a second God of Love in my dreams;
and, since then, my innocent mind is being troubled with his being away
from me.

 

6\. O fair one! The sandal paste on my body appears to me like a poison,
this garland is like a serpent and the moon's rays seem like a fire.

 

7\. O companion! My mind gets not rest anywhere, in palaces, gardens, in
lakes, in hills, at any time, during the day or night; all the enjoyable
things have assumed now contrary aspects and are paining me.

 

8\. The bedding, betel leaves, music, singing, and dancing, all now fail
to give me satisfaction and peace.

 

9\. O companion! I would have gone to-day where is residing that
deceiver; but I fear for my father as well for the honour of my family.

 

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

 

10\. My father is not yet declaring the svayamvara for my marriage. What
shall I do? Had he given me in marriage to that Sudars’an, I would have
allowed him embrace me and satisfy his passions to-day!

 

11\. O friend! look at the strange ideas of the Creator! There are
hundreds of kings today who are influential and I do not consider them
beautiful; and that King's son is exiled from his kingdom and yet he has
stolen away my heart.”

 

12\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus that King's son, Sudars’ana, though helpless,
and living in a forest on roots and fruits, deprived of wealth, power,
and army, began to reign in the heart of that princess.

 

13-14. S’as’ikalâ, too, began to recite slowly the root mantra of
Sarasvatî and therefore her love towards this prince held out signs of
success.

 

Once engaged in meditation on that excellent root mantra on Kâma, and,
while repeatedly reciting it mentally, he got in a dream the vision of
that Ever Full, the World Mother Ambikâ, that cannot be expressed in
words, the Vai<u>sn</u>avî S’akti and capable to bestow all wealth and
property.

 

15-16. At this time the King of Ni<u>s</u>âdas, the lord of
S’rimgaverpur came to the hermitage and presented an excellent chariot
together with all other necessary things. This chariot was drawn by four
horses, decorated with nice flags and was endowed with the prospect of
getting victory everywhere; thinking it thus a befitting present to be
given to the King, he gave it to Sudars’ana.

 

17\. Sudars'ana, too, accepted the offer of a friend and worshipped him
well in return, with roots and fruits of the forest.

 

18-19. The lord of the Ni<u>s</u>âdas, thus worshipped as a guest, went
away. The Munis and ascetics then began to address Sudars'ana, with
fondness “O son of the king! Don't be anxious and restless; within a
very short time, you will get your kingdom, no doubt, by your own good
luck and prowess.

 

20\. O one attached to one’s vows! The Goddess that enchants the whole
universe, the Giver of boons, S’rî Ambikâ, has been pleased with you;
assistance is also rendered well to you; therefore do not trouble
yourself with contrary thoughts any more.”

 

21\. The Munis, who have taken vows, addressed Manoramâ also “Your son
will soon become the lord of the world; you need not care any more.”

 

22\. Then the lean and thin Manoramâ, hearing the Muni's words said “O
Brâhma<u>n</u>as! Let your âsiss (words of benedictions) be justified
with success. What wonder that a kingdom be obtained by the good will of
the Sâdhus!

 

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

 

23\. There is no force, no minister, no help, no property; how, under
what combinations, can then my son get kingship?

 

24\. You are the best of the knowers of mantrams; due to the influence
of your good will, my son will surely be a king; there is no doubt in
this.”

 

25\. Vyâsa said :-- Wherever that intelligent Sudars'ana used to go on
his chariot, there he seemed by his own prowess, as if he were
surrounded by a whole army consisting of 109, 350 foot, 65,610 horse,
21,870 chariots and 21,870 elephants.

 

26\. This is the influence of the seed mantra; it is not an ordinary
acquisition. It is because Sudars’ana, with gladness and one-pointedness
of his mind, meditated on his seed mantra, that he acquired the above
powers; there is no doubt in this.

 

27\. Becoming pure and peaceful, whoever gets this wonderul seed mantra
from a true spiritual guide and meditates on it incessantly, is destined
certainly to attain all desires.

 

28\. O best of kings! There is no such thing either in the heavens above
or in the worlds below, that a man won’t get, when the Supreme Goddess
becomes pleased.

 

29\. Those are certainly very unfortunate and of dull intellect, who
cannot place their faith on the worship of this Goddess and consequently
suffer incessantly all sorts of troubles.

 

30\. O best of the Kurus! At the beginning of the creation, this Ambâ
Devî was the Mother of all the Gods, and is therefore known as the First
Mother.

 

31\. She is practically seen in this world in the shape of Buddhi
(iutellgence), Kîrti (fame), Dhrîti (fortitude), Lak<u>s</u>mî (Goddess
of wealth), S’akti (the Force), S’raddhâ (Faith), Mati (Intellect),
Smriti (memory), etc.

 

32\. It is only the deluded souls that do not realise the nature of the
Devî; it is only those, whose hearts are destroyed by the glare of false
argument, that do not worship this All-auspicious Goddess of the
Universe.

 

33-34. O king! Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’ambhu, Indra, Varu<u>n</u>a,
Yama, Vâyû, Agni, Kuvera, Vis'vakarmâ, Pû<u>s</u>â, Bhaga, the two
Asvins, Âdityas, Vasus, Rudras, Vis'vedevas, Maruts, all worship the
Supreme Deity of Creation, Preservation and Dissolution.

 

35\. Who is there amongst tho wise that does not serve this Highest
Energy? The real nature of that Auspicious Goddess, the Bestower all
desires, Sudars’ana came to know very well.

 

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

 

36\. She is the Real Essence, Brahmâ, very rarely realised; She is the
Higher Vidyâ and the Lower Vidyâ (Avidyâ) and She is the vital energy,
the Mukhya Prâ<u>n</u>a, of the best of the Yogis, who are desirous of
liberation.

 

37\. O king! What individual is there that is able to realise the nature
of Pramâtmâ (the Highest Universal Self) without having recourse to Her,
Who is manifesting this universal consciousness, by bringing into
existence these Sâtvik, Râjasik, and Tâmasik creations.

 

38\. Sudars'ana, though he dwelt in the forest, realised a greater
happiness than that in obtaining the sovereignty of a kingdom, by
constantly meditating on that Goddess.

 

39\. S’as’ikalâ, too, being too much oppressed with the arrows of love,
any how remained with her soul in her body, having had to be always
cared for her health in various ways by her attendants.

 

40\. Then the king Subâhu, on coming to know that her daughter is
desirous of getting her husband, made arrangements for her Svayambara (a
marriage in which the girl chooses her husband from among a number of
suitors assembled together) without any delay.

 

41-44. The Svayambara of the royal family, the Pundits say, is of three
kinds :-- lst Ichchhâ Svayambara (optional); 2nd Pa<u>n</u>ya Svayamvara
by fulfilling a promise, e.g. Râmachandra broke in two the bow of S’iva
and married Sîtâ; 3rd the Svayambara, preferring one who will prove the
strongest hero by one’s own prowess. Of these three kinds of
Svayambaras, the king Subâhu preferred Ichchâ Svayamvara (according to
the bride's free choice).

 

Accordingly the king employed many artisans, had platforms covered with
beautiful carpets and big halls decorated beautifully in various ways.

 

45-47. Thus the assembly hall for Svayambara built and decorated and all
the necessary articles and equipments brought thither, the fair eyed
S’as’ikalâ, told her companions with sorrow “Better go to my mother and
say her privately that I have already selected mentally my husband the
beautiful Sudars'ana, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi in my mind; I
won't marry any other prince than him; the Goddess Bhagavatî has settled
him for my husband.”

 

48-50. Vyâsa said, the companion of S’as’ikalâ hearing thus, went
quickly to her mother Vaidarbhî and addressed her sweetly in private “O
chaste one! Your daughter, with a sorrowful heart, has sent me to you to
say the following; Please hear and do at your earliest convenience, what
is good and beneficial.” She said “There is staying in the hermitage of
Bhâradvâja, the son of the king Dhruvasandhi; I have mentally selected
him as my husband; I won't select any other prince.”

 

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

 

51\. Vyâsa said :-- The queen, hearing her words, told to her husband,
when he returned to the palace, all her daughter's words as she had
heard them.

 

52-53. Hearing this, the king Subâhu was astonished and then laughed
frequently and then began to say to his wife, the daughter of the king
of Vidarbha the following true words :-- “O fair one! That king’s son
Sudars’ana is a minor, he has been exiled to the forest; now he is
helpless and is residing with his mother in a dense forest.

 

54\. For his sake, the king Vîrasena was slain in battle by the king
Yudhâjit. O fair eyed! how can that helpless exiled poor boy become her
husband.

 

55\. Do say therefore to S’as’ikalâ that, in the assembly hall for her
Svayamvara, many kings commanding honour and respect would be present.
She would then choose whomever she likes. She need not repeat such words
any more.”

 

Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the 3rd Skandha about the Svayambara
of S’as’ikalâ, the daughter of the king Kâsirâja in the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](bk03ch19.md)
