[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch15)  [Next](bk03ch17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On the glory of the Devî**

 

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- After gaining the victory in the battle, the king
Yudhâjit returned to the city of Ayodhyâ with his huge army and asked
where are Sudars’ana and Manoramâ? He wanted to kill Sudars’ana.

 

2\. He repeatedly exclaimed “Where are they gone?” and sent his servants

 

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

 

on their search. Then, on an auspicious day, he installed his daughter’s
son on the throne.

 

3\. Mahar<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha was engaged as the priest; he and
the other ministers began to chant the auspicious hymns of the
Atharvaveda and with the jars, filled with water, and consecrated by
these hymns, installed S’atrûjit on the throne.

 

4\. O best of the Kurus! Conch shells resounded; drums, bherîs and
tûriyas, resounded; and great festivals and rejoicings took place in the
city.

 

5\. The reciting of the Vedic mantrams by the Brâhma<u>n</u>s, the
chanting of hymns by the bards and the auspicious acclamation of Victory
to the new king resounded the whole city of Ayodhyâ with joy.

 

6\. When the new king S’atrûjit ascended on the throne, the subjects
were filled with joy; everywhere hymns were sung; drums were resound. At
this Ayodhyâ looked as fresh as ever.

 

7-8. O King! Though there were thus great rejoicings and festivals, yet
some good persons were found that remembered Sudars’ana and gave vent to
this feeling of sorrow, thus :-- “Alas! Where has that prince gone?
Where has that chaste queen Manoramâ gone with her son? Oh! The enemies
have killed his father for greed of kingdom.”

 

9\. The saints with their views impartial, thus rendered uneasy, sorry,
began to pass away their time there subject to S’atrûjit.

 

10\. After installing duly his daughter’s son on the throne and after
having made over the charge of the kingdom to the wise councillors,
Yudhâjit turned towards his own city.

 

11-12. Afterwards Yudhâjit heard that Sudars’ana was staying in the
hermitage with the Munis. He started at once for Chitrakûta and went
quickly to Durdars’a, the chief of the city of Sringavera, being
accompanied by Bala, the chief of the Nîsâdas.

 

13-15. Hearing that Yudhâjit was coming there with his army, Manoramâ
began to think that his son was a minor and became very sorrowful,
distressed and terrified. Then she with tears in her eyes addressed the
Muni thus :-- “Yudhâjit is coming here; what shall I do and whither
shall I go? He has slain my father, and has installed his daughter’s son
on the throne. Still he is not satisfied and he is now coming with his
army here to kill my minor child.”

 

16-21. O Lord! In days of yore, I heard that the Pândavas, when they
went to the forest, lived in the holy hermitage of the Munis with
Draupadî. One day the five brethren went a hunting, and the beautiful
Draupadî stayed without any fear with other maid servants in the

 

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

 

hermitage where there was the chanting of the Vedas by Dhaumya, Attri,
Gâlava, Paila, Jâvâli, Gautama, Bhrigu, Chyavana, Kanva of the
Atrigotra, Jatu, Kratu, Vîtihotra, Sumantu, Yajñadatt, Vatsala,
Râs'âsana, Kaho<u>d</u>a, Yavakrî, Yajñakrit, Kratu and other holy high
souled Ri<u>s</u>is like Bhâradvâja and others.

 

22-23. While the five great heroes Arju<u>n</u>a and others, the
destroyers of their enemies, were roaming in the forests, Jayadratha,
the king of Sindhu came with his army to the hermitage, hearing the
reciting of the Vedic hymns.

 

24\. Hearing thus, that king quickly descended from the chariot so that
he might have a sight of these holy mahar<u>s</u>is.

 

25-27. Accompanied by two attendants only, he approached to the Munis
and, finding them engaged in the study of the Vedas, waited there with
folded hands for an opportunity. O Lord! When the king Jayadratha on
entering the hermitage took his seat, the wives of the Munis came there
to see the king and began to enquire “Who is this person?”

 

28\. With the wives of the Munis came there also the beautiful Draupadî.
Jayadratha looked upon Draupadî as if she were the second goddess
Lak<u>s</u>mî.

 

29-30. Looking at that lovely royal daughter who looked like the Deva
girls Jayadratha asked the Mahar<u>s</u>i Dhaumya, “Who is this
beautiful lotus eyed lady? Whose wife is she and who is her father? What
is her name? Oh! From her beautiful appearance it seems that the goddess
S’achî has come down on earth.”

 

31\. This fair woman is shining like the celestial nymph Rambhâ
surrounded by the Rak<u>s</u>asis or like the beautiful creeper
Lavangalatika encircled by thorny trees.

 

32\. O good ones! Tell truly whose beloved is she? O Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! It
seems that she is the wife of some king, not the wife of a Muni.

 

33\. Dhaumya said :-- “O king of Sindhu! She is the daughter of
Pânchâla; her name is Draupadî; she is the wife of the Pândavas; they
are residing in this forest, having got rid of their fears.”

 

34\. Jayadratha said “Where have those powerful Pândavas of great
prowess gone now? Are they dwelling in this forest, free from fears?”

 

35\. Dhaumya said :-- “The five Pândavas have gone out on hunting,
ascended on a chariot. They will return at noon with their game.”

 

36-37. Hearing the Muni's words Jayadratha got up, and going near to
Draupadî, bowed down to her and said :-- “O Fair One! Is there every-

 

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

 

thing well with you? Where have your husbands gone? To-day it is eleven
years that you are residing in the forest.”

 

38\. Draupadî then said :-- “O prince! Let all be well with you, wait
here for a short while; the Pândavas are coming quickly.”

 

39\. While Draupadî thus spoke, that powerful king, being overpowered
with greed and avarice, stole her away, disregarding all the Munis
present there.

 

40-42. O Lord! The wise should never trust any body; if on any body he
places his trust, he will surely come to grief. For example, see the
case of the king Bali. Bali, the son of Virochana, and the grandson of
Prahlâda, was prosperous, devoted to his religion, true to his promise,
performer of sacrifices, generous, always giving protection to and liked
by the saints and a great warrior. His mind never turned to any
irreligious subject and he performed ninety nine Yajñas with full
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs (remunerations).

 

43-44. But the Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u, who is all full of Sâttvic purity
and who is never affected with passions and changeless, who is always
worshipped by the Yogis, He, in the form of a dwarf in his Vâmana
incarnation as the son of Kas'yapa Ri<u>s</u>i, to serve the Devas,
stole away his whole seagirt earth and kingdom deceitfully on
hypocritical pretext.

 

45\. O Lord! I heard that the son of Virochana was a generous large
hearted king. He truly resolved to give what was wanted; but
Vi<u>sn</u>u behaved with him deceitfully to serve the cause of Indra.

 

46\. When the pure, Sâttvik Vi<u>sn</u>u could assume this dwarf
incarnation to bring about the hindrance to Bali’s Yajña, what wonder is
that other ordinary mortals would practise things like that?

 

47\. Therefore never trust on any body in any way. Lord! Where there are
greed and avarice, reigning in one’s heart, what fear can he have to
perpetrate any evil deed?

 

48-49. O Muni! It is through avarice that men commit sinful deeds; they
do not care what good or bad will happen to them in the next world.
Thoroughly overpowered by greed, they take away in mind, word and deed
other’s things; and thus they become fallen.

 

50-51. Lo! Human beings always worship the Gods for wealth; but the
Devas do not give them wealth instantly; they give them these things
through others by making them carry on trade, make gifts, or shew their
strength or by making them steal.

 

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

 

52\. The Vais’yas worship the Gods simply because they think they will
be highly prosperous and therefore they sell many things as grains,
cloth and the like.

 

53\. O Controlled one! Is there not the desire to take away the other’s
property in this act of merchandise? Certainly there is. Besides the
merchants, when they find that when people are in urgent need of buying
articles from them, expect that the price of those articles might run
higher.

 

54\. O Muni! Thus every one is anxious to take away other’s properties.
How, then, can we trust them?

 

55\. Those who are clouded by greed and delusion, their going to places
of pilgrimages, their making charities, their reciting the Vedas, all
are rendered useless. Though they go to the holy places, etc., still
these things bear no fruits to them, as if they have not done these
things at all.

 

56\. Therefore O Enlightened one! You make Yudhâjit go back to his own
place. Then I will be able to remain here, like Sîtâ, with my son.

 

57-58. On Manoramâ's thus speaking to the Muni, the fiery Mahar<u>s</u>i
went to Yudhâjit and said :-- “O King! You better go back to your own
place or anywhere else you like. The son of Manoramâ is a minor; that
queen is very much grieved; she cannot come to you now.”

 

59\. Yudhâjit said “O peaceful ones! Kindly cease showing this impudence
and give me Manoramâ. I will never go away leaving her. If you do not
give her easily, I will take her away by force.”

 

60\. The Ri<u>s</u>is said “O King! If there be any strength in you, you
can take away Manoramâ by force; but the result will be similar to that
when the King Visvâmitra wanted to take away the heavenly cow by force
from the hermitage of Vas'i<u>st</u>ha.”

 

Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter on the glory of the Devî and the going
of the King Yudhâjit to the hermitage of Bhâradvâja, to kill Sudars’ana,
in the the 3rd Adhyâya of S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk03ch17.md)
