[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch07)  [Next](bk03ch09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On the Gu<u>n</u>as and their forms**

 

 

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

 

1\. Brahmâ said :--O Nârada! I have described to you what you asked me
just now about the creation of this universe, etc. Now hear with
attention the colour of the three qualities, as well their configuration
and how they are seen to exist.

 

2-3. The Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a is the source of pleasure and happiness; and
when happiness comes, everything seems delightening. When integrity,
truthfulness, cleanliness, faith, forgiveness, fortitude, mercy,
bashfulness, peace and contentment arise in one's heart, know certainly
that there has arisen firmly the Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a in that man.

 

4\. The colour of the Sattva quality is white; it makes one always like
religion, and have faith towards good purposes and discard one's
tendencies towards bad objects.

 

5\. The Ri<u>s</u>is, the seers of truth classify Sraddhâ (faith) under
the three headings: Sâttvik, Râjasik and Tâmasik.

 

6\. The quality Rajas is of red colour, wonderful and is not pleasant;
it is the source of all troubles; there is no doubt in this.

 

7-8. The intelligent should understand that Rajas has certainly arisen
in him, when his mind is filled with hatred, enmity, quarrelsome
feeling, pride, stupification, uneasiness, sleeplessness, want of faith,
egoism, vanity and arrogance.

 

9-11. The quality Tamas is of black colour. From Tamas arises laziness,
ignorance, sleep, poverty, fear, quarrels, miserliness, insincerity,
anger, aberration of intellect, violent atheism, and finding fault with
others. The wise should think that Tamas has overpowered him when the
above

 

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

 

qualities are found to possess him. When this Tamas quality is attended
with the Tâmasî faith, then it becomes the source of pain to others.

 

12\. The well wishers should manifest in themselves the Sattva
qualities, control the Râjasic qualities, and destroy the Tâmasic
qualities.

 

13\. These three qualities are always found to remain intermingled with
another, and each of them has always an inherent tendency to overcome
the others; and therefore they are always, as it were, at war with
another. They never have a separate existence from one another.

 

14\. Never is found anywhere only one Sattva quality to the exclusion of
others, the Rajas and Tamas; similar is the case with the Rajas or
Tamas. They remain intermingled and depend on one another.

 

15\. O Nârada! Now hear, in detail, which two qualities remain in twins,
knowing which, one is freed from this ocean of the transmigration of
existence.

 

16\. I have realised these; therefore you ought not to have any
uncertainties on these points. The reality of these is especially felt,
when it is really understood and when its effects begin to manifest
themselves.

 

17\. O high-minded! No one is able to realise these at once; it requires
be heard, and then meditated upon. It also depends on one's natural
capability and merits, due to the past actions.

 

18-21. Suppose one hears of the sacred places of pilgrimages and is
filled with the Râjasic devotion. He goes out to those places and sees
what he had heard before. There he performs his ablutions, makes
offerings and the Râjasic gifts, stays there for some time; but all this
he does under the influence of the Râjasic quality. And when he returns
home, he finds himself not free from lust, anger, love and hatred; he
remains the same that he was before. Therefore, in this case, O Nârada!
man hears but he does not realise the purifying effects of those holy
places. O best of Munis! And when he does not find any benefit from the
holy place of pilgrimage, it is equivalent to his not at all hearing of
the place.

 

22\. O best of Munis! The effect of visiting the sacred places of
pilgrimages is then said to accrue to any individual, when he becomes
freed from his sins, just as the fruit of cultivating fields is then
said to occur, when the cultivator gets the ripened harvest out of his
labour and enjoys the produce of his fields.

 

23\. O Nârada! Lust, anger, covetousness, delusion, thirst, hatred,
love, vanity, malice, jealousy, non-forgiveness, unrest all these
indicate that there is sin; and until these are purged out of one's body
and mind,

 

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

 

man lives in sin. If the visiting of the sacred places of pilgrimages
does not enable one to overcome the above passions, then the labours in
going to those places are in vain, i.e., those labours merely are the
results just as the toil only undergone by the cultivator is his only
result, and is not met with any reward when there is no harvest at all.

 

24-28. Lo! The cultivator takes hard labour to clear his fields and
cultivate the hard soil; he then sows the valuable seeds, because this
is considered as doing good. Next, in expectation of the harvest, he
undergoes a good deal of pains, day and night, to protect his fields and
goes down to sleep, in the cold season, in the forest surrounded by
tigers and other dangerous animals; but alas! locusts coming eat away
and destroy all the crops, to the utter disappointment of the
cultivator. All his labours are spent in vain. So, O Nârada! The labour
taken by one in going to the holy places yields pains, and pains only,
instead of success and happiness.

 

29-32. When the Sattva quality grows in abundance, as a consequence of
reading the Vedânta and the other S'âstras, dispassion comes towards the
Râjasic and the Tâmasic qualities and things, and the Sattva quality
overpowers the Rajas and Tamas. Similarly when the Râjasic quality grows
in abundance, as a natural consequence of greed and avarice, then it
overpowers Sattva and Tamas; so, by delusion, when the Tâmasic quality
grows in abundance, it overpowers the Sattva and the Râjasic qualities.
O Nârada! I will now speak to you, in detail, about the overpowering of
these qualities by one another.

 

33-35. When the Sattva quality grows in preponderance, the mind rests in
religious ideas and things; it no more thinks of those external things,
the products of the Rajas and Tamas qualities. Rather it wants to enjoy
the Sâttvic things; wealth, religious affairs, sacrifices that can be
acquired or performed without any trouble. Then that individual yearns
after salvation and renounces his pursuits after the Râjasic and Tâmasic
objects.

 

36\. Thus, O Nârada! first try to conquer the Rajas and then the Tamas;
then the Sattva becomes pure.

 

37\. When the Râjasic quality grows in preponderance, the individual
imbibes the Râjasic faith, abandons his own Sanâtan Dharma (settled
eternal religion) and practises against his religious instructions.

 

38\. Under the Râjasic propensities, one is eager to amass wealth and
enjoy the Râjasic things. The Rajas drives away the Sattva and curbs the
Tamas.

 

39-41. Nârada! So when the Tâmasic quality grows in preponderance,

 

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

 

the faith in the Vedas and in the religious S'âstras entirely
disappears. Imbibing the Tâmasic faith, the individual squanders away
his wealth and is always engaged in quarrels, and party feelings, envy,
violence and never enjoys peace. The individual with the Tâmasic quality
in excess overpowers the Râjasic and Sâttvic qualities and becomes
angry, wicked, and a great cheat and does everything as he likes,
without any regard to his superiors.

 

42\. Nârada! Thus you see that, of these three qualities, no one can
remain entirely alone, free from the other qualities. These remain
always in twos or threes.

 

43-44. The Sattva can never exist without the Rajas; the Rajas can never
exist without the Tamas; and these two qualities can never exist without
Tamas. Again Tamas cannot exist without Rajas and Sattva. These
qualities act and react always in twos or threes.

 

45-47. They never exist separately; they live in pairs or threes and are
the originators of each other; these qualities are of the nature of
procreating things; in other words, Sattva originates the Rajas or
Tamas; again the Rajas originates sometimes Sattva and Tamas. Again the
Tamas sometimes originates Sattva and Rajas. Thus they generate each
other as the earthen pots and earth are their mutual causes.

 

48-49. Deva Datta, Vi<u>sn</u>u Mitra, and Yajña Datta these three
united perform any action, so these three qualities united reside in the
buddhi (intellect) of the Jîvas and generate their sense perceptions.

 

Just as the husband and wife get into a couple, the qualities get into
couples.

 

50\. The Sattva with Rajas forms the couple Rajas Sattva; so Sattva
Rajas forms another couple, where the Sattva predominates. So Sattva end
Rajas forms each with Tamas the other couples.

 

51\. Nârada said! O Dvaipâyana! Hearing thus about these three qualities
from my father, I asked him again these questions.

 

Thus ends the eighth chapter of the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rîmad Devî
Bhâgavatam containing the description of the Gu<u>n</u>as, of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk03ch09.md)
