[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch15)  [Next](bk04ch17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On the Birth of the several Avatâras of Vi<u>sn</u>u and their deeds**

 

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

 

1-2. Janamejaya spoke :-- O best of Munis! How did Vi<u>sn</u>u, of
wonderful deeds, get his incarnation owing to the curse, cast on Him by
Bhrigu? what were His different incarnations in different Manvantaras
respectively? O Thou, well versed in religion! O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Kindly
narrate those sin-destroying deeds of Hari in His several incarnations,
that are the source of happiness, peace and welfare to all humanity.

 

3\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Hear, I am narrating to you the incarnations
of S’rî Bhagavân Hari which He had in the several Manvantaras and in the
several Yugas respectively.

 

4\. I will tell you now, in brief, what forms He took and what deeds He
did in the various incarnations.

 

5\. In the Châk<u>s</u>usa Manvantara, the Bhagavân Hari took the
incarnation of Dharma; and the two sons of Dharma, Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a,
were widely celebrated in this world.

 

6\. Then, in the present Vaîvasvata Manvantara, under the reign of
Vaîvasvata Manu in the second Yuga, Bhagavân Hari incarnated as
Dattâtreya, in the shape of the son of Atrî Ri<u>s</u>i.

 

7\. Anasûyâ the wife of Atrî, was desirous to have, as her sons, the
three Devas Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Rudra; and in fulfilment of her
desires, the Devas took their births in her womb.

 

8\. Anasûyâ, was foremost amongst the chaste and virtuous women and on
her praying, Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Rudra the Trinity at once agreed
to become her sons.

 

9\. Brahmâ was born as Soma, Hari was born as Dattâtreya and Rudra was
born as Durvâsâ.

 

10\. In the fourth Yuga, the Bhagavân assumed the beautiful double form
in one, the upper part resembling a lion and the lower part a human
being to accomplish the noble purpose of the Devas.

 

11\. It was to kill Hira<u>n</u>yakas’ipu that the Bhagavân Hari assumed
this appearance, wonderful even to the Devas.

 

12\. In the Tretâ Yuga, the superior and the best of all the Yugas, the
Bhagavân incarnated as Vâmana ( the Dwarf), the son of Mahar<u>s</u>i
Kas’yapa, to curb the power of Bali.

 

13\. The Dwarf Hari took away by pretext, the kingdom of Bali, while he
was performing a sacrifice and sent him down into the Pâtâla (the lower
regions).

 

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

 

14\. Afterwards, in the nineteenth Yuga, known as the Tretâ Yuga, S’rî
Bhagavân Hari incarnated as Paras’urâma, very powerful and the son of
Jamadagnî Ri<u>s</u>i.

 

15\. He was very beautiful and graceful in his body, truthful and the
conqueror of his senses. He extirpated the K<u>s</u>attriya race and
gave the whole world over to the high minded Ri<u>s</u>i Kas’yapa.

 

16\. O king! He is the Paras’urâma, the sin-destroyer, the incarnation
of Hari, and the doer of wonderful deeds.

 

17-20. After that the Bhagavân Hari incarnated as Râma, the son of
Das’aratha. Next in the twenty-eighth Dvâpara Yuga, He incarnated as the
very powerful Arju<u>n</u>a and S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Ams’as of Nara
Nârâya<u>n</u>a. To remove the load of the earth, these two were born;
and they fought deadly battles in the battlefield of Kuruk<u>s</u>ettra.
O king! Thus the several incarnations of Hari arose, according to the
requirements of Prakriti. O King! These three worlds are under the
control of Prakriti.

 

21\. Whatever the Prakriti wishes at any time, She can fashion the world
in that way. And She does this incessantly in accordance with the Word
Divine, the Highest S’akti, to please the Puru<u>s</u>a, without any
cessation.

 

22-23. In days of yore, the most ancient Bhagavân, the Highest, above
all the qualities of Mâyâ, formless, all pervading, difficult to be
conceived, without any decay, self-supporting, without any want, created
these worlds, moving and unmoving and He manifested Himself as the
Trinity, Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’a in the shape of the three
qualities Sâttva, Râjas and Tâmas, and which is called the Highest
Prakriti.

 

24\. This all auspicious Prakriti shines differently according to the
differences in time and circumstances. This threefold Prakriti, the
Great Enchantress of the world is creating, preserving the worlds and is
destroying them at the end of the Kalpas.

 

25\. O King! Whenever there takes place the union with this Prakriti,
Brahmâ creates, Vi<u>sn</u>u preserves, and the all-auspicious God
S’ankara destroys the worlds.

 

26\. It was She That gave birth to Kâkutstha, the best of the kings; and
to conquer the Dânavas, She placed him at a certain place.

 

27\. O king! Thus all men controlled by the Great Law in this world,
enjoy sometimes the pleasures, enjoy sometimes pains and thus exist in
the world.

 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa, on the Birth of the several Avatâras of Vi<u>sn</u>u and
their deeds.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk04ch17.md)
