[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch05)  [Next](bk04ch07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VI**

** **

**On the origin of Urvas’î**

 

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! First there appeared on the mountain, the
king of the seasons, Vasanta, the Spring. All the trees flowered and
became very beautiful; and the bees began to hum round all sides.

 

2\. Mangoes, Bokul trees, the beautiful Tilaka trees, the good Kimsukas,
Sâl, Tâl, Tamâl and Madhuka trees assumed unequalled beauties,
ornamented with their flowers.

 

3\. Cuckoos began to coo coo (warble) beautifully on the tops of trees;
the creepers flowered and began to embrace the trees.

 

4\. The creatures became enamoured with love and began to look on their
paramours with amorous eyes and began to hold pleasant sexual
intercourses.

 

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

 

5\. The southern breeze blew gently, full of pleasant odours and
agreeable to touch. The sensual organs became very powerful and could no
longer be brought under their control by the Munis.

 

6\. Then Kâma, united with Rati, hurriedly entered into the Hermitage of
Badarikâ with the five arrows in his hands.

 

7\. Rambhâ, Tilottamâ, and other prominent Apsarâs all went to that
beautiful hermitage and began to sing in perfect tune with gamuts, key
notes and respective pauses.

 

8\. The two Mahar<u>s</u>is awoke on hearing the sweet music, the
warbling of the cuckoos and the nice hummings of the bees.

 

9\. Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a became anxious to see the untimely bursting of
the Vasanta (vernal season) and the flowering of the trees.

 

10\. How can the spring season come now at such an untimely season. I
see, all the creatures are become extremely amorous with each other and
infatuated with passionate lust.

 

11\. It is very unusual that untimely things should happen. How has this
come to pass? Struck with wonder, Nârâya<u>n</u>a began to speak to Nara
with eyes wide apart.

 

12\. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Brother! See these trees look very
elegant with flowers on them; the cuckoos are sounding sweet notes on
all sides; the bees are humming on all sides.

 

13\. The spring, the lion of the seasons, has burst asunder the fierce
elephant, the winter season, by its sharp nails, as testified by the
budding of Palâsa flowers.

 

14-18. O Brahman! See how beautiful and excellent has become this
hermitage with the presence of the Goddess Spring Lak<u>s</u>mi? O
Devarsî! The Raktâs'oka flower is the palm of her hand; Kims’uka flower,
her excellent feet; Nîlâsoka flowers, her black hairs on her head, the
full-blown lotuses, her eyes; the bel fruits, her breast; the jolly
Kunda flowers, her teeth; Manjari, her beautiful ears; red Bandhu
flowers, her lips; Sindhubâra, her wonderful nails; the peacocks, her
ornaments; the sounds of Sârasa birds, the jingling of her feet
ornaments; the wreaths of flowers, her waist ornaments; the mad gooses,
her gait; Kadamba flower's filaments, her hairs on her body; O best of
ascetics! With all these, the Vasanta Lak<u>s</u>mî has assumed a
wonderful nice appearance.

 

19\. Why has this occurred untimely? Think over it; O Devar<u>s</u>i! I
am struck with wonder; surely this is obstructive of our penances.

 

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

 

20\. Hear! There the Apsarâs are singing sweetly the song, tending to
destroy our Tapasyâs; it seems, these are the means, no doubt, adopted
by Indra to pollute our Tapasyâ.

 

21\. Why is this spring season now generating our pleasures? It is clear
that that Indra, the enemy of the Asuras, is become afraid of our
Tapasyâ and is creating these obstructions to disturb our asceticisms.

 

22\. Lo! The cool, odorous, and pleasant breezes are blowing; no other
cause can be traced than the wicked deed of Indra.

 

23\. When the best of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, the Deva Nârâya<u>n</u>a was
addressing thus, the whole host of Cupid became visible before their
sight.

 

24\. And the two Ri<u>s</u>is were very much surprised on seeing them.

 

25-27. They saw near to them the Cupid with his attendants Menakâ,
Rambhâ, Tilottamâ, Puspagandhâ, Sukes'î, Mahâs'vetâ, Manoramâ,
Pramodvarâ, Ghritâchî, Châruhâsinî, the expert in music, Chandra Prabhâ,
the cuckoo voiced Somâ, the lotus eyed Vidyunmâlâ, Kânchana malinî, and
others.

 

28\. Eight thousand and five hundred Apsarâs and long multitudes of the
hosts of Cupid, the Munis saw and were surprised.

 

29\. Then those prostitutes of the Devas, dressed with their heavenly
ornaments and the heavenly flowers, appeared before the Munis and bowed
down their heads on the ground.

 

30\. The Apsarâs began their enchanting songs, exciting much passion and
rarely heard or seen in this world.

 

31-32. The two Munis Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u-like Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a
were pleased with their music and addressed them thus :-- O thin waisted
good looking Apsarâs! You have come here as guests, I see, from your
Heavenly world. Stay here in peace and all comfort; we will gladly serve
you as your hosts.

 

33-34. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The two Munis, thinking that Indra has
sent these Apsarâs to obstruct their Tapasyâ, were filled with egoism
and determined to create, out of their strength of Tapasyâ a new Apsarâ,
who would be very much more beautiful and possessing far more heavenly
graces than the present ones, who are ordinary looking and clumsy in
their behaviours.

 

35\. And the Munis, by clapping or striking their thighs, instantly
created a woman, exquisitely beautiful in all respects.

 

36\. This good looking woman was named Urvas'î, since she was produced
from the thighs. And all the other Apsarâs present there were very much
thunderstruck on seeing that Urvas'î.

 

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

 

37\. Then the Muni Nârâya<u>n</u>a easily created as many women as there
were Apsarâs to serve them.

 

38\. The just produced Apsarâs brought with them all sorts of offering
in their hands, and, singing and smiling, came before the Munis and with
clasped hands bowed down before them.

 

39\. The heavenly damsels sent by Indra, though enchanting to others
were themselves now bewildered on beholding Urvas'i, beautiful in all
respects and produced out of the Tapasyâ of the Munis; and their hairs
over the bodies stood on their ends. Then they tried to make their faces
as beautiful as they could and began to address the Munis thus :--

 

40\. O Munis! We are ignorant girls; how can we praise you and the
greatness of your Tapasyâ and at your steadiness. Oh! There is no one in
this Universe, that is not burnt with the passion by the arrows of our
sharp eyesight? But there is no trace of mental disturbance and
defilement in you; Oh! Wonderful is your greatness, indeed!

 

41\. We are convinced that both of you are the Amsas of Vi<u>sn</u>u and
that your treasures are your incessant peace and control of mind. We
have come here not to serve you but to hinder you in your penances, that
we may fulfill the desires of Indra.

 

42\. By what good luck of ours we have got a sight of thee, we do not
know; we do not know also what merits we did? We have committed great
offence to you; still you have not cursed us. You have considered us as
those of your own family and have pardoned us. Therefore our minds are
free from sorrow and anxiety. Much praise be to your forgiveness! Wise
saints do not squander away their occult powers, derived from
austerities, in trivial ways like cursing others.

 

43\. Vyâsa said :-- Very pleased were those two Dharma's sons, the two
Mahar<u>s</u>is, self controlled and desireless, to hear these words of
those godly behaved heavenly damsels; they then spoke to the damsels,
blazing with the fire of their Tapas.

 

44-45. Nara and Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Damsels! We are pleased with
you; better ask from us your desired boons; we will instantly grant them
to you. You better take with you to your Heaven this beautiful eyed
Urvas'î, born of our thighs as a present to your Deva Râja, the Indra.

 

46\. Now peace be to all the Devas; you better go to your own places; do
not, in future, disturb the Tapasyâ of others.

 

47\. The damsels said :-- Where will we go now? We have reached your
lotus feet through our devotion, and our joy knows no bounds; O
Nârâya<u>n</u>a the Supreme amongst the Gods!

 

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

 

48\. O Lord! O Madhusûdana! O Lotus-eyed! If Thou art pleased with us
and dost want to give us our desired boons, we disclose to you our
wished for object.

 

49\. O Lord of the Devas! Thou art the Lord of the world; so beest Thou
the Lord of us. O Destroyer of the foes! We will gladly put ourselves at
the service of your feet.

 

50\. Let those sixteen hundred and fifty beautiful-eyed damsels
including Urvas'î, that are your creation and that are now existing
here, let them go unto Heaven by your command.

 

51\. And we, the sixteen hundred and fifty damsels that have come
before, may be allowed to remain here at your service.

 

52\. O Mâdhava! You are the Lord of the Devas; be true to your word and
give us our desires. Those seers, the Munis, who know what is Dharma,
declare that it is sin, equivalent to murder, to destroy the hopes of
those women that are struck with passion.

 

53\. We are very fortunate to come here from Heaven and we are filled
with extreme love for you, O Deves'a! You are the Lord of the world; you
can do all things; therefore do not leave us.

 

54\. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O thin bodied damsels! I am practising at
this place the tapasyâ for full one thousand years, controlling my
passions; how can I now break it by engaging myself to enjoy sensual
things.

 

55\. I have no inclination to indulge in sexual pleasures, tending to
destroy the Highest Bliss as well as the Highest Dharma. What
intelligent person will like to indulge like a beast in sensual
pleasures.

 

56-57. The Apsarâs said :-- Of the five senses; sound, etc., the
pleasures attained through the sensation of touch are excellent, and are
reckoned as the source of Bliss; no other pleasures stand equal to it.
Therefore do then fulfill our words, and enjoy incessantly this highest
bliss and roam freely in this Gandhamâdan mountain.

 

58\. If you like to go to Heaven, be pleased to know that there is no
Superior Heaven to Gandhamâdan (the mountain like intoxicating happiness
of the senses). Dost thou enjoy the highest bliss, the pleasant sexual
intercourse with us, the heavenly damsels in this very beautiful and
lovely place.

 

Thus ends the Sixth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S'rîmad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa on the origin of Urvas'î.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](bk04ch07.md)
