[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch09)  [Next](bk04ch11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On the curse on Vi<u>sn</u>u by Bhrigu**

 

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

 

1-4. Janamejaya said :-- O Son of Parâs'ara! There has arisen a great
doubt in my mind on hearing just now your words. These Nara
Nârâya<u>n</u>a are the two sons of Dharma; they are ascetics, calm and
quiet, the Ams'as of Vi<u>sn</u>u; they reside in a holy place of
pilgrimage! They are filled with the Sattvic qualities, subsisting
always on roots and fruits of the forest, the highsouled hermits and
truthful. How were they addicted to such warfare? Why had they left
their invaluable asceticism? And with what object were they fighting for
full one thousand Deva years with Prahlâda.

 

5\. What was the end, O Muni, of their fight with Prahlâda? Kindly
explain to me in detail the cause of this warfare.

 

6\. Women, wealth or any other worldly object can be the cause of any
quarrel or fight amongst any persons; but, in this case, the two
ascetics had none of these; how then this idea of fight sprung within
their minds.

 

7-8. And why did they practise such severe austerities? Was it that they
had to overpower others, or enjoy pleasures themselves or to reach
Heaven

 

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

 

that they practised tapasyâ? What fruits did they eventually obtain from
such penances?

 

9\. They became very lean and thin through their asceticism; still how
could they fight full one thousand Deva years without getting fatigued.

 

10\. They were not entangled in this fight for kingdom, or wealth or for
women or for any other worldly object; then why did they fight with the
high souled Prahlâda?

 

11\. Having no attachment for any worldly object nor any desire to gain
any thing therefrom, why did they engage themselves so thoroughly, in
such pains giving battle?

 

12\. Intelligent persons always do works leading to bliss; they never do
painful works; this is the long standing rule of the world.

 

13\. The two sons of Dharma were the Ams'as of Hari, all knowing and
adorned with all qualities; why did they fight, subversive of religion?

 

14\. O Mahâr<u>s</u>i! Even the dull and stupid persons in the world
won't go to these deadly battles leaving asceticism and samâdhi, leading
to the purification of all desires.

 

15\. I have heard that Yayâti, the Lord of the earth was dropped from
Heaven to this world, owing to his Ahamkâra, though he was a virtuous
king devoted to charities and sacrifices.

 

16-17. No sooner Yayâti, said the king :-- did As'vamedha sacrifice,
etc., with Ahamkâra, egoism, he was dropped by Indra with thunderbolt in
his hands. So one can see that, without Ahamkâra no fight can occur. The
ascetics had no bodily strength; therefore if they had to fight, it is
through the waste of their Tapasyâ that they could do so.

 

18\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The all knowing sages that have realised the
truth or Dharma declare the threefold Ahamkâra arising out the Sattvic,
Rajasic and Tamasic qualities respectively to be the causes of this
world.

 

19\. How, then, can these two Munis being embodied forego their
Ahamkâras? Without any cause, no actions follow; this is quite certain.

 

20\. Tapas, charities, sacrifices all originate from the Sattvic
qualities. And quarrels arise from the Rajasic or Tamasic qualities.

 

21\. All arise from Ahamkâra, whether good or bad; this is quite
certain.

 

22\. There is no other thing that enchains a soul than this Ahamkâra. It
is out of Ahamkâra that this Universe is created: how can it be then
free from it?

 

23\. O King! Brahma, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'ha, even these are with
Ahamkâras. Then how can you expect other ordinary Munis to be free from
it?

 

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

 

24\. Encased with Ahamkâra, this Universe is rolling. Births and death
occur repectively through this Karma.

 

25\. O Lord of the earth. The Devas, birds and men are revolving in this
world like the wheel of a chariot.

 

26\. In this wide world who can count how many Avatâras Vi<u>sn</u>u had
to take in all sorts of wombs, good or low.

 

27\. Ordained by the Lord of the Universe, Nârayâ<u>n</u>a Himself had
to take the Fish, Tortoise, Boar, Man Lion and the Dwarf incarnations.

 

28\. Vasudeva Janârdana the Lord, had to undertake countless Avatâras
births in this world.

 

29\. In the Vaivasvata manvantara, the Avatâras of Bhagavân Hari are
being mentioned to you. Hear!

 

30\. The all pervading Lord of the world, the God of the Gods, had to
take several incarnations in this world, owing to the curses inflicted
by Bhrigu.

 

31\. The king said :-- There has now again arisen another fresh doubt,
why was Vi<u>sn</u>u cursed by Bhrigu Muni?

 

32\. O Muni! What injury did Hari commit to that Muni, and whereof the
Muni Bhrigu cursed him.

 

33-34. Vyâsa said :-- Hear, O king! the cause of the curse; I will
narrate to you. In days of yore, the king Hira<u>n</u>yakasipu, the son
of Kasyapa often quarrelled with the Devas; owing to this incessant
warfare, the whole universe was much alarmed and perplexed.

 

35\. And when Hiranyakasipu was slain by the Man-Lion incarnation,
Prahlâda, the tormentor of the foes, continued his enmity towards the
Devas and began to annoy them.

 

36\. Thus one hundred years dreadful battle occurred between the Devas
and Prahlâda, to the astonishment of all.

 

37-38. O king! The Devas fought very hard and were victorious. Prahlâda
was defeated and was sorely grieved. Hearing that the Eternal Religion
is the best, he handed his kingdom over to his son Bali and went to the
Gandhamâdan hill to practise tapasyâ.

 

39-40. The prosperous Bali, too, on gaining his kingdom, began to
quarrel with the Devas and the war thus went on. Ultimately the powerful
Indra and the Devas defeated the Asuras.

 

41-42. O king! Indra, of unequalled prowess, with the aid of
Vi<u>sn</u>u, deprived the Daityas of their kingdom. The defeated
Daityas took refuge of their family spiritual guide S'ukrâchârya and
addressed him thus, O Brâhmana! You are endowed with your fiery strength
of Tapasyâ and you are now

 

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

 

powerful; why are you not lending your helping hands to your Daitya
followers. O foremost of the councillors. If you do not help us and save
us, we will not be able to stay in this earth and will soon have to go
down to Pâtâla.

 

43-44. Vyâsa said :-- Thus addressed by the Daityas, the very kind
hearted S'ukrâchârya said, O Daityas! Do not be afraid; I will protect
you by my fire of strength and vigour; and help you with sound counsels
and medicines. Be brave and energetic and cast aside your mental agony
and sorrow.

 

45-47. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The Daityas became fearless under the
patronage of S'ukrâchârya. The Devas had their spies and knew all about
these. They held councils with Indra and settled that before the Daityas
had time to dislodge us from our Heaven with the mantra of S'ukrâchârya,
we will speedily go and attack them. Thus attacked all on a sudden, they
will all be slain by us and we will drive them down to the Pâtâla.

 

48\. Thus forming their resolves, with fully equipped arms and weapons,
they went out of rage to fight with the Daityas and orderd by Indra and
aided by Vi<u>sn</u>u, they began to kill the Demons.

 

49\. When the Devas were thus slaying the Demons, they got very much
terrified and exclaimed “O Lord! Protect us! Protect us!” and took the
refuge of Sukra.

 

50\. S'ukrâchârya, seeing the Daityas very much perplexed and
distracted, at once cried aloud out of the influence of his Mantra “No
fear, no fear,” Then the Devas on seeing S'ukrâchârya left the Daityas
and fled away to their own places.

 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>î Veda Vyâsa on the curse on Vi<u>sn</u>u by Bhrigu.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk04ch11.md)
