[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch20)  [Next](bk04ch22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXI**

 

**On the killing of the sons of Devakî**

 

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus, in due course, Devakî, the goddess
incarnate, being united according to rules with Vâsudeva, became
pregnant.

 

2-4. When full ten months were over, a good-looking and beautiful child
(male) was first born to Devakî. Then the good-natured Vâsudeva
remembered his promise, and also what is ordained by Heaven; and he
spoke to Devakî, the part incarnate of Aditi “O fair-looking! You know
that I saved your life at your marriage by swearing on oath to deliver
all your fresh-born children to Kamsa. Now has come the time to hand
over your child to Kamsa.”

 

5\. O good-haired woman! Now I will hand your this son to Kamsa. Know
Kamsa is very cruel and wicked. I cannot say what step he will take,
urged on by Fate, to kill your child. O Sweet One! We have no hands in
the matter. The effects of Karma are exceedingly puzzling. Ordinary
persons cannot know them.

 

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

 

6\. All persons are subject to Time, the Destroyer, and enjoy the merits
or demerits of their past deeds. The effects of past Karma are fashioned
by the Creator; knowing this, allow me to take away your child.

 

7\. Devakî said :-- O Lord! Certainly men have to suffer fully the
effects of their past Karmas. But can that not be upset by residing in
holy places, practising penances and asceticism or by making generous
gifts?

 

8-9. The high minded Mahar<u>s</u>is have fixed rules and penances for
destroying the sins of past deeds; twelve years’ vow to observe penances
can purify one from sins, e.g., Brâhmi<u>n</u>icide, stealing gold,
drinking or stealing the wife of one’s preceptor and many others.

 

10-11. O Sinless one! Will not any one be freed from their sinful
effects, if they observe practices and penances as are ordained by Manu
or other Munis? If you don’t accept penances to be sufficiently
purificatory, do you mean to say, then, that what the Mahar<u>s</u>is,
seers, Yâjñavalkya and other promulgators of religious doctrines have
uttered, they did so, as an act of dire falsehood and villainy?

 

12\. O My husband! “What is in the womb of Fate will surely come to
pass,” if this be taken as granted, then the whole Ayurveda (medicinal
books) and Mantra vâdas, the science and recitation of mantras or sacred
formulae turn out utterly fruitless and false!

 

13-16. If all the actions are under the control of Fate, then no effect
can come out of any effort; so all efforts are reduced to no effect. If
what is ordained by Heaven is to come to pass then what is the use of
taking recourse to any action and Agni<u>st</u>oma sacrifices, etc.,
that are declared to lead to Heavens. Judge! If Heaven or Fate you
consider all-in-all, then the whole Vedas, the revelations from God’s
mouth turn out false; if the Vedas be false, then there is no reason why
the whole Dharma will not be destroyed.

 

N.B. :-- Fate is here denounced.

 

17\. Now when it is seen that effects do come out whenever any exertion
is made, then you ought to think out carefully and find out some means
to avert danger. Therefore do you judge and find out a good way of
preserving the life of this new born baby.

 

The learned people say that to tell a lie is not a sin, if you can
thereby save a life, and have an honest motive for the welfare of all.

 

Note :-- Here is a diplomatic statement!

 

18\. Vâsudeva said :-- O blessed one! I now tell you what is truth and
the matters connected with truth.

 

19-20. Effort, application and manifestation of energy are certainly the
duties of man; but their effects are all under the Great Destiny or
Fate.

 

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

 

The Pundits knowing the ancient lore say that there are three kinds of
Karma mentioned in the Purâ<u>n</u>as and Âgamas :-- First, the Sanchita
Karma (done in past births); the Prârabdha Karma, the Karma already
done; and the Vartamân Karma (Karma in hand).

 

21\. The Karma, auspicious and inauspicious, done in many previous lives
and preserved in seed forms, remains always inherent in a human soul.
Urged on by this Karma, the Jîvas quitting their previous bodies, enjoy
Heaven or Hell as effects of these, their own acts.

 

22-23. According to their good or bad works, the Jîvas acquire the
higher happy body and enjoy various pleasures in the Heavens, or they
take up very painful vicious bodies and suffer various pains in hell.

 

24-25. At the expiry of the above period in Heaven or Hell, when there
comes the time of his assuming another body, the Jîva becomes conscious
of the subtle body (Linga Deha) and takes his birth again. When the
Linga Deha comes into existence, the part of the Karma done in various
previous births that are ripe and ready to yield their fruits, gets
attached to the Jîva by God (or Destiny).

 

26\. Therefore the collective effect of Karma done in previous births
always exists in a Jîva’s body. O Fair-eyed One! The effects of
Prârabdha Karma, ripened and ready to yield their fruits must have to be
experienced by a Jîva, whether happy or unhappy.

 

27\. O beautiful young woman! Penances, performed according to rules,
destroy the effect of Karmas that are in hand and are weak (i.e., not
yet accumulated strongly as to remain in seed forms).

 

28\. The Prârabdha Karma, those acts out of all the previous acts done
in previous births that are fully mature and ready to yield their
fruits, cannot be averted; their effects must have to be experienced and
then they can die away; they cannot be expiated by penances or any other
remedial measures. Therefore you must hand over unconditionally your new
born babe unto the hands of Kamsa.

 

29-30. O Goddess! I have never done any blameable action, nor have I
told any lie. Therefore do you fulfill your truth and hand over your
baby. O Devakî! Dharma is the only thing permanent and real in this
fleeting world. Even the births and deaths of high souled persons are
subject to the great Destiny. Therefore the Jîvas ought not to be sorry
when there is no help for it.

 

31\. O dear one! What shall I say to you! Know this much that his life
is spent in vain who is lost to Truth. O beautiful one! Whose this life
is destroyed, what can he expect in the life to come!

 

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

 

32\. Therefore, O Goddess! Give me your baby and I will hand it over to
Kamsa. If we can observe this truth, we will meet with ample rewards
afterwards; there is no doubt in it.

 

33\. Where there are pains and pleasures for the Jîvas, there it is
highly incumbent on us to do good and meritorious deeds. If we can act
according to Truth, we will certainly get good fruits.

 

34\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus addressed by Vâsudeva, the husband of Devakî,
who was very much grieved and intelligent, gave over the newly born
baby, her whole body trembling, to the hands of Vâsudeva.

 

35\. The virtuous Vâsudeva took that baby and went out to the Kamsa’s
palace. On the way, the people, seeing him thus, were very much
astonished and began to praise him.

 

36-37. The people said :-- “O people! See how Vâsudeva is sensible to
keep his words! He is taking his son to hand over to Kamsa. This
truthful and highsouled man, free from malice, is going to give up his
son to the hands of Kamsa who is the Death Personified. See his
wonderful patience; this man’s life is really high, noble and true.”

 

38\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Vâsudeva, thus praised, reached at last the
Kamsa’s palace and handed over his newly-born son to Kamsa.

 

39-41. The King Kamsa, too, was very much astonished to see this
wonderful patience of Vâsudeva. Then he held aloft the child and laughed
and said :-- “O son of S’ûrasena, you have been blessed today by giving
me your son just now. But the voice from Heaven said that your eighth
son will be the cause of my death; this your first son is not my cause
of death. Therefore I will not kill this baby; you can take your baby
back to your home.

 

O High-minded One! Let me have your eighth son brought here, when he
will be born; I hope you will positively do it.”

 

42\. The cruel and wicked Kamsa returned the child and said :-- “Let
this child go back safely to his home.”

 

43-44. When the king Kamsa said thus, Vâsudeva, the son of S’ûrasena
gladly took his child back and came home. Then the King Kamsa told his
ministers that the Heavenly voice told that the eighth son would he the
cause of his death; and so there was no necessity to kill that child.
There was no need to incur sin by killing the first child.

 

45\. The ministers, hearing the king Kamsa’s those words, began to
praise him very much and exclaimed repeatedly “Well done” “Well done.”
They went away to their respective homes, when ordered to do so by
Kamsa.

 

46-49. Now Nârada, the best of the Munis, arrived to Kamsa. The king
Kamsa, the son of Ugrasena, stood up at once and offered him water to
wash

 

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

 

his mouth and with green grass and rice worshipped him devotedly and
enquired of his welfare. He then asked the Muni about the cause of his
untimely arrival there. The Mahar<u>s</u>i Nârada then smilingly and
with sweet words repeatedly uttered “Kamsa,” “Kamsa” and then said, O
blessed one! I went perchance to Sumeru Mountain. There Brahmâ and other
gods formed an assembly and were thus thinking out plans that
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Supreme God, would take His birth in the womb of
Devakî, the wife of Vâsudeva to kill Kamsa.

 

50\. Now I ask you, you are very expert as a politician; then why have
you not killed the son of Vâsudeva? Kamsa said :-- “I will kill the
eighth son according to the Heavenly Voice.”

 

51\. Nârada said :-- O King! Now I understand that you do not understand
anything of politics, leading to auspicious or inauspicious results;
especially when you are quite ignorant of the Mâyâ of the Devas, then
what shall I say to you!

 

52-53. The truth is this :-- The warriors, looking after their own
welfare, never overlook the weakest of their foes. What have you
understood when the Heavenly Voice uttered “the eighth son.” It means
the children counted from the first and then finished upto eighth; it
may mean first, second, third or upto eighth. Never forego your enemies;
then why have you desisted in killing your enemy when you got that enemy
in your possession. Nothing is shewn of you in this act save dire
foolishness, and ignorance.

 

54\. Thus saying, the Mahar<u>s</u>i Nârada vanished quickly. Kamsa, of
little understanding brought back the son of Vâsudeva and killed him by
dashing him against a stone and was relieved.

 

Note :-- This human body is a microcosm; the universe is the macrocosm.
God resides in the centre and controls the two. In this human body also
live the Devas and the Dânavas. The left half of the body, the Îdâ side,
is the seat of the Devas. The right half, the Pingalâ side, is the seat
of the Dânavas. In this body war is always going on between the Devas
and Dânavas. Sometimes the Devas get victory; sometimes the Dânavas win.
God is in the centre, the heart and controls the two.

 

Here ends the 21st Chapter of S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses composed by Veda Vyâsa, on the killing
of the sons of Devakî.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](bk04ch22.md)
