[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch10)  [Next](bk04ch12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XI**

 

**On S’ukrâ’s going to Mahâdeva to get the Mantra**

 

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- When the Devas retired from the battlefield,
S’ukrâchârya addressed the Demons thus :-- O best of the Demons! Please
hear, what had been told to me by Brahmâ in days of yore.

 

2-3. Janârdan Vi<u>sn</u>u is coming here to slay all the Demons, He
killed before Hira<u>n</u>yâk<u>s</u>a, the king of the Asuras, in His
Boar incarnation. He killed Hira<u>n</u>yakasipu by assuming His
Man-Lion appearance; now too, he will kill all the Daityas, no doubt,
with great enthusiasm.

 

4-5. Now my mantra force will not be of any avail before S’rî Hari. And
without my help you will not be able to conquer the Devas. Therefore, O
Demons, wait for some time for me; I will start today to the presence of
S'iva Mahâdeva to obtain from him the Mantra S’akti.

 

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

 

6\. I will return, as early as possible, getting the Mantra from S’rî
Mahâdeva; and with the help of the power of those great Mantras I will
be able to protect you thoroughly.

 

7\. The Daityas said :-- O best of the Munis! We are now defeated and
our forces are well nigh exhausted; how will we be able to stay on this
earth and expect your return for so long a time?

 

8\. Those who were of great strength amongst us, they all are slain; now
we are left very few in number. In this crisis it is not advisable and
auspicious for us to remain here in this battlefield.

 

9\. S’ukrâchârya said :-- Better you all stay here until I return,
getting the requisite Mantra; remain peaceful and engaged in asceticism.

 

10\. The heroes apply one or other of the following four measures :--
conciliation, alliance, gifts and bribery, partitions and sowing
dissensions and punishment or open attack according to the conditions of
time, place strength and circumstances.

 

11\. Intelligent and well wishing persons do serve their enemies even in
time of distress; but no sooner they find that their strength and army
have increased, than they try at once to kill all their enemies.

 

12\. Now, therefore, pretend your meekness and allegiance and adopt
peace and remain in your own place until my arrival.

 

13\. O Demons! I will come back with the Mantra from Mahâdeva. I will
fight again with the Devas, by that veritable mantra power.

 

14\. O king! Thus firmly making up his mind to have the Mantra,
S’ukrâchârya went to Mahâdeva.

 

15\. The Dânavas sent Prahlâda to the Devas for conciliation. The Devas
regarded Prahlâda truthful and they all trusted on him.

 

16\. Prahlâda with Asuras addressed thus the Devas with gentleness and
humility.

 

17\. O Immortals! We all have abandoned our weapons and armour. Now we
desire to wear barks of trees and practise asceticism.

 

18\. The Devâs took Prahlâda's words to be true and deserted from
further fight; were freed of anxiety and felt all delighted.

 

19\. On the Daitya’s leaving their weapons, the Gods desisted from
battle, went to their respective places and freely gave themselves up to
pleasure and amusements.

 

20\. The Daityas controlled themselves and practised asceticism in the
Kas’yapa’s hermitage, expecting the return of S’ukrâchârya.

 

21\. S’ukrâchârya went to Kailâsa and made respectful obeisance to the
God Mahâdeva. Mahâdeva enquired of the cause of his coming.

 

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

 

22\. S’ukrâchârya said :-- I ask for Mantras, O Deva! from you that are
not possessed by Brihaspatî, for the defeat of the Devas, and the
victory of the Asuras.

 

23\. Vyâsa said :-- On hearing his words, the all-knowing S’ankara S’iva
began to think what He would do in this matter.

 

24\. Certainly, this is with the revengeful object of attacking the
Devas, for their defeat and for the victory of the Asuras that this Muni
has come.

 

25\. The Devas ought to be protected by me; thus thinking, S’ankara
Mahes’vara advised him an entirely difficult tapasyâ to practise.

 

26\. Full one thousand years he would practise tapasyâ with feet upwards
and head downwards, he will have to inhale the smoke of burnt husk. Then
he will get the Mantra and his desires will be fulfilled.

 

27\. That would be done; thus saying to S’ankara, S’ukrâchârya practised
that excellent vow, peaceful and inhaling the smoke of husk to get that
Mantra.

 

28-29. The Devas came to know that S’ukrâchârya is practising his vow
and the Daityas have become arrogant. They then counselled.

 

30\. And came to the conclusion, took up weapons and arms and went to
the Daityas, ready to fight.

 

31\. The Daityas, seeing the Devas dressed in armour and holding weapons
and coming from all sides, became very much afraid and anxious.

 

32\. The Daityas, seeing this all on a sudden, were attacked with fear
and began to address the Devas, proud with their army, in words, full of
good meanings and morals.

 

33\. O Devas! We have abandoned our arms; we are now armless; our
spiritual guide is in his tapasyâ, you gave us words of fearlessness;
why then you have come now dressed in full armour and with armies to
kill us.

 

34\. O Devas! Where is your truth. And where is your religion acccording
to S’ruti? It is stated in S’ruti never to kill the weaponless, the fear
stricken, and the refugees.

 

35\. The Devas said :-- You sent your good S’ukrâchârya, out of pretence
to acquire the Mantras; your asceticism is veiled under a deceitful
object. Therefore we will fight with you certainly.

 

36\. Be ready now and dress yourself with your arms and ammunitions,
“Lo! Whenever you get any loop hole in your enemies, catch hold of it
and kill your enemy.” This is the eternal religion.

 

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

 

37\. Vyâsa said :-- On thus hearing the reply from the Devas, the
Daityas after consideration quitted that place and fled away with
terror.

 

38\. And they took refuge under the S’ukrâchârya’s mother. She saw the
Daityas very much fearstricken and at once guaranteed to them protection
from fear.

 

39\. The mother of Kâvya S’ukrâchârya said :-- Don’t fear; don’t fear;
cast away fear. O Dânavas! In my presence, no fear can overtake you.

 

40\. The Asuras on hearing her words were free from anxiety and pain and
remained in that hermitage, in no way now bewildered or agitated, though
they had no arms.

 

41-42. Here the Devas, seeing the Daityas flying away, pursued them and
entering the hermitage were ready to kill the Daityas, not taking into
account what strength they gained there. The mother of S’ukrâ warned the
Devas not to kill; but, inspite of her hindrance, they began to slay the
Daityas.

 

43\. Seeing the Daityas thus attacked, the mother was furiously
irritated and told them she would make all of them overpowered by sleep
by her tapas strength, clarified intellectual force.

 

Note :--Is it by the asphyxiating gas? Or, by poisonous vapours or
liquids?

 

44\. So saying she sent the Goddess of sleep who at once overpowered the
Gods and made them all lie down on the grounds senseless. Indra with the
other Devas lay there dumb, and miserable.

 

45\. On seeing Indra thus stupefied by sleep, the Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u
told Indra to enter into His body. He would then carry him to another
place and he will be better.

 

46-47. Indra entered into the Vi<u>sn</u>u’s body; and, under His
protection, he became free from sleep and fear. On seeing Indra thus
sheltered by Vi<u>sn</u>u and fearless, the mother of Kâvya spoke.

 

48\. O Indra! I will devour you with Vi<u>sn</u>u today by my Tapas
force. All the Devas will presently see all this and my extraordinary
power.

 

N.B.: Is it by making the earth go down, causing a fissure, thus
engulfing the whole army? Or by blowing them up? Or by showering jets of
poisonous gas or hot water or vapour from all sides.

 

49\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! No sooner the mother spoke thus, than both
Indra and Vi<u>sn</u>u were both stupefied under her magical spell,
superior thought power, and a thorough learning of the art of warfare.

 

50\. The Devas, seeing them very much overpowered and bewildered, were
greatly struck with wonder; they became desperate and began to cry
aloud.

 

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

 

51\. Indra, on hearing the Devas cry aloud, told Vi<u>sn</u>u, O
Madhusûdana! I am more bewildered in particular than yourself.

 

52\. O Mâdhava! No need of any further consideration. Before this
wretch, inflated with pride by her tapasyâ, burns us, better cause her
death as early as possible.

 

53\. When thus requested by Indra who was very much perplexed, Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u quickly remembered his Sudars’ana disc, casting aside the
thought that it is hateful to kill a woman.

 

54-55. The disc, the ever obedient weapon of Vi<u>sn</u>u appeared
instantly at his remembrance; and Vi<u>sn</u>u, becoming angry as
prompted by Indra held the disc in His hand, and, hurling it off on the
S’ukrâ’s mother, severed off her head quickly. The god Indra became very
glad at this.

 

56\. The Devas became free from sorrow, got very much pleased and
heartily exclaimed victory to Hari and worshipped Him and began to chant
His praises.

 

57\. Indra and Vi<u>sn</u>u then became free from all troubles; but they
began to fear that Bhrigu (S’ukrâ’s father) would curse them terribly
and without fail.

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa, on S’ukrâ’s going to Mahâdeva to get the Mantra.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk04ch12)
