[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch22)  [Next](bk04ch24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**ChapterXXIII**

 

**On the birth of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a**

 

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

 

1-2. Vyâsa said :-- The six sons of Devakî being thus killed by Kamsa
and the seventh womb being miscarried, Kamsa began, when Devakî was
pregnant for the eighth time, to think of the cause of his own death as
advised by Nârada and watched carefully, day and night, so that this
time there would be born a son and there be no miscarriage.

 

3\. On the other hand the Bhagavân Hari came down and rested on the body
of Vâsudeva as part incarnate and then entered into the womb of Devakî,
in due order.

 

4\. That very time the Goddess Yogamâyâ, of Her own accord, enters into
the womb of Yasodâ in order to help the workings of the gods.

 

5\. Rohinî, the wife of Vâsudeva was anxiously dwelling at that time
through the fear of Kamsa in the Nanda Gokula; Balarâma, the part
incarnate of Ananta, took his birth there as Her son.

 

6\. Kamsa then imprisoned Devakî, who was being worshipped by gods, and
engaged servants to take care of her.

 

7\. Vâsudeva, too, entered into the prison with his wife Devakî,
thinking of his issue and also being attracted by his attachment towards
his wife.

 

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

 

8\. Vi<u>sn</u>u, here, the Deva of the Devas, to accomplish the purpose
of the gods began to grow regularly in the womb of Devakî, being
incessantly adored and praised by the gods.

 

9-10. When the tenth month was complete, on the eighth day of the dark
fortnight, under the star Rohinî, Kamsa became much bewildered with fear
and called on his Dânava followers and said “You must all carefully
protect Devakî in the prison.

 

11-12. The son born from this eighth womb of Devakî will turn out my
dire enemy; therefore do you all very carefully protect that child, my
death incarnate (so that the child may not be transferred anywhere
else). O Daityas! I will be able to sleep without any anxiety then, when
I will be successful. Kill this eighth son of Devakî who has become the
source of my constant worries and endless troubles.

 

13\. Equipped with swords, shafts and bow and darts do you all
incessantly watch with eyes open on all sides, leaving off your sleep
and drowsiness.”

 

14\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus ordering the Demons, the king Kamsa who had
become worn out with this anxiety and was bewildered with fear, went
quickly to his own palace room; but he could not find any trace of
happiness.

 

15-18. On the other hand, Devakî, at dead of night, in that prison, told
Vâsudeva “O king! My birth pain has come; I see here many guards,
terrific, who are watching and protecting us; what shall I do now?
Yasodâ, the wife of Nanda, promised me before this. O respected one!
Your heart is almost burnt up with the fire of grief; therefore do you
send to my house your son; I will protect it with utmost care; and
especially to incur Kamsa’s faith and belief, I will give you another
son. O Lord! This is now a very hard moment; what are we to do now?

 

19\. And again how are you to exchange the two sons? However let what
may come, come to pass; now the moment of child birth has come; I am
possessed by a feeling of shame not liable to be overcome. You better
turn away your face; there is no other remedy here.”

 

20\. Thus saying to that blessed Vâsudeva, worshipped by the gods,
Devakî, at dead of night, delivered a wonderful child.

 

21\. The blessed Devakî looking on that exceedingly beautiful child, was
struck with wonder and told her husband, her whole body being filled
with joy.

 

22\. O Lord! Look at the face of your new born child, a very rare thing
to see such a face as this. Alas! The son of my paternal uncle, Kamsa,
will kill my this new born child.

 

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

 

23\. “Kamsa will do so.” Saying this, Vâsudeva took up that child in his
arms and began to look amorously at the face of that child of wonderful
deeds.

 

24\. Thus looking, Vâsudeva thought “What can I do now so as to relieve
me from my sorrows owing to the future destruction of this child.”

 

25-27. While Vâsudeva was thus anxiously pondering over, the Heaven
Voice clearly said thus :-- “O Vâsudeva! Quickly go to Gokula with the
child. The keepers and guards I have made dead asleep by My Mâyâ. The
eight very strong doors are now lying wide open. You better free
yourself from your chains and take this child, keep it in the house of
Nanda and bring Yoga Mâyâ from there and come back here.”

 

28-29. Thus hearing the Heavenly Voice, he cast his glance at the doors
and found them all wide open. O King! Very quickly then he took the
child and stepped out of the prison, quite unnoticed by the guards and
watchmen. Going to the banks of the Jumnâ he found there the daughter of
Kalindi, flowing with great force and became anxious.

 

30-31. But the river Jumnâ instantaneously turned out to be easily
fordable just knee deep; then Vâsudeva, guided by Yoga Mâyâ, crossed the
Jumnâ and betaking to an unfrequented road arrived at Gokul at dead of
night. There, at the doorway of the house of Nanda, he began to see the
cows, buffaloes, the wealth and property of Nanda.

 

32\. At that very moment, there was born of Yos’odâ, the Mahâ Devî, the
part of the Divine Yoga Mâyâ, the Incarnate of the three qualities.

 

33\. Then the Mahâdevî Yoga Mâyâ, assuming the appearance of a female
artisan, taking that divine female child in her arms came there and
handed her over to Vâsudeva.

 

34\. Vâsudeva, too, delivered his child over to the lotus like hands of
the Devî and, taking the female child instead, quickly returned with his
heart full of joy.

 

35\. He went unto the prison and kept that female child in the bed of
Devakî and remained aside, fearful and anxious.

 

36-37. But that child, the moment she was lulled to sleep, began to cry
in a sonorous voice; the royal guards at once woke up on that cry, and
being bewildered with fear, hurriedly went to their king and said “O
King! Come quickly. Devakî has brought forth a child.”

 

38-39. The King of the Bhojas, hearing their words, went there quickly
and saw the doors open, called on Vâsudeva “O blessed one! Let me have
the eighth son of Devakî, my death incarnate; I will at once kill that
enemy of mine, born as part incarnate of Hari.”

 

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

 

40\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing Kamsa’s words, Vâsudeva handed over
to him the female child crying and very much bewildered with fear.

 

41\. At the sight of the female child, the king was very much astonished
and began to think that the Heavenly Voice and the Seer Nârada’s words
turned out false.

 

42\. How can Vâsudeva be able to bring about, in this dreadful place,
the unnatural act of turning male into a female. Especially my guards
are carefully watching the place. There is no doubt in this.

 

43\. How has this female child come here? Where has that eighth born
child gone? I ought not to doubt in this matter. For the ways of Time
are mysterious!

 

44-46. Thinking thus, the cruel King Kamsa caught hold of that female
child by her legs and, raising her high up in the air, was going to
strike her against a stone, when the female child slipped out of his
hands and flying into the air assumed a divine appearance and gently
spoke to Kamsa, thus :-- “What will you get by killing me? Your powerful
enemy is already born on the earth. O vilest of men! Disgrace to your
family! He, the Excellent Human being Who is very difficult to be
worshiped will certainly kill you.”

 

47-49. Saying thus, the auspicious female child, able to go anywhere
according to her will, disappeared. Kamsa astonished returned to his own
home and, becoming impatient with fear and anger, called all the Dânavas
Baka, Dhenuka, Vatsa and others, and addressed them thus :-- “O Dânavas.
Go all of you to serve my purpose. Kill anywhere the child whom you see
just born.

 

50\. Let Pûtanâ, expert in killing children go today to Nanda’s Gokula.
My order is this :-- Any child recently born they must kill.

 

51\. Dhenuka, Vatsaka, Kes’i, Pralamba, and Vaka, etc., all should
remain in Gokula to carry out my order.”

 

52\. The cruel king Kamsa, thus ordering the Demons, went away to his
own palace, and, thinking on this matter over and over again became,
very much afflicted with fear and his mind got immensely depressed.

 

Thus ends the 23rd Chapter in the 4th Skandha of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa, on the birth of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](bk04ch24)
