[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch21)  [Next](bk04ch23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**      THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXII**

 

**On the part incarnations of the several Devas**

 

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya asked :-- O grandfather! What bad act did that child
commit, that no sooner he was born than he was killed by Kamsa?

 

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

 

2\. Especially, Mahar<u>s</u>i Nârada is the the best amongst the Munis
and foremost amongst the Brahmâ-vids (Knowers of Brahmâ), always doing
virtuous acts, and learned; why did he become the agent in this very
sinful act?

 

3\. Pundits declare that the doers and stimulators of any evil deed both
are equally responsible; then how is it that Nârada, being the best of
the Munis, instigated the wicked Kamsa to do this evil act!

 

4\. I am very much in doubt on this point. Kindly describe, in detail,
the act that the child did as the result of which be had to meet with
this fate of being killed.

 

5\. Vyâsa said :-- The Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada is always fond of seeing
quarrels brought about amongst parties; he always likes thus to see the
fun. Here specially to serve the gods’ purpose he went to Kamsa and
incited him to such an act.

 

6\. Really he never intends to speak a lie; he is always truth speaking;
pure hearted, and always ready to serve the gods.

 

7\. Thus the six sons were born to Devakî; and Kamsa, too, killed those
six sons consecutively as they were born. These six sons named
<u>S</u>a<u>d</u>garbha, were killed just after their births, owing to
their having been previously cursed.

 

8\. O King! Hear why they were cursed before. In the reign of
Svâyambhuva Manu, were born to Ur<u>n</u>â; the wife of Mahar<u>s</u>i
Marîchi, the six powerful sons, all of a virtuous disposition.

 

9-11. Once, on an occasion, the Prajâpati Brahmâ, on seeing his
daughter, became passionate, and was ready to hold sexual intercourse
with her. At this, those six sons laughed at him. Brahmâ cursed them
saying “You all go quickly and take your birth in the wombs of the
asuras.” Therefore those six sons became the sons of Kâlanemi in their
first birth. At their second birth, they became the sons of
Hira<u>n</u>yakas’ipu. This second time they had the fear of curse in
their minds and therefore were born endowed with knowledge.

 

12\. In this birth they became peaceful and, collecting all their
energies, they began to practise austerities. Brahmâ was pleased at this
and asked the <u>S</u>a<u>d</u>garbha to take boons.

 

13\. Brahmâ said :-- O my sons! I was very angry to you before and
cursed you; now I am very much pleased with you; ask boons from me that
you all desire.

 

14-15. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing Brahmâ’s words, they were very glad and
becoming very anxious to secure their objects of desire, said :-- O our
grand

 

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

 

sire! Today thou art pleased unto us; now favour us with our desired
boons. That we may be invulnerable to all the Devas, human beings, the
big serpents the Gandarbhas, and the Lord of Siddhas, (semi-divine
beings supposed to be of great purity and holiness and said to be
particularly characterised by eight supernatural faculties called
Siddhis).

 

16\. Vyâsa said :-- Brahmâ told them “What you have asked, you would
certainly get; O blessed ones! better go now; my words will be found to
be literally true. No doubt in this.”

 

17-19. Granting them boons, Brahmâ went away; they then became very
glad. O best of Kurus! Hira<u>n</u>yakas’ipu began to think “My sons now
have pleased the Grandsire Brahmâ and are now regardless of me” and got
very angry and said :-- You all are become very proud on account of
receiving boons; and since you have ceased your good feelings towards me
I also henceforth cut off my connection with you. Now better go to
Pâtâla; you will be known in this world as <u>S</u>a<u>d</u>garbha.

 

20-21. At present you would be always involved in deep sleep and remain
in Pâtâla for many years; and when you will be born one after another in
the womb of Devakî, then your father Kâlanemi of previous birth will be
born as Kamsa; and he would be cruel hearted and surely kill you all, no
sooner you be born.

 

22\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus because they were cursed, they took their
births repeatedly and Kamsa, too, being urged on by the same curse,
killed those sons of Devakî, the <u>S</u>a<u>d</u>garbha, no sooner they
were born.

 

23-24. In the seventh womb of Devakî, Ananta made his appearance. The
foetus in the womb was attracted by Yoga mâyâ and placed in the womb of
Rohi<u>n</u>î. But there was the rumour that there was miscarriage in
the womb of Devakî in the fifth month; and this became known to the
public.

 

25\. Kamsa came to know that there had been miscarriage. That wicked
soul became exceedingly glad to hear this gladdening news.

 

26\. And at about this time the Bhagavân, the Protector of the devotee
appeared in the eighth womb of Devakî to serve the purpose of the gods
and to relieve the load of the Earth.

 

27-28. The King said :-- O best of Munis! “You have described the part
incarnations of (1) Kas’yapa as Vâsudeva and (2) of Bhagavân Hari to
relieve the burden of the Goddess Earth as prayed by Her; and (3) of
Ananta Deva; but you have not described the part incarnations of the
other Devas. How the other Devas incarnated as their parts on this
earth, kindly describe them now.”

 

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

 

29\. Vyâsa said :-- The part incarnations of Suras and Asuras on this
earth, and their names I am now saying to you in brief; hear.

 

30-32. Vâsudeva was the part incarnation of Kas’yapa, Devakî was of
Aditi, Baladeva, of Ananta; Vâsudeva S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, of S’rîmân
Nârâya<u>n</u>a; the son of Dharma existing even at that time in his
physical body; Arju<u>n</u>a, of Nara, the younger brother of
Nârâya<u>n</u>a.

 

33\. Yuidhi<u>st</u>hira was part incarnate of Dharma, Bhimasena, of
Vâyu, the powerful twins of Mâdri, Nakul and Sahadeva, of
As’vinî-kumâras?

 

34\. The valiant hero Kar<u>n</u>a, born of Kuntî, was part incarnate of
the Sun, and the high minded Vidura, the knower of the Supreme Essence,
was incarnate of Yama, the king Dharmarâj. Dro<u>n</u>a, the Âchârya of
the Kurus and the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas was the part incarnate of Brihaspatî;
and his son As’vatthâmâ was part incarnate of Rudra Deva.

 

35\. S’antanu was the part incarnate of the Ocean; his wife, of the
river Ganges in human farm. It is stated in the Purâ<u>n</u>as that the
king Devaka was part incarnate of the Lord of Gandarvas.

 

36-41. The Grand-father of the Kauravas, the foremost of the heroes,
Bhî<u>s</u>ma Deva was the incarnate of Vasu; Virâ<u>t</u>a, the Lord of
Matsya was the part incarnate of Maruts; Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra, of the
Daitya Hamsa, the son of Ari<u>st</u>a Nemi; Kripa and Krita Varmâ, of
Maruts; Duryodhana, of Kali and S’akuni, of Dvâpara; Suvarchâkhya
Somapraru, of the son of the Moon; Dhri<u>st</u>adyumna was part
incarnate of Fire and S’ikha<u>nd</u>î of Râksasa; Pradyumna was part
incarnate of Sanatkumâra; the king Drupada was part incarnate of
Varu<u>n</u>a; Draupadî, of Lak<u>s</u>mî; Draupadî’s five sons, of
Visve-devas; Kuntî was incarnate of Siddhi; Mâdri, of Dhriti; Gândhârî,
of Mati; the wives of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a were the heavenly public women;
thus all the Devas came as their part incarnations, urged on by Indra.

 

42-43. Amongst the Asuras, S’is’upâla was the incarnate of
Hira<u>n</u>yakas’ipu; Jarâsandha, of Biprachitti, S’alya, of Prahlâda;
Kamsa, of Kâlanemi and Kes’î, of Haya S’irâ. The Asura named
Ari<u>st</u>a of the form of a cow that was killed by Kri<u>sn</u>a was
the son of Bali.

 

44\. Dhri<u>st</u>aketu was part incarnate of Anuhrâdha, Bhagadatta, of
Vâskala; Pralamba, of Lamba; Dhenuka, of Khara.

 

45\. Châ<u>n</u>ûra and Mus’<u>t</u>ika, the two athletes, were part
incarnates of Vârâha, and Kis’ora, the two dreadful Daityas.

 

46-47. Kubalaya, the elephant of Kamsa, was part incarnate of
Ari<u>st</u>a, the sun of Diti. Vakî was the daughter of Bali, Vaka was
her younger.

 

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

 

The powerful son of Dro<u>n</u>a, As’vatthâmâ, though known as the part
incarnate of Rudra, was really born of the four parts of Yama, Rudra,
Cupidity and Anger.

 

48-49. The Daityas and Râksasas that were born to relieve the heavy
burden of the Earth were all incarnates of Asuras. O king! I have thus
narrated to you in order the incarnations of the Suras and Asuras, as
they are stated duly in the Purâ<u>n</u>as.

 

50-51. When Brahmâ and the other Devas went to Vi<u>sn</u>u and prayed
to Him then Hari gave to Brahmâ one hair of a black colour and one hair
of a white colour. The Bhagavân S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a was born of that
black hair and S’a<u>n</u>kar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a Baladeva was born of the
white hair. They were both the incarnations of Vi<u>sn</u>u.

 

Note here the black is the younger and the stronger; and they also
represent the polarities. The Jîvas are points of those hairs.

 

52\. He who hears with devotion the story of these part incarnations
becomes freed of all sins and passes away his time merrily, surrounded
by his circle of friends; there is no doubt in this.

 

Thus ends the 22nd chapter in 4th book of S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam the
Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa on
the part incarnations of the several Devas.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](bk04ch23.md)
