[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk03ch30)  [Next](bk04ch02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On the questions put by Janamejaya regarding Kri<u>sn</u>a’s
incarnation**

 

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- O Vâsaveya! the Chief amongst the Munis, the
Ocean of all knowledge, O the Sinless One! the Lord and Well Wisher of
our families, I come to you with a mind to ask you certain questions.

 

 \* Vâsavî is the name of the mother of Vyâsa.

 

2-3. I heard of yore, but I do not know why was that illustrious son of
Sûrasena, that powerful Ânakadundubhi (1), the pious and illustrious
Vasudeva, the father of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the incarnation of the God
Hari Himself, and who was worshipped even by the Gods, thrown into
prison by Kamsa?

 

Note :-- (1) Ânakadundubhi is the epithet of Vasudeva, father of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a, since at Vasudeva's birth, drums called Ânakas and
Dundubhis were resounded in the sky.

 

4-5. What faults had he and his wife Devakî committed? Why that Kamsa
the descendant of Yayâti, killed the six infant sons of Devakî? And for
what reason did the God S’rî Hari incarnate Himself as the son of
Vasudeva in the prison house of Kamsa?

 

6-11. How was that Lord of the Universe, S’rî Bhagavân, and the Ruler of
the Yâdava clan, taken to Gokula? Why was He, born of a K<u>s</u>attriya
family, generally recognised as of the Gopâla (cow-herd) clan? Why were
His father Vasudeva and mother Devakî thrown into prison? And why did
not S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, of indomitable prowess, and capable to create
and preserve the worlds, could release instantly, father and mother from
their imprisoned state? I cannot conceive that the so-called Fate could
have any influence on such high souled persons, the father and mother of
the Supreme Being, S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a; who were those sons of Vasudeva
that were killed by Kamsa? And who was that girl child who when struck
by Kamsa on a slab of stone instantly rose up above the sky, assuming
the form of A<u>st</u>abhujâ, the eight armed Goddess? O Sinless One!
Kindly explain unto me how did S’rî Hari manage to perform the
house-holder's duties, when he had married the several wives? and what
were those glorious deeds that he did in His this incarnation and how
did he finally pass away from his mortal physical coil? My mind sinks
into an ocean of confusion, when I hear of the several things done by
S’rî Hari; some times I find the deeds, not capable of being done by any
other than the Supreme Being Himself and sometimes I hear of deeds that
can be done by  an ordinary man. And, therefore I cannot decide whether
Vasudeva was the Incarnation of God or an ordinary being. Be pleased to
remove these doubts from my mind and describe the life of Vâsudeva in
its true light.

 

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

 

12-14. In days of yore, the two sons of Dharma were the two best amongst
the Ri<u>s</u>is, and were the Devas Nara and Nârâya<u>n</u>a. They were
very high souled persons and they performed severe austerities for long
extending years. They were born as part incarnations of Vi<u>sn</u>u;
and, for the good of the world, did they, in the Vadarikâ'srama, perform
penances, controlling their six passions, and free from desires.

 

15\. The all-knowing sages Nârada and others say that the well known
Arjuna and S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a of indomitable prowess were the two part
incarnations of those two ancient Munis Nara and Nârâya<u>n</u>a.

 

16\. How came those two Devas Nara and Nârâya<u>n</u>a to be born in the
two bodies of Kri<u>sn</u>a and Arju<u>n</u>a, though they did not
relinquish their previous bodies!

 

17\. And also when those two Munis had attained liberation, their goal
in their Yogas, by performing severe penances, how could they again be
born in other bodies!

 

18-19. If any S'ûdra dies performing his own religion, he takes up a
Vais’ya body in his next incarnation; if any Vais'ya died so, he takes
up a K<u>s</u>attriya body and a K<u>s</u>attriya when adhering to his
own rites and ceremonies, dying takes up a Brâhma<u>n</u> body in his
next incarnation. And if a Brâhmi<u>n</u> be free from desires and
resorts to the path of peace, when he dies, he becomes free from
incarnations and is saved from this disease of getting into the world.

 

20-21. Now the reverse seems to take place in the case of Nara and
Nârâya<u>n</u>a. In spite of withering up their bodies by hard penances,
they took up K<u>s</u>attriya bodies. Under what influence of Karma, did
they take up up birth when they were Yogis? Or might they, the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, become K<u>s</u>attriyas owing to some curse? Whatever
it may be, kindly remove my doubts, explaining to me their causes.

 

22\. It is heard that the Yâdava clan suffered destruction through the
curse of a Brâhma<u>n</u> and in spite of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a being the
incarnation of the Supreme Being, his family died of the effect of curse
from Gândhârî.

 

23\. How was it that Pradyumna was stolen away by S'ambara, the lord of
the Asuras; and for what purpose when Vasudeva, the Deva of the Devas
was present, how was it that his son was stolen away from the lying-in
room? This seems impossible.

 

24\. Why did not Vasudeva see, with His inner vision, the stealing away
of his son from the impregnable walls of His fortress-like mansion in
Dwârkâ? (And could thus have prevented this!)

 

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

 

25-39. O Muni! After Vâsudeva had gone to Heaven, his wives were
plundered by the dacoits on the way. I am very much in doubt on this
point. Also I cannot understand why did this event take place just after
His translation to Heaven? Again how was S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, who was
Vi<u>sn</u>u's Full incarnation, born into this world to take off the
vicious load of this earth, and to destroy the evil-doers, terrified and
He fled through the fear of Jarâsandha, evacuated His kingdom of Mathurâ
and went with His armies and friends to Dwârkâ? Vâsudeva came here to
destroy the evil miscreants and to conserve the religion; how then did
He not, as He was all knowing, previously kill those dacoits, who
afterward stole and plundered His wives? Was it, that He, being
Omniscient did not know those dacoits? He protected the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas,
no doubt, who were high souled, righteous and virtuous; but I cannot
understand how did He consider the high souled virtuous persons like
Bhî<u>s</u>ma, Dro<u>n</u>a and others as loads of earth and slay them.
The devotees of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, observing good customs, conducts and
practices, Yudhi<u>st</u>hira and his brothers performed the Râjasuya
sacrifice, according to rules, giving various offerings to the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s and depended entirely on Vâsudeva; still, O Muni! they
suffered terrible hardships; whither were their virtuous deeds by this
time? what horrible sins did they commit that they had to suffer pains
and troubles in the assembly. The highly merited Draupadî arose from the
midst of sacrificial fire and is born of the part of Lak<u>s</u>mî, pure
and devoted to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. How did such a glorious woman meet
with incomparable terrible pains often and often; how could she be
caught hold of by her hair on her head by Duh'sâsan; and carried to the
royal assembly, when she was in her menses and extremely terrified and
harassed? How did she come to be a slave of Matsya Râj in his kingdom
Virâ<u>t</u>, and though actually crying aloud like a female osprey
(eagle) she was highly insulted by Kîchaka! Alas! how could Draupadî be
stolen away by Jayadratha, though latterly released by the
Pâ<u>nd</u>avas? What evil deeds did the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas commit in their
previous births, that they had to befall under so many telling
difficulties?

 

40\. O high minded Muni! My ancestors performed the Râjasûya sacrifice
and still they fell under so many serious difficulties. Kindly explain
the causes of these to me.

 

41-42. If it be urged, that they suffered so many serious calamities,
due to their actions in their former lives, that seems impossible.
Because they are born of the Devas; thus arises my doubt; be pleased to
explain to me.

 

Again how the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas, the sons of Kunti, of good conduct, and
knowing the illusory nature of the world, why did they, out of pretence
kill Bhî<u>s</u>ma, Drona and others?

 

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

 

43\. This appears a riddle to me that these Pâ<u>nd</u>avas were led to
the extermination of their race, being inspired by Hari Vâsudeva, to
this horrible act.

 

44\. Rather to live on begging alms and to live on rice, growing wild or
without cultivation, or to live as an artisan or artist than to kill the
valiant warriors unlawfully in a battle, simply out of voluptuous greed.

 

45\. O Best of the Munis! You have preserved this extirpated race by
producing the Goloka sons (i. e. sons born by other persons of women
after their husbands are dead) of indomitable prowess.

 

46\. And why did my honoured father, born of Uttara in this respected
family , encircle a snake round the neck of a Brâhmi<u>n</u> ascetic?

 

No body, born of a K<u>s</u>attriya family, shews signs of hatred and
jealousy towards a Brâhmi<u>n</u>. Is it that my father shewed such
feeling to that ascetic, who took the vow of silence!

 

O Best of the Munis -- These things and lots of others are troubling my
mind with many grave doubts. O merciful saint! You know every thing; be
kind enough to quell this the disturbed state of my mind.

 

Thus ends the First Adhyâya in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavata Purâ<u>n</u>a of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk04ch02.md)
