[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch04)  [Next](bk04ch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On the dialogues of** **Nara** **Nârâya<u>n</u>a**

 

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O best of kings! There is no need of dwelling at
length on this point; suffice to say, that in this world, are found
persons very rare that are religious, and free from egoism, jealousy,
anger, etc.

 

2\. O king of kings! Even in the Satya Yuga, the Golden age, this world,
moving and unmoving, was covered with feelings of jealousy and anger.
What to say in this Kali Yuga (Dark Age)! (There is no wonder that this
world would be full of these vicious things.)

 

3\. O best of kings! When the Devas are deceitful, jealous, and filled
with feelings of anger, what is to be said with human beings and other
lower creations!

 

4\. O Lord of the Earth! It is natural, that injury be inflicted on
those persons that commit injury; but when peaceful persons, void of any
enmity, are injured, that is certainly an act wicked and mischievous.

 

5\. Whenever, any devout ascetic, calm and quiet, is engaged in prayer
and meditation, and silent muttering of one's mantrams, the king of the
Immortals throws hindrance in his asceticism. (This is certainly a
mischievous act.)

 

6\. (Holy, unholy and mixed persons exist in all the yugas). To those
that are holy, all the yugas are the Satya yuga; to the unholy ones
always it is the Kali yuga (Dark age); and to the mixed ones, always it
is Tretâ and Dvâpara.

 

7\. You will very seldom find a few persons, following really the True
Religion; otherwise, you would have found all the persons in the
different yugas religious, appropriate to those yugas.

 

8\. O king! In all cases where the conservation of religions and
religious affairs are concerned, know that the original wish and desire
is the cause. If this desire be impure and sullied, religion becomes
also sullied for, verily, this impurity in one's desire is one's cause
of ruin in every respect. (Therefore the impure desires are never to be
cherished and indulged.)

 

9\. A son, named Dharma, was born of the heart of Brahmâ; he was devoted
to Brahmâjnâna (the knowledge of Brahmâ), truthful, and always engaged
in rites and ceremonies and in accordance with the Vedic religion.

 

10\. This high souled Muni Dharma was a householder and married duly,
according to the proper procedure, to the ten daughters of Dak<u>s</u>a
Prajâpati.

 

11\. This Dharma, the foremost amongst the followers of truth,
impregnated them and had four sons, named respectively Hari,
Kri<u>sn</u>a, Nara, and Nârâya<u>n</u>a.

 

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

 

12\. Hari and Kri<u>sn</u>a, amongst the four, used to remain always in
the practising of the yoga.

 

13\. Nara and Nârâya<u>n</u>a came over to the Himâlayân mountains and,
in the hermitage of Badarikâ, commenced the difficult religious
asceticism and penance.

 

14\. The foremost of the ascetics, those two ancient Munis, began to
recite that highest mantra of Para Brahmâ, the Gâyatrî, on the wide
spacious bank of the Ganges.

 

15\. The two Risis named Nara and Nârâya<u>n</u>a, born of Hari's Ams'a,
practised excellent tapasyâ for full one thousand years.

 

16\. The whole Universe, moving and unmoving, became hot through the
Fire of their Tapas. Indra became also perplexed.

 

17-18. The thousand-eyed Indra became anxious, thought and within
himself thus :-- What is to be done now? These two sons of Dharma are
practising Tapas and are in meditation. If they succeed, they can occupy
my excellent seat in Heaven; how can I break their Tapasyâ and what
steps shall I take to hinder them.

 

19-20. Lust, anger, and insurmountable avarice Indra brought into
existence and, intent on hindering their tapasyâ, mounted on the
elephant Airâvata, went quickly to the hill Gandhamâdan, and approaching
the holy hermitage, saw the two ancient Ri<u>s</u>is.

 

21\. Their bodies were incandescent by Tapasyâ, as if they were the two
rising Suns. Were they Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u manifested there or were
they the two shining sources of light? These two Ri<u>s</u>is were the
sons of Dharma. What would they do with their Tapasyâ?

 

22-23. Thinking thus, the lord of S'achî seeing them addressed thus :--
O highly fortunate ones! O two Ri<u>s</u>is the sons of Dharma! Please
tell me what are your objects? I have come here to give thee excellent
boons; I am very pleased with your Tapasyâ; therefore ask boons from me;
and even if they be not worth giving, I will give them to you.

 

24-25. Vyâsa said :-- The Ri<u>s</u>is were deeply immersed in
meditation and seemed very firm and resolute; they, therefore, did not
reply anything, though Indra, standing before them, repeatedly urged
them to ask boons from him. Seeing this, the king of the Immortals began
to terrify them with his supernatural enchanting fearful mâyic powers.

 

26\. He created lions, tigers, wolves and other murderous animals and
began to terrify the two Ri<u>s</u>is with them; Indra also produced
rains, hurricanes and fires very frequently so that they might yield.

 

27\. In spite of Indra's attempt to terrify them by his wonderful Mâyâ,
the two Munis, Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the two sons of Dharma, could not
be brought under his control. And Indra returned to his own place.

 

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

 

28-31. And he became very sorry and thought thus :-- These two Munis
could not be tempted away with boons, nor did they fly away from their
place of worship, though terrified with fire, wind, wolves, tigers and
lions. No one, I think, would be able to break their meditation. When
fear and temptations have not distracted their meditation, they are
certainly meditating on the Eternal Mahâ Vidyâ S'rî Bhuvanes'warî, the
Prime Force of Nature, the Source of all Mâyâs, and the Goddess the
Creatrix of all the worlds, the wonderful highest Prakriti; what other
expert in emitting Mâyâ there can be? Who can break their meditation!

 

32\. Indeed! how can this whole host of Mâyâs that are created by Gods
and Asuras overpower those purged of all their sins, who are meditating
their Creator, the Supreme Mâyâ, that Illusion by which one considers
the unreal Universe as really existent and as distinct from the Supreme
Spirit, whence the Gods and Asuras have derived all their supernatural
powers.

 

33\. He in whose heart reign the seed mantras of Vâk, Kâma and Mâyâ,
called Vâgvîjam, Kâmavijam, Mâyâvîjam, no one is able to stand against
and overpower him.

 

34-35. O king! Indra, enchanted by Mâyâ, did not desist from tempting
the two Ri<u>s</u>is, but he went on thinking other means by which their
asceticism could be baffled and asked Kâma and Vasanta (the god of Lust
and the season spring) to come before him and addressed them, thus :-- O
Kâma! You now be united with your wife Rati and Vasanta (the God of
spring) and go to the hill Gandhamâdan, accompanied by all the Apsarâs
(celestial damsels) and with all the Rasas (love sentiments).

 

NOTE :-- The Gandhamâdan is the mountain like unsurpassable intoxicating
happiness of the senses.

 

36-37. There you will find the two ancient excellent Ri<u>s</u>is Nara
and Nârâya<u>n</u>a practising asceticism in solitude, in the hermitage
of Badarikâ. O Manamatha! You better go before them, and with the
influence of your arrows, do now my work and make their hearts extremely
lustful.

 

38\. O Fortunate One! Charm over them by means of your arrows, make them
leave their asceticism by magical spells.

 

39\. Who is there in this world of Devas, Daityas, human beings, that,
being whipped by your arrows, do not come under your control?

 

40\. When Brahmâ, I, Mahâdeva, Moon and Fire are all fascinated by your
arrows, then is there any doubt that these two Ri<u>s</u>is would not be
fascinated by them!

 

41\. I am sending these public women as your assistants. Rambhâ and
other beautiful celestial nymphs would all follow you.

 

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

 

42\. You alone, or Rambhâ or Tilottamâ alone can do this work. Will
there be any doubt if you all unite in this?

 

43\. O Good One! Do this work for me; I will confer on you your desired
objects.

 

44\. O Manmatha! I tempted them with boons but these two ascetics, of
controlled minds, could not be displaced from their seats. My efforts
were rendered useless.

 

45\. I frightened them very much with all the Mâyic powers; yet they
could not be dislocated from their deep thoughts. It seems that they are
quite heedless in the preservation of their bodies.

 

46\. Vyâsa said :-- Kâmadeva, on hearing the king of the Devas,
addressed him thus :-- O Indra! Today I will fulfill all your desires.

 

47\. But there is one word. If these two ascetics be meditating
Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’iva or Brahmâ or the Sun, then I will be able to bring
them under my control.

 

48\. And if they be meditating on the Great Seed Mantra, the root of all
Mâyâ, and the great Kâmavîjam, the king of the Kâma, I will never be
able to subdue such a devotee of the Highest Devî.

 

49\. If these two ascetics have devotedly taken refuge of the Great
Power Mahâ Devî, then they will not come under the sight of my arrows.

 

50\. Indra said :-- O Blessed One! Go now with your assistants, ready to
do your work. No body but you, I find, that can fulfill my this
beneficial, though very difficult work.

 

Vyâsa said :-- Thus ordered by Indra, they all departed to where the
Dharma's sons Nara, and Nârâya<u>n</u>a were performing their hard
Tapasyâs.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk04ch06)
