[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch01)  [Next](bk04ch03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On the supremacy of the effects of Karma**

 

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

 

1\. Sûta said :-- The learned Vyâsa, the son of Satyavatî, and the
knower of the Purâ<u>n</u>as, when thus asked by Janamejaya, the son of
Parîksit, whose heart had become calm, replied in the following words,
capable to remove all his doubts. Vyâsa said :--

 

2\. O king! You would better know, that in this Universe the course of
Karma is not easily comprehensible; even the Devas are not capable to
comprehend the wonderful effects of actions; what to speak of men!

 

3\. When this Universe composed of the three Gu<u>n</u>as arose, it was
through Karma, that everything had its origin.

 

4-5. It was the seed of Karma whence the Jîvas (the individual embodied
souls) arose with neither any beginning nor any end. Those Jîvas go
often and often incarnating in numberless varieties of wombs and then go
to dissolution. When this Karma ceases, the Jîvas then are never to have
any more connection with any other body.

 

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

 

6\. The Karmas done by Jîvas are of three kinds :-- auspicious,
inauspicious and mixed (partly auspicious and partly inauspicious); of
which the auspicious is the Sattvik Karma, the inauspicious is the
Tamasik Karma and the mixed, is the Râjasic Karma. Thus have been said
by the Sages.

 

7\. These three again are subdivided into three. They are Sanchita
(accumulated), Bhavisya (impending in future) and Prârabdha (commenced).
All these Karmas are in dwelling always with the body.

 

8-9. O king! Everybody, even Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'a all under
the influence of this Karma! And they experience pleasure, pain, old
age, disease and death, joy and sorrow, lust, anger, greed and other
bodily qualities, out of the effects of this Karma, which we call
ordinarily Fate.

 

10-11. Therefore love, hatred and other bodily qualities all predominate
equally in all bodies. Anger, jealousy, hatred, and other similar
qualities arise in the Devas, men, and birds owing to some sort of
dislikes on previous occasions; and love, compassion, pity, etc., arise
out of some sort of likings, existing already.

 

12-13. O king! No individual can arise without some sort of action or
other. It is through Karma that the Sun traverses in the sky; it is
through Karma that the Moon was attacked with consumption disease; and
it is through Karma that the Rudra holds the disc of skull bone. This
Karma, therefore, has no beginning nor end (till Mok<u>s</u>a); now that
this Karma is the sole cause in the production of this Universe.

 

14-16. For this reason, this whole Universe, moveable and immoveable, is
real; but Munis are deeply absorbed in meditation to ascertain about its
reality or unreality. They cannot definitely know it for certain whether
this world is real or unreal; for where Mâyâ is prevalent, the universe
is there. Where there is the cause fully existing in all respects, there
is no effect, how can we say? The Mâyâ is eternal and always acts as the
Prime Cause of all.

 

17\. Therefore, O king! the sages declare that the seed of Karma is
eternal. This whole universe changes incessantly, being controlled by
this karma.

 

18\. O king of kings! They say, it is through the will of Vi<u>sn</u>u,
of unbounded energy and splendour, that all this universe enters, again
and again, into all sorts of wombs, whether good or evil.

 

19\. Now, if the birth of Vi<u>sn</u>u, of infinite prowess, takes place
according to His will, then why is it that He travels through many
impious births? Why is it that Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u goes, in different
Yugas, to take His births in low, vile origins?

 

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

 

Where is that self dependent man, who, leaving his abode
Vaikun<u>t</u>ha and all sorts of pleasures and happiness, desires to
live in this mortal temple, filled with urine, faeces and other filthy
matters.

 

20\. No intelligent man will leave comfortable resting places and
amorous sports and gathering flowers for the sake of dwelling in this
uterus in the womb?

 

21\. Who likes to live with his face downwards in the womb, when he can
enjoy fine heavenly soft downs, puffed up with cotton or silk.

 

22\. Who will abandon singing, dancing and music, where all sorts of
love feelings are being manifested, and think of coming down to this
veritable Hell?

 

23\. Who will abandon the wonderful ambrosial nectar and prosperity
given by Lak<u>s</u>mî, that cannot be easily renounced, and then like
to taste this urine and faeces.

 

24\. There is no hell more aggravating in the three worlds than this
existence in the wombs. The Munis, afraid of these, perform difficult
asceticisms in this wondrous world.

 

25\. Wise, intelligent persons renounce their kingdoms and enjoyments
and resort to forests. Who is there so stupid as to enter willingly in
the various wombs?

 

26\. Worms and insects torment the Jîvas in the womb; the digestive fire
of the stomach heats it from below, whereas it is always fearfully tied
down on all sides by the flesh, enclosing its fat or marrow. O King; Not
a trace of happiness is visible there.

 

27\. It is far better to live in a prison house, fettered by hard iron
chains. Whereas it is not desirable to live for a moment in the womb.

 

28\. It is very hard and painful to be in the womb for ten months. To
come out of the hard and terrible womb is extremely troublesome.

 

29\. Jîvas get trouble in their childhood; they cannot speak, and they
do not know what to say, when they are hungry or thirsty; they depend
entirely on others and they are grieved.

 

30\. When the child becomes hungry and cries, the mother becomes
anxious. When the child is afflicted with diseases and cries, the mother
then knows and administers medicines.

 

31\. Thus many troubles arise in childhood. Sages do not therefore find
any happiness and do not desire, of their own accord, to come here.

 

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

 

32\. O king, no sane man, would forego incessant heavenly pleasures and
prefer before the Devas to this toilsome and painful state of being born
in the womb.

 

33\. O king of kings! All the Devas, Brahmâ and others have to enjoy
full the effects of their Karmas done, whether they are pleasant or
painful.

 

34\. O best of kings! The fruits of karma must have to be experienced,
whether auspicious or inauspicious, be he a Deva, or human being or an
animal; any one who has embodied himself in fine or gross bodies!

 

35\. Human beings, by dint of their practise of penance, religious
austerities alms givings and sacrifices, rise to Indrahood. Indra, in
his turn, when the effects of his good actions cease, comes down to
inferior births! there is no doubt of it.

 

36\. In the Rama Incarnation, the Devas had to incarnate themselves a
Monkeys; and in the Kri<u>sn</u>a incarnation, the Devas had to
incarnate themselves as human beings, Cow-herds (Gopas) and Yâdavas.

 

37\. Thus being urged on by Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân incarnates
Himself many times, yugas after yugas, to preserve the religion.

 

38\. O king of mortals! Thus, like a carwheel, Bhagavàn Hari incarnated
Himself in various wombs successively in a wonderful manner.

 

39\. The destruction the of Daityas was done by Hari in His many
secondary incarnations.

 

40\. Now I will narrate to you the auspicious facts of the birth of
Kri<u>sn</u>a, Who incarnated Himself in the family of Yadu (Yadu Kula).

 

41\. O king! The illustrious Vâsudeva, born of the part of the Muni
Kas'yapa, had to take his birth again as a human being due to his
previous curse and had to maintain his livelihood by tending cows.

 

42\. O best of kings! And the two wives Kas'yapa, Aditi and Surasâ had
to take their births as the two sisters, Devaki and Rohi<u>n</u>î, on
account of the curses cast on them. O Descendant of Bharata! We have
thus heard that they were greatly cursed at one time by Varu<u>n</u>a,
the water deity, who got very much angry. The king said.

 

43-47. What fault was committed by Kas'yapa that he had to take his
birth along with his wife as cowherds. And why was it that the
Everlasting uninterrupted Atman Vi<u>sn</u>u Nârâya<u>n</u>a had to take
his birth in Gokula. He whose abode is Vaikun<u>t</u>ha, who is the Lord
of Rama! who is Bhagavân and the Supreme amongst the gods, who is the
upholder of the universe and the yugas! Under Whose order can such a
being abandon his abode and take his birth in the world like an ordinary
mortal? There is this grave doubt, then, of mine on this point.

 

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

 

48-51. Obtaining this depraved human coil, one is always perplexed with
various thoughts, sometimes with lust, anger, jealousy, intoleration,
sorrow, enmity sometimes with pleasurable feelings, happiness, fear,
sufferings, penury, sometimes with straight-forwardness, good or bad
deeds, faithfulness, treachery, unsteadiness, supporting others;
sometimes with remorse, hesitation, bragging, greed, vain boasting,
delusion, or hypocrisy and sometimes with remorse; these different
feelings exist in men.

 

52\. How then can Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân abandon His eternal pleasures
and have recourse to this human birth, full of many perplexing thoughts.

 

53\. O best of Munis! What peculiar happiness is there in the pleasures
of human births, that S’rî Bhagavân Hari has to undertake the burden of
dwelling thus in the human wombs?

 

54-55. O Munîndra! The sufferings that are experienced, while in the
womb, the pain during the time of delivery, the misfortunes in the early
childhood, the troubles of passionate lust in youth, the greater sorrows
and difficulties in the householder's life, all these are existent
there; how then Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u incarnate Himself often in these
various human births.

 

56-57. What an amount of enormous difficulties had Brahmâ-born Hari to
undertake in His Râma incarnation! That high souled One had to suffer
for his exile in forest, for the stealing away of his wife Sîtâ, for the
frequent wars, for the final separation from his wife Sîtâ.

 

58-59. Likewise in the Kri<u>sn</u>a Avatâra, the birth in a prison, the
departure to Gokul, tending cows, the killing of Kamsa, departure to
Dwârkâ with great difficulty and all sorts of household difficulties
were there. Why had He to suffer all these?

 

60\. Who amongst the wise and the emancipated, of his own accord
condescends to take on his shoulders so many hard sufferings? This is
the grave doubt in my mind; be graciously pleased to remove my this
grave doubt and make my mind tranquil.

 

Here ends the Second Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhagâvatam of the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>î
Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk04ch03.md)
