[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch24)  [Next](bk05ch01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXV**

 

**On the Devî’s Highest Supremacy**

 

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

 

1\. The King said :-- O Best of Munis! Hearing these sorrows of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a, the part incarnate of Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân, I am in
doubt on your utterances.

 

2\. Behold! Bhagavân Vâsudeva is the part incarnate of Nârâya<u>n</u>a;
how could the Asura S’ambara steal away His son from the
lying-in-chamber!

 

3\. The beautiful Dvârakâ city is specially well-guarded; the
lying-in-chamber is again within the centre of that; under these
circumstances, how was it that the Daitya could enter there and steal
away the child!

 

4\. O Son of Satyavatî! How was it that Vâsudeva could not know that!
This appears very strange to me!

 

5\. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Please explain to me why was that child stolen
away from the lying-in-chamber, though S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a was staying
there at the city; and how was it that he was not able to know this
beforehand!

 

6\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Mâyâ called S’âmbhavî (Pârvatî's) is the
cause; it fascinates and deludes the minds of human beings. Thus it is
known to us. Who is there in this world that is not deluded by this
Mâyâ?

 

7\. The Jîvas, no sooner they are born as human beings, are immediately
overcome with human qualities; the Deva or Asura qualities or their
natures do not then visibly exist.

 

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

 

8-9. O King! Hunger, thirst, sleep, fear, lassitude, delusion, sorrow,
doubt, pleasure, egoism, old age, disease, death, non-knowledge,
knowledge, displeasure, envy, jealousy, pride and weariness; all these
human qualities are seen to exist in human embodiments.

 

10-11. Behold! The night wanderer Râk<u>s</u>asa Mâricha assumed, by his
Mâyâ, the form of a golden deer and came before S’rî Râmchandra; and
Râmchandra was not the least aware of it. Then the stealing away of
Sîtâ, the death of Ja<u>t</u>âyu, Râma’s going to the forest on the very
day of his installation to the throne of Ayodhyâ; the death of his
father due to his bereavement, all these S’rî Râmchandra did not know a
bit beforehand.

 

12\. When Râva<u>n</u>a stole away Jânakî and carried her by force Râma
did not know this before or after that event had happened. He wandered
from forest to forest in search of Her, like a quite ignorant man.

 

13\. Afterwards He killed Bâli, the son of Indra and with the help of
the monkeys, erected a bridge across the ocean, and, crossing it, went
to Lankâ.

 

14\. He sent the chief monkeys to all the quarters in search of Sîtâ and
had to undergo all the troubles of deadly battles in the great
battlefield.

 

15\. The most powerful Raghunandana was tied down by Nâgapâs’a (snakes)
and was afterwards freed from it by Garu<u>d</u>a.

 

16\. Then, being furiously enraged, the great Râghava slew
Kumbhakar<u>n</u>a, Nikumbha, Megha Nâda and Râva<u>n</u>a.

 

17\. The Janârdan Râmchandra was not aware of the innocence of Sîtâ; and
therefore He made her take an oath about the purity of Her character and
even made Her undergo an ordeal of fire.

 

18\. Afterwards Râmachandra, the son of Das’aratha, had to banish his
dear blameless Sîtâ on the mere ground of bad name, imputed to her by
some ignorant person and that he would be thus blamed by the public.

 

19\. He did not know that Kus’î and Lava were His two sons, born in the
forest. Afterwards when the Muni Vâlmikî told him, He came to know of
them.

 

20\. Behold also Râmachandra could not know about the departure of Sîtâ
to Pâtâla; getting angry once He was about to kill his brother
Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a even.

 

21\. Râma, the slayer of the Râk<u>s</u>’asa Khara did not know that
Kâla Puru<u>s</u>a was coming to him. He, incarnating in the human body,
did acts all becoming to a man. Similarly S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the
descendant of Yadu, taking human birth did acts all like a man. What
more discussion can there be in this?

 

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

 

22\. Lo! From the very outset He fled, out of fear of Kamsa, to Gokula;
afterwards he fled out of fear of Jarâsandha to the Dwârkâ city.

 

23\. Knowing all the rites and ceremonies of the Sanâtan Dharma (the
Eternal Religion) He stole away Rukmi<u>n</u>î who was chosen as bride
elect by S’is’upâla. This act was very unreligious of Him.

 

24\. S’ambara Daitya stole away his newly born child and Kri<u>sn</u>a
lamented for this. Afterwards on coming to know of the real state of
things from the Goddess Bhagavatî, He was very glad. Therefore it can be
easily seen from all these circumstances that He had to yield to
pleasures and to undergo remorse like ordinary human beings.

 

25\. Again, under the orders of his wife Satyabhâmâ, He had to go to
Heaven to bring the Pârijâta tree and He had to fight with Indra. This
shows clearly that He was under the subjection of His wife.

 

26\. In that battle Hari with disc in hand defeated Indra; the Lord of
the Devas, took away the Kalpa tree and retained the prestige of His
respected wife (whom He had offended).

 

27\. Again Satyabhâmâ tied down Hari against a tree and presented Him as
a gift to Nârada; afterwards she, the passionate woman, freed
Kri<u>sn</u>a on paying an equivalent of gold coins.

 

28-29. On seeing Rukmi<u>n</u>î’s many sons, Pradyûmna and others, all
qualified with diverse qualifications, His wife Jâmbavatî prayed to S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a with humility, so that she may have also many beautiful
sons. For her sake, Kri<u>sn</u>a firmly resolved to practise tapasyâ
and went to the place where the great devotee of S’iva, Upamanyu, was
staying.

 

30\. Hari desiring to have sons engaged Upamanyu as His spiritual guide
and obtained from him the Mantram called Pâs’upata Mantra and became a
Dundee (holder of a staff) and shaved His head.

 

31-32. In the first month He subsisted on fruits only and meditated on
S’iva and repeated silently the S’iva mantra. Thus He practised very
severe austerities. In the second month He subsisted on water only and
stood on only one leg. In the third month he lived on air only and stood
on the end of His great toe.

 

33-36. Thus time passed away. In the sixth month the God Rudra, holding
Moon on His forehead, was pleased with His asceticism and devotion and
appeared before Him on that spot. The God Mahâ Deva came on a bull; He
was attended by Brahmâ  and Vi<u>sn</u>u, Indra and the other Devas,
Yakshas and Gandarbhas and addressed thus :-- “O high minded
Kri<u>sn</u>a of Yadu’s descent; I am pleased with Your severe
asceticism; now ask Your desired boon; I will grant it just now. I
fulfil all the desires of all my devotees;

 

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

 

what desire, then, there can be that is not fulfilled, when I am seen by
the devotees!”

 

37-38. Vyâsa said :-- The son of Devakî was very glad to see the God
S’amkara and fell prostrate at His feet. Then that eternal supreme God
of the Devas began to recite hymns in praise of Him in a tone as deep as
the rumbling of a cloud.

 

39\. Kri<u>sn</u>a said :-- O Deva of the Devas! O Lord of the world!
You alone destroy the misfortunes and sorrows of all the beings. O
Destroyer of Asuras! You are the Cause and Creator of this universe. I
salute Thee.

 

40\. O One having a blue throat! I bow down to Thee! O Holder of
trident! I again and again salute Thee! O Lord of Pârvatî! You destroyed
Dak<u>s</u>a’s sacrifice. I salute Thee.

 

41\. I am blessed by Thy sight and think myself as having discharged all
my duties and satisfied. O Virtuous One! My human birth is crowned with
success by saluting Thy feet.

 

42\. O Lord of everything! O three-eyed! I am tied down to this world by
my attachment towards my wives; now I take refuge unto Thee to free me
from these bonds.

 

43\. O Destroyer of sorrows! I am very much troubled on attaining this
human birth; O Bhava! I am afraid of this world; and hence I take refuge
unto Thee; now save me.

 

44-45. O Destroyer of cupidity! I experienced a good deal of troubles in
the womb; next out of fear to Kamsa I had to go to Gokula where I
suffered much pains; there I had to obey the orders of cow-herds; there
I had to attend as Nanda’s cow-herd, the pasturing of his cows and was
constantly suffocated with the awful dust thrown up by the cows; I had
to wander constantly in the wild forests of Brindâban.

 

46\. O Omnipresent One! I had to leave my dear ancestral place, the city
of Mathurâ, a rare place to be found anywhere else, out of the great
fear of Kâla Yavana, the king of the Mlechchas and had to go to Dwârakâ
city.

 

47-48. O Lord! In order to preserve the cause of religion, I had to hand
over the best prosperous kingdom to Ugrasena, due to the curse of
Yayâti. My elders made him the king of the Yâdavas; following their
examples, I gave him the kingdom and am now serving him always like his
servant.

 

49\. O S’ambhu! The householder’s life is exceedingly troublesome;  it
makes one subject to one’s wife and go against his religion. There we
are

 

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

 

always dependent on others; and no word is heard or dreamt even, how to
free oneself from those bondages of the world. Oh! What an irony of
Fate.

 

50\. O Destroyer of cupid! My wife Jâmbavatî, on seeing the sons of my
wife Rukmi<u>n</u>î has urged me to practise this Tapasyâ so that she
might get excellent sons born to her also.

 

51\. O Lord of the Devas! O Lord of the world! I am engaged in this
asceticism with the desire to get sons; O Deva! I feel shame in asking
you for the sons!

 

52\. You are the lover of your devotees; You give eternal freedom; You
are the Lord of all the Devas. By worshipping and satisfying You, who is
so fool as to ask for this trivial and transient thing!

 

53\. O Omnipresent One! O S’ambhu! O Lord of the world! Knowing You as
the giver of salvation, I, still deluded by Mâyâ, ask from You, being
requested by my wife, this happiness that sons be born to me of my wife.

 

54-55. O S’amkara! This world and its concerns are the abode of all
sorrows; it is the cause that brings in all sorts of pains and troubles,
and it is transient and will go to destruction. I know all these; still
my mind does not desist from it.

 

56\. Vyâsa said :-- O great and powerful king! The God of Gods, Mahâ
Deva, thus praised and adored by Govinda, the Destroyer of enemies,
replied :-- You will get many sons.

 

57\. You will get sixteen thousand one hundred wives and no doubt you
will get ten sons of each of them. These sons will be very powerful and
valorous.

 

58-60. The good-looking S’amkara saying these words remained silent;
then S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a bowed down at the feet of Girijâ, the wife of
S’amkara. Then the Goddess Pârvatî addressed repeatedly to Vâsudeva and
said :-- O mighty armed! O Kri<u>sn</u>a! O best of human beings! You
will be the typical exemplary householder; (all people will try to
follow you). When one hundred years will pass away, your race will be
extinct, due to the curse of the Brâhma<u>n</u>a and Gândhâri.

 

61\. Your sons and the other Yâdavas will lose their senses on drinking
liquor; they will kill each other in the battle field and thus will be
extirpated.

 

Note: Here Vi<u>sn</u>is and Andhkas are meant.

 

62\. Then you and your elder brother Balabhadra (Balarâma) will give up
your bodies and will ascend to the Heavens; O Mighty Person! Do not
grieve in matters that cannot be avoided.

 

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

 

63\. You should know that there can be no remedy to what will inevitably
come to pass; therefore no one is to grieve for them; this is all along
my view.

 

64\. O Madhusûdana! After Your death, due to the curse of
A<u>st</u>âvakra Muni, your wives will be forcibly stolen away by
indomitable robbers. There is no doubt in this.

 

65\. Vyâsa said :-- When Devî Pârvatî thus spoke, S’ambhu, with the
other gods disappeared; Kri<u>sn</u>a too, bowed down to Upamanyu and
went back to the city Dvârkâ.

 

66-67. Therefore, O King! Though Brahmâ  and the other Devas are heard
to be the lords of the world, still they are all being tossed hither an
thither by the waves of the ocean of Mâyâ. They are all like wooden
dolls subject to Mâyâ.

 

68\. As their previous karmas, so their several manifestations in the
field of action, by the Great Mâyâ, the incarnate of Parâ Brahmâ.

 

69\. She has no differences nor any want of mercy; That Goddess of the
universe is always leading the Jîvas towards the Eternal Freedom
(freedom from Mâyâ).

 

70\. Had She not created this world, moving and unmoving and if She had
not remained there as the Controller of the Jîvas in the shape of
unshakeable consciousness the Kû<u>t</u>asthya Chaita<u>n</u>ya, this
whole world would have become devoid of any consciousness, like an
insentient substance and would have dissolved in the Tâmasî Mâyâ (sheer
darkness). There is no doubt in this.

 

71\. Therefore that Goddess of the Universe has, through Her mercy,
created all these worlds and Jîvas, and resting incarnate in each Jîva,
is directing each and every of them according to his karmic merits and
demerits.

 

72\. Therefore it is a matter not to be doubted that Brahmâ  and the
other gods are all under this Mâyâ; the Suras and Asuras are subject to
Her.

 

73\. Therefore, O king! Know this as certain that the Great Goddess
moves and enjoys freely according to Her will; She is not dependent on
anybody. Therefore it is the duty of everyone to serve and worship, with
whole head and heart, that Devî.

 

74\. In these three worlds there is nothing higher or more excellent
than Her. Therefore this birth cannot be crowned with success in any
other way than remembering that Highest Force, the Parâ S’akti and Her
place.

 

75-77. One should always think, without any difference, that Eternal
World Mother, thus “Let me not be born in that family which has not that
Supreme Goddess for its presiding Deity; I am that Goddess Bhagavatî and
no other; I am Brahmâ, untouched by sorrows.” One should hear first from
the mouth of one’s Spiritual Guide; next by hearing Vedanta and

 

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

 

other religious scriptures, one should first form an idea of that
Bhagavatî; and then if one daily meditates on That Goddess, the Highest
Self incarnate with one minded devotion, one will get, within a short
period, the Eternal Freedom; else there is not the least chance, even if
one performs lots of innumerable good works of becoming free.

 

78\. S’vetâs’vatara and other pure hearted Ri<u>s</u>is obtained this
freedom from the bondages of Mâyâ by meditating, in their hearts, this
Highest Self and nothing else.

 

79\. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and the other Devas, Gaurî, Lak<u>s</u>mî and
other goddesses, all worship This Supreme Goddess, of Sachchidânanda
Parâ Brahmâ<u>n</u>î.

 

80\. O pure-hearted king! I answered all that you asked me, terrified
with the fears of this world; what more do you want to hear?

 

81-82. O king! I have described this wonderful Purâ<u>n</u>a narrative,
destructive of sins, productive of virtue. He who daily listens to this
Bhâgavatam equal alike to Veda, becomes freed from all sorts of sins and
goes to the region of the Highest Goddess and passes his time in the
midst of the Highest Glory. There is no doubt in this.

 

83\. Sûta said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>is! This Srî Mad Bhâgavatam, called
otherwise the Fifth Purâ<u>n</u>am was recited, in detail, in days of
yore by Vyâsa. Whatsoever I heard from him, I have now told exactly the
same to you.”

 

Here ends the 25th Chapter in the Fourth Skandha of Srî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa on the Devî’s Highest Supremacy.

 

Note :-- The best mantra is the whole hearted devotion to one’s Guru,
and devotion and surrender of one’s Self to the Supreme Mother, doing
works without attachment to the fruits thereof. This will lead to
dispassion and Renunciation. To one who is faithful in this, all the
other mantras will be duly revealed and all his desires will be found to
be true and fulfilled.

 

Here ends as well as the Fourth Skandha.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk05ch01.md)
