[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch12)  [Next](bk04ch14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIII**

 

**On cheating the Daityas**

 

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

 

1\. The king said :-- What did the intelligent Brihaspatî do after he
had assumed falsely the appearance of S’ukrâchârya, and lived there as
the spiritual guide of the Demons.

 

2\. O Muni! Brihaspatî is the Guru of the Devas; he also devotes his
time in studying the Vedas; and is the ocean of all knowledge; he is the
son of the Mahar<u>s</u>i Angirâ and he is himself a Muni. Endorsed with
all these good qualifications, how could he deceive the Demons.

 

3-4. In all the religious S’âstras, Truth is declared to be the essence
of Dharma; and the Supreme Self is attained through Truth, so the wise
sages say. How can we expect an ordinary householder to be true when
such a man as Brihaspatî takes recourse to falsehood with the Demons.

 

5\. If one acquires, as one’s wealth, the whole Universe, still one does
not require anything more than what is required in feeding one’s belly;
how

 

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

 

is it that Brihaspatî could speak falsehood merely for the sake of his
belly?

 

6\. O Muni! The words sung by the ancient virtuous and respectable sages
were true and had their corresponding objects denoted by those words;
now they employed the term S’i<u>st</u>a meaning that there were
virtuous, respectable persons as denoted by them. When Brihaspatî can
even commit such condemnable deceitful acts and speak falsehood, we can
expect no virtuous respectable persons in the world. Where then do you
find the S’i<u>st</u>a persons, denoted by the word S’i<u>st</u>a, sung
by the ancient sages? The word S’i<u>st</u>a is now meaningless!

 

7\. The Devas are sprung from the Sâttvic qualities, men from Râjasic
qualities and birds, etc. from the Tâmasic qualities.

 

8\. When the Guru of the Immortals, the incarnate of Sâttvic qualities,
can become a liar, how can one expect those who are Râjasic or Tâmasic
to follow rigorously the truth?

 

9\. Oh! This Trilokî is all pierced with falsehood! Where is the
Religion! And what will be the ultimate goal of all these creatures!

 

10\. When Bhagavân Harî, Brahmâ, Indra and the best of the Devas when
all can betake to pretext, fraud and trickery and show cleverness in
them; what to speak of men!

 

11-12. O Giver of honour! When all the Devas, Vas’is<u>t</u>ha,
Vâmadeva, Vis’vamitrâ, Brihaspatî and other ascetic Munis get themselves
overpowered by lust and anger, when their intelligence gets destroyed by
covetousness and avarice, when they are addicted to vices and are expert
in fraud, pre-text and trickery, then what fate, alas! can you expect of
Dharma and what help is there of any religious persons!

 

13\. Alas! lndra, Agni, Moon, and Brahmâ when these get overpowered by
the strong influence of lust, are in illicit love with others’ wives,
where is the goodness and virtuous behaviour in this Trilokî?

 

14\. O Sinless One! To whom, then, can we look upon as our spiritual
guide and our advice and law givers when all the Devas and Munis are
corrupt with avarice?

 

15\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Be he Indra, Brihaspatî, Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u or Mahes’a, whoever is embodied or will put on bodies, he
will have to be in touch with the previously mentioned Ahamkâra, and
covetousness and other vices due to name and form.

 

16\. O king! Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a are all attached to
sensual objects; and what improper and sinful actions there can be that
cannot be committed by persons devoted to sensual objects!

 

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

 

17\. It is through cleverness and fraud that any one devoted to sensual
objects can easily make oneself as cleverly free from Mâyâ; but when
difficulty comes, then his trickery gets discovered and the respective
qualities hidden in him are brought to bear their respective results.
Know, then, the three qualities to be conjointly the cause of all these
actions; as without any cause, no action gets visible.

 

18\. These discrepancies in the case of Brahmâ and others are caused by
the three qualities; their bodies are all created from Pradhân Mahat and
the other 25 Tattvas (essences).

 

19-20. O king! Brahmâ and others are subject to death; then how can you
doubt on other things? In advising others, everybody gives, as it were,
good and virtuous advices; but the burden falls upon their own heads;
they fall off from their advices and act according to their hidden
natures; then they yield to lust, anger, envy, egoism and fascination.

 

21\. No one who is embodied can get rid of passions, born of the 3
qualities. O king! Thus the Trilokî goes, is the saying of the
Mahar<u>s</u>is.

 

22-29. This Trilokî, auspicious, inauspicious, mixed, never gets any
serious change; its nature remains always uniform. See Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u sometimes practises severe asceticism; Indra, the lord of
the Devas sometimes follows the practices of religious sacrifices. Again
you find Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân, full of youth, fond of the Leela,
enjoying the company of Ramâ in Vaikun<u>t</u>ha; sometimes He is the
ocean of mercy, is fighting dreadful battles with the Demons and being
severely afflicted with their clusters of arrows; sometimes he gains
victories, sometimes he gets defeat through the irony of Fate; thus he
gets undoubtedly pleasures and pains. O king! some time Nârâya<u>n</u>a
draws all the worlds into his belly and takes his yogic sleep on the
thousand headed serpent S’es’a and again he gets himself awakened by
Prakriti. O king! Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’a, Indra, the Devas, and
Munis all of them, live up to the limit of their ordained time and when
the time of Pralaya, the Universal dissolution, ends, this whole
Universe, moving and nonmoving, again comes into existence as before;
there is no doubt in this. O king, at the expiry of the ordained time,
Brahmâ and all others will die , no doubt.

 

30-31. Again, in due course, Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes’a and the
other Devas come out and assume bodies and get all the passions, lust,
etc., as ordained. O King! You need not be astonished; this Trilokî
always goes on accompanied by lust, anger, etc.

 

32-34. Persons free from lust, anger and other passions are very rare in
this world. He who is afraid of this world does not marry, and thus
being free from the attachments to any worldly object, becomes free and

 

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

 

roams fearless. The Moon stole away the wife of Brihaspatî, and
Brihaspatî himself stole away the wife of his younger brother. Thus in
this wheel of Samsâra, all the creatures are ever passioned with
attachment, avarice, etc.

 

35\. The householder can never expect to obtain freedom. Therefore those
who want to be free, should carefully relinquish the idea of the
stability of the world and worship the Eternal Mother Full and Sat, Chit
and Ânandam.

 

36\. This world, moving and unmoving, O Mahes’ânî, rolls in madness,
overpowered by Her Mâyâ.

 

37\. Intelligent persons worshipping Her, trample down the three
qualities and become free. O king! No other Path exists for Freedom.

 

38-39. Until one gets the Grace from the Mahes’ânî, one never gets
happiness. True mercy is not found anywhere else but from Her. Then one
should worship the All merciful, being of pure heart. For Her worship
leads to freedom, even in this body-hood.

 

40\. He who getting a human frame fails to worship Mahes’ânî, gets down
from the highest rung of the ladder. This is my opinion.

 

41-42. This Universe, composed of the three qualities, is encompassed
with Ahamkâra and fastened to untruth; therefore freedom can never be
expected without the worship of That Potent Goddess, O Muni! O king!
Renounce every worldly object and serve the Goddess Bhuvanes’varî; this
is the highest duty of all.

 

43\. The king said :-- What did, then, the Devaguru do in the disguise
of S’ukrâchârya? And when did the real S’ukrâchârya come there? O
respected Muni! Speak on these points.

 

44\. Vyâsa said :-- Please hear what the disguised Brihaspatî in the
shape of S’ukrâchârya did afterwards.

 

45\. The demons were made to understand clearly by Brihaspatî; and then
they took him for S’ukrâchârya and placed implicit faith on him and
began to think of him and him alone.

 

46\. The Daityas, enchanted and deceived by the magic of Brihaspatî,
took now his refuge for acquiring the knowledge from him, since they
mistook him for S’ukrâchârya. Who is there that is not enchanted by the
idea of gaining something?

 

47\. On the other hand, when the term of ten years was over,
S’ukrâchârya, the real Guru of the Daityas, ceased enjoying Jayantî and
began to remember his disciples, the Daityas.

 

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

 

48\. He now began to think that “My disciples, the Daityas, are
expecting every instant my return; and I would now go and see them,
bewildered with fear.

 

49-51. They are my devotees and I ought to do such that they might not
be afraid of the Devas.” And then he exclaimed to Jayantî, “O beautiful
one! Let my sons take the shelter of the Gods; your term of ten years is
today over; I now go therefore, to see my disciples; soon I will again
come to you.”

 

52\. “Be it so”, replied Jayantî, the best of those who know religion,
“you can go where you like; I am not to destroy your Dharma.”

 

53-54. Hearing these words, S’ukrâchârya went hurriedly to the Demons
and saw the Devaguru Brihaspatî sitting before them in the guise of
S’ukrâchârya. He was explaining to them the Jaina doctrines, compiled by
himself and finding fault with the act of envy, taking revenge and
killing and cursing the sacrifices, etc.

 

55\. He was telling them “O Enemies of Gods! Truly, I am telling you
words that will, no doubt, prove good to you. Non-killing is the highest
virtue; even the enemies ought never to be killed.

 

56\. It is the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, addicted to enjoyments and pleasures of
the senses, who want to satisfy their tastes and pleasures that are
found in the Veda’s injunctions to kill animals; but there is no virtue
higher than non-killing animals.”

 

57-58. O king! S’ukrâchârya was perfectly astonished to hear Brihaspatî,
the Guru of the Devas, speaking against the Vedas and began to think
that Brihaspatî is certainly my enemy. My disciples have been duped by
this cheat; there is no doubt in this.

 

59\. Fie to Avarice! It is the seed of sin; very strong and the
veritable gate to hell; Brihaspatî, even, the Guru of the Devas, is
speaking lies, bound under the influence of this heinous avarice!

 

60\. Oh! What wonder is this that the Guru of the Devas, who is the
promulgator of all the religious S’âstras and whose word is accepted as
the final decision, is now expounding the doctrines of atheists.

 

61\. When Brihaspatî can become the expounder of atheistic doctrines,
impelled by covetousness what to speak of those whose minds are not pure
and whose intelligence is not sharp?

 

62\. This Deva Guru, though a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, is acting today like a
rogue, wanting to take away all and is deceiving my disciples the
Daityas, who have been confounded by his magic.

 

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses on cheating the
Daityas by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](bk04ch14.md)
