[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch17)  [Next](bk04ch19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVIII**

 

**On the Devî Earth’s going to the Heavens**

 

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Hear in detail the complete life and the
deeds in the incarnation of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a and also the various
wonderful achievements by the Goddess of this universe.

 

2\. Once on a time, the Earth was very much overburdened by the load of
wicked kings and She was therefore very much afraid.

 

3\. She then assumed the appearance of a cow and went to the Devaloka
crying and very much dejected.

 

Indra, the lord of the Devas, asked her, O Vasundhare! What is the cause
of your fear now? Who has troubled you? What afflictions are you merged
in? Please tell me all these.

 

4\. On hearing Indra’s words, the Earth exclaimed :-- O Respect giver!
When You have asked me, I am explaining to you the cause of all my
afflictions and sorrows; at present I am overburdened with too much
load.

 

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

 

5-8. Now is reigning in the earth Jârâsandha, the king of Magadha, a
very very vicious person. Thus the other S’is’upâl, the lord of the
Chedis, the uncontrollable Kâs’irâj, Rukmî, the powerful Kamsa, the
strong Naraka, the Sauvapati S’âlva, the wicked Kes’î, Dhenuka, and
Batsaka all these are now in royal positions. O Lord of the Devas! These
kings are all devoid of the least trace of virtue, quarrelsome against
each other, infatuated with vanity, and addicted to vicious deeds. These
have become kings as if they were personified Yamas, the Lords of Death,
and are constantly troubling me. I am now unable to carry their loads;
where shall I go now? This great thought is constantly ailing me.

 

9-11. O Vasava! What to tell! The Bhagavân in His Boar Incarnation is
the cause of all these my afflictions; O Indra! These present troubles I
am fallen into only through Him; for when the cruel Daitya
Hirânyâk<u>s</u>a; the son of Ka’syapa stole me away and drowned me in
the great ocean, then it was Vi<u>sn</u>u in his Boar incarnation that
killed him and rescued me from the ocean and then kept me in this my
stable position.

 

12\. Had he not then lifted me up, I would have rested safe in the
depths of Rasâtala; O Lord of the Devas! Now I am quite unable to bear
the load of these vicious persons.

 

13\. O Surendra! The vicious twenty eight Kali is coming quickly in
front. Thinking of His influence, it seems to me that I will be very
troubled then and will have to go down to Rasâtala.

 

14\. Therefore, O Lord of the Devas! I am bowing down before Your feet,
kindly relieve me of my burden and save me from these endless troubles.

 

15\. Indra said :-- O Earth! I cannot do anything for you. You better go
and take refuge of Brahmâ. I am also going to Him. He will remove all
your troubles.

 

16\. Hearing Indra’s words the Earth hurriedly went to the realm of
Brahmâ and Indra and all the other Devas followed Her; and all reached
the Brahmaloka.

 

17-18. O King! The Grand Father Brahmâ saw the Earth coming to him and
through the power of meditation, found out the cause of Her coming and
said :-- O Auspicious One! why are You crying? What troubles You have
now? What wicked person has given You troubles.

 

19\. The Earth said :-- O Lord of the Earth! The vicious Kali is coming
before; under Its influence the subjects will be horribly vicious;
therefore I am very much afraid of this Kali.

 

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

 

20\. In the beginning of this Kali Yuga, the ancient enemies, the Asuras
have now incarnated on this earth as kings. They will be extremely
wicked, quarreling against each other, and will be clever in stealing
others’ things. There is no doubt in these.

 

21\. O Grand Father! Now kill these vicious kings and relieve my burden.
O Lord! I am very much troubled by the armies of these kings.

 

22\. Brahmâ said :-- O Goddess! I, too, am unable like Indra to remove
your load. Let us go to that Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Holder of the disc.

 

23\. That Janârdana will remove your burden. I thought of this well
before and settled what to do.

 

24-25. Vyâsa said :-- Thus saying, the four faced Brahmâ, the Author of
the Vedas, rode on His Hamsa Vehicle taking in front the Goddess Earth;
and the Devas went to Vi<u>sn</u>u and began to praise Vi<u>sn</u>u
Janârdana, the Deva of the Devas, with the words of the Vedas with full
devotion.

 

26\. Brahmâ said :-- Thou hast thousand heads, thousand faces, thousand
feet. Thou art the Puru<u>s</u>a of the Vedas, Thou art the Deva of the
Devas, and Thou art Eternal.

 

27\. O Omnipresent! Thou art the Past, Present, and Future! O Lord of
Lak<u>s</u>mî! Thou hast awarded immortality unto us.

 

28\. Thou art the Creator of universe, the Preserver and the Destroyer;
Thou art the One and the Only goal and thou art the God. Everybody knows
that all these glories belong to Thee.

 

29\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! When Brahmâ praised thus, Vi<u>sn</u>u whose
sign was Garu<u>d</u>a, was highly pleased and appeared before Brahmâ
and the other Devas.

 

30\. The Bhagavân asked them about their welfare and enquired in detail
into the cause of their arrival there.

 

31\. Brahmâ them bowed down to Him and, remembering the cause of the
sorrows of the Goddess Earth, said :-- O Lord! Thou art now to relieve
the burden of the Earth.

 

32\. O Thou, Ocean of mercy! When the end of the Dvâpara yuga will come
Thou art to incarnate in the world and kill the wicked kings and thus to
relieve the burden of the Earth.

 

33-34. Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- I am not independent in these matters; why
I? Brahmâ Mahes’a, Indra, Agni, Yama, Visvakarmâ, the Sun and
Varu<u>n</u>a and other Devas, nobody is independent. This whole
universe, moving and

 

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

 

unmoving is existing under the control of the Yoga Mâyâ; and from Brahmâ
up to the clot of grass, all are strung into the thread of Her Three
qualities.

 

35\. O One of good vows! Whatever that Yoga Mâyâ, the Supreme Goddess,
Who is All will, Whose mouth is inward, Who does good at all times, what
She wills She does that at any time. You should all know that we are
entirely under Her control.

 

36-41. You better think that were I independent, what for would I have
stayed in the great ocean, incarnating in the Fish and Tortoise Bodies!
O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! What name or pleasure is there in enjoyment in the
body of lower animals! What holy merit or any other reward may I expect
from being born in the wombs of lower animals? What is the reason that I
assume the body of a Boar? or of a Man-Lion? or of a Dwarf? Why was I
born as the son of Jamadagni. Especially why did I, being born of that
highsouled Brâhma<u>n</u> Jamadagni, and being the best of the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, do the most atrocious act like that of a heartless
brute and fill up the lakes with their blood. Alas! I killed the
K<u>s</u>atriyas mercilessly; to say nothing more than that I killed the
sons that were then in the wombs. Were I independent, what for I would
have done these horrible and cruel deeds! O Lord of the Devas! See
again. In my Râma incarnation I roamed on foot, helpless and without any
provision, in the fearful Da<u>nd</u>aka forest unfrequented by anybody,
wearing clotted hair, bark, rags, like a man who feels no shame, and
behaved like a hunter and killed many animals.

 

42-44. Being under the delusion of Mâyâ, I could not make out the real
nature of the golden deer; consequently leaving Janakî in the thatched
cottage, I went out pursuing the deer. Though repeatedly warned by me
not to leave the place, Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a was moved by the
qualities of Prakriti, forsook her and went out on my search.

 

45\. Then the hypocrite Râva<u>n</u>a, the king of the Râk<u>s</u>asas,
under the garb of a beggar; stole away by force the daughter of Janaka,
who had become very lean on account of sorrows.

 

46\. I was very much distressed owing to the separation from my dear
wife and roamed about weeping sorely in forest and formed friendship
with Sugrîva, under the influence of the circumstances.

 

47\. It was an act of gross injustice on my part to kill Bâlî, the king
of the monkeys. I freed him from his curse; afterwards, aided by the
monkeys, I had to go to Lankâ.

 

48\. When my younger Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a and myself were both
enchained under the chain of the serpents, Nâgapâs’a, and were
senseless, the monkeys all were astonished.

 

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

 

49\. Then Garu<u>d</u>a came and freed us the two brothers, from those
Nâgapâs’as! I considered then what adverse inauspicious circumstances
Fate sometimes ordains on our lot.

 

50\. I lost my kingdom, lived in the forest, my father died, Janakî was
stolen and I had to suffer extreme troubles in very deadly battles; I
could not know what worse fate still awaited for us?

 

51\. O Suras! What more calamity can you expect to befall any person
than that I was from the very first deprived of my kingdoms and wealth,
and had to go to the forest with the princess Sîtâ dwelling in and
taking shelter in a dense forest!

 

52\. At the time of my going to the forest my father did not give a
single penny; penniless and helpless I had to get out of Ayodhyâ on
foot.

 

53\. I was compelled to leave my K<u>s</u>attriya Dharma and take up the
avocation of a hunter and thus to spend fourteen years in forest.

 

54\. After that, under the benign influence of Fate, I was able to kill
that Asura Râva<u>n</u>a and got the victory in the battle and was able
to bring back dear Sîtâ to Ayodhyâ.

 

55\. There I succeeded in becoming the ruler of the kingdom Kos’ala with
its subjects and got the full kingdom and enjoyed for a few years the
pleasures of the world.

 

56-57. The stealing away of Sîtâ took place at the first outset; next I
got my kingdom; then the subjects began to circulate the bad name
regarding Janakî; and I being afraid of that, deported her into exile in
the forest. At that time I had to suffer again extreme pain and agony
due to the separation from my wife. Then the daughter of the Goddess
Earth penetrated into the Earth and got down to the Pâtâla.

 

58\. O Devas! When I had to depend on Fate and to suffer so many
troubles incessantly, where else can you dare to say that an independent
man exists.

 

59\. Afterwards under the influence of Time, I had to go to Heaven with
my brothers. Let all this point to what it may, the intelligent learned
people can say what an amount of mishaps takes place to one who is
dependent!

 

60\. O One born from the Lotus! You hear my word; I am in every way
dependent; why I? Rudra, You and all those Suras are fully dependent.

 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Fourth Book of the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa on the Devî Earth’s going to the Heavens.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](bk04ch19.md)
