[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch03)  [Next](bk04ch05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

** **

**On Adharma**

 

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

 

1\. The King spoke :-- O highly honoured and intelligent one! I have
heard the anecdote just related to me by you. I am very much bewildered.
This Samsâra (world) is vice incarnate. I wonder how the Jîvas,
entangled in its meshes, can again be freed!

 

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

 

2\. When the son of Kas'yapa, whose kingdom is the three worlds, can
commit such an heinous act, what wonder, then, that any other ordinary
person would do more blameable things!

 

3\. On the pretence of serving and on a solemn oath, when a man, can
enter into his step-mother's womb and take away the life of the son,
what more heinous and dreadful can take place than this!

 

4\. When the preserver and controller of religion, the ruler of the
three worlds can do such acts, you cannot expect that any other person
would desert from committing heinous, contemptible acts.

 

5\. O World Teacher! Indeed my grandfather did unjustifiable horrible
mean acts in the battle field of Kuruk<u>s</u>ettra.    It is really
wonderful!

 

6-7. Bhî<u>s</u>ma, Dro<u>n</u>a, Kripa, Kar<u>n</u>a, even
Yudhis<u>t</u>hira, who is the part incarnate of Dharma all these were
urged by Vâsudeva into this contrary religious act. These personages are
all born of Devâmsas, devoted to religion, and intelligent. These know
the transitory nature of this world; how can these commit such mean
blameable things!

 

8\. O Glory of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! What faith or regard can we have for
a religion, when such high souled persons commit such irreligious acts!
Indeed, there is doubt whether religion exists at all or not! O Best of
the Munis! My heart is agitated very much on hearing these incidents.

 

9\. If it be said that the word of the Âptas (seers) is a sufficient
guarantee for the entity of religion, it may then be questioned where
there is such an Âpta, holding such a pure religious body? All those
persons who are attached to worldliness are bent on all worldly objects
with their whole head and heart; these, therefore, cannot be Âptas.

 

10\. When self interest is obstructed, jealousy and anger arise; and to
secure one's self interest, out of jealousy, arise untruthful words.

 

11\. Even the pure, excellent, virtuous S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, with full
consciousness, had to assume under pretence a Brâhmi<u>n</u> form for
killing Jarâsandha.

 

12\. Just as the holy S'rî Hari assumed a false appearance to kill
Jarâsandha, similarly Arju<u>n</u>a, too, did a false sacrifice to
accomplish his ends. Where is, then, one who can claim to be an Âpta?
And what proof is there of the existence of such an Âpta?

 

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

 

13\. What sort of sacrifice was this? Did it lead to heaven in the next
world or did it lead to glory or did it serve the cause of any good
will? Why was it deprived of that peace and rest? (It was performed with
a view to kill S'isupâla and others).

 

14-15. The Pundits, of yore, declare that truth is the first Pâda,
cleanliness, the second; compassion, the third; and charity is the
fourth Pâda (foot) of Dharma (Religion). Thus, devoid of these, how can
Religion stand with due regards from all?

 

16\. How can an act bear good fruits, which has no trace of virtue in
it? It seems no one had any trace of faith and steadiness in one's
religion. (The Pân<u>d</u>avas did sacrifice out of arrogance; how can
they be Âptas?)

 

17-20. Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of the Universe, assumed His Dwarf
(Vâmana) Incarnation with the express object to cheat Vali, the king of
the Daityas. Now, O Muni! The king Bali, performed one hundred
sacrifices; he was the protector of the Vedas, virtuous, charitable,
truthful and self controlled; why was such a man dislodged from his
position by Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Powerful. Who was victorious in this
affair? Was he the Vali, who was cheated? Or was it Vâmana Deva, the
expert in making nice pretence? Who was the better of the two? I have
got grave doubts on this point. O the best of the twiceborn! You are the

composer of the Purâ<u>n</u>as, virtuous, and liberal hearted. Speak
what is true (and thus tranquil my heart).

 

21-23. Vyâsa said :-- O king! The victory was certainly Bali's, in as
much as he fulfilled his promise and gave over his kingdom of earth to
Vi<u>sn</u>u. And in as much as Vi<u>sn</u>u in his 5th or dwarf
Incarnation deceived Bali, he had to become a dwarf (i. e. a small mean
person indicated even by the shortness of his body). O king! There is
nothing superior in religion

to truth. See! S’rî Hari even had to become, for his falsehood, a gate
keeper of Vali. O king! It is hardly possible for a human being to
observe in every way the injunctions of truth.

 

24\. Powerful, indeed, is Mâyâ, composed of the three qualities and of
various forms. By Her is created this Universe, made manifold by the
admixture of the three qualities (Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas).

 

25\. How can you expect therefore, truth to be observed wholly, without
the least violation, by a deceiver. This world is made up of the mixture
of Rajas; O king! Know this as the every day routine of things in
nature.

 

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

 

26-27. It is only the Munis and Hermits that can observe pure truth; and
that is why they are without any attachment; they do not accept any
thing from any other body; they are desireless; and they all have no
rough wear and tear of the world. They exist as perfect examples; their
case is quite separate. All the others are caught under the meshes of
the three Mâyic Gu<u>n</u>as.

 

28\. O Best of kings! The Dharma S’âstras, Purâ<u>n</u>as and the Angas
the Vedas are full of diverse opinions on any one point under
consideration for their composers were under the influence of the
different Gu<u>n</u>as.

 

29\. The Sagu<u>n</u>a persons (i. e. persons under Mâyâ) do
Sagu<u>n</u>a works (works composed of qualities) and the Nirgu<u>n</u>a
persons (i. e. persons above Mâyâ) do not do any Sagu<u>n</u>a work. And
when the Gu<u>n</u>as are mixed with one another, they cannot remain
pure (i. e. they exhibit qualities of those Gu<u>n</u>as with which they
are mixed).

 

30\. O king! One is influenced by Mâyâ no sooner one takes one's birth
in this world; so that no body can remain steady in this pure, steady
maxim of truth, untainted by any falsehood or deceit.

 

31\. The sense organs, Indriyas, confound the Buddhi (reason) and make
one follow the path of enjoying sensual things. Mind is attached to
senses and follows diverse ways, urged on furiously by the three
Gu<u>n</u>as.

 

32\. O king! All the beings, Brâhmâ down to the moving and non-moving
things, fall under the delusion of Mâyâ; She plays with them.

 

33\. This Mâyâ is always imposing on all; and She is incessantly making
formations and transformations in this Universe; O king of kings! The
man under the influence of action takes recourse to this untruth (i.e.,
actions arise first from this untruth) from the very moment of his
birth.

 

34\. Persons when they do not get their desired objects after they have
pondered how to secure the sensual objects, take recourse to pretext,
and, from that pretext do many sinful acts.

 

35\. Lust, anger, and avarice; these three are very powerful enemies.
The Jîvas under their influence cannot distinguish the right from the
wrong.

 

36\. When wealth, might and rank come to a person, he gets deep-rooted
Ahamkâra, and becomes very egoistic; from Ahamkâra, delusion comes and,
from delusion, insensibility and death ensue.

 

37-38. Here men argue mentally many plans; and thence jealousy,
intolerance and enmity spring in the heart; next arise, out of delusion,
hope, thirst, misery, low-spiritedness, arrogance and irreligiousness.

 

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

 

39\. It is through Ahamkâra that people are led to perform sacrifices,
charities, visit places of pilgrimages, practise vows and rules for
religious rites and ceremonies.

 

40\. Hence these sacrificial acts, etc., proceeding from Ahamkâra, are
unable to remove the clouds of impurity from the mind, as observance of
purity and cleanliness does. Especially when any action is done through
greed or undue affection, as its motive, it cannot be pure in every
respect.

 

41\. Therefore, at the commencement of any sacrifice, the wise persons
look at the purity of sacrificial things; (Dravya Suddhi); those
articles that are collected without injuring others, are the best in
religious acts.

 

42\. O best of Kings! If the things, acquired by injuring others, be
utilised in any auspicious act, they yield contrary results at the time
of fruition.

 

43\. It is he only, whose mind is very pure and undefiled, who gets the
results wholly auspicious from any sacrificial act. Minds defiled do not
acquire their proper desired objects.

 

44-45. When the preceptor and the priests ordained are sincere and pure;
moreover, when the place, moment, act, sacrificial things, the mantras,
and the sacrificer are all holy, then and there only, the full results
accrue in their entirety to the sacrificer.

 

46\. If the sacrifice be intended for the destruction of one's enemy or
for a personal motive and one's gain, it converts auspicious results
into those that are inauspicious and lead to ruin in the end.

 

47\. Selfish persons are unable to ascertain, which actions are
auspicious and which are not; they depend on the circumstances what they
call Daiva, and the people do acts sinful instead of virtuous.

 

48-49. The Devas and demons all are created by Brâhmâ, the Prajâpati,
the Creator; they all are selfish; hence they are at war and war with
each other. The Devas are born from the Sattva Guna; the human beings
are sprung from the Rajas and the birds are sprung from the Tamas.

 

50\. O King! When the Devas, born of the Sattva Guna are always engaged
in inimical actions, what wonder, then, is there, that the lower ones
would be at war with one another!

 

51-52. O King! When the Devas are always discontented, filled with
jealousy and envy, at war amongst each other, and obstructors of the
ascetics and the austere persons, then know that this Universe has
sprung from Ahamkâra (egoism). How can you expect them to be free from
feelings of anger, jealousy; etc.!

 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fourth Book, the Mahâ Purânam S’rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses on Adharma by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda
Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk04ch05.md)
