[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch14)  [Next](bk04ch16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XV**

 

**On the truce between the Daityas and the Devas**

 

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O king Janamejaya! Prahlâda was glad to hear the
above words of the high souled Bhârgava.

 

2\. Knowing Fate to be the strongest, he addressed the Daityas :--
Never, in this battle will victory be ours.

 

3-5. Then the victorious Demons, infatuated with pride, told Prahlâda
:-- What is Fate? We do not recognise it. We ought to fight. O Lord of
us :-- Fate reigns over those that are idle, not energetic. Has Fate any
shape? Who has created it? Has anybody seen Fate? However let us gather
strength and fight. You are very intelligent and all knowing; It is
proper that you should take our lead in the fight.

 

6\. O king! When the Daityas spoke thus, Prahlâda, the great Destroyer
of enemies, became the general and challenged the Devas to fight.

 

7\. On seeing the Asuras in the battle field, the Devas, dressed with
arms and weapons, began to fight with them.

 

8\. For full one hundred years the dreadful battle was fought between
Indra and Prahlâda; on seeing this, the Munis were astonished.

 

9\. O king! In this fearful battle, the Daityas with their general
Prahlâda, the followers of S’ukrâchârya, got the victory.

 

10\. Then Indra, advised by their Guru Brihaspatî, began to remember the
Goddess of the Universe, the Most High, the Giver of welfare, the
Destroyer of all sorrows and calamities, and the Bestower of freedom,
worship Her, and sing hymns to Her with great devotion.

 

11-12. Indra said :-- Victory be to the name of the Goddess Mahâmâyâ,
the Eternal Mother, the Holder of the trident! Holder of conchshell,
disc, club, and lotus, the Giver of “no fear.” Salutation to Thee, the
Goddess of the Universe; Thou art the Supreme Heroine in everything that
relates to force, that is described in the S’akti Dars’ana S’âstras.
Thou art the Ten Tattvas, Thou art the Mother, Thou art the Mahâvidyâ
(the Supreme Knowledge).

 

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

 

13\. There are many Tattvas; here the ten tattvas are according to the
S’akti Dars’ana. There are many Dharma S’âstras. Here S’akti S’âstra is
meant.

 

The Tattvas are those ultimate substances into which these gross
manifestations resolve. The tattvas are Mahâvindu, Nâda S’akti, Mis'ra
Vindu, etc.

 

O World Mother! Thou art the Mahâ Kundalinî (the great Serpent Fire);
thou art the Everlasting Existence, Intelligence and Bliss; Thou art the
Deity of the vital Fire (Prâ<u>n</u>a); Thou art the Deity of the
Agnihotra (maintenance of the Sacred Fire and an oblation to It); Thou
art the Holy Flame, burning always in the ethereal space in the Heart;
Salutation to Thee!

 

14\. Thou dwellest within the five Sheaths (the Annamâyâ, the
Prâ<u>n</u>amâyâ, the Manomâyâ, the Vijñânamâyâ and the Ânandamâyâ
sheaths are the five sheaths here referred to). Thou art the Indweller
of the Ânanda mâyâ kosa, Thou art of the nature of Puchchha Brahmâ, the
end of Brahmâ. Thou art the Deity of all, the Ânanda (bliss) unblown, O
Mother! Thou art the Deity of all the Upani<u>s</u>adas.

 

15\. O Mother! Be pleased unto us; we have become powerless; protect us,
O Mother! we are defeated by the Daityas; O Goddess! Thou art endowed
with all the powers, Thou art our Sole Refuge in this Universe, in times
of distress, and Thou art the Only One, strong and capable to remove all
our dangers.

 

16\. O Goddess! Those who incessantly meditate on Thee are really happy
and those that do not meditate Thee, their fear, and sorrows are never
removed; those that want ultimate freedom from bondage and who meditate
on Thee always; those pure souls, being free from Ahamkâra, and free
from attachment go, no doubt, beyond this ocean of world.

 

17\. O World Mother! Thy prowess is ever manifested whenever protection
is demanded; You always come forward and relieve the distressed; You are
the great destroyer! Thou art the Time Incarnate of all these worlds; O
Mother! We are fools; how can we appreciate your qualities.

 

18\. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’a, I myself, Sun, Yama, Varuna, Fire,
Air, the high minded munis, Âgama, Nigama, the Tantras and the Vedas,
are quite unable to realise Your unequalled prowess; Salutation to Thy
Feet.

 

19\. Those are blessed that are devoted to Thee; They are the great
souls; they always dive in the Ocean of Bliss, being always free from
the fangs of this Samsâra. Those that are not Your devotees, cannot
cross this Ocean of Samsâra, where the Birth and Death are the billows.

 

20\. O Goddess! Those that are always fanned by the white châmaras and
those that travel always in cars, they in their previous births
worshipped Thee with various things; therefore they have acquired the
effects of their meritorious deeds; this is my opinion.

 

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

 

21\. Those that are always worshipped amongst the human beings, those
that go on nice elephants, those that are surrounded by pleasures and
enjoy the lovely companions of beautiful coquettish women, those that go
surrounded by soldiers, O Goddess! I consider they worshipped Thee in
their previous births, and they are now enjoying fruits of their past
deeds.

 

22-23. Vyâsa said :-- Thus praised by Indra, the Goddess of the Universe
with four arms hurriedly appeared there mounted on a lion. Conchshell,
disc, club, and lotuses were held by the beautiful eyed Goddess in Her
four hands respectively, wearing a red apparel and ornamented with
divine garlands.

 

24\. The Goddess being pleased addressed the Devas with sweet words,
“Cast off your fear. O Devas! I will see presently all about your
welfare.”

 

25\. Addressing the Devas thus, the Divine Mother mounted on a lion,
went hurriedly to the place where the demons were waiting, infatuated
with pride.

 

26\. All the Daityas with their general Prahlâda saw the Goddess before
them and were terrified and began to address each other “What are we to
do now?”

 

27-28. This Chandikâ Goddess has come here to protect the Devas. She
destroyed Mahi<u>s</u>âsura and Chan<u>d</u>a Mun<u>d</u>a; it was She
that killed, in days of yore, Madhukai<u>t</u>ava with evil look.

 

29-30. Seeing the demons thus full of sorrowful thoughts, Prahlâda
addressed the Daityas :-- “It is better not to fight but let us fly away
all together.” Then the Daitya Namuchi told the Daityas ready to fly
away “If you fly away, this World Mother will instantly kill you all
with weapons in Her hands.

 

31\. Do that by which we can protect us. Let us worship the Goddess of
the Universe, and, getting Her permission, we will go this very day to
the Pâtâla.”

 

32\. Prahlâda said “I will worship the Goddess Mahâmâyâ, the Creatrix,
Preservrix and Destructrix of the Universe, the World Mother, and the
Assurer of safety to Her devotees.”

 

33\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus saying, the knower of the highest knowledge,
Prahlâda, the devotee of Vi<u>sn</u>u, began to sing hymns with folded
hands in praise of the Goddess, the Upholdress of the Universe.

 

34\. I bow down to Thee, the incarnate of the mantra “Hrîm” the Refuge
of all, and within Whom this whole Universe, moving and unmoving, is
appearing untruly as a snake is mistaken for a garland of flowers.

 

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

 

35\. O Goddess! All these Universes, moving and unmoving, have sprung
from Thee; Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and others are Creators, Preservers in
name only; Thou hast created them all.

 

36\. O Mahâmâyâ! You are the Divine Mother of all! When You have created
the Asuras and the Suras, how can you then see any difference between
the Devas and the Daityas?

 

37\. As a Mother makes no distinction between her good sons and bad
sons, so You are not to make any difference between us and the Devas;
this is our prayer to you.

 

38\. O Goddess! You have been sung in all the Purâ<u>n</u>as as the
World Mother; therefore, O Mother! We are your sons just as the Devas
are.

 

39\. O Mother! As they have got their interests, so we too have got our
interests; therefore there is no difference between he Daityas and the
Devas. Therefore if anyone makes any difference, it is due to the subtle
error.

 

40\. O Goddess! As we are attached to wealth, wives, and other pleasures
of the senses, so the gods are; O Goddess! How then can any difference
exist between them and us.

 

41\. O Mother! They are the sons of Mahar<u>s</u>i Kas’yapa; we also are
his sons; Therefore you cannot have partiality for them before us.

 

42\. O World Mother! In You no such difference is visible anywhere.
Therefore do You here preserve equality amongst us both.

 

43\. The Suras and Asuras all have sprung from the permutations and
combinations of the 3 qualities! Then how the Devas being embodied can
possess more qualities than us.

 

44\. Every embodied soul possesses always cupidity, anger, covetousness;
how then can one expect to remain without any quarrels with others.

 

45\. We think that it is all sport with You to see our opinions
different, rather contradictory, and it is You who got us involved in
quarrels with each other and it is Your pleasure to witness how we fight
against each other.

 

46\. Sinless one! O Châmunde! Were You not so fond to see our fight, how
then, we being brothers are at war against each other. Certainly it is
Your Divine Sport.

 

47\. O Goddess! I know what is religion, I know who is Indra. It is the
very idea to enjoy these sensual pleasures that is the only cause of our
incessant quarrels.

 

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

 

48\. O Mother! You are the Sole Ruler of this Samsâra; no sensible man
can carry out the words of a man who yearns for something. (i.e., O
Mother, You are the only one that is desireless; so we can obey your
words).

 

49\. O Mother! Once the Devas and the Asuras conjointly churned the
ocean. At that time Vi<u>sn</u>u, on the plea of distributing the jewel,
and the ambrosial nectar, incurred quarrels amongst them.

 

50\. O Mother! You have made him the Preserver and Controller of the
Universe and the Spiritual Guide of the world. And it was He who took
away the Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî, the beautiful lady amongst the Deva
women.

 

51\. Indra, the Lord of the Gods, took the elephant named Airâvat, the
flower Pârijât, the Heavenly Cow yielding all desires, and the horse
Uchchais’ravâ. Thus, through the desires and devices of Vi<u>sn</u>u,
they got the excellent things.

 

52\. O! What a wonder is this that the Devas were considered holy
persons, after they had committed such unholy acts; no doubt the Devas
had done a very heinous crime. O Goddess! You can judge Yourself what is
the just and unjust thing in this case.

 

53\. What is Religion? And where is Religion? And what are the acts done
by a religious man? What is uprightness, justice, and purity? You better
examine which party has observed virtue? Who has shown uprightness,
justice and parity? To whom victory and defeat are due? You are the only
one capable to judge all these things.

 

54-55. Alas! Whom to tell all the conclusions arrived at in the
Mimâmsakas. If any one considers, one will find the world is the field
of dissensions and quarrels; the argumentators look to the logical
reasoning only; followers of the Vedas look to the rules and regulations
only; these so called men of gross ideas they acknowledge that this
world is created and preserved by the One only, and yet they quarrel
amongst each other.

 

56-57. If there be One and only One Lord of this wide infinite Samsâra,
then why would there be differences and quarrels amongst each other? Why
is there not seen any agreement in opinion and why do the S’âstras
differ and why are there so many differences in the opinions held by the
knowers of the Vedas.

 

58\. O Goddess! This whole Universe, moving and unmoving is selfish;
hence arise so many differences between several opinions. There was no
one unselfish in this world and there would be no unselfish persons born
hereafter.

 

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

 

59-64. Look! The Moon stole away perforce knowingly the wife of
Brihaspatî; Indra, knowing what is religion stole away the wife of
Gautama; Brihaspatî enjoyed forcibly the wife of his younger; and also
he outraged his elder brother’s wife in her pregnant state and cursed
the boy in the womb and

made him blind. What more to say than Vi<u>sn</u>u, all full of Sâttvic
qualities, severed perforce the head of Râhu. O Mother! Look to the case
of my grandson Bali who used to pay due respects to all, who was the
foremost amongst the virtuous, observer of rigorous truth, performer of
sacrifices, liberal, peaceful, all-knowing. The pretender Hari, taking
the form of a dwarf in his Vâmana incarnation, deceived Bali and took
away all his kingdoms. Alas! Still the intelligent good persons reckon
the Deva Vi<u>sn</u>u as the preserver of Religion. What a wonder! Those
who are flatterers become victorious in this world; and defeat come to
those that speak of Dharma.

 

65\. O Goddess! You are the Mother of all the worlds; do whatever You
like. But You should know that the Demons are all under Your protection;
kill or save them as You like.

 

66\. The Devî said :-- O Demons! Leave you all the anger arising from
this warfare and go without any fear to Pâtâla and live there at your
ease and happiness.

 

67\. Better now wait on Time; whether you will get auspicious or
inauspicious fruits for your deeds. Know whoever is desireless and
unattached, to him happiness is always and everywhere.

 

68\. Whose mind is avaricious, He does not get peace and happiness, even
if he acquires the Trilokî. Even, in the golden age, avaricious persons
did not get happiness, though they acquired the fruits of their actions.

 

69\. Therefore you get yourselves freed of your sins and obey My order
and leave the earth and go down to the Pâtâla.

 

70\. Vyâsa said :-- On hearing the Devî’s words, the Demons obeyed and
bowing at Her feet and preserved by Her, went to Pâtâla.

 

71\. Then the Devî disappeared; and the Devas went away to their own
homes. Thus the Devas and the Daityas, abandoning their feelings of
enmity towards each other, lived in peace.

 

O King! He who hears this fact, gets himself freed from all sorts of
calamities and reaches the Highest Peace.

 

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses, on the truce
between the Daityas and Devas and on their departures with peace, by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk04ch16)
