[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk04ch07)  [Next](bk04ch09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On going to the Tîrthas**

 

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

 

1\. Sûta said :-- Thus asked by the son of Parîk<u>s</u>it, the king
Janamejaya, the best of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, the son of Satyavatî,
Vyâsa spoke, in detail, the following :--

 

2\. The virtuous Janamejaya became very much sorry and despondent when
he heard in detail the improper acts of his own father Parîk<u>s</u>it,
the son of Uttarâ.

 

3\. Owing to insulting the Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy, his father had to go to
hell; and he was constantly thinking how to release his father.

 

4\. The son is called “Puttra” for he releases his father from the hell,
named “Put”. He is the true son that can do so.

 

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

 

5-6. The fortunate son of Parîk<u>s</u>it became very much tormented and
bewildered with fear when he heard what was the fate of his father, who
died bitten by a serpent on the top of a palace, due to the curse of a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, void of any bathing, charities, and the purificatory
acts.

 

7\. When Vyâsa returned home, Janamejaya asked him, the whole course of
events of Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a.

 

8\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the terrible Hira<u>n</u>ya Kas'ipoo was
slain, his son Prahlâda was installed on his throne.

 

9\. During the government of Prahlâda, the chief of the Daityas, the
worshipper of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and Devas, the kings on earth began
with faith to do many sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Devas.

 

10\. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as were engaged in their Tapasyâ, Dharma, and in
frequenting the places of pilgrimages; the Vais'yas, in their trade; and
the S'ûdras, in serving the other three classes.

 

11\. The incarnation of Hari, the Nri Simha (Man-Lion) made Prahlâda,
the king of the Daityas in the Pâtâla (Nether regions); and Prahlâda,
engaged there, spent his time in the preservation and welfare of his
subjects.

 

12\. Once, on a time, the great ascetics Chyavana Muni, the son of
Bhrigu went on his way to bathing in the river Narmada, at the place of
pilgrimage, called Vyârhitîs'vara.

 

13\. There he saw the great river Revâ and, while he was descending in
the river, a dreadful snake caught hold of him and carried him to the
Pâtâla. The Muni was greatly terrified and began to think of the Deva of
the Devas, Janârdana Vi<u>sn</u>u.

 

14-15. On remembering the lotus eyed  Vi<u>sn</u>u, the serpent lost his
poison, and Chyavana Muni did not find any trouble, though carried to
the Pâtâla.

 

16\. Then the serpent, coming to know of the power of the Muni, left him
for fear that the Muni might curse him; the snake afterwards repented
very much.

 

17\. Chyavana, the best of the Munis, worshipped by the daughters of the
serpents, roamed there and entered once into a beautiful palace of the
Nâgas and the Dânavas.

 

18\. While he was walking, he was seen by the religious king of the
Daityas, the Prahlâda.

 

19\. The lord of the Daityas on seeing him worshipped him and enquired
of him the cause of his coming there.

 

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

 

20\. Are you sent here by Indra? Speak truly, O best of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Is it to pry into my kingdom out of the enmity between
the Devas and the Daityas?

 

21\. Chyavana said :-- What have I to do with Indra? That I might be
sent by him, as his spy, messenger, to your city!

 

22\. O Chief of the Daityas! Know me as Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu,
prompt in religious duties and whose eye is illumined by knowledge. Do
not fear that I am sent here by Indra.

 

23\. When I went to bathe in a place of pilgrimage, in the holy Narmadâ,
and dropped into the river, a poisonous snake caught hold of me (and
carried me here).

 

24\. I took the name of Vi<u>sn</u>u; and the serpent, hearing the
Vi<u>sn</u>u's name, became void of poison, and left me here as you see.

 

25\. O king! Coming here, I see you. You are a devotee of Vi<u>sn</u>u;
know me, too, a devotee of the same Vi<u>sn</u>u.

 

26\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Prahlâda, the son of Hira<u>n</u>ya Kas'ipu,
on hearing his sweet words, gladly asked him about the various places of
pilgrimages.

 

27\. Prahlâda said :-- O Best of Munis! Kindly describe to me, in
detail, which are the places of pilgrimages on the earth, Pâtâla, and in
the Heavens, that verily lead to holiness.

 

28\. Chyavana said :-- O King! He whose body, words, and mind have grown
pure, to him, his every footstep is a place of pilgrimage; he, whose
heart is impure and defiled, to him the holy Ganges even is a thing more
hated and worse than the Kîka<u>t</u>a country (the name of Behâr).

 

29\. Every holy place will impart holiness to him whose mind is first
pure and deprived of sin.

 

30-31. O Best of the Daityas! On the banks of the Ganges, are situated
good many cities, towns, villages, places to assemble, mines, small
villages, the living places of the aborigines, the chândâlas, and
kaivartas, the Hû<u>n</u>as, Bangas, the Khasas and the other Mlechchas.

 

32\. The inhabitants of the above places drink at their will the holy
Ganges water, equivalent to Brâhma, and bathe therein and do other
works.

 

33\. O King! There not even a single soul becomes pure. What use is a
holy place to him, whose heart becomes attached to the sensual objects
and who can therefore be called the lost souls.

 

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

 

34\. Know, O king! the mind as the principal factor in any religious act
or in any holy place. He who wants purity, let him first make his own
mind pure.

 

35\. The residents in any holy place deceive others and thus incur great
sins. The sins committed in a place of pilgrimage can never be removed;
they become unending and inexhaustible.

 

36\. As the fruit, Indravâru<u>n</u>â, is never sweet though fully ripe,
so whose heart is defiled, he can never be pure though he bathes
hundreds and thousands of times in the Tîrtha water.

 

37\. He who wants welfare of his own and others, he should first make
his mind pure; when his mind becomes pure, then, the purity of material
things and the purity of conduct can have any effect; then and then only
resorting to places of pilgrimages becomes efficacious.

 

38-39. Always avoid company with the lowest class of persons in the holy
places; it is far better to shew one's good will and compassion to all
the souls (jîvas) by one's intellect and by one's acts. You have asked
me about the holy places of pilgrimages; I will now tell you those that
are the best.

 

40\. O king! The holy Naimis'âra<u>n</u>ya is the first, next
Chakratîrtha; next Puskaratîrtha; there are many others besides these
that cannot be counted. O Best of kings! There are lots of other holy
places in this world.

 

41-42. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Prahlâda, the king of the Daityas, on
hearing the Muni's words, became ready to go Naimis'ra<u>n</u>ya and,
with very much gladness, exclaimed to his followers, the Daityas :-- O
Good Ones! Get up; today we will go to Naimis'âra<u>n</u>ya and we will
see the lotus eyed, yellow robed S’rî Achyutam, the Vi<u>sn</u>u.

 

43\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When thus addressed by Prahlâda, the Demons
were exceedingly glad; and they all marched out of Pâtâla.

 

44\. The Daityas, and Demons all united went to Naimis'âra<u>n</u>yam
and filled with much pleasure, they all bathed on reaching that holy
place.

 

45\. There, accompanied by the Daityas, Prahlâda roamed about the sacred
places and saw the holy Sarasvatî river and Her pure clean water.

 

46\. The highsouled Prahlâda bathed in the Sarasvatî river and his mind
was satisfied.

 

47\. The king of the Daityas was very much pleased and he perform
ablutions and charities according to due rites in that most auspicious
sacred place of pilgrimage.

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Fourth Book of S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>î
Veda Vyâsa on going to the Tîrthas.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk04ch09.md)
