[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch13)  [Next](bk05ch15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIV**

 

**On the killing of Tâmra and Chik<u>s</u>ura**

 

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

 

1-4. Vyâsâ said :-- Hearing the death news of Durmukha,
Mahisâ<u>s</u>ura became blind with anger and began to utter repeatedly
to the Dânavas, “O! What is this? What is this? Alas! That delicate
woman has slain in battle the two heroes Durmukha and Vâskala! Lo! Now
look at the wonderful workings of the Daiva (Fate). It is the acts
virtuous, or otherwise that make men dependent; and the powerful Time
awards pleasure or pain accordingly. The two powerful Demons are killed;
what are we to do hereafter? You all judge and say what is reasonable at
this critical juncture.”

 

5-23. Vyâsa said :-- When the powerful Mahi<u>s</u>a said thus, his
general Chik<u>s</u>ura, the great warrior spoke as follows :-- “O King!
Why are you so anxious as to take away the life of a delicate woman? I
will kill Her;” thus saying he departed for battle, mounted on his
chariot and accompanied by his own army. The powerful Tâmra accompanied
him as his attendant; the sky and all the quarters became filled with
the clamour of their vast army. The auspicious Devî Bhagavatî saw them
before Her and She made an extraordinary wonderful sound with Her
conchshell, with Her bow string and with Her great bell. The Asuras
heard that and trembled and fled, speaking amongst each other, “What is
this?” The Chik<u>s</u>urâk<u>s</u>a seeing them turning their backs,
told them very angrily, “O Dânavas! What fear has now overcome you? I
will slay today this vain woman in the battle with arrows; so you should
quit your fear and remain steady in battle.” Thus saying, the Dânava
Chieftain Chik<u>s</u>ura came fearlessly before the Devî with bows and
arrows in his hands and, accompanied by his army, angrily spoke thus :--
“O Thou of large and broad eyes! Why are you roaring to terrify the weak
persons! O the Soft limbed One! I have heard all about your deeds but I
am not a bit afraid of You. O One of beautiful eyes! It is a matter of
disgrace, rather sin, to kill a woman; knowing this my heart wants to
pass over this act (does not like to do it, if my purpose be served
without it).

 

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

 

O Beautiful One! The women fight with their side glances and amorous
gestures; but I have never heard a woman like you coming to fight with
arms and weapons. Even the delicate flowers, Mâlati, etc., cause pain on
the bodies of beautiful women like you; so it is not advisable to fight
against you with flowers even; what to speak of sharpened arrows! Fie on
those who spend their lives according to the K<u>s</u>atriya Dharma! Oh!
Who can praise that Dharma which allows this dear body of ours to be
pierced by sharpened arrows? This dear body is nourished by sweet food,
by being smeared with oil, and by smelling the scents of beautiful
flowers. Ought, then, one to destroy it by arrows from an enemy? Men get
their bodies pierced by arrows and then become rich. Now is it possible
for the riches to give pleasure afterwards when they caused such pains
in the beginning? Even if this be so, fie on those riches! O Beautiful
One! It seems you are not intelligent; why have you desired to fight
instead of to enjoy sexual pleasures. O beautiful! What merits have you
found in the battle that you have chosen this. Where you see the action
of the axes and spears, striking each other with clubs, and hurling of
sharpened arrows and weapons and where, when death comes, jackals come
and feed upon the dead bodies, what merits have you been able to trace
out in these things! It is only those cunning poets that praise these;
they say that those who die in battle go to heaven! O Beautiful! Those
sayings are, no doubt, mere flatteries. Therefore, O Excellent One! Go
away anywhere else you like; or accept this king Mahi<u>s</u>a, the
tormentor of the Devas, as your husband.”

 

24-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Dânava Chik<u>s</u>ura speaking thus,
the Divine Mother addressed him thus :-- O Stupid! Why are you speaking
false words, having no significance, like a literary man giving out mere
words only? You do not know anything of politics, ethics, metaphysics;
you serve the illiterate and stupid; therefore, you are also a first
class illiterate; you do not know what are the royal duties; then what
are you speaking before me? I will kill that Mahi<u>s</u>âsura in battle
make the soil muddy with his blood, thus establish firmly My pillar of
Fame and then go happily to My abode. Surely will I slay that vain
vicious demon, the tormentor of the Devas. Better fight steadily. O
Stupid! Better go to Pâtâla with all the Dânavas, if you and
Mahi<u>s</u>a desire to live any longer. And if you like to go unto
death, then be ready and fight without any delay; I will slay you all;
this is My firm resolve.

 

31-39. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing the Devî’s words, the Dânava,
proud of his own strength, began to hurl instantly on Her showers of
arrows, as if another shower of rain burst upon Her. The Devî cut off
those arrows

 

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

 

into pieces by Her sharp arrows and shot at him dreadful arrows like
poisonous snakes. Then their fight became astounding to the public; the
Divine Mother, then, struck him with Her club so much that he fell down
from his chariot. That vicious demon, thus struck by the club, remained
senseless near to his chariot for two muhûrtas, fixed like a mountain.
Tâmra, the tormentor of the foes, seeing him thus, could not remain
steady and came forward to fight with Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ. The Devî seeing
him laughed and said, “O Dânava! Come, Come, I will instantly send you
unto death. Or, what is the use of your coming? You are so weak that you
can be called lifeless. What is that stupid Mahi<u>s</u>a doing now? Is
he thinking out the way to save his life? You all are too weak; no use
in killing you, all my labours will go in vain, if that wicked
Mahi<u>s</u>a, the enemy of the gods, be not slain. Therefore, do you go
to your home and send here your king Mahi<u>s</u>a. I am staying here in
that form in which that wicked one likes very much to see Me.”

 

40-56. Hearing Her words, Tâmra became very angry and drawing his bow up
to his ear, began to hurl arrows after arrows on Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ Devî.
The Bhagavatî, too, had her eyes reddened with anger and drawing Her bow
began to shoot arrows quickly at the demon, wishing to kill, as early as
possible, the enemy of the gods. In the meanwhile, Chik<u>s</u>ura
regained his senses, and taking up again his bow in an instant, came
before the Devî. Then Chik<u>s</u>ura and Tâmra, the two valiant
warriors, began to fight dreadfully with the Devî. Mahâ Mâyâ then,
became very angry and began to hurl arrows after arrows so incessantly
that all the armours of all the Dânavas became pierced and were cut down
to pieces. The Asuras, thus pierced by arrows, became infuriated with
anger and hurled angrily a network of arrows upon the Devî. The Dânavas,
thus struck with sharp arrows and filled with cuts and wounds looked
like the red Kims’uka flowers in the spring. The fight then grew so
severe between Tâmra and Bhagavatî that the seers, the Devas, were all
struck with wonder. Tâmra struck on the head of the lion with his
dreadful hard Mu<u>s</u>ala (club), made of iron, and laughed and
shouted aloud. Seeing him thus vociferating, the Devî became angry and
cut off his head by her sharp axes in no time. The head being thus
severed from the body, Tâmra, though headless, for a moment turned round
his Mu<u>s</u>ala and then fell down on the ground. The powerful
Chik<u>s</u>ura, seeing Tâmra thus falling down, instantly took up his
axe and ran after Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ. Seeing Chik<u>s</u>ura with axe in
his hand, the Bhagavatî quickly shot at him five arrows. With one arrow,
his axe was cut down, with the second arrow his hands were cut and with
the remaining ones his head was severed from his body. Thus when the two
cruel warriors were slain, their soldiers soon fled

 

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

 

away in terror in all directions. The Devas were exceedingly glad at
their downfall and showered gladly flowers from the sky and uttered
shouts of Victory to the Devî. The Ri<u>s</u>is, Gandarbhas, the
Vetâlas, the Siddhas and Châra<u>n</u>as were all very glad and began to
utter repeated, “O Goddess! Victory, victory be Yours.”

 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the killing of
Tâmra and Chik<u>s</u>ura in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](bk05ch15.md)
