[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch06)  [Next](bk05ch08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On the going of the Devas to Kailâsa**

 

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

 

1-3. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Mahi<u>s</u>a seeing the Dânavas afflicted
with grief, quitted his buffalo appearance, assumed a lion form and
spreading this long manes began to roar aloud and fell amidst the Deva
forces; then the Devas were terrified on seeing his sharp nails. That
lion-form Mahi<u>s</u>a first attacked so severely the Garu<u>d</u>a
with his nails, that his whole body was besmeared with blood; then he
attacked Vi<u>sn</u>u's arms with his nails.

 

4-11. Seeing the Dânava, Vâsudeva Hari raised his discus in anger and
attacked him with great force to kill him. Just when Hari struck the
Dânava violently with his Chakra, the powerful Dânava quitted
immediately his lion-form, assumed the buffalo form and struck Hari with
his two horns. Vâsudeva, thus pierced in his breast with the horns,
became confounded and fled away as best as he could till he reached his
own abode, Vaikun<u>t</u>ha. Seeing Hari thus fleeing away, S'ankara,
too, thought him invulnerable and fled to his Kailâs'a mountain with
fear. Brahmâ, too, fled to his own abode with terror; but the powerful
Vâsava took patience and remained steady in the battle. Varu<u>n</u>a
taking his S'akti waited patiently for battle. Yama, too, with his staff
remained there ready to fight. Kuvera, the Lord of the Yak<u>s</u>as,
remained very busy in close fighting with the Dânavas; Fire, taking
S’akti, also waited. The Sun and Moon, the Lord of the stars, both
remained in firm resolve to fight with Mahi<u>s</u>a, the lord of the
Dânavas.

 

12-22. O King! In the meanwhile, the Dânava forces got angry and
attacked them on all sides, shooting at the enemies a mass of dangerous
serpent-like arrows. The Lord of the Dânavas, Mahi<u>s</u>a, too,
assuming the buffalo appearance, reigned supreme in the middle. At this
moment fierce sounds of the warriors on both the sides were heard.
During the

 

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

 

sharp contest of the Devas and Dânavas, the sounds from the bowstrings
and the clappings of the hands were heard like the roarings of thunder.
The powerful Dânava, then, swelled with pride, began to hurl the
mountain tops with his horns, thus killing the Deva forces. Some by
hoofs and some by the lashing of the tail, that angry Mahi<u>s</u>a,
very wonderful to behold, sent to the region of Death. Then the Devas
and Gandarbhas became very much frightened; so much so, that Indra fled
away at once on the sight of Mahi<u>s</u>a. Indra thus retreating from
the field, Yama, Kuvera, and Varu<u>n</u>a all quitted the battle-ground
with fear. Indra fled away quitting his Airâvata elephant and
Uchchais'ravâ horse; so Mahi<u>s</u>a got the possession of the elephant
and the horse, as well the heavenly cow of the Sun. So the Dânavas
considered themselves pre-eminently victorious and returned to their
abodes. Next they wanted to go, as early as possible, to the Heavens,
with all their forces. In no time Mahi<u>s</u>a went to the abode of
Indra, deserted by all the terror-stricken Devas and got the possession
thereof. Then taking his seat on the beautiful throne of Indra, he made
the other Dânavas occupy the several seats of the other Devas.

 

23-27. Thus fighting full one hundred years, the Dânava Mahi<u>s</u>a,
puffed up with pride, acquired the seat of Indra, his desired object. He
banished the Devas from the Heavens; the Devas, thus tormented began to
wander in the caves of hills and dales for a period of good many years.
O King! The Devas, at last, were quite tired and took the four-faced
Brahmâ, the Creator's refuge. At that instant, the Lord of the world,
the Rajas incarnate, the Originator of the Vedas, was seated on His
lotus seat; surrounding Him were standing his mortal sons Marîchi, etc.,
with their passions subdued, mind calm and beyond the sphere of the
Vedas and Vedângas; there were there also Siddhas, Gandarbhas, Kinnaras,
Châranas, Uragas, and Pannagas. The terrified Devas then began to praise
and chant hymns to Brahmâ, the Lord of the world.

 

28-33. The Devas said :-- “O Creator! O Lotus-born! O Thou, the Remover
of the pains and afflictions of all this world! How is it that you are
not moved with pity towards the Devas, seeing that we are defeated by
the lord of the Dânavas and have been banished from our abode; what more
shall we say, our troubles are now indescribable, as we are living in
the caves of hills and dales. O Creator! A son may be a hundred times
guilty of offence; is it, then, that the father, devoid of any feeling
of covetousness, deserts his sons and gives them trouble! We are
oppressed by the Dânavas, we who are wholly devoted to your lotus-feet,
why are you today showing signs of indifference towards us! That wicked
Dânava is thoroughly enjoying to-day the Heavens of the Devas, is
forcibly taking their share of the oblations of clarified butter in the
Yajñas (sacrifices)

 

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

 

from the Brâhma<u>n</u>as; is enjoying the Pârijâta tree and also the
heavenly milching cow, the jewel of the ocean. What more shall we
describe to you the strange doings of the Asuras; O Lord of the Devas!
You are perfectly aware of all that they strive and execute; for, by
your knowledge, you know everything of this world; therefore, O Lord! We
lie prostrate at your feet. That vicious Dânava, of wicked character and
full of mischievous actions, gives us troubles in various ways wherever
we go; O Lord of the Devas! Thou art our only Protector; therefore, O
Lord! Do what is good to us. Thou art the Awarder of the desires of the
Devas. Thou art the First Creator of the world, and Preserver; therefore
if Thou dost not do us our good, to whom else shall we take refuge, when
we are so severely oppressed as if we are burnt in a forest
conflagration! Who else is more lustrous, more beneficent and more
peace-giving Governor?

 

34-35. Vyâsa said :-- O king! All the Devas, praising Him thus, bowed
down to the Lord of creation with folded hands and saluted him, with
their faces very heavy, overladen with deep sorrow. The Grand Sire of
all the Lokas, seeing the plight of the Devas, consoled them with sweet
words and made them happy.

 

36-43. O Suras! What shall I do? The Dânava has become exceedingly
haughty on account of his getting boons; he can be killed by females
only; He is invulnerable by any male. What remedy is there now?
Therefore, O Suras! Let us all go to Kailâsa, the best of all the
mountains; thence we will take S'ankara, the expert in doing the works
of Gods, and go to Vaikun<u>t</u>ha, where Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Deva of the
Devas resides. There we all will unite and hold a counsel and decide
what is best to do, to serve the purpose of the gods. Thus making out
the programme, Brahmâ riding on his Hamsa went to Kailâsa, accompanied
by all the Devas. At the same time S'iva came to know out of his
introspection about the coming of Brahmâ and the other Devas and soon
came out of his dwelling abode. When they met each other, they saluted
each other and felt very glad. The Devas then bowed down to them. Seats
were given to the Devas; and when they sat respectively on their Âsanas,
the Lord of Pârvatî also took his own seat. S'iva asked the welfare of
Brahmâ and the Devas and asked the reasons of their coming to Kailâsa.

 

44\. O Brahmâ! What has caused you to come here along with Indra and the
other Devas? O highly fortunate one! Please mention it.

 

45-47. Brahmâ said :-- O Deva of the Devas! The Dânava Mahi<u>s</u>a is
oppressing all the Devas in the Heavens; they therefore terrified are
wandering hither and thither in the caves and hills with Indra.
Mahi<u>s</u>a

 

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

 

and the other Dânavas are now accepting their share of Yajñas; the
Lokopâlas, being oppressed, have come to-day and are now taking shelter
of Thee. O S'ambhu! Considering the situation serious, I have taken them
with me here; therefore, O Deva, do that which is reasonable and by
which the purpose of the Devas can be carried out. O Bhûta Bhâvana! (The
creator of the world) The whole charge and responsibility of all the
Devas devolves on Thee.

 

48\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus, S'ankara smiled a little and
spoke charming words to the Lotus-born in the following manner :--

 

49-55. O Bibhu! It is You that gave before this boon to Mahi<u>s</u>a;
and therefore it is you that have wrought this mischief. The Dânava has
become so strong a hero that he has caused terror to all the Devas even.
Now where can we get such a noble woman who becomes able to kill that
Dânava, elated with pride. My wife nor your wife ought to go to battle;
even if they, the good ladies go, how will they be able to fight? The
fortunate wife of Indra, too, is not expert in the art of warfare; where
else there is another lady who can kill this demon, blinded with pride.
I, therefore, propose this; let us all go today to Vi<u>sn</u>u and,
praising him with hymns, engage him quickly to this cause of the gods.
Vi<u>sn</u>u is foremost amongst the intelligent; therefore it is highly
advisable to execute all actions after duly consulting with him. He, by
dint of his high intelligence, will find out means and effect our
purpose.

 

Vyâsa said :-- O King! Brahmâ and the other Devas heard Rudra and
approved heartily and saying, “Be it so” instantly rose up. At the time,
seeing all the auspicious signs concerning the success of the gods, they
all became glad; and, riding on their respective vehicles, drove towards
the abode of Vi<u>sn</u>u. Favourable fragrant winds, pleasant to touch,
began to blow gently, birds began to chant hymns of praise and signs of
success were seen all along their way. The sky was clear and the
quarters became free; in short, everything showed favourable all along
their way.

 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter on the going of the Devas to Kailâsa in
the Fifth Skandha of S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am
of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk05ch08.md)
