[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch03)  [Next](bk05ch05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

** **

**On the war counsels given by Indra**

 

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

 

1-17. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The messenger of the Dânavas having
departed, Indra, the lord of the Devas, Yama, Vâyu, Varu<u>n</u>a, and
Kuvera and other Devas, called an assembly and addressed thus :-- O
Devas! the most powerful Mahi<u>s</u>a, the son of Rambha, is now the
king of the Dânavas; he is particularly expert in hundreds of Mâyâs
(magic) and has become haughty on the strength of his boon. O Devas!
Mahi<u>s</u>a has sent his messenger; he wants to take possession of the
heaven; he came down to me and spoke thus :-- “O Indra! Quit your this
heaven and go any where you like, or be ready to pay your homage to the
highsouled Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, the Lord of the Dânavas. The Dânava Chief
never becomes angry with his opponent who becomes submissive like a
servant; if you surrender and serve him, he will, out of mercy, grant an
allowance to you. O Lord of the Devas! If this does not like you, then
collect your forces and be ready for fight; no sooner I return, the Lord
of the Dânavas will come here at once ready to give battle to you.” Thus
saying, the messenger of that wicked Dânava departed. Now what are we to
do? O Devas! Think on that. O Devas! Even a weak enemy is not to be
overlooked by a powerful opponent, especially when the enemy is powerful
by his own powers and is ever energetic, never is he to be overlooked.
It is always incumbent on us to make our efforts, as best as we can,
both by our body and mind as far as lies in our power; the result,
victory or defeat depends entirely on Fate. It is useless to make treaty
with a deceitful and dishonest person; we therefore never should make
treaty with this person; you are all honest; that Dânava is dishonest;
therefore ponder and ponder deeply and ponder again; do you that which
is proper. It is not advisable to go out at once for fight when we are
unaware of our enemy's strength; let us therefore send spies truthful,
honest, motiveless, quick, to ascertain their strength, those who can
easily enter amongst our enemies and yet who have no relation, nor any
interest with them. The arrangements of their forces, their movements,
their numbers, they will ascertain correctly who are their generals,
what is their number and what is their strength, they will thoroughly
examine and return here quickly. First, we will ascertain the strength
of the forces of our opposite party and then we will decide at once
whether we will start for battle or seek protection within forts. Wise
persons always consider before they act; any act done rashly leads in
all respects to many troubles, and anything done after mature

 

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

 

prejudgments leads to happiness; so the wise do. The Dânavas are all one
in their heart and mind; therefore it is not advisable, in any way to
apply the principle of Bheda (sowing principles of discord). Let our
spies go there, ascertain their strength, return and inform us; we will
then judge what principle is proper and apply to the expert Dânavas. Any
act done contrary to policy and expediency will undoubtedly produce
effects contrary in every way just like a medicine which we have not
tried already.

 

18-22. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus counselling with the Devas; Indra
sent expert spies to ascertain the true state of affairs. The spies,
too, went into the abode of the Daityas, with no delay and made their
searches thoroughly into every nook and corner and returned and told
Indra all the strength of the Dânava forces. Indra was very much
startled to know, then, of their arrangements. He immediately bade all
the Devas be ready for battle and called for his High priest Brihaspati,
expert in giving advices and began to consult with him how to carry on
the warfare with that indomitable enemy, the Lord of the Asuras. On
Bhihaspati, the best and famous of the Angirâ family, taking his
excellent seat.

 

23-25. Indra thus said :-- “O Guru of the Devas! O Learned! Please say
what are we to do now in this critical juncture? You are omniscient;
to-day you are our guide. The Demon Mahî<u>s</u>a has become very
powerful, very haughty; surrounded by Dânavas he is now coming to fight
with us. You are expert in mantras; find out the remedy for us.
S'ukrâchârya is the remover of all obstacles on their side; and that you
are our safe guard is well known to us.”

 

26\. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing these words of Indra, Brihaspati, who is
always ready to effect the Deva's purposes, thought intently on the
subject, said very shortly thus :--

 

27-51. Brihaspati spoke :-- O Lord of the Devas! O Venerable One! Be
peaceful; have patience; when a difficulty comes, one should not, all on
a sudden, lose one's patience. O Chief of the Immortals! Victory or
defeat is completely under the control of destiny: therefore intelligent
ones should always be patient. O S'atakratu! What will unavoidably be
done must come to pass; knowing this as certain, one would always be an
enthusiast and exert one's powers. Everything is guided by Fate. Knowing
this, the Munis devote themselves at all times solely filled with energy
in their meditation and Yoga practices for their final liberation.
Therefore, to show one's energy, according to the rules of the daily

 

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

 

practices, ought to be indispensably done; and one should not repel or
feel pleasure on failure or success; for that is under Fate. Success
sometimes comes without the exercise of one's own powers, as seen in
cases of the lame and the blind; and that is not the reason why one
should be very glad. The embodied beings are all under Daiva (Fate);
therefore even if success be not attained, though one's own powers are
exercised thoroughly, no one is to blame for that. O Lord of the Suras!
What to say of forces, Mantras, or advices, what of chariots or weapons,
nothing to lead to success; It is Daiva, and only Daiva that makes one
successful. This whole universe is under Daiva; it is, therefore, that
we see powerful persons suffering pains, and weak ones getting
happiness; the intelligent ones sleeping without any food and fools
enjoying merrily; distressed persons getting victory and powerful ones
suffering defeats; what cares, then ought one to entertain in this. O
Lord of the Suras! Whatever is inevitable to come to pass, be it success
or failure, one will lead one's energies to that end; therefore one
needs to consider beforehand whether one's energies will be successful
or not. In times of distress, one sees distress too much and in times of
pleasure, one seeks pleasure too much; one's self, therefore one should
not surrender to one's enemies, pleasure and pain. Pain and suffering is
not felt so much in patience as is felt when impatient; therefore one
must practise patience when pain or pleasure comes. Indeed it is very
difficult to bear oneself up in distress or happiness; therefore wise
persons try not to let these feelings crop up at all from the very
beginning. “I am always full, undiminishable, I am beyond these
Prâkritic qualities. Who is there to suffer? What is suffering?” Thus
one ought to think at that moment. I am beyond the twenty-four Tattvas;
what pleasure or pain can, then, arise to me? Hunger and thirst are the
Dharma of Prâ<u>n</u>a; pain and insensibility is the Dharma of mind,
age and death belong to this physical body. I am free from these six
diseases; I am S’iva. Grief and delusion are the qualities of this body
what then do I care for them? “I” am not the qualities of the body nor
“I” am the soul pertaining to that. I am beyond the seven
transfigurations, changes, e. g., Mahat, etc., I am beyond this
Prakriti, Nature, and beyond the sixteen changes wrought out by
Prakriti; I am therefore eternally happy, I am beyond Prakriti and its
transformation, then why am I to suffer pain always? O Lord of the
Suras! Think on these and be without any passion. O S'atakratu! This
attachment is the root of all miseries and non-attachment is the source
of all happiness; non-attachment therefore, is the chief means of the
extirpation of all your troubles. Lord of S'achi! Nothing can be happier
than contentment.  In case you find it difficult to practise dispassion,
apply, then, discrimination and

 

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

 

 

think of Fate, that what comes inevitably to pass. O Lord of the Suras!
Actions already done cannot die out without their effects being enjoyed.
O Best of the Suras! Let all your intelligence be brought to action, let
all the Devas lend their helping hands to you; what is inevitable must
come to pass; what then can you care for your happiness or pain? O King!
Happiness is felt for the expiation of good deeds and pain is felt for
the expiation of bad deeds; therefore wise persons get thoroughly
delighted when their pu<u>n</u>ya ends. O King! Judge and hold a council
to-day; then try your best. But what is unavoidable will come to pass,
even if you try your best.

 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the counsels given by
Indra in the Mâhâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk05ch05.md)
