[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch24)  [Next](bk05ch26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**ChapterXXV**

 

**On the killing of Dhûmralochana**

 

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

 

1-7. Vyâsa said :-- O Janamejaya! When Dhûmralochana ceased speaking,
the Devî Kâlikâ made a wild laughter and began to speak sweetly thus :--
O Stupid! Skilled in flattery, you know only how to use jugglery of
words like an actor; do you think that your ends will be served if you
speak only sweet words; this can never be. O Stupid! Fight now; there is
no need of useless words. You are strong and have been sent by that
wicked Demon with a great army. This Devî, out of wrath, will kill you,
S’umbha, and Nis’umbha and other commanders by Her arrows and will then
return to Her abode. Where is that stupid S’umbha? And where is this
Devî, the Great Enchantress of the Universe!

 

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

 

Their marriage in this world is entirely out of question and can never
take place. O Stupid! What do you think that a lioness becoming very
passionate, would make an ordinary jackal her husband? or would a
she-elephant prefer an ass? or would a heavenly Cow like a bison? Go to
S’umbha and Nis’umbha and tell truly to them :-- “Fight or go instantly
to Pâtâla.”

 

8-10. Vyâsa said :-- O Fortunate One! The Demon Dhûmralochana, hearing
thus the Kâlikâ’s words, became very angry and spoke with reddened eyes
:-- “O Ugly One! I will slay Thee and this lion infatuated with pride in
battle and take this Fair One to the king. O Kâlî! I have not been able
to do this, simply it would break our amorous love sentiments. O
Quarrelsome One! Otherwise I would have undoubtedly slain Thee just now
with my sharpened arrows tipped with irons.”

 

11\. Hearing thus, Kâlikâ said :-- O Fool! Why do you boast vainly? this
is not the religion of a hero with bows and arrows in their hands. Shoot
your arrows with all your might; I will send you to the realm of Death.

 

12-31. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing the Devî’s words, Dhûmralochana
caught hold of his very strong bow and began to shoot arrows after
arrows at Kâlikâ. Indra and the other Devas came out to see the fight on
their best cars in the celestial space and shouted “Victory to the Devî”
and thus eulogised Her. Then a deadly fight ensued between them with
arrows, axes, clubs, S’aktis, and Mu<u>s</u>alas and various other
weapons. Kâlikâ cut off at the very outset all the asses that carried
the chariot by Her arrows and next broke his chariot and began to laugh
repeatedly. O Bhârata! Then Dhûmralochana becoming angry mounted on
another chariot and began to shoot deadly arrows at Kâlikâ. Kâlikâ Devî,
too, out off those arrows into pieces before they reached Her and shot
arrows after arrows on the Dânava in quick succession. Thousands of his
soldiers near to him were killed; the asses and the charioteer were
killed and the chariot was broken. She cut off his arrows by Her swift
serpent-like arrows and blew Her conchshell. The Devas seeing this
became very glad. Dhûmralochana, seeing himself displaced from his
chariot, took up with anger his very strong Parigha weapon and came near
to the chariot of the Devî. Then the Dânava, terrific like death, began
to abuse the Devî and said :-- “O Ugly tawny-eyed Kâlî! I will kill Thee
just now.” Thus saying, he suddenly went near to Her and when he was
about to throw his Parigha weapon on Her, the Ambikâ Devî burnt him to
ashes simply by Her loud shout (of defiance). Seeing Dhûmralochana burnt
to ashes, his soldiers became panic-stricken, and fled away immediately,
crying aloud “O Father! O Father!” The Devas saw this and and gladly

 

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

 

showered from high heaps of flowers on the Devî. O King! The battle
ground then assumed a dreadful appearance; at some places the slain
Dânavas; at others, the horses; at other places elephants and at some
other places the asses lay scattered on the field. The herons, crows,
vultures, the Pis’âchas of the class Ba<u>t</u>abaraphas and jackals and
other carnivorous animals, began to dance wildly and clamour hideously
at the sight of the dead bodies, lying on the field. The Ambikâ Devî
then quitting the field, went to a distant place and blew Her conchshell
so furiously and terribly that S’umbha heard that terrific noise, while
he was sitting in his own residence. At the next moment, he saw that the
Dânava forces had retreated, and they were coming there crying. Some of
them were besmeared with blood all over the bodies; some had got their
feet, some their arms, cut asunder, some were devoid of eyes, some had
got their backs broken; some had their waists broken; some got their
necks broken and some were going on bedsteads. Seeing them thus, S’umbha
and Nis’umbha asked them :-- “Where is Dhûmralochana? Why have you all
retreated? And why have you not brought that Lady? Where are the other
forces? Who has blown this horrible conch-shell? O Fools! Inform me
quickly and truly all these things.”

 

32-33. The soldiers said :-- “O King! Dhûmralochana has been slain by
Kâlikâ; She has destroyed all the soldiers and has done extraordinary
deeds.” O King! Know the blowing of the conchshell that has caused
terror in the hearts of the Dânavas and has enhanced the joy of the
Devas and is being resounded in the celestial space, is that done by the
Ambikâ Devî. (Note: In the Mârka<u>n</u>deya Purâ<u>n</u>a, Ambikâ
killed Dhûmra.)

 

34-45. O Lord! When the Devî broke the chariot of Dhûmralochana by the
multitude of Her arrows and killed the horses and at last slew
Dhûmralochana himself, when all the forces were slain by Her who
appeared like a lion and when the rest of the army retreated, the Devas
seeing all these were very much gladdened and showered flowers from the
celestial sky. O King! We have come to a perfect conclusion that we will
not get the victory; now consult with your expert ministers and do what
is needful. O King! The Supreme Goddess of the Universe is waiting there
alone to fight with you without any help of any other forces; this is a
great wonder to us. O King! Intoxicated with Her power, that Girl,
fearless, is reigning there taking Her stand on the lion. All these seem
wonderful to us. O King! Consult with your councillors and out of the
four policies peace, fight, retreat or remaining neutral, accept what is
best. O Tormentor of the foes! True! There are no forces with the Devî,
but the whole host of the Devas will take up Her cause in crisis, there
is no

 

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

 

doubt. In due time, Hari and Hara both will come and assist Her; now the
guardians of the several quarters, the Lokapâlas are waiting by Her side
in the celestial space. O Tormentor of the Gods! Know that the
Gandarbhas, Kinnaras, and human beings all will come timely and help
Her. O King! We guess all these. But that Lady does not want the
assistance of anyone nor does She expect that any other body would do
the work for Her. You must know this certainly, that She alone can
destroy this whole Universe. What to speak of the Dânavas only! O Highly
Fortunate One! Knowing all these, do as you like. It is the duty of the
servants to speak beneficial and at the same time true words with
moderation.

 

46-51. Vyâsa said :-- O King! S’umbha, the tormentor of others, hearing
their words asked his younger brother in private :-- “O Brother! This
Kâlikâ has slain today Dhûmralochana with his forces; the few retreated
and came over to me. Now the Ambikâ Devî, puffed up with pride is
blowing Her conchshell. Brother! The ways of Time are knowable even to
the wise. The grass becomes a thunderbolt and the thunderbolt becomes
like a grass and powerless. Know thus the course of Destiny. O Fortunate
One! Now I ask you, what are we to do now? Are we to entertain yet the
desire of enjoying Ambikâ, or are we to fly away from here or are we to
fight on? Say quickly. Though younger, in times of difficulty, I
consider you as my elder.”

 

52-54. Hearing thus the S’umbha’s words, Nis’umbha said :-- “O Sinless
One! Flight or taking refuge in a fort is not reasonable. To fight with
this Lady is the best course. I will take the best generals and soldiers
with me and will slay that Lady and quickly return. And if Fate be
strong and prove it otherwise, then, after my death, think out again and
again and do what is best.”

 

55-60. Hearing thus the younger brother’s words, S’umbha said, “You
better wait; let Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a go to the battle,
surrounded with forces. To kill a hare it is not necessary to send an
elephant. This is a very trifling matter; the two great warriors
Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a will be freely able to slay Her.” Thus
saying his younger brother, the King S’umbha addressed Cha<u>nd</u>a
Mu<u>nd</u>a, who were waiting before him, thus :-- O Cha<u>nd</u>a! O
Mu<u>nd</u>a! Take your forces and go quickly to kill that shameless
Lady, puffed up with pride. O Pair of Warriors! Kill that tawny-eyed
Kâlikâ in the battle and bring that Ambikâ Devî here quickly. Do this
Great Service. And if that haughty Ambikâ be unwilling to come here,
though taken as a captive, then kill that Durgâ, the ornament of the
battle, too, by sharp arrows.

 

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

 

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of
Dhûmralochana in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](bk05ch26.md)
