[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch33)  [Next](bk05ch35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXIV**

 

**On the methods of the worship of the Devî**

 

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

 

1\. The King said :-- O Bhagavân! Kindly narrate to me in detail now the
methods how to serve and worship the Goddess and the Mantrams that are
used on such occasions.

 

2-12. The Ri<u>s</u>i said :-- O King! I am now describing the method
how to worship the Goddess. Hear. This leads to the fulfilment of all
desires, to the liberation from one’s bondage, to self-realisation and
to the destruction of all miseries. The worshipper has to perform his
bath; then putting on a white cloth, he will have to perform his Vaidik
and Tântrik Sandhyâ; then he should, with his heart controlled, perform
his Âchamana ceremony and select a good auspicious site for his own
Poojâ purposes. Next he should plaster the site with cow-dung and spread
his sacred carpet (Âsana) whereon he is to take his seat with a cheerful
mind and sip water for Âchamana three times. Then he is to collect the
articles for worship according to

 

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

 

his best capacity and place them duly in their respective positions. He
is to perform Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma (regulate his breath); and then follows
the Bhuta-S’uddhi, the purification of the old and the formation of the
celestial body and Jîva-S’uddhi by which the Sâdhaka becomes the
Devatâ-maya; he then proceeds to Mâtrikâ Nyâsa (i.e., setting mentally
in their several places in the six Chakras and then externally by
physical action the letters of the alphabet which form the different
parts of the body of the Devatâ. He then places his hand on different
parts of his body, uttering distinctly at the same time the appropriate
Mâtrikâ for that part).

 

Bhuta-S’uddhi :-- Dissolve earth into water, water into fire, fire into
air, air into ether; ether into Ahamkâra, Ahamkâra into Ma<u>h</u>at and
Ma<u>h</u>at into Prakriti, the final Cause. This process is called
Bhuta-S’uddhi.

 

He is to mention then the time, date, tithi, and month of the year and
make his Sankalpa; then he will have to assign to the different parts of
his body the Mâtrikâ Mantrams duly as well as his own Mantram; next he
is to meditate in his own body the seat of the different Devatâs and do
the internal worship. He is to breathe life into the Deity outside to be
worshipped as well as within himself to be meditated and worshipped;
then he is to do the same with the articles for worship and purify them
by sprinkling with water and Astra or Pha<u>t</u> Mantram, thus removing
all sources of obstacles that are likely to interfere with the act.
Next, on an auspicious copper plate, he is to draw inside a six-angled
(hexagonal) figure (two triangles crossing each other with their
vertices one upward and the other below) with white sandal paste or with
eight perfumed things and outside this figure, an octagonal figure of
eight petals; outside this he is to draw the boundary lines that is
called the Bhûpura. On each of the eight petals he is to write each
letter of the nine-lettered Vîja (Seed) Mantram and the ninth letter in
the central ovum. Next by the Mantram by which breath is infused or by
the Vedic Mantram he will have to place the Yantra in the proper
position and then worship the Âdhâra S’akti (the vital Force) in the
central ovum and the holy seat with the Pî<u>t</u>ha Mantrams. He will
have to invoke the Devî, uttering the Seed Mantram over a golden plate
or figure and carefully worship Her by offering seats and other articles
duly as enunciated in the Yâmala Tântras, etc. Then he will have to
perform the six-fold worship of the Ga<u>n</u>as in the six angles and
worship Indra, etc., and Vajra and others in the Bhûpura (the boundary)
and thus finish the Poojâ of the Yantra. (For the Poojâ see the
Prapancha Sâra.) Note :-- Bhûpura is what is thought over outside front
or in the beginning. Here the Ga<u>n</u>a Devatâs are first thought over
and worshipped. Worship outside, worship inside and See the Deity in and
out, everywhere and be free is the motto of the worship. In the absence
of the Yantra, one

 

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

 

will have to make a metalled image of Bhagavatî and worship Her with the
greatest caution with the Mantras as expounded by S’iva in the Tantrams
(of Jâmalâ and others). Note :-- Yantra is that which restrains. This
human body is the Yantra. And its imitation is placed outside in various
shapes and figures. The Yantra is the mystical diagram used by the
devotees for worship. Or one may use the Vaidik Mantrams in worshipping
the Deity in accordance with the prescribed rules and with his mind
controlled; then, merged in meditation, one is to mutter silently
(perform the Japam of) the nine-lettered Mantram. (The Mantram is Krîm
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>e Kâlike Svâhâ). Japam (muttering or repeating
silently the Mantram) is of two kinds :-- Nitya (daily) and
Pauras’charanik (repetition of the name of the deity accompanied with
burnt offerings). In the Nitya Japam, Nitya Homas are performed and in
the occasional Pauras’charanik Japam, one tenth of this is offerred;
Abhi<u>s</u>eka, too, is one-tenth of this Homa; Tarpa<u>n</u>am is
one-tenth of Abhi<u>s</u>eka and the feeding of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as is
one-tenth of what is done in the Tarpa<u>n</u>am. O King! Thus
completing the Japam one is to read daily the Cha<u>nd</u>î (do the
Cha<u>nd</u>îpâ<u>t</u>ha) where the three glorious deeds of the Devî
are narrated; next he will have to allow the Deity invoked to depart to
Her own place. The Navarâtra Vrata (nine night vow) is next to be
observed according to the proper rites and ceremonies. Hrîm
Mahi<u>s</u>a Mardinyai Svâhâ is the Mantra.

 

13-31. In the bright fortnight of the month of Âsvin or Chaitra, is to
be observed the fasting of the Navarâtra by those who desire for their
own welfare. Homas are to be offered, many in number, and Mantrams are
to be recited, the same as in one’s own Mantram, good Pâyasam with
sugar, ghee, and honey mixed is to be offered in this ceremony. Goat
meat, or holy leaves of the Bel tree, or red Karavîr flowers or til
(sesamum seed) mixed with honey can be used instead in the Homa
ceremony. The special days for the worship of the Devî are the eighth,
ninth, or fourteenth day (tithi) of the half month. The feeding of the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s must be done on each occasion. O King! Thus the poor
become wealthy, the diseased get cured, and the persons that have no
issue get obedient and well qualified sons. The King, expelled from his
kingdom, gets back by the grace of Mahâ Mâyâ, dominion over the whole
earth and becomes able to destroy all those enemies of his, by whom he
was before vanquished, when he worships the Devî. The persons, desirous
of learning, get undoubtedly the learning honourable and auspicious,
provided he worships the Devî with his senses restrained. Persons of all
castes, Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, K<u>s</u>atriyas, Vais’yas or S’ûdras can
become masters of all pleasures and happiness provided they worship with
devotion the Devî, the Preserver of the World (the Jagaddhâtrî). A man
or woman whoever

 

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

 

performs the Navarâtra vow always full of devotion, gets all the desired
fruits. Whoever celebrates the holy Navarâtra ceremony in the bright
fortnight of the month of Âs’vin with his heart full of the thought of
the Devî, gets all his desired fruits. O King! Now I am describing the
rites and ceremonies; here a square raised platform or altar is to be
made according to the prescribed rules; a water-jar is then to be placed
on it with the Vedic mantrams and due rites and ceremonies. One will
have to make a beautiful Yantra according to the previously laid rules
and the water-jar is to be placed on it; then spread the beautiful Yava
grains all around the jar. An awning or pandal is to be erected over the
altar and the place of worship, and the site is to be decorated with
flowers. Lights and Dhûpas, incense and perfumes are then to be used in
the hall of the Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ Devî. O King! The Devî is to be
worshipped thrice; morning, midday and evening; no miserliness is to be
shown in spending wealth for this purpose. Light, dhûp, good presents of
rice and other edibles, flowers, and fruits of various kinds are to be
offered in this worship of the Devî; the chanting of the hymns of the
Vedas, songs, and music with the various instruments are to be done and
a grand festivity is to be made. Moreover, note this carefully that
virgins are to be worshipped duly with sandal, ornaments, clothings,
various edibles, sweet scented oil, and beautiful garlands. (This
worship of the virgins is one of the essentials.) Thus completing the
worship of the Devî, Homa is to be done duly with Mantrams and other
necessary articles on the eighth or the ninth tithi. Lastly the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s are to be fed duly; then the worshipper is to take his
first meal after fasting (i.e., make pâra<u>n</u>am) on the tenth day;
then presents and various articles are to be offered to the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, according to one’s might and with devotion.

 

32-44. O King! Any man, or any chaste married woman or a chaste widow
whoever performs thus the Navarâtra Vrata gets in this world all the
desired fruits and enjoys all sorts of enjoyments and gets unbounded
happiness and after death goes to the highest place. And if, owing to
some cause or other, he has to take his birth again in this world, he
would be born in an excellent family and would become endowed with good
conduct and qualifications and get the unflinching devotion towards the
Ambikâ Devî. O King! I have thus described to you the rules of the
Navarâtra ceremony; this vow is the best of all; highest and greatest
pleasures and happinesses are obtained in worshipping thus the
auspicious Mahâ Mâyâ. O King! Better worship Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ duly
according to the prescribed rules; then you would be able, by Her grace,
to conquer all your enemies and you will regain your excellent dominion,
unshaken by any, and you will get again the highest pleasure and
happiness when you

 

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

 

will be reunited with your wife and sons in your own palace; there is no
doubt in this. O Vais’ya! You, too, better worship the same Mahâ Mayâ,
the Goddess of the Universe, worshipping Whom leads to the
fructification of all desires. You will then be able to regain all your
worldly pleasures in your own home and be respected by your relatives
and acquaintances and finally, after your death, you will go to the holy
abode of the Devî. There is no doubt in this. Those that do not worship
the Devî, go to Naraka or hell; moreover they suffer much from various
diseases in this world. Those that do not worship the Devî are always
defeated by their enemies, are void of wife and sons, become stupid and
suffer pains from their unsatisfied desires. And those that worship the
Preservrix of this world with the Bel leaves, Karavîra flowers,
S’atapatra and Champaka flowers, that blessed man, devoted to the Devî,
gets filled with all sorts of enjoyments. O King! What more can I say
than this, that those who have worshipped the Devî Bhavânî with the
Mantrams approved by the Nigama S’âstras, those very persons get honour
in this world and are filled with all sorts of power and wealth. Verily,
they stand foremost in the rank of best men, becoming the only
repositories of all the best qualities in this world.

 

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the methods of
the worship of the Devî in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](bk05ch35.md)
