[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch26)  [Next](bk05ch28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVII**

 

**On the description of the war of Raktabîja**

 

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

 

1-14. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Seeing the two Dânavas killed in the
battle, the remnant soldiers all fled away back to S’umbha. Some of them
were cut and wounded in many places by arrows, some had their arms
severed, some were bleeding; thus they entered crying into the sky. On
reaching the lord of the Daityas, they began to make frequently the
noise indicative of danger and exclaimed, “O King! Save us, Save us;
Kâlikâ is devouring everything today. The two great warriors
Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a, the tormentors of the Devas, were slain
by Her; all the soldiers were devoured by Her; we have fled away
panic-stricken. O Lord! Kâlikâ has rendered the battlefield horrible by
the dead bodies of elephants, horses, camels, warriors, and foot
soldiers. A river of blood is flowing there of which the flesh of the
soldiers is sufficient mud, their hairs are like aquatic plants, the
broken chariot wheels are like whirlpools, the severed arms and feet are
like fishes and their heads look like Tumbi fruits (long gourds). O
King! Save your line; go quickly to Pâtâla. The Devî has become angry
and will, no doubt, destroy our

 

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

 

race. Even the lion is eating away the Dânavas; and the Kâlikâ Devî is
killing innumerable Dânavas by Her arrows. Therefore, O King! What
intentions are you cherishing in your mind? Is it that you have desired
to be merely slain with your younger brother Nis’umbha! And what good
purpose will this cruel woman, destroying your race, serve, for Whose
sake, you have desired to kill all your friends? O King! Victory or
defeat in this world are under the Daîva. The wise never risk to meet
with great difficulties for the gratification of an ordinary whim. O
Lord! Look at the wonderful deeds of that Great Creator! What more
wonder can there be than this that a woman alone killed all the Dânavas.
O King! You have conquered by the help of your army all the Lokapâlas
(guardians of the quarters of the sky); but now that Lady, though alone
and unsupported by anybody, is challenging you to fight.

 

15-24. O King! In ancient times, in the holy pilgrimage of
Pu<u>s</u>kara, the sacred place of the Devas, you performed austerities
when Brahmâ, the Grandsire of all the worlds, came to you to grant a
boon. Then you asked the boon and wanted to become to be immortal. But
when Brahmâ refused to grant it you wanted from him and were granted
that you would not be killed by any male being, be he a Deva, Dânava, a
man, Nâga, Kinnara, Yak<u>s</u>a, or any other person. O Lord! For that
very reason we think now that this Lady has timely come to kill you.
Think over it seriously and cease fighting. O King! This Devî is the
great Mahâ-Mâyâ, the Highest Prakriti; It is She that devours everything
at the end of a Kalpa . This auspicious Devî is the Creatrix of all the
worlds and the Devas. She is the embodiment of the three qualities,
endowed with all the powers. She is Tâmasi, i.e., is the Destructrix of
the whole world. This Devî can never be conquered, Imperishable,
Eternal, She is the Sandhyâ and the Refuge of the Devas. She is Gâyatrî,
the Mother of the Vedas. She is All-knowing and always manifested. This
Undecaying Lady is void of any Prakritic attributes, though She at times
possesses attributes. She is Success Incarnate and bestows success to
all; She is Bliss Herself and gives bliss to all. This Gaurî bids all
the Devas discard all their fears. She is S’uddha Sattva. Thus knowing,
O King! Quit thy inimical feelings to Her; seek refuge unto Her; the
Devî would then certainly protect you. Be obedient to Her and save your
race. Then the remnant Dânavas will be able to live for a very long
time.”

 

25\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus, S’umbha, the conqueror of the
Devas, told them truly in words becoming of a hero.

 

26-42.  S’umbha said :-- “O Fools! Hold your tongue.You have fled
because your desire to live is very strong. So you better go to

 

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

 

Pâtâla without any delay. This world is under the control of Fate; so I
need not think about Victory. I am under this Fate just as Brahmâ and
other Devas are under it. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra, Yama,
Ag<u>n</u>i, Varu<u>n</u>a, Sûrya, Chandra, and Indra are all under the
sway of this Destiny. O Fools! Whatever is inevitable will certainly
come to pass. What need I think over it then? The effort also comes to
be of such a nature as will lead to that ordained by Fate. Thus
thinking, the wise never grieve; especially the wise ones never leave
their own Dharma for fear of death. The happiness, pain, longevity,
birth and death of all the embodied souls are all determined by Fate
when their proper time arrives. See! When the time is over, Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahâdeva, the lord of Pârvatî die away; on the
expiration of their terms of lives, Indra and other Devas go to
destruction. Similarly I am also completely under the sway of time; so
what doubt is there that I, too, will go to destruction when I have
observed my own Dharma! This Lady is challenging me to fight of Her own
will; how can I fly away and live hundreds of years. I will fight today.
Let the result come whatever it may. I will gladly take the victory or
defeat whatever the case may be. The learned approving of the cause of
effort declare Fate as fictitious; those who realise their sayings know
that they are full of reason. Without exertion no end can be achieved;
weak persons depend on the destiny. Foolish persons say that Fate is
strong; but the wise do not say so. There is no proof whether Fate
exists or not; in fact what is called Fate is invisible; how can it then
be seen? Has anybody seen Fate? It is simply a scare for the illiterate;
remedy only to console one’s mind in times of distress. Simply proximity
to a grindmill without any man’s effort cannot grind a material.
Therefore if exertion be made in proportion to the gravity of the work,
success is sure to ensue; if exertion be made less in proportion, the
work does not come to a successful issue. If time, place and one’s
enemies’ forces be correctly taken into account and then if the proper
attempts be made, success follows; thus Brihaspatî has said.”

 

43-44. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus making a firm resolve to send the
powerful Raktabîja to the battle with a vast army; S’umbha said :-- “O
Raktabîja! You are a very powerful hero; therefore do you go to the
battle. O Fortunate One! Fight as you are the strength of your forces.”

 

45-46. Raktabîja said :-- “O King! You need not be a bit anxious for
this work.Certainly I will either slay Her or I will bring Her under
your control. Please see my skill in this warfare;   that Lady,
favourite

 

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

 

of the gods, is worth nothing; I will just now conquer Her and make Her
your slave.”

 

47-50. Vyâsa said :-- O Best of Kurus! Thus saying, the powerful
Raktabîja mounted on his chariot and went to the battle accompanied by
his forces. The battalion consisted of cavalry, infantry, chariots and
elephants. Thus surrounded he departed from the city for that Devî,
seated on a mountain top. Then the Devî, seeing him coming, blew Her
conchshell; the Dânavas were terrified at that sound and the joy of the
Devas increased. Hearing that sound Raktabîja came very hurriedly to
Châmu<u>nd</u>â and began to speak to Her sweetly.

 

51-62. O Girl! Do you think me weak and thus want to terrify me with the
sound of a conchshell? O Lean One! Have you taken me to be a
Dhûmralochana? O Sweet speaking one! My name is Raktabîja; I have come
here for Thy sake. If Thou desirest to fight, be prepared; I am not a
bit afraid of that. O Dear! You saw those who were weak; I do not belong
to that class. Therefore dost Thou fight as Thou likest and then Thou
wilt be able to ascertain my strength. O Beautiful! If Thou didst serve
the old persons before, if Thou hadst heard the science of politics and
morals, if Thou hadst studied the political economy, joined the
assemblage of the Pundits or if Thou hast been well versed in literature
and Tantras, then hear this my good counsel which will serve as a
medicinal diet to Thee. Out of the nine sentiments, the S’ringâra
(Amorous love sentiments) and S’ânti (Peace) are considered as the chief
by the assemblage of the Pundits. Again out of these two, the love
sentiment is the king. Drenched with this sentiment, Vi<u>sn</u>u lives
with Kamalâ; Brahmâ, the four-faced, lives with Sâvitri; Indra with
S’achî and S’ankara resides with his wife Umâ. The tree stands with
creepers surrounding it, the deer lives with his female deer, the pigeon
lives with the female pigeon; thus all the beings are very attached to
this sentiment of remaining in couples. Those who cannot enjoy owing to
certain disease or illness, they are deprived by Fate of such
enjoyments. Those who are ignorant of this love sentiment in couples,
they are deprived of it by the sweet jugglery of words of the cheat and
yet attached to the Peace sentiment. When delusion, the destroyer of
Buddhi, the common sense, occurs, when the violent indomitable anger,
greed, and lust arise, where, then, is the place for knowledge and
dispassion? Therefore, O Auspicious One! Dost Thou marry the beautiful
S’umbha or the powerful Nis’umbha.

 

63\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When Raktabîja spoke all these words,
standing before the Devî Kâlikâ, Ambikâ and Châmu<u>nd</u>â began to
laugh.

 

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

 

Here ends the Twenty-seventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the
description of the war of Raktabîja in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the
Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](bk05ch28.md)
