[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch21)  [Next](bk05ch23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXII**

 

**On the eulogising of the Devî by the Devas**

 

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

 

1-7. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the Devas were all defeated, S’umbha
began to govern all their kingdoms; thus one thousand years passed away.
The Devas, on the other hand, deprived of their kingdoms, were all
drowned in an ocean of cares and anxieties; at last they began to feel
very much and were greatly afflicted. They asked with reverence their
own Guru Brihaspati, “O Guru! What are we to do now? O All knowing! You
are the Great Muni; kindly say unto us if there be any means by which we
can get rid of this our present crisis. There are thousands of Vedic
Mantrams which yield the desired results, if they are worshipped with
due rites and ceremonies and if all the rules be observed thereof. O
best of Munis! Many Yajñâs are mentioned in the Vedas that yield all the
desired results; you know them all; so kindly perform those Yajñâs. Do
all those ceremonies duly that are ordained in the Vedas for the killing
of enemies; O Descendant of Ângirasa! You ought to perform as early as
possible those sacrifices for magical purposes to destroy the Dânavas so
that all our miseries come to an end.”

 

8-22. Brihaspati said :-- “O Lord of the Suras! All the mantras
mentioned in the Vedas yield the desired results, but subservient to the
Great Destiny only; they do not give results of themselves but do so in
obedience to to the laws ordained by Nature. You all are the presiding
Deities of the Vedic Mantras; but, now, by the strange irony of Time,
you are put to difficulties and troubles; what can I do now in this
case? See! Indra, Ag<u>n</u>i, Varu<u>n</u>a, and other gods are invoked
in sacrifices; how, then, can sacrificial ceremonies do good when you
are put to so great difficulties. Therefore there is no remedy to those
which will take place unavoidably; but those who are wise declare that
in such cases means are to be adopted. Some sages say that Fate is
strong but those who advocate the cause of taking remedial means say
that Fate is powerless; remedies or manly exertions lead to all success.
But, O King of the Devas! The embodied souls ought to resort to both
Fate and Remedies; it is never advisable to depend solely on Fate.
Therefore, it is advisable to think out again and again as far as one’s
own Intellect goes, the best remedies. O Devas! I have thought over
again and again on this subject and say to you my opinion. Hear. In days
of yore, the Bhagavatî, being appeased, killed Mahi<u>s</u>âsura; and
when you

 

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

 

all praised and chanted hymns to Her, She gave you this boon that She
will remove all your sorrows and troubles no sooner you remember Her,
and She told that you all must remember Her whenever any difficulty
would arise to you out of this Great Destiny. She would, then, free you
all of your ocean of great difficulties. Therefore do you all now go to
the highly sacred and exquisitely beautiful Himâlayân mountains and
worship the most worshipful Chandikâ Devî with your love and devotion.
Know all the rules of the Seed mantra of Mâyâ and be engaged in taking
Her name accompanied with burnt offerings. I have come to know, by Yogic
power, that She will be pleased with You. I see that today your
difficulties will come to an end; there is not the least doubt in this.
I have heard that the Devî resides always in the Himâchal; if you
worship and praise and chant hymns to Her, She will certainly grant you
your desired boons. Therefore fully decide on this thing and go to the
Himâlayâs. O Devas! She will fulfil all your desires and carry out all
your intentions.”

 

23-24. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus his words, the Devas departed
to the Himâlayâs and they became all merged in the devotional worship of
the Supreme Goddess and began to meditate constantly in their hearts the
Seed mantra of Mâyâ (Hrîm). They bowed down to the Goddess Mahâ Mâyâ,
the Discarder of all the fears of Her Bhaktas and began to chant hymns
to Her with perfect devotion.

 

25-42. O Goddess! Salutation to Thee! O Thou, the Lord of the Universe!
the Lord of our hearts! Thou art the Everlasting Bliss and the Giver of
bliss to the Devas! Salutation to Thee! Thou art the Destroyer of the
Dânavas and Thou art the Giver of all desires of human beings. Thou
canst be approached with devotion. Salutation to Thee! O Thou, the
Incarnate of all the Devas! Thy names are endless; Thy forms are
endless; none can count them. Thou residest always as the Force
Incarnate in all the actions, in the Creation, Preservation and
Dissolution of Beings. O Goddess! Thou art the Memory, Constancy,
Intelligence, Old Age. Thou art the nourishment, contentment; Thou
upholdest all; Thou art the beauty, peace, good knowledge, prosperity
and happiness, Thou art the Goal, fame, and intellect and Thou art the
Eternal Seed unmanifested. We now bow down to those forms of Thine
through which Thou dost serve the purpose of the Devas in this world as
we are now in need of peace. Thou art forgiveness and mercy; Thou art
the Yoga Nidrâ (a state between sleep and wakefulness); Thou art the
kindness and Thou residest in all the beings in so many forms, great and
grand, and so very celebrated; O Goddess! Thou hadst already served the
cause of the gods in killing our

 

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

 

great enemy Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, puffed up with vanity. Therefore Thy
mercy is well known amongst the gods; what more, Thy mercy is known,
since very ancient times and it is narrated in the Vedas. What wonder is
there that a mother nourishes gladly her own sons and preserves them
carefully! For Thou art the Mother of the Devas; Thou art the great
source of help to them; therefore dost Thou fulfill all their desires
with Thine whole heart. O Devî! We do not know the limit of Thy
qualities nor of Thy forms; O Goddess! Thou art worshipped by the whole
Universe. Thou art fully competent to save all from dangers; we are
objects of Thy pity; dost Thou save us from our present troubles! Thou
art capable to kill enemies without shooting any arrrows, without
striking any blows, without hurling any trident, axes, S’aktis, clubs,
or any other weapons; merely by Thy mere will Thou canst kill; still for
sports and for the good of all beings Thou incarnatest and fightest for
the sake of Lîlâ. The ignorant persons know such things as birth, death,
etc., that this world is not eternal; that no actions can be without any
cause; we, therefore, ascertain by reasoning and inference that Thou art
the Supreme Cause of this whole Universe. Brahmâ is the Creator,
Vi<u>sn</u>u is the Preserver, and Mahes’a is the Destroyer; so it is
related in the Purâ<u>n</u>as. Thou again hast given birth to these
three Gods in the respective cycles; therefore Thou art the Mother of
all; there is no doubt in this. O Devî! In days of yore, these three
Devas worshipped Thee; Thou Wert pleased and gavest them all the best
powers. Being thus endowed with Thy powers, they have been able to
create, preserve and destroy this Universe beautifully. Art they not
foolish, though they be Yatis (persons of self-controlled nature), who
do not worship the Universal Mother, the Consciousness Incarnate, the
Giver of liberation,  on Whose feet are worshipped by the Devas, and
worshipping Whom, one gets the fruits of all one’s desires? Certainly
those Vai<u>sn</u>avas, Sauras (worshippers of the Sun) and Pas’upatas
(worshippers of S’iva) are foolish braggarts who do not meditate Thee as
the embodiment of Kamalâ (prosperity), modesty, beauty, continuancy,
Fame, nourishment. O Mother! The Asuras, Hari, Hara and other great
Devas worship Thee in this world; therefore those mortals are certainly
deceived by their Creator that do not worship Thee on the surface of
this earth. O Devî! Hari himself serves the lotus feet of Lak<u>s</u>mî
by colouring them (toes and other fingers of the feet) red with lac
juice; Hara is very anxious to serve the lotus feet and take the dust
thereof of Parvatî; Lak<u>s</u>mî and Parvatî are but Thy part
manifestations; therefore to serve them is, in other words to serve
Thee. What to speak of other persons, even those who can discriminate
between real and unreal and those who have left their worldly homes and
have become dispassionate towards worldly objects, even those Munis
worship forgiveness and mercy, that are but Thy parts; therefore who is
there

 

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

 

in this world that does not serve Thy lotus-feet! O Devî! Those human
beings plunge into the dreadful wells of this Samsâra, the round of
birth and death, and are deprived of all pleasures, who do not serve Thy
lotus feet. What more can be said than the fact that those fallen beings
suffer terribly from poverty, humility, leprosy, headache, and the
chronic enlargement of spleen. O Mother! Those persons are void of any
wealth and wife; they are the carriers of loads of wood and collect
grass and leaves and show their skill in such acts; they are of little
understanding and never they served in their previous births Thy
lotus-feet. This we have come to know very well within our heart of
hearts.

 

43-47. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When all the Devas thus eulogised,
instantly the Devî Ambikâ, full of youth and beauty appeared there out
of mercy. That extraordinary beautiful Bhagavatî, endowed with all
auspicious signs, and adorned with the Divine clothings, ornaments, and
garlands and sandal paste, etc., appeared before the Devas. Before Whom,
even the world enchanter Cupid bows down; with such beautiful, Divine
appearance, the Devî emerged from the mountain cave in order to take Her
ablutions in the Ganges. That Devî, sweet voiced like a cuckoo, gladly
smiling began to say to the Devas, singing hymns to Her, in a voice deep
like that of a rumbling cloud.

 

48\. The Devî said :-- O Best of Suras! Whom are you praising constantly
in this place? What do you want! Why are you so anxious and seem to be
so much care-worn? Do please tell all this to Me in detail.

 

49\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Devas were first enchanted by Her beauty
and softness; then, being encouraged by Her sweet words, began to speak
with great joy.

 

50-57. O Devî! We pray toThee, O Lord of his Universe! We bow down to
Thee. O Thou, the Ocean of mercy! Protect us from all the troubles; we
are very much care-worn and tormented by the Daityas. O Great Goddess!
In ancient times Thou didst kill Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, the source of
troubles to all and then told us to remember Thee whenever any
difficulty would arise. Then Thou wouldst undoubtedly remove all the
troubles arising from the Daityas no sooner we remember Thee. O Devî! We
have now remembered Thee for that very reason. At present the two
dreadful Asuras, S’umbha and Nis’umbha have sprang up and are creating
great disturbances; and they cannot be killed by any male beings. The
powerful Raktavîja and Cha<u>nd</u>a Mu<u>nd</u>a and other Asuras
united have dispossessed the Devas of their Heavens. Thou alone art our
goal and refuge; without Thee there is none other to save us. Therefore,
O Beautiful One! Thou dost do this work for the Devas who are extremely
troubled and distressed. O Powerful Devî! The Devas are always at the
services of Thy lotus feet; still the very powerful Dânavas are throwing
them into dangers; O Mother! Thou art the

 

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

 

Preserver of the distressed; therefore dost Thou preserve the Devas,
devoted to Thee. O Mother! The Dânavas, being very much emboldened by
their powers, are creating many havocs on the surface of the Earth; now
remembering that, in the beginning of the Yugas, Thou didst create all
this Universe, Thou dost now ought to protect all this Universe.

 

Here ends the Twenty-second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the eulogising
of the Devî by the Devas in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](bk05ch23.md)
