[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch20)  [Next](bk05ch22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXI**

 

**On the conquest of the Heavens by S’umbha and Nis’umbha**

 

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

 

1-6. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I am describing to you that excellent pure
life and doings of the Devî that destroy all the sins of all the beings
and make them happy. In days of yore, there were two very powerful
demons S’umbha and Nis’umbha; they were two brothers, strong heroes and
invulnerable by the male persons. Those two wicked Asuras were
surrounded with numerable Dânavas; they tormented always the Devas. Then
the Goddess Ambikâ, for the good of the Devas, killed S’umbha and
Nis’umbha with all their attendants in a very dreadful battle. In the
battlefield the Devî killed their main assistants Cha<u>nd</u>a
Mu<u>nd</u>a and the exceedingly terrible Rakta Vîja and Dhumralochana.
When the Devî destroyed those Dânavas, the Devas became fearless; the
Devas then went to the beautiful Sumeru mountain and praised Her and
chanted hymns to Her.

 

7-8. Hearing about the names of S’umbha and Nis’umbha, Janamejaya asked
:-- O best of Munis! Who were those two Asuras? How came

 

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

 

they to be most powerful? Who put them here? Why were they vulnerable to
women only? Under whose tapasyâ and under whose boon did they become so
strong? And why did that great Devî kill them? Describe all these to me
in detail.

 

9-20. Vyâsa said :-- O King, I am describing to you that beautiful
anecdote where the Devî’s holy deeds are involved. Hear. This incident
full of all that is good, destroys the hearer’s all sins and grants them
all their desired ends. In days of yore, S’umbha and Nis’umbha, the two
fair and good looking brothers came out of Pâtâla to this earth. These
two Asuras, when they grew to their manhood, performed severe asceticism
in Pu<u>s</u>kara, the holy place of pilgrimage, the most purifying
place in this world and they refused to eat rice and water. They became
so very skilled in their Yoga practices that they passed away in their
one posture and seat one Ajuta (10,000) years. Thus they performed very
difficult Tapasyâ. Then the God Brahmâ, the Grandsire of all, became
pleased with their asceticism and appeared before them, riding on His
vehicle, the Swan. The Creator, seeing them thus deeply merged in
meditation, asked them to get up from that state and told them thus :--
“I have become pleased with your asceticism. I fulfil the desires of all
the Lokas; I have now come to you, pleased to see you so very strong in
your ascetic practices; better ask your desired boons from me; I will
grant them to you.” Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Grandsire’s
wards, S’umbha and Nis’umbha got up from their meditation; concentrating
their attention towards Him, circumambulated Him and bowed down to Him
with their hearts full of reverence. The two Asuras were very weak, lean
and thin by their hard tapasyâ and they looked very humble. They fell
down before Him like a piece of wood and began to speak in a sweet
voice, choked by intense feelings. O Brâhma<u>n</u>! O Deva of the
Devas! O Thou, the Ocean of Mercy! O Destroyer of fear of the devotees!
O Lord! If Thou art pleased then dost Thou grant us immortality. There
is nothing in this world more fearful than death; we two have taken
refuge unto Thee, being afraid of this death. O Thou, Ocean of mercy! O
Creator of the world! O Lord of the Devas! O Universal Soul! Protect us
from this fear due to the terrible Death.

 

21-23. Brahmâ said :-- Is this the boon that you ask? This is in every
way, against the Law of Nature; for no one, in these three Lokas, can
grant this boon to anybody. When one becomes born, one must die; and
when one dies, one must be born again. This Law is ordained in this
world by the Supreme Creator of this Universe, from time immemorial.
Therefore all the beings must die; there is no doubt in this. Better ask
any other boon that you desire; I will grant that to you.

 

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

 

24-27. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of Brahmâ, the two
Dânavas pondered over the matter and bowed down to the Prajâpati, the
Lord of the Creation and said :-- O Merciful One! Grant us then so that
we shall be invulnerable to any of the male of the Immortal Devas down
to human beings and birds and deers; this is the boon that we ask. Where
exists the woman so powerful as to kill us? We never fear any woman in
all the three Lokas. O Lotus-born! We, the two brothers, want not to be
killed by any male; the females are naturally weak therefore we need not
fear them.

 

28-58. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing their words, the Grandsire Brahmâ
gladly granted them their desired boon and returned to His own abode. On
Brahmâ going away, the two Dânavas, too, returned to their own places.
They then appointed the Muni Bhrigu as their priest and began to worship
him. Bhrigu, the best of the Munis, then, on an auspicious day and when
the star was benign, got a beautiful golden throne built and gave it to
the king. S’umbha, being the eldest, was then installed on the
auspicious throne as the king; the other brave and excellent demons
began to assemble there quickly for serving him. The two great warriors
Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a, proud on account of their great strength
came there with their large armies, chariots, horses, and elephants.
Similarly the valiant warriors Dhumralochana, hearing that S’umbha had
become their King, came there with his own army. There came up also at
that time the great warrior Rakta Vîja, more powerful on account of his
getting a boon, attended by his army of two Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î
soldiers. O King! Hear why this Rakta Vîja became so very unconquerable;
whenever this Asura was wounded by any weapon, if one drop of blood fell
on the ground, at once would be created so many innumerable Asuras,
resembling his wicked nature and with similar weapons in their hands.
The Asuras born of this blood would have similar appearances and would
be similar in strength and ready to fight at once when they were born.
That great warrior, the great Demon Rakta Vîja was unconquerable in
battle for this very reason and no being could now kill him. The other
Asuras, when they heard that S’umbha had become their king, came up
there with their armies consisting of four divisions of elephants,
chariots, cavalry and infantry and began to serve him. The army of
S’umbha and Nis’umbha thus became countless; and they forcibly conquered
and got possession of all the kingdoms that existed then on the surface
of the earth. Then Nis’umbha, the destroyer of enemies, collected his
army and marched up to the Heavens without any delay to conquer Indra,
the Lord of S’achî. He fought very hard with all the Lokapâlas on all
sides when Indra struck him on his breast with His thunderbolt.
Nis’umbha fell unconscious

 

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

 

on the ground with that blow when his soldiers, defeated in the battle,
fled away on all sides. S’umbha, the destroyer of the enemies’ forces,
hearing the unconscious state of the younger brother, came up at once on
the field and shot at the Devas with multitudes of arrows. The untiring
S’umbha fought so violently that Indra and the other Devas and
Lokap<u>a</u>las were defeated. S’umbha then took away, perforce, the
position of Indra and he occupied the Celestial Tree and Heavenly
milching cow that yielded all desires and other excellent things over
which Indra used to reign. In fact, that high-souled Asura got the
dominion of the three Lokas and took away all those that were offered at
the sacrifices. He became highly glad on getting the Nandana Garden and
was extremely delighted when he drank the celestial nectar. He then
defeated in battle Kuvera, the god of wealth and occupied his kingdom.
He defeated the Moon, Sun, and Yama, the God of Death and occupied their
positions. Surrounded by his army, Nis’umbha dispossessed Varu<u>n</u>a,
Fire, and Air of their kingdoms and began to reign in their stead. Thus
deprived of their kingdoms, prosperity and wealth, the Devas left the
Nandana Garden and fled, out of terror, to the caves of hills and
mountains. Thus deprived of all their rights, the Devas without any
weapons, without any lustre, without any home, and without anywhere to
go, began to wander in lonely forests. O King! All the Immortals began
to knock about in lonely gardens, mountain caves and rivers; and nowhere
they found happiness; for happiness depends entirely unto the hands of
Fate. O Lord of men! Even those fortunate souls, who are powerful, and
wealthy and wise, meet at times with distress and poverty. O King! How
marvellous are the ways and manners of Time! It makes kings and donors
beggars; it renders the powerful, weak; literates, illiterates; and it
makes great warriors into terrible cowards. O King! Vâsava performed one
hundred horse-sacrifices and got the excellent Indra’s position; but
again be fell into extreme difficulties; thus runs the wheel of Time.

 

59\. It is Time that bestows the gem of knowledge to a person and it is
Time again that deprives that very same man of his wisdom and makes him
a great sinner.

 

60-61. The Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u takes incarnations, under the control
of Time, in several lower wombs as boar, etc., and Mahâ Deva carries on
His body the human skulls, that are not even fit to be touched. When
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’a and others suffer such painful things,
then one need not wonder at the workings of the Great inscrutable Time.

 

Here ends the Twenty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book on the conquest of
the Heavens by S’umbha and Nis’umbha in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the
Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](bk05ch22)
