[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch22)  [Next](bk05ch24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIII**

 

**On the prowess of Kaus’ikî**

 

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

 

1-7. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the tormented Devas praised thus, the
Devî created from Her body another supremely beautiful form. This
created form, the Ambikâ Devî, became known in all the worlds as
Kaus’ikî, as She came out of the physical sheath of the Devî Parvatî.
When Kaus’ikî was created out of the body of Parvatî, the Parvatî’s body
became transformed and turned out into a black colour and became known
as KâIikâ. Her terrible black appearance, when beheld, increases the
terror even of the Daityas. O King! This Devî is now become known in
this world as Kâlarâtri, the night of destruction, at the end of the
world, identified with Durgâ, the Fulfiller of all the desires. The
Ambikâ Devî, then, began to look splendid, decked with various
ornaments; Her beautiful form began to look very lovely. The Devî Ambikâ
then smiled a little and said, “Better be fearless; I will slay just now
your enemies. It is My incumbent duty to carry out your purposes; I will
therefore slay in battle Nis’umbha and others for the sake of your
happiness.”

 

8-30. Thus saying, the Devî Bhagavatî, elated with pride, mounted on
lion and, taking Kâlikâ with Her, entered into the city of S’umbha, the
enemy of the gods. Ambikâ went to a garden adjoining the city
accompanied by Kâlikâ, and began to sing in such a sweet melodious tune
that enchants even the God of Love, who fascinates the whole world. What
more can be said than the fact that, hearing that sweet melodious song,
the birds and beasts became enchanted; the Devas then began to feel much
pleasure from the Sky. In the meanwhile Cha<u>nd</u>a, Mu<u>nd</u>a the
two dreadful Asuras, and attendants of S’umbha, came out accidentally
there on their sportive excursions and saw the beautiful Ambikâ Devî
singing and Kâlikâ Devî sitting before Her. O best of Kings! No sooner
Cha<u>nd</u>a, Mu<u>nd</u>a saw the extraordinary beauty of the Goddess
Bhagavatî, than they went at once to S’umbha. On approaching towards the
lord of the Daityas sitting in his room, they bowed down and told thus
in a sweet voice :-- "O King! Here has come from the

 

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

 

Himâlayâs a woman accidentally, mounted on a lion; Her limbs are shining
with all good signs so much so that even the God of love would be
enchanted by Her sight. Nowhere, in the Devalokas, the Gandarbha Lokas
or in this earth can be found such a beautiful lady; we never saw nor
heard about such a lady before. O King! That lady is singing so
beautifully and pleasingly to all that even the deer are standing
motionless by Her side enchanted, as it were, by Her melodious voice. O
King! That Lady is fit for you; therefore determine first whose daughter
is this lady, what for she has come there and then marry Her. Know this
as certain that such a beautiful lady is not to be found anywhere in
this world. Therefore do you bring Her to your house and marry Her. O
Lord of men! You have acquired all the gems and jewels of the Devas; why
not, then, accept this Gem in the form of a lady? O King! You have taken
by force the exquisitely beautiful Airâvata elephant of Indra, the
Pârijâta Tree, the seven faced horse Uchchais’ravâ, and many other
jewels. You have acquired by your might the Prince of Jewels, the
celestial car of the Creator Brahmâ, ensigned by the emblematic Swan.
You have dispossessed Kuvera of his treasure of the value of a Padma
(one thousand billion) and Varu<u>n</u>a, the God of oceans, of his
white umbrella. O King! When Varu<u>n</u>a was defeated, your brother
Nis’umbha took perforce his Pâs’a weapon. O King! The Great Ocean gave
you, out of terror, various jewels and honoured you by presenting a
garland of lotuses which never fade away. What more can be said than the
fact that you have conquered the Death and took away His force and that
you have easily conquered Yama, the God of Death and have taken from Him
His horrible staff. O King! You have brought that Heavenly cow which
came out when the ocean was churned; that cow is still with you; what
more to say than that Menakâ and other Apsarâs are under your control.
Thus you have got by your strength all the jewels. Why, then, are you
not taking this exquisitely beautiful lady, the Prince of Jewels,
amongst women. O King! All the jewels in your house, will serve their
real purpose, no doubt, then and then only when they will shine with
this queen of jewels, this Lady. O Lord of the Daityas! There cannot be
seen in all the Trilokas such a Beautiful Lady as this that I have now
described before you. Therefore bring this Beautiful Lady quickly and
accept Her as your wife.

 

31-35. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of
Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a, S’umbha spoke gladly to Sugrîva who was
close by :-- “Go, Sugrîva, do my messenger’s work; you are well skilled
in these things. Speak so that the Beautiful Lady of thin waist may come
over to me. Those who are well versed in the science of amorous love
declare

 

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

 

that only two methods are to be adopted by the clever persons towards
the female sex :-- (1) conciliation and gentle words and (2) gifts and
presents. For if the policy of division or sowing dissensions be
applied, then hypocrisy is shewn and that means the improper
manifestation of love sentiment; whereas if chastisement be applied then
the love sentiment becomes interrupted. Therefore, the wise have
condemned these as corrupt means. O Messenger! Where is that woman who
does not come round excited with passion when good and sweet words are
spoken to her in accordance with the S’ama and Dâna methods?”

 

36-37. Vyâsa said :-- Sugrîva, hearing the nice skilled words of S’umbha
went hurriedly to the spot where existed the Mother of the Universe. He
saw the Fair Lady mounted on a lion, saluted Her and spoke gently and
sweetly as follows :--

 

38-49. The messenger said :-- “O Beautiful One! S’umbha, the enemy of
the Gods and the King of all, is beautiful in all respects, the ruler of
the three Lokas, a great hero and conqueror of all. Hearing your beauty
and loveliness, that high-souled monarch is so much attached to you and
has become so very passionate that he has sent me to you to express his
views. O One of delicate limbs! Please hear what that Lord of the
Daityas has spoken to Thee, after duly saluting Thee, words full of love
and affection towards Thee :-- O Beloved! I have defeated all the Devas
and have thus become the Lord of the three worlds; specially I partake
of all the offerings made in sacrificial acts and ceremonies, without
moving away from my house. I have taken away all the gems, jewels and
wealth that belonged to the Devas; consequently the abode of the Gods
has become now worthless, on account of all its jewels being carried
sway. O Fair One! I am now enjoying all the jewels that exist in the
Trilokas; so much so that all the Devas, Asuras, and human beings are
passing away their times, subservient to Me. But no sooner Thy
qualifications reached my ears Thou hast penetrated into my heart and
has made me completely subservient to Thee; O Fair One! What am I to do
now? Whatever Thou commandest, I am ready to do that; verily I am now
Thy servant; so Thou oughtest to save me from the darts of passion. O
One having swan-like eyes! I am verily made your captive. Specially I am
extremely agitated by the arrows of Cupid; therefore dost Thou serve me
when Thou wilt be made the Lord of the three worlds and thus enjoy the
incomparably excellent things. O Beloved! I will remain ever Thy
obedient servant up to the last moment of death. O Excellent One! I
cannot ever be killed by the Devas, Asuras and human beings. O Fair
faced One! Thou wilt be always prosperous and fortunate. Thou

 

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

 

wilt be able to sport anywhere Thou likest. O Devî! Please ponder over
the above words of the Lord of the Daityas in Thy heart and speak out
Thy views gladly and with the same sweetness in reply; O Brisk One! I
will go immediately to S’umbha and inform him about Thy mind.”

 

50\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Devî, ready to serve the cause of the
Gods, heard the messenger’s gentle words and replied smiling and
sweetly.

 

51-66. S’rî Devî spoke :-- I know fully well S’umbha and Nis’umbha; the
King S’umbha is very powerful, the conqueror of all the Devas, and the
destroyer of enemies. He is the repository of all good qualities, the
enjoyer of all pleasures, very valorous, charitable and is beautiful, in
fact a second Cupid. He is adorned with thirty-two auspicious signs;
particularly he is a hero and cannot be killed by the Devas or human
beings. O Messenger! Knowing this I have come here to have a look of
that great warrior S’umbha. The jewel comes in contact with gold to
increase its lustre; so I have come here from afar to see my husband. On
seeing all the Devas, Gandharbhas, Râk<u>s</u>asas and the eminent
beautiful persons on the earth I have come to know that they are all
terror stricken and almost unconscious and shudder at the name of
S’umbha. So, on hearing about his abilities, I have now come here to see
him. O Messenger! O Fortunate One! Better now go back to the great hero
S’umbha and speak to him in private the following sweet words of Mine
:-- “That you are foremost amongst the powerful; beautiful of the
beautifuls, skilled in all the branches of learning, well qualified,
charitable, clever, born of a high noble family, energetic, and
conqueror of the Devas; especially, by the sheer force of your arms, you
are so much exalted and you now enjoy all the gems and jewels.
Therefore, O King! Knowing your qualifications, I have come truly of my
own accord to your city with the desire of getting for Me a husband. O
High-souled One! I am fit for your consort. O Lord of the Daityas! There
is a slight hitch in My marriage. It is this: In my early days while I
was playing with My comrades, I promised before them privately partly
out of childishness and partly out of vanity for bodily strength that I
will certainly marry that hero who is powerful like Me and who will
defeat Me in battle, thus testing his powers and weaknesses. My comrades
laughed at my words and spoke with wonder, ‘Why has this girl made such
an extraordinarily difficult promise?’ Therefore, O Monarch! Better
marry Me and fulfil My desires after knowing My strength and defeating
Me in a battle. O Beautiful One in all respects! Better come yourself or
your younger Nis’umbha and perform the marriage ceremony after defeating
Me in the battlefield.”

 

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

 

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter in the Fifth Book on the prowess of
Kaus’ikî in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](bk05ch24.md)
