[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch32)  [Next](bk05ch34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXIII**

 

**On the description of the greatness of the Devî**

 

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

 

1-8. The king Suratha said :-- “O Muni! This Vais’ya is now become a
friend of mine in this forest; he has been expelled from his home by his
sons and wife and he has come lately here in this forest. He is now
suffering very much from the bereavement of his family and has become
very much troubled in his mind. He is not getting any peace whatsoever.
I am also become like him and have become very distressed owing to my
kingdom being robbed away. This thought, though really devoid of any
substantial cause, is not leaving my heart now. Oh! My elephants and
horses, now under my enemies, have become weak; My servants are
suffering very much owing to my absence! My enemies will, within no time
squander away forcibly all my hoarded riches. This thought is not giving
me any happiness; nay, I cannot get any sleep owing to this care and
anxiety. O Lord! I know that this world is false as a dream; yet my mind
is so deluded that I cannot make me quiet. Who am I? What are those
horses and elephants to me? They are not my brothers, sons, nor friends;
yet I feel very much for them and am troubled with

 

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

 

their troubles. O Muni! I know these all are delusions; still I am not
able to make my mind free from them. This is very wonderful indeed! What
is the cause of all this? O Lord! Nothing is veiled from your sight, you
are fully able to solve all these doubts. Therefore, O Ocean of mercy!
Kindly explain to me and this Vais’ya the cause of all this delusion.”

 

9\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the King Suratha asked thus, the Muni in
reply said to him the following words, full of wisdom, so that his
delusion and sorrow might vanish.

 

10-25. The Muni said :-- “O King! I am telling you the cause of bondage
as well the cause of release of all the beings in this Universe. She is
known as Mahâ Mâyâ. She is the Mûla Prakriti, the state of equilibrium
of the three Gu<u>n</u>as, Sâttva, Râjas and Tâmas. Even Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’vara, Indra, Varu<u>n</u>a, Vâyu, and the other
Devas, Gandarbhas, Nagas, Râk<u>s</u>asas, men, deer, animals, birds,
trees and various kinds of creepers all are under Mâyâ; thus they are
all bound; again they all get release when they are released by that
Mâyâ. By Her is created all this world, moving and not moving, all the
beings are caught in Her net and all are under the control of Her. You
are a K<u>s</u>attriya; so Râjogu<u>n</u>a preponderates in you and your
heart is thus rendered impure. She, by Her Mâyâ, deludes even the minds
of those who are Jñânins or wise; you are but an ordinary man compared
to them. Even Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a, though possessed of vast
wisdom, still roam, under the sway of Mâyâ, in the three worlds
completely deluded by their attachments to the sensual objects. O King!
In the Satya Yuga, in ancient times Vi<u>sn</u>u Nârâya<u>n</u>a himself
performed a very hard tapasyâ in S’vetadvîpa. He passed away full ten
thousand years in meditation, with the object of attaining the unbroken
everlasting Bliss and becoming steadfastly attached to Brahmâ Vidyâ. O
King! Brahmâ, too, became engaged in performing a tapasyâ, meditating
the Primordial Force, Âdyâ S’akti, in a very wonderful solitary place
for the cessation of delusion. Once on a time Vâsudeva Hari wanted to go
to another place; he got up and started to see other places. Brahmâ,
also, left his place and started for another destination. When they met
each other in their way, each one asked the other, “Who are you?” The
Prajâpati answered :-- “I am the Creator Brahmâ.” Hearing thus the
Brahmâ’s words, Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- “O You Stupid! I am Achyuta
Vi<u>sn</u>u; therefore I am the Creator of this world. You are inferior
to Me as there is so much of Râjogu<u>n</u>a in preponderance in you.
Know Me as the eternal Vâsudeva, preponderating in Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>a.
Do you not remember that I fought a dreadful battle for you and thus
saved your life a short while ago, I slew the two Dânavas Madhu and
Kai<u>t</u>ava

 

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

 

when you were much distressed by them and took My refuge. How then do
you boast now! O Fool! Quit your this vain boasting now. In this wide
world, there is none superior to Me.”

 

26-31. The Ri<u>s</u>i said :-- Thus engaged in disputing with each
other, their lips were quivering with anger and their eyes got red.
When, Behold! there appeared suddenly between those two disputants, a
nectar-like white phallic emblem (Lingam), wonderfully long and
extensive. Then a voice, from without anybody, broke out in the Heavens
and addressed Brahmâ and Vi<u>sn</u>u who were quarrelling thus! Whoever
amongst you will be able to go to the other end of this Lingam whether
beyond its top or below its bottom, he is certainly the superior of you
two; let one of you therefore go down to Pâtâla and let the other go up
to the Heavens. Leave off your useless disputations and take my word as
proof. It is always advisable to select an umpire to decide such a
quarrel as this that has sprung up between you two.

 

32-39. The Ri<u>s</u>i said :-- O King! Hearing thus the divine word,
both of them became ready and began energetically to measure the length
of the wonderful Lingam that stood in front of them. Vi<u>sn</u>u went
down to Pâtâla and Brahmâ went up to Âkâs’a to measure the Lingam and
thus to ascertain their superiority. Going down some distance
Vi<u>sn</u>u got tired and doing his best, when he could not find out
the end of the Lingam, he returned and remained at the desired meeting
place. On the other hand, Brahmâ was ascending to the skies when he got
one Ketakî flower dropping from the head of the Lingam. He became over
glad and returned also to the desired meeting place. Brahmâ became very
much elated with vanity and when he returned, he at once showed that
flower to Vi<u>sn</u>u and spoke thus the false words :-- “O
Vi<u>sn</u>u! This Ketakî flower has been obtained from the head of the
Lingam. I have brought this to you simply that you would recognise it
and be convinced in your heart.” Hearing these words of Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u saw the Ketakî flower and said :-- “O Brahmâ! Who is your
witness in this matter? He whose words are true, who is equal to all,
who is intelligent, pure, and always of good conduct, he can be the
witness in such matters of dispute.”

 

40-44. Brahmâ said :-- “Who will come now as witness from that far off
place? This Ketakî flower is the witness; this will give evidence.” Thus
saying, Brahmâ requested Ketakî to give evidence; Ketakî soon replied
thus to convince Vi<u>sn</u>u. O Vi<u>sn</u>u! I was on the head of
Mahâdeva; Brahmâ has brought me from there down to this place; you ought
not therefore to have any doubt on this point. My word is the evidence;
Brahmâ has gone to the other end of the Lingam. Some devotee

 

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

 

of S’iva put me on His head and Brahmâ has got me down from there.
Hearing thus the words of Ketakî, Vi<u>sn</u>u was very much astonished
and said this :-- “I cannot trust your word; if Mahâ Deva comes and
speaks this Himself, then I can trust and take it as a proof.”

 

45-53. The Ri<u>s</u>i said :-- O King! The eternal Mahâ Deva, hearing
the words of Vi<u>sn</u>u, spoke thus to Ketakî with great anger, “O
Liar! Do not utter such false words; You dropped down from My head and
Brahmâ while ascending up, picked you up on the way. Now as you have
told a lie, I will never take you; you are henceforth forsaken by Me.”
Brahmâ was then very much put to shame; he bowed down to Vi<u>sn</u>u;
Mahâ Deva, forsook the Ketakî flower from that date. O King! Such is the
power of Mâyâ; when Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and other wise persons are so
self-deluded by Her, what need to speak of other ordinary mortals! See!
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî, is self-deluded and is always
deceiving the Daityas for the welfare of the Devas, without any fear
whatsoever of the sin that he is thereby incurring. Though He is the
Lord of all yet He has to take several incarnations in several wombs,
forsaking the pleasures of the Heavens and fighting with the Daityas. O
King! Vi<u>sn</u>u is omniscient and He is the Lord of this world;
specially He is the only One, Supreme in the creation of the Gods. Now
when Mâyâ exercises such a powerful influence on Vi<u>sn</u>u, what
wonder is there that the other ordinary beings would be deluded by Her?
O King! That Highest Prakriti draws away violently the hearts of the
wise and drags them down into the ocean of world. That Omnipresent
Bhagavatî is ever the cause of bondage of all when She casts Her net of
delusion and She is again ever the cause of liberation when She imparts
Her knowledge to them.

 

54\. The King said :-- O Brâhma<u>n</u>! What is the nature of Her? and
what is the Supreme Force? What is the Cause of this creation? And where
is Her highest place? Kindly narrate all these to me.

 

55-66. The Ri<u>s</u>i said :-- O King! She is beginningless; therefore
She had no origin at any time; that Highest Devî is Eternal and She is
always the Cause of all Causes. (How then can any other be powerful like
Her). O King! She resides in all the beings as the essential vital
Force; deprived of that Force, every being is reduced to a dead carcass.
She is pervading as the Universal Force of Consciousness in all the
beings. The form of this S’akti (Force) is the form made up of
consciousness itself, the Brahmâ. (For the force of Fire is Fire itself;
it is not seen in any other form). Her appearances and disappearances at
times are simply for serving the purposes of the Gods. O King! Whenever
the Devas and men worship Her, Ambikâ makes Her appearance visible to
destroy their pains and sufferings. She assumes various

 

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

 

forms and possesses various powers. That Highest Îs’varî comes down of
Her free will to serve Her some purpose or other. She is not like the
Devas, under the control of Daiva or Fate; She is not under the
influence of Time (as both Fate and Time are created by Her). She puts
always every being to action according to his capacity. Puru<u>s</u>a is
not the Doer; He is simply the Witness. This whole Universe is the
object seen. That Devî is the Mother of all this that is witnessed. She
is the Manifested and She is the Unmanifested and She is the Effect
also. She alone is the Actress and manifests thus the world and thus
gives the colouring to the Puru<u>s</u>a. When the Puru<u>s</u>a is
coloured thus, She destroys quickly these worlds. It is said that
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a are respectively the Creator, Preserver
and Destroyer of the world; but this is merely a statement; really they
are merely instruments in Her hands. Bhagavatî has created them in
reality for Her Pastime and stationed them in their respective posts.
She has bestowed to them Her part manifestations, i.e., Sarasvatî to
Brahmâ, Lak<u>s</u>mî to Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Girijâ to Mahes’a and has
thus rendered them more powerful. They, the lords of the Devas, always
meditate and worship Her as the Creatrix, Preservrix and Destructrix of
this Universe. O King! I have thus described to you, as far as my
intelligence and knowledge go, the holy greatness and the excellent
glory of Her (in reality, I have not been able to come to the end of
it).

 

“Aim Hrîm Klîm Châmu<u>nd</u>âyai bichche” is the (9) nine lettered
mantra.

 

Here ends the Thirty-third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the description
of the greatness of the Devî in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34](bk05ch34)
