[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch30)  [Next](bk05ch32.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXI**

 

**On the death of S’umbha**

 

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! S’umbha, the Lord of the Daityas, hearing the
words of the soldiers, began to say, then, with eyes rolling with anger.

 

2-15. S’umbha said :-- “O Fools! What are you saying all this? How can I
do this unspeakably mean act and then hope to live? How shall I be able
to roam in this world when I have become the cause the slaying of my
brothers and ministers? Time is the more powerful cause of all that
takes place, good or bad; so when this formless Time is the Supreme
Ruler, what use is there in my brooding over the result? Let whatever
come that is inevitable, let whatever be done that is destined to take
place; death or life, I do not think of either. The more so when Time is
never able, even when worshipped, to thwart off death or life when their
proper moment arrives. See! The God of rain gives us rain in the rainy
season; but, it is seen that sometimes it does not rain in the month of
S’râvan (the rainy season); whereas it rains sometimes in the month
Agrahâyana, Pau<u>s</u>a, Mâgha, or Phâlguna (not the rainy season).
Therefore it is evident that Time is not the chief factor. Fate is
stronger than Time; Time is merely the instrumental cause. It is this
Fate that has created all this universe; it cannot be rendered
otherwise. I consider Fate Supreme; Fie on this one’s own exertion! For,
Lo! Nis’umbha, who had before conquered all the Devas, is slain today by
an ordinary woman! Alas!

 

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

 

When Raktabîja, too, had been slain, how can I desire to hold on to my
life, foregoing all my name and fame! Even Brahmâ, who has created all
this universe, will not sooner come to an end than his longevity
expires. Four thousand Yugas constitute one day of Brahmâ; and in that
one day fourteen Indras perished; so twice the life of Brahmâ constitute
the life of Vi<u>sn</u>u; similarly twice the life period of
Vi<u>sn</u>u constitute the life period of Mahes’a; and when their
longevities expire, they come to an end. This visible earth, mountains,
sun and moon all will perish; so it has been specially ordained by the
Destiny; therefore, O Fools! I do not care a bit for the death. When a
being is born, he must die; and when anyone dies, he will be born again,
there is no doubt in this. So one ought to preserve one’s name and fame
which is more permanent in this transitory body. Prepare my chariot; I
will go today to the battlefield; let victory or defeat come what it
may, as Fate has ordained. I will soon go to fight.”

 

16-33. Thus saying, S’umbha mounted on the chariot quickly and went
where the Devî Ambikâ was staying. Then the four-fold army, cavalry,
infantry, chariots, horses and elephants and innumerable soldiers,
followed him with weapons in their hands. Going there to the Himâlayâ
mountain, he saw the Divine Mother sitting on Her Lion. She appeared so
very lovely as to enchant the three worlds. Her body was decorated with
various ornaments, all the auspicious gems were manifest; the Devas,
Gandarbhas, Yak<u>s</u>as and Kinnaras in the heavens were all
worshipping Her with hymns and Pârijâta flowers; and the Devî was making
beautiful sounds with bells and conches, indicative of Her victory.
Seeing Her S’umbha was very much enchanted with passionate love and
struck with, the five arrows of cupid, thought thus :-- How wonderful is
Her lovely countenance! See! How wonderful and amazing is Her
skilfulness! Delicacy and capability to endure the hardships of war,
though quite contrary to each other, are both in Her. What a wonder is
this! Her bodies are extremely delicate and limbs are lean and thin;
besides She is lately blooming into womanhood; still She does not feel
any passion; this is undoubtedly very wonderful! She is exquisitely
beautiful that can be desired of in one’s mind; and though She is
endowed with all the auspicious signs, yet She has no inclinations for
all the pleasures and allurements of the world and is now slaying the
powerful Asuras; this is wonderful indeed! Now what steps are to be
taken so that this Lady comes under my control? All the Mantrams also
are not with me now to bring over this Swan-eyed Lady unto me. This
proud lovely Lady is the incarnate of all Mantrams; how will She come
under my control? This heroic Lady cannot be controlled by conciliatory
words, allurements, dissensions; it is not advisable, too, to fly away
from the battlefield and to

 

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

 

go to Pâtâla. What am I to do? Where shall I go in this critical moment?
And if I die at the hands of this Lady, that death is not a glorious
one; it will take away my fame. The death in a battlefield is conducive
to one’s well being, so the sages say, when both the parties are equally
strong. The Devas have created this Lady stronger than even hundred
strong men; She is a woman merely in name. This Lady is very powerful
and has come here to destroy the Dânavas; there is no doubt in this.
What effect will conciliatory words now produce on Her; She has come to
slay us; Will She be appeased with good words? Neither will allurements
of precious things be of any avail, for She is decked with various arms
and weapons; nor will it be of any use to sow dissensions between the
Devas and Her. Further all the Devas are under Her control. Therefore it
is far better to die than to fly; victory or death would come unto me
today as Fate has ordained.

 

34-46. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus thinking in his mind, S’umbha became
ready to shew his strength; and firmly resolved to fight, he said to the
Devî before him :-- Devî! Fight. But, O One of delicate limbs! Thy so
much toil is in vain. Thou hast no sense at all; for Thou art doing
contrary to the doings of woman-kind. The pair of eyes of women are
their arrows; the eyebrows are their bows; their gestures and postures
are their weapons and their hits are those persons who are skilled in
amorous love sentiments. The dyes used in painting the bodies are their
armours, their mental desires are their chariots, so sweet soft words
and conversations are their trumpet sounds; women have no other things
for their war preparations. Therefore, O Beloved! Any other weapons are
mere mockeries and ridiculous; their modesty is their ornament;
impudence can never grace them. An exquisitely beautiful woman, if
engaged in a fight will look harsh; especially when Thou wilt draw Thy
bow, how wilt Thou be able to hide Thy breasts? When Thou wilt run with
Thy club, where will Thy gentle treadings go? O Beautiful! Thy
councillors are this Kâlikâ and the stupid Châmu<u>nd</u>â.
Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ is Thy adviser; her voice is very hoarse; how can then
she be able to nurse Thee? Again this Lion, the terror of all the
beings, is Thy carrier. Therefore, O Dear! Leave aside all these and
come over unto me. O Beautiful One! That Thou art ringing Thy bells and
dost not sound. Thy lute goes quite against Thy beauty and youth. O
Sensitive One! If Thou likest to fight, better assume an ugly
appearance, let Thy nature be ferocious and cruel; let Thy colour be
black like a crow; lips elongated, legs long, nails ugly, teeth
horrible, and let Thy eyes be ugly or yellow like those of a cat. O
Devî! Assume such an ugly appearance and stand firmly for the fight. O
Deer-eyed One! Speak first harsh words

 

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

 

unto me; then I will fight with Thee; my hand does not get up to strike
Thee with handsome teeth, in the battlefield, Who art like a second
Rati.

 

47\. Vyâsa said :-- O Best of the descendants of Bhârata! When S’umbha
said thus, the Divine Mother, seeing him passionate, smiled and said :--

 

48-50. O Stupid One! Why are you so much distressed with passion? O
Fool! If your hand does not come forward to strike weapons at Me, then
fight with this ugly Kâlikâ or Châmu<u>nd</u>â; they are your best
compeers in the battlefield; they will fight with you; I will stand as a
mere Witness. Thus saying, the Devî Bhagavatî said to Kâlikâ, in sweet
words :-- “O Kâlikâ! Your nature is fierce; this S’umbha likes also the
fierce; so kill him.”

 

51-69. Vyâsa said :-- O King! That Kâlikâ, the incarnate of Death, thus
ordered, took up Her club immediately and became ready to fight, as if
sent there direct by the God of Death. A dreadful fight then ensued
between the two; and the highsouled Munis and the Devas were present
there and witnessed the great event. S’umbha first struck at Kâlikâ,
raising his club. Kâlikâ, then, struck S’umbha in return with her club
violently. Instantly she made a dreadful sound, broke down his chariot,
glittering like gold, into pieces, killed the horses of the chariot and
slew the charioteer. Walking, then, on foot with a very heavy club in
his hand, S’umbha struck with great anger on the breast of Kâlikâ and
began to laugh. Kâlikâ, in the meanwhile, rendering his stroke useless,
soon took up Her axe and cut off his left hand, pasted with sandal and
decked with arms and weapons. His left hand thus out off, his whole body
was drenched with torrents of blood; yet he came up with club in his
hand and struck Kâlikâ with it. Kâlikâ, too, laughed and with Her
scimitar cut off his right arm holding the club and ornamented with
armlet. S’umbha became angry and came up violently to kick Her when
Kâlikâ quickly cut off his two legs. His arms and legs thus severed from
his body, the Demon frightened Kâlikâ and told Her, “Wait, wait.” And
soon he came up before Her. Seeing the Demon coming, Kâlikâ severed his
neck from his body like a lotus; blood began to gush out in continuous
streams. O King! The head of S’umbha, thus severed from his body, fell
on the ground like a mountain. Immediately the life left the body.
Seeing the Dânava fall down lifeless, Indra and the other hosts of Devas
began to worship the Devî Bhagavatî, Châmu<u>nd</u>â, and Kâlikâ and
chanted lovely hymns to them. The winds then began to blow pleasantly;
all the quarters looked very clear and Fire in sacrificial altars, being
circumambulated, became very propitious. On the other hand, those
Daityas that remained alive quitted

 

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

 

their arms and weapons, bowed down to the Divine Mother, and fled away
one and all to the Pâtâla. O King! I have now described in regular order
to you how the Devî protected the Devas and destroyed S’umbha and other
Asuras. Those human beings on the surface of the earth that read this
anecdote from the beginning to the very end or hear it constantly, get
all their desires fulfilled; there is no doubt in this. O King! Verily
he gets a son who has not got any son; he gets abundance of wealth who
is without any wealth; the diseased become cured of their diseases; what
more can be said than the fact that he who hears this glorious deed of
the Devî in its entirety, gets all that he desires. O King! That man who
reads daily this holy anecdote or hears it, has never to fear from his
enemies; in addition be gets liberation after leaving his this body.

 

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter of the Fifth Book on the death of
S’umbha in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](bk05ch32.md)
