[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch28)  [Next](bk05ch30.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIX**

 

**On the killing of Raktabîja**

 

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

 

1-21. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Please hear attentively about the
extraordinary boon that was given by Mahâdeva, the God of gods, to the
great warrior, Raktabîja. Whenever a drop of blood from the body of that
great warrior will drop on the surface of the earth, immediately will
arise innumerable Dânavas, equal in form and power to him; thus the Deva
Rudra granted the Demon the wonderful boon. Thus elated with the boon,
he entered into the battlefield with great force in order to kill Kâlikâ
with Ambikâ Devî. Seeing the Vai<u>sn</u>avî S’akti, lotus-eyed, seated
on the bird Garu<u>d</u>a, the Demon struck Her with a violent weapon
(named S’akti). She then baffled the weapon by Her club and hurled
Sudars’ana disc on the great Asura Raktabîja. Thus struck by the disc,
blood began to ooze out from his body as the red stream of soft red
sandstone comes out of a mountain-top. Wherever on the surface of the
earth drops of blood fell from his body, then and there sprang out
thousands and thousands of demons like him. Indrâ<u>n</u>i, the wife of
Indra, became very angry and struck the terrible Raktabîja with his
thunderbolt. Streams of blood then began to ooze out from his body. No
sooner the drops of blood fell from the Demon’s body, than were
instantaneously born from the blood many powerful Asuras, of similar
forms, having similar weapons and hard to be conquered in battle.
Brahmâ<u>n</u>î then becoming enraged

 

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

 

struck at him with the staff of Brahmâ with greater force. Mâhes’varî
rent the Dânava asunder by striking him with Her trident. Nâra Simhî
pierced the Asura with Her nails; Vârâhî struck at him with Her teeth.
Then the Dânava becoming angry shot at them all with sharpened arrows
and pierced them all. Thus when the Mâtrikâ Devîs were pierced by the
club and other various weapons of that great Asura, they got very angry
and pierced the Dânavas in return with shots of arrows. Kaumârî, too,
struck at his breast with Her weapon, named S’akti. The Dânavas then got
angry and hurled on them multitude of arrows and began to pierce them. O
King! The Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ Devî, getting angry, cut off his weapons into
pieces and shot violently at him other arrows. O King! Thus struck by
severe blows, when blood began to flow in profuse quantities from his
body, thousands and thousands of Dânavas resembling Raktabîja sprang out
instantly from it. So much so, that the heavens were all covered over
with Raktabîjas that sprang up from the blood. They all covered all over
their bodies with coats of armour, began to fight terribly with weapons
in their hands. Then the Devas, seeing that the innumerable Raktavîjas
were striking the Devî, became very much frightened and were distressed
with sorrow. They began to talk with each other with sorrowful
countenances that thousands and thousands of huge bodied warriors were
springing from the blood. These were all very powerful; so how could
they be destroyed! In this battlefield there were now left only the
Mâtrikâs, Kâlikâ, and Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ. It would be certainly extremely
difficult for them to conquer all these Dânavas. And if at that moment,
S’umbha and Nis’umbha were to join them with his army, certainly a great
catastrophe would occur.

 

22-28. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When the Devas were thus extremely
anxious, out of terror, Ambikâ Devî said to the lotus-eyed Kâlî :-- “O
Châmu<u>nd</u>â! Open out your mouth quickly, and no sooner I strike
Raktabîja with weapons, you would drink off the blood as fast as it runs
out of his body. Instantly I will kill those Dânavas sprung from the
blood with sharpened arrows, clubs, swords and Mu<u>s</u>alas; and you
would then be able to devour them all at your will, and, then, roam in
this field as you like. O Large-eyed One! You would drink off all the
jets of blood in such a way that not a drop of it escapes and falls on
the ground. And then when they will all be devoured, no more Dânavas
would be able to spring. Thus they will surely be extirpated; otherwise
they will never be destroyed. Let me begin to strike blows after blows
on Raktabîja and you better drink off quickly all the blood, being
intent on destroying the forces. O Chamu<u>nd</u>e! Thus, the Dânavas
being all exterminated, we will hand over to the Indra, the lord of the
Devas, his Heavens without

 

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

 

any enemy; and, thus, we can go peacefully and happily to our own
places.”

 

29-47. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Châmu<u>nd</u>â Devî, of furious
strength, hearing thus the Devî’s words began to drink the jets of blood
coming out of the body of Raktabîja. The Devî Ambikâ began to cut the
Demon’s body into pieces and Châmu<u>nd</u>â, of thin belly, went on
devouring them. Then Raktabîja, becoming angry, struck Châmu<u>nd</u>â
with his club. But though She was thus hurt severely, She drank off the
blood and then devoured all the limbs thereof. O King! Thus Kâlikâ Devî
drank off the blood of all other powerful wicked Dânava Raktabîjas that
sprang out of the blood. Ambikâ thus destroyed them. Thus, all the
Dânavas, created out of the blood were devoured; then, there was left,
lastly, the real Raktabîja. Ambikâ Devî then cut him asunder into pieces
by Her axe and thus killed him. Thus, when the dreadful Raktabîja was
slain in the battle, the Dânavas fled away trembling with fear. Without
any weapons, covered all over their bodies with blood, and void of
consciousness they uttered, dumb confounded “Alas! Alas! What has
happened, what has happened.” Thus crying, they told their King S’umbha
thus :-- “O King of Kings! Ambikâ Devî has killed Raktabîja and
Châmu<u>nd</u>â has drunk off all their blood. The carrier (Vâhana) of
Devî, the powerful ferocious Lion killed other powerful warriors and
Kali devoured the remaining soldiers. O Lord of the Dânavas! We have
fled and come to you to give the news of the battle and to describe the
wonderful doings of that Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ Devî in the battlefield. O
King! In our opinion, no one will be able to conquer that Lady, be he a
Daitya, Dânava, Gandarbha, Asura, Yak<u>s</u>a, Pannaga, Châra<u>n</u>a,
Râk<u>s</u>asa, or an Uraga. O King of Kings! The other Goddesses,
Indrâ<u>n</u>i and others, have come to the battle, on their own
carriers respectively and are fighting with various weapons. O Lord of
the Dânavas! The Dânava forces are all slain by them with the excellent
weapons in their hands. Even Raktabîja has been slain in no time. That
Lion, of indomitable prowess, killed the Râk<u>s</u>asas in the battle;
The Devî alone is hard to conquer; how much more would it be impossible
to conquer Her, when She has been joined with other goddesses. So
consult with the ministers and do what is reasonable. In our opinion it
is better to make treaty with Her and quit your enmity. O King! Think
over the fact that that Lady destroyed all the Dânavas and at last drank
off the blood of Raktabîja and at last killed him. What on earth can be
more wonderful than this? O King! The Devî Ambikâ killed all the other
Daityas and Châmu<u>nd</u>â devoured their blood, flesh, and all.
Considering all this, it is now better for us to serve the Devî Ambikâ
or fly away to Pâtâla. No more fighting is desirable. She is

 

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

 

not an ordinary woman; She is Mahâ Mâyâ, there is not the least doubt in
this. Only to serve the cause of the Gods, She has manifested Herself
and is now destroying the Râk<u>s</u>asas’ race.”

 

48\. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing thus, S’umbha got confounded by Kâla
(Death), as his end was coming nigh, and said the following words, his
lips quivering with anger.

 

49-54. You are struck with fear; so you all take the refuge of
Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ or fly down to Pâtâla; but I will kill Her with all my
exertion and effort. I conquered all the hosts of Devas and I have
enjoyed their kingdom; shall I now, out of the fear of one Lady, fly and
enter into the Pâtâla. All my attendants, Raktabîja and other heroes,
are now slain in the battle and is it possible that I will now fly away
out of the sake of preserving my life only. See! The death of all the
beings is ordained by Kâla and it is unavoidable. No sooner a being is
born, he is liable to the fear of death. How can a man, then, out of
fear of death, quit all his name and fame? O Nis’umbha! I will now go
immediately to the battle, mounting on my chariot and will return after
slaying Her in battle. And if I cannot kill Her, I will not then return
any more. O Best of warriors! Better stand on my side with all your
forces and kill that Lady in no time, with sharp arrows.

 

55-58. Nis’umbha said :-- Today I will go to the battle and slaying that
Kâlikâ, will shortly return here with Ambikâ. O King! Do not think at
all for that Lady; see my world-conquering strength and look at that
weak woman; there is a vast difference. Cast aside your this great
mental anxiety and trouble. Enjoy, O Brother, excellent things. I will
bring that dignified Lady with all honours before you. O King! You ought
not to go to the battle when I am alive. I will presently go to the
fight and bring for you that Lady as a sign of our victory.

 

59-60. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus saying, the younger brother, proud of
his own strength, went hurriedly to the battlefield, mounting on his big
chariot. He was protected all over his body by his coat of armour and he
was well provided with various weapons and all other accoutrements of
war. The bards began to sing hymns to him and various other propitious
ceremonies were being performed.

 

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of
Raktabîja in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](bk05ch30.md)
