[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch11)  [Next](bk05ch13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XII**

 

**On the holding of counsel by Mahi<u>s</u>âsura**

 

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

 

1\. Vyâsa said :-- The World-Mother, hearing Tâmra’s words, spoke
laughing a little and with a deep voice like that of a rumbling thunder
cloud.

 

2-13. The Devî spoke :-- “O Tâmra! Go and say to your Lord Mahi<u>s</u>a
who, it seems, is stupid, whose end is nigh, who has become very
passionate, and who is void of knowledge what is proper and what is
improper. I am not like your grown up mother, the she-buffalo, having
horns, eating grass, with a long tail and a big-belly. I do not like to
have Vi<u>sn</u>u, the god S’ankara, Brahmâ, Kuvera, Varu<u>n</u>a, or
Fire. How then can I select a beast? If I do so, I will be an object of
much censure amongst the several worlds. I am not desirous of any more
husband; my Husband is existing; though He is the Lord of all, Witness
of All, yet He is not the Actor; He is without any desires and He is
calm

 

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

 

and tranquil. He, the S’iva, is devoid of any Prakritic qualities,
without any attachment, the Great Infinite, without anyone to rely on,
without any refuge, omniscient, omnipresent, the Great Witness, the
Full, and the seat of the Full, the Auspicious. He is the abode of all,
capable to do all, the peaceful, capable to create everything and He is
seeing everywhere. How can I then leave Him and try to serve the dull,
stupid Mahi<u>s</u>a? Let him come and fight with this understanding
that he will be defeated and be made the conveyance of Yama, the God of
Death or the carrier of water of the human beings. And if that impious
heretic desire to live, let him fly at once to Pâtâla with all his demon
comrades; else I will slay him in battle. See! The combination of
similar substances leads to happiness; and if out of ignorance, the
connection takes place between things entirely different in their
natures, it becomes at once the source of all pains and troubles. You
are a thorough illiterate when you ask me to worship your lord; do you
not see me endowed with exquisite beauty? and what is your
Mahi<u>s</u>a? A buffalo with horns; how can then creation become
possible between us? Better fly away or fight if you like; I will kill
you and your friends, and if you leave the region of Heavens and the
share of Yajñâ, then you will become happy.”

 

14-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus saying, the Devî howled and roared so
loudly that it appeared strange and it caused a great terror to the
Dânavas who took it as the great dissolution of the universe at the end
of a Kalpa. The earth and the mountains trembled; the wives of the
Dânavas, had miscarriages at that terrific noise. Tâmra hearing that
sound was terrified; his mind became unsteady and he at once fled to
Mahi<u>s</u>a. O King! The Dânavas present in the city became deaf; thy
fled and became very anxious and were absorbed in the thought whence and
how that sound came. The lion, too, enraged and, raising up its manes,
roared so loud that the Daityas became very much terrified.
Mahi<u>s</u>a, too, became confounded to see Tâmra returning; he then
held a council with his ministers what ought to be done next?
Mahi<u>s</u>âsura said :-- “O best of the Dânavas! Shall we now take our
shelter within the forts? Or shall we go out and fight? Or will it be
favourable to us if we fly away? You all are intelligent and versed in
all the S’âstras and unconquerable by your foes; therefore ought you all
to consult over the the matter in utmost privacy for our success at the
present moment. The root of Kingdom lies in the council in the secret
place (cabinet) and Statesmanship; if this counsel be kept well
preserved in secrecy, then that Kingdom is also kept entire; therefore
it is highly incumbent that the plan be kept in strictest confidence
amongst the good and virtuous ministers. If the plan be out, then
destruction comes both to the King and his Kingdom; hence the plan must
be kept secret

 

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

 

by those wanting glory, lest it be taken advantage of and rendered
ineffective by other persons. O Ministers! Now declare, taking due
consideration of time and place, after duly discussing and ascertaining
what is the best course to adopt, what would be beneficial and full of
reason and intelligence. First find out the cause why this powerful
woman, created by the Devas has come here alone and helpless? That woman
is challenging us to fight. What more wonder can there be than this? Who
can say in the three worlds what the result will be, whether it will be
good or otherwise? Victory comes not to many persons nor defeat comes to
a single individual; therefore victory or defeat lies at the hands of
the Luck and Destiny. Those who plead for place, policy, statesmanship,
they say what is Fate? Is there anyone who has seen Fate?
(Adri<u>st</u>a) No one has seen His appearance. It may be argued that
there may exist such a thing as Fate; to which it might be replied, what
proofs are there for such an existence? Thus the weak persons alone hold
it out as their only hope; nowhere are seen energetic persons who can
fulfil their ends by their own efforts, by those who enrol themselves
under Fate. Therefore “effort,” “energy” are the words of the heroes and
“Fate” is the word of the cowards. You should all consider today these
subjects fully and intelligently and then decide what are we to do?”

 

31-39. Vyâsa said :-- Thus hearing the King, the famous Vidâlâk<u>s</u>a
with folded hands spoke thus :-- O King! First it should be definitely
ascertained whose wife is she, this woman possessing large eyes? Whence
and for what purpose has she come here; next what ought to be done
should be decided. It seems to me that the Devas, knowing that your
death will ensue from the hands of a woman, have created very carefully
this lotus-eyed woman out of their own essences. And they are lying in
wait, unknown to anybody in the celestial space with a desire to see the
battle but really to fight with you. In due time, they will undoubtedly
help this woman. When the war will ensue, Vi<u>sn</u>u and the other
Devas will put this woman in front and slay us all. Whereas this Devî
will slay you. This is their earnest desire. O King! I have come to know
this beforehand; but what will be the actual result I cannot say. I
cannot say also whether it is advisable for You to fight now; therefore
it would be better if you consider yourself well on this matter of the
gods and do accordingly. Our duty, the duty of your servants lies in
this :-- That we should sacrifice at any moment our lives for the
preservation of your prestige and to enjoy with you whenever you are
enjoying. But, O King! It is extremely advisable to ponder over this
very carefully when we see that this woman, though alone, is challenging
us to fight who are armed with powerful soldiers.

 

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

 

40-44. Durmukha said :-- O King! I know for certain, that we will not
get victory in this battle; still we ought not to show our backs; for
that would lead us to sheer disgrace. Even in our encounter with Indra
and other Devas, we did nothing hateful and blameable; then how can any
of us fly away when we come face to face with a helpless woman?
Therefore fight we must; that is certain; let whatever happen. What is
inevitable, must come to pass. Thus considered, what need we care for
the result? If we die in the battle, we will get name and fame; if we be
victorious, we will get happiness. Thus thinking both the cases, we must
fight today. Death is inevitable when our longevity expires; our
prestige will suffer if we fly away; therefore we ought not to spend
uselessly our time in thus expressing our vain regret for life or for
death.

 

45-51. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Durmukha’s words,
Vâskala, the eloquent speaker, thus spoke to the king, with clasped
hands and his head bowed down. O King! You need not think thus in agony
with this unpleasant affair; alone I will kill that Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ, of
unsteady eyes. O Best of kings! To be always prompt and energetic
indicates that one is steady in one’s heroic valour; to consider one’s
enemy as dreadful is contrary to above; so we ought now to take recourse
to heroic valour. O King! Therefore I will discard fear altogether and
fight out valiantly; I will no doubt, send Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ in the
battlefield to the abode of Death. I fear not Yama, nor Indra, nor
Kuvera, nor Vayu nor Ag<u>n</u>i, nor Vi<u>sn</u>u, nor S’ankara, nor
Moon nor Sun; I do not fear any of them; what fear can I, then,
entertain of that vain arrogant woman, who has got none to support her.
I will kill Her with these arrows, sharpened on stones. You can see
today the prowess of my arms and enjoy peace; you will not have to go to
battle anymore to fight with Her.

 

52-65. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Vâskala having said thus to the lord
Mahi<u>s</u>a in a haughty spirit, Durdhara bowed down and said thus :--
O Lord of the earth! Let the purpose be whatsoever, with which the
beautiful Devî with eighteen hands, the creation of the gods, may come
hither, I will vanquish Her. O King! I think, it is simply to terrify
you, as the Suras have thus created this Mâyâ woman; therefore, do you
forsake your delusion by knowing this merely as a scare. O King! Such is
the statesmanship; now hear about the workings of the ministers.
Ministers in this world are of three kinds :-- (1) Sâttvik; (2) Râjasik
and (3) Tâmasik. Those ministers in whom the Sattva quality is
predominant, they perform their Master’s duties according to their own
strength. The Sâttvik Mantris (ministers) are well versed in their
Mantra S’âstras (the policies and statesmanship), virtuous and
one-pointed in their thoughts, they never do any injury to their king
and they fulfil

 

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

 

their own purposes. The Râjasik Mantris are of different sorts; they are
always after their own interests; at times, whenever they like, they do
the State duties. The Tâmasik Mantris always look of their own interests
out of their greedy nature; they serve their ends even by ruining the
regal interests. It is the Tâmasik Mantris that are influenced by the
bribes from the enemies, become separated at their hearts from their own
masters and give out the secrets to the enemies, while staying in their
homes. They always advise alienation policy like the sword ensheathed in
a scabbard; and when the time of war comes, they always frighten their
masters. Therefore, O King! Never put your trust on ministers; if you do
so, they will always hinder you in your actions and counsels; what harm
cannot be done by those ministers that are treacherous, greedy,
deceitful and void of any intelligence and always addicted to vicious
acts, when they are trusted! Therefore, O King! I will go myself to the
battle and serve your purpose; you need not be at all anxious in this
matter. I will soon bring before you that vicious woman; I will do your
actions by my own strength and powers. Let you be calm; and look at my
strength, fortitude and valour.

 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the holding of
counsel by Mahi<u>s</u>âsura in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 Slokas by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](bk05ch13)
