[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch01)  [Next](bk05ch03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On the birth of Dânava Mahi<u>s</u>a**

 

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

 

1-2. The king said :-- “Lord! You have described fully the glory of the
Mahâ Mayâ Yoges'varî; now describe Her Life and Character; I am very
eager to hear them. This whole universe, moving and nonmoving, has been
created by Mahes'varî; who is there that desires not to hear Her Glory!”

 

3-7. Vyâsa spoke :-- O king! You are very intelligent; I will describe
in detail all this to you; whoever does not describe Her Glory to the
peaceful and faithful, is certainly low-minded? In days of yore, a
terrible battle ensued between the Devas and Dânava forces on this earth
when Mahi<u>s</u>âsura was the Ruler of this world. O king!
Mahi<u>s</u>âsura went to the mountain of Sumeru and performed a very
severe and excellent tapasyâ, wonderful even to the gods. O king!
Meditating on his Ista Devatâ (the deity for his worship) in his heart,
elapsed full ten thousand years, when Brahmâ the Grandfather of all the
Lokas, was pleased with him. The fourfaced Brahmâ, arrived there on his
vehicle the swan, asked Mahi<u>s</u>âsura “O One of virtuous soul! Ask
from me what is your desired object; I will grant thee boon.”

 

8\. Mahi<u>s</u>a said :-- “O Lord, Lotus-eyed! I want to become
immortal! therefore O Thou, the Grandfather of the Devas! Dost thou do
for me so that I have no fear of death.”

 

9-11. Brahmâ said :-- “O Mahi<u>s</u>a! Birth must be followed by death,
and death must be followed by birth; this is the eternal law of nature.
Then know this as certain that when one is born, one must die; and when
one dies, one will be born. O Lord of the Dânavas! What more to say than
this, that high mountains, vast oceans, and all the beings will die when
time will come. O Ruler of the earth! You are virtuous; therefore ask
any other boon than this immortality; I will grant that to you.”

 

12-13. Mahi<u>s</u>a said :-- “O Grand Sire! Grant, then, that no Deva,
Dânava, nor human being of the male sex can cause my death. There is
none among women who can cause my death. Therefore, O Lotus-eyed! Let
woman be the cause of my death; how can women slay me! The are too weak
to kill me!”

 

14\. Brahmâ said :-- “O Lord of the Dânavas! Your death will certainly
occur, at any time, through a woman; O Highly Fortunate One! No man will
be able to cause your death.”

 

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

 

15\. Vyâsa said :-- Thus granting him the boon, Brahmâ went to his own
abode; the lord of the Dânavas, too, returned to his place, very glad.

 

16\. The king said :-- “O Bhagavân! Whose son was this powerful
Mahi<u>s</u>âsura; how his birth took place? and why, too, did he get a
body of a buffalo?”

 

17-26. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Rambha and Karambha were the two sons of
Danu; these two Dânavas were far famed in this world for their
pre-eminence. O king! They had no issues; hence, desirous of issues,
they went to the sacred banks of the Indus (Pañcha Nada) and there
performed severe asceticism for long years. Karambha got himself
submerged in water and thus began his severe tapasyâ; while the other,
Rambha, had recourse to a juicy peepul tree (haunted by Yakshinîs) and
there began to worship Fire. Rambha remained, engaged in worshipping the
Five Fires; knowing this, Indra, the Lord of S'achî, was pained and
hurried thither, being very anxious. Going to Pañcha Nada, Indra assumed
the form of a crocodile and caught hold of the legs of the wicked
Karambha and killed him. Hearing of the death of his brother, Rambha got
very much enraged and wishing to offer his own head as an oblation to
the Fire, he wanted to cut off his own head; he, being infuriated, held
the hairs of his head by his left hand, and, catching hold of a good
axe, by his right hand, was on the point of cutting it, when the Fire
gave him knowledge, desisted him from this act and spoke thus :-- You
are stupid; why have you desired to cut off your own head; killing one's
ownself is a great sin; and there is no means of deliverance from this
sin. Why are you then ready to execute it? Do not seek your death now;
what end will that serve you? Rather ask boons from me; thus you will
get your welfare.

 

27-31. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of Fire,
Rambha quitted the hold of his hairs and said :-- O Lord of the Devas!
If thou art pleased, grant my desired boon that a son be born unto me,
who will destroy the forces of my enemy and who will conquer the three
worlds. And that son be invincible in every way by the Devas, Dânavas
and men, very powerful, assuming forms at will, and respected by all.
The Fire said :-- O highly Fortunate! You will get your son, as you
desire; therefore desist now from your attempting suicide. O highly
fortunate Rambha! With any female of whichever species, you will
co-habit, you will get a son, more powerful than you; there is no doubt
in this.

 

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

 

32-50. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Hearing thus the sweet words of the Fire
as desired, Rambha, the chief of the Dânavas, went, surrounded by
Yaksas, to a beautiful place, adorned with picturesque sceneries; when
one lovely she-buffalo, who was very maddened with passion, fell to the
sight of Rambha. And he desired to have sexual intercourse with her, in
preference to other women. The she-buffallo, too, gladly yielded to his
purpose and Rambha had sexual intercourse with her, impelled as it were
by the destiny. The she-buffalo became pregnant with his semen virile.
The Dânava, too, carried the she-buffalo, his dear wife, to Pâtâla (the
lower regions) for her protection. On one occasion, another buffalo got
excited and wanted to fall upon the she-buffalo. The Dânava was also
ready to kill him. The Dânava came hurriedly and struck the buffalo for
the safety of his wife; whereon the excited buffalo attacked him with
his horns. The buffalo struck him so violently with his sharp horns that
Rambha fell down senseless all on a sudden and finally died. Seeing her
husband dead, the she-buffalo quickly fled away in distress and, with
terror, she quickly went to the peepul tree and took refuge under the
Yaksas. But that buffalo, excited very much and maddened with vigour,
ran in pursuit of her, desiring intercourse with her. On seeing the
miserable plight of the weeping she-buffalo, distressed with fear, and
seeing the buffalo in pursuit of her, the Yaksas assembled to protect
her. A terrible fight ensued between the buffalo and the Yaksas, when
the buffalo, shot with arrows by them, fell down and died. Rambha was
very much liked by the Yaksas; so they cremated his dead body for its
purification. The she-buffalo, seeing her husband laid in the funeral
pyre, expressed her desire to enter also into that fire. The Yaksas
resisted; but that chaste wife quickly entered into the burning fire
along with her husband. When the she-buffalo died, the powerful
Mahi<u>s</u>a rose from his mother's womb from the midst of the funeral
pyre; Rambha, too, emerged from the fire in another form out of his
affection towards his son. Rambha was known as Raktavîja after he had
changed his form. His son was thus born as a very powerful Dânava and
became famous by the name of Mahi<u>s</u>a. The chief Dânavas installed
Mahi<u>s</u>a on the throne. O king! The very powerful Raktavîja and the
Dânava Mahi<u>s</u>a, thus took their births and became invincible of
the Devas, Dânavas and human beings. O king! I have now described to you
the birth of the highsouled Dânava Mahi<u>s</u>a and his getting the
boon, all in detail.

 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the birth of
Mahi<u>s</u>a Dânava in the Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am
composed of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk05ch03)
