[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch14)  [Next](bk05ch16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XV**

 

**On the slaying of Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a and Asilomâ**

 

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

 

1-3. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing the two Demons slain by the Devî,
Mahi<u>s</u>âsura became very much amazed and sent the powerful Asilomâ
and Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a and the other Dânavas to the battle to kill
the Devî. The Dânavas, all very skilled in the art of warfare, marched
on for battle, fully equipped with weapons and clad in armour, and we
attended by a vast army. They arrived there and saw the Divine Mother
with eighteen hands taking Her stand on a lion, with axes and shield in
Her hands.

 

4-5. The calm-tempered Asilomâ appeared before the Devî ready to kill
the Daityas, saluted Her and smilingly said :-- O Devî! Why have You
come here? and what for You are killing these faultless Daityas? O
Beautiful One! Tell all these to me truly. We will make treaty with you.

 

6-17. Take gold, jewels, pearls and any other excellent things the you
like and retire from the field as early as passible. Why do you like
this warfare tending to increase misery; the wise persons say that it
leads to the destruction of all happiness. Your body is very delicate;
it cannot bear the stroke of flowers even; then why are you suffering
the stroke of weapons on your bodies; I am very much puzzled to think
these things. See! The cleverness is judged when peace is the result
thereof; for it leads always to happiness. Then why are you liking to
fight which will lead only to pain and suffering. Happiness is only to
be had and pain is to be avoided; this is the rule. O Devî! That
happiness is again of two kinds :-- Permanent and transitory. The
pleasure that comes out of the knowledge of Atmajñân is permanent and
that which is derived from enjoyments is transitory; these who know
truly the Veda S’âstra, they avoid this transitory pleasure of
enjoyments. If you follow the opinion of the Mimâmsakas and do not
believe in the

 

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

 

existence of future births, even then you ought not to fight; when you
have got this youthful age, you ought to enjoy the excellent pleasures
in this world. O One of lean stomach! And if you doubt in the existence
of the other worlds after death, even then you ought to desert from
fighting and perform, in this life, such actions as will lead you to the
attainment of Heavens. This fully developed womanhood is transient;
knowing this do virtuous actions always; the wise ones always avoid
tormenting others; thus one ought to perform things not contradictory to
Dharma, Artha and Kama. Therefore, O Auspicious One! Do You also things
virtuous always. O Mother! Why are you killing these Daityas without any
cause? There is, again, the feeling of mercy; the lives again of all are
dependent on Truth. Therefore the sages always preserve piety, mercy and
Truth. O Beautiful One! Then what is the use in Your killing these
Demons? Please say explicitly on this point.

 

18-27. The Devî said :-- O Powerful one! Hear why I have come here and
why I am killing the Daityas? I answer your question on the above
points. O Demon! I, though merely a spectator, always go about all over
the worlds, seeing the justices and injustices done by the several souls
there. Never I possess any desire of enjoyment, nor have I greed for
anything, nor have I enmity with any creature. Only to preserve the
virtue and religion and to keep up the righteous, I roam over the
worlds. This is My vow and I always adhere to it. To preserve the good
and to put down the evil doers is My duty. Many Avataras are to take
their incarnations, cycles after cycles, to preserve the Vedas;
therefore I incarnate Myself in yugas after yugas. Now the wicked
Mahi<u>s</u>a is ready to destroy the Devas; seeing this, I have come
here to kill him. I tell you verily that I will slay that vicious
powerful Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, the enemy of the gods. Knowing this, you
remain or depart, as you desire. Or you can go to Mahi<u>s</u>a, that
impious son of a she-buffalo, and say what is the use in sending other
Asuras to the battle; he can come himself and fight. If your king likes
to make a treaty, then let him avoid his enmity with the Devas and go
down to the Pâtâla. Let him return to the Devas whatever he has taken
perforce from them and go to the Pâtâla, where Prahlâda is residing.

 

28-29. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Devî’s words, Asilomâ
asked gladly, before the Devî, the powerful Asura
Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a :-- Well, Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a! You have
heard just now all what the Devî has said; now are we to observe treaty
or declare war. What are we to do under the circumstances?

 

30-34. Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a said :-- Our king knows full well that
his death will certainly take place in the battle; knowing this, he is
not willing

 

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

 

to make peace, out of his egoism and vanity. He is seeing before him
daily the deaths of the Dânavas and still he has sent us to battle. Who
can overcome the destiny? The duty of a servant is a very difficult one;
he will have to be always submissive and obedient, without caring the
least for his own self-respect; just as the dancing dolls are completely
under the hands of the actors and their movements vary according to the
pulling of the wires employed in making them dance. How can we then go
to our master and say such hard words as he would give away to the Devas
all the gems and jewels and go down to Pâtâla with other Dânavas. One
considers it one’s duty to speak pleasant words though untrue; true
words cannot be beneficial; true and at the same time beneficial words
are very rare in this world; at such critical cases, one ought to remain
silent. Especially heroes ought never to excite their kings by useless
words; this is the essence of politics. We should never go and advise
our king with eagerness what is best or to ask advice from him about
such things; the king would then certainly be very angry. Therefore we
ought to do our duties to the king, even if our lives be at stake. To
consider our lives as nothing and to fight for our king are what is best
for us.

 

35-57. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus thinking, the two heroes then wore
their coats of armour, mounted on their chariots and, with bows and
arrows in their hands, became ready for fight. First
Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a shot seven arrows; the great warrior Asilomâ
stood aloof at a distance as a mere witness. The Divine Mother cut off
those arrows to pieces with Her arrows, no sooner they reached Her, and
then shot at Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a three arrows sharpened on stone.
The demon Vidâlâksa fell senselss by these arrows on the battle-field
and after a short while died, as if ordained by Fate. Seeing
Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a thus dead, Asilomâ took up his bows and arrows
and came up, for fight. The hero, then, raising his left hand, said
briefly, thus :-- “O Devî! I know that death is inevitable to the
Dânavas; still I am ready to fight; for I am dependent and Mahi<u>s</u>a
is of very dull intellect; he cannot make any distinction between what
is really good and what is merely pleasant. I will never speak before
him unpleasant words, though beneficial. Rather I will sacrifice my life
in the battle-field than advise him anything, be that auspicious or
inauspicious. The Dânavas are being killed no sooner they are shot at by
your arrows; seeing this I consider Fate superior to all. Prowess does
not lead to any success; Fie on one’s prowess! Thus saying, the Demon
began to shower arrows after arrows on the Devî; the Devî, too, cut them
to pieces with Her own arrows before they came to Her; and, becoming
angry, soon pierced him with arrows. The Devas witnessed this sight from
above. The body of the

 

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

 

Demon was then covered with cuts and wounds; blood began to flow from
them; the Demon consequently began to shine like the jovial Kimsuka
tree. Asilomâ then lifted aloft his heavy iron club and ran after
Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ and hurt the lion on his head with anger. Not caring at
all this severe stroke of the club inflicted by that powerful Demon, the
lion tore asunder his arms with his claws. Then that dreadful Demon
leapt with club in his hand and got up the shoulder of the lion and hit
the Devî very hard. O King! The Devî, then, baffled the hit and cut off
the Demon’s head with Her sharp axe. The head being thus severed, the
Demon was thrown on the ground with great force; seeing this, a general
cry of distress arose among his soldiers. The Devas shouted aloud
“Victory to the Devî” and chanted hymns to Her. The drums of the Devas
resounded and the Gandarbhas began to dance in great joy. Seeing the two
Demons thus lying dead on the battlefield, the lion killed some of the
remaining forces by his sheer strength and ate up others, and made the
battlefield void of any persons. Some fled away in great distress to
Mahi<u>s</u>âsura. The fugitives began to cry aloud, “Save us, save us”
and said, “O King! Asilomâ and Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a are both slain;
and those soldiers that remained were eaten up by the lion.” Thus they
told and plunged the King in an ocean of dire distress. Hearing their
words, Mahi<u>s</u>a became absent minded through pain and grief and
began to think over the matter with great anxiety.

 

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the slaying of
Vi<u>d</u>âlâk<u>s</u>a and Asilomâ in S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk05ch16)
