[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch25)  [Next](bk05ch27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVI**

 

**On the killing of Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a**

 

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

 

1-17. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus ordered, the two strong warriors
Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a hurriedly went to the battle, accompanied
by a vast army. There they saw the Devî, intent on doing good to the
Gods. Then they began to address Her in conciliatory words. O Lady! Dost
Thou not know that the extraordinarily strong S’umbha and Nis’umhha, the
Lords of the Daityas have crushed down the Devas and vanquished Indra
and have become intoxicated with their victory? O Fair One! Thou art
alone! Only Kâlikâ and Thy Lion are with Thee! It is Thy foolishness
that Thou art desirous to conquer S’umbha, who is endowed with all
power. I think there is no adviser to Thee, man nor woman; the Devas
have sent Thee here simply for Thy destruction. Think, O Delicate One!
over the powers of Thine as well as those of Thy enemy. Vainly dost Thou
boast of Thy having eighteen hands. Before the great warrior S’umbha,
the conqueror of the Devas, many hands and many weapons will be useless;
they will prove mere burdens. So dost Thou fulfil what reigns in the
heart of S’umbha, the destroyer of the legs and the uprooter of the
teeth of Airâvata elephant. Vain is Thy boast, O Beloved! Follow my
sweet words; they will do good to Thee, O Large-eyed One! They will
destroy Thy pains and give Thee bliss. Those actions that lead to pain
are to be avoided by the wise; and those that bring in happiness are to
be served by the Pundits, versed in the S’âstras. O Sweet speaking one!
Thou art clever. Look at the great strength of S’umbha with Thy eyes. He
has enhanced his glory by crushing down the Devas. And if Thou thinkest
the gods superior, that is false, for the wise men do not rely on the
mere guess, full of doubts; they believe what they actually see.
S’umbha, hard to be conquered in battles, is the great enemy of the
Gods; they have been crushed down by him, and have therefore sent Thee
here. O Sweet smiling One! Thou hast been deceived by their sweet words;
they, prompted by their selfish ends, have sent Thee here simply to give
Thee trouble. The friends that come with certain business and selfish
ends are to be rejected. Friends out of religious motives are only to be
sought for refuge. Verily I tell Thee that the gods are terribly
selfish. Therefore dost Thou serve S’umbha, the conqueror of Indra and
the lord of the three worlds; he is a hero, beautiful, lovely, cunning
and thoroughly expert in the

 

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

 

science of amorous love. Thou wilt get the prosperity of all the worlds
by the mere command of S’umbha; therefore make a firm resolve and serve
that splendid husband S’umbha.

 

18-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Universal Mother, hearing the words of
Cha<u>nd</u>a spoke with a voice deep as thunder. O Boor! Why do you use
false deceitful words? Fly away just now. Why shall I make S’umbha my
husband, disregarding Hari, Hara and the other Devas? O You, a veritable
Fool! I have no necessity for My lord; I have got nothing to do with my
lord. I Myself am the Lord of all the beings; and I preserve this whole
Universe with all the lords and beings therein. Note this. In ancient
times I saw thousands and thousands of S’umbha and Nis’umbha and I slew
them all. I sent hundreds and hundreds of Daityas and Demons to the
realm of Death. Before Me the hosts of Devas were destroyed in yugas
after yugas. Today the Daityas again will go unto destruction. The Time
has come to destroy the Daityas; why, then, are you struggling in vain
with your followers for your lives? Fight now and keep the Dharma of the
warriors; death is inevitable; thinking thus, the high-souled ones
should keep their name, fame, and respect. What business have you to do
with S’umbha and Nis’umbha? Follow the warrior’s Dharma and go to
Heavens, the abode of the gods. S’umbha, Nis’umbha and your other
friends and followers, all will follow you and will come here no doubt.
O Stupid One! I will put an end to all the Dânavas today. Therefore cast
aside your weakness and go on, fight. I will slay you and your brother
just now; next I will kill the proud Rakta Vîja, Nis’umbha and S’umbha
and the other Dânavas in the battle field and will then go to My desired
place. Now remain here if you like or fly away quickly. You have been
fed in vain because you fear to fight. What use is there now in using
sweet words like a weak and distressed man. Well! Take up your arms now
and fight.

 

31-61. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a, elated
with pride got excited at the Devî’s words, became angry and made a
violent noise with their bow strings. The Devî, too, blew Her conchshell
so loudly that the ten quarters of the sky reverberated; in the
meanwhile, the powerful lion became very angry and roared loudly.
Hearing that sound Indra and other Devas, the Munis, Yak<u>s</u>as,
Siddhas, and Kinnaras became all very glad. A dreadful fight than ensued
between Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ and Cha<u>nd</u>a with arrows, axes and other
weapons, causing terror to the weak. Then Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ Devî became
very wrathful and cut off to pieces all the arrows shot by Cha<u>nd</u>a
and then hurled arrows serpent-like on him. Then the sky over the battle
ground seemed to be overcast with arrows just as the

 

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

 

clouds get covered over with locusts, dreadful to the cultivators. In
the meanwhile Mu<u>nd</u>a, exceedingly terrible, came up to the field,
taking with him his army and becoming impatient with anger began to
shoot arrows. Seeing that multitude of arrows, Ambikâ got very angry;
out of Her frowny look, Her eyebrows became crooked, Her face became
black, and Her eyes turned red like Kadalî flowers; at this time
suddenly came out of Her forehead Kâlî. Wearing the tiger’s skin, cruel,
covering Her body with elephant’s skin, wearing a garland of skulls,
terrible, with a belly like a well dried up, mouth wide open, with a
wide waist, lip hanging loosely, with axe, noose, S’iva’s weapon, in Her
hands, She looked very terrible like the Night of Dissolution. She began
to lick frequently and forcibly dashed into the Dânava army and began to
destroy it. She angrily began to take the powerful Dânavas by Her arms
and pouring them into Her mouth crushed them with Her teeth. Taking the
elephants with bells by Her own power in Her hands She put them all into
Her mouth and swallowed them all with their riders and began to laugh
hoarsely. Thus camels, horses and charioteers with chariots all She put
into Her mouth and began to chew them all grimly. O King! Seeing that
the forces were being thus destroyed, the two great warriors
Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a began to shoot arrows after arrows
without intermission and covered the Devî with them. Cha<u>nd</u>a
hurled the Sudar<u>s</u>an-like disc, lustrous like the Sun, with great
force against the Devî, and frequently shouted thundering cries. Seeing
him roaring and the lustrous disc coming towards Her like another sun,
She shot at him arrows sharpened on stones so that the warrior
Cha<u>nd</u>a became overpowered by them and lay down senseless on the
ground. The powerful Mu<u>nd</u>a seeing his brother unconscious became
very much distressed with grief; but he got angry and began to shoot
arrows immediately on the Devî. Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ Devî hurled the weapon
named Î<u>s</u>ikâ and thus cut off to pieces all the dreadful arrows of
Mu<u>nd</u>a in a moment and shot Ardha Chandra (semi-circular) arrow at
him. With this arrow the powerful Asura was deprived of his pride and
made to lie down unconscious on the earth. Mu<u>nd</u>a thus lying on
the ground, a great uproar arose amidst the army of the Dânavas; and the
Devas became delighted in the sky. In the meanwhile Cha<u>nd</u>a became
conscious and taking a very heavy club hurled it violently on the right
hand of Kâlikâ. Kâlikâ rendered that blow useless and instantly tied
down that Asura by Her Pâsa weapon, purified by Mantras. Mu<u>nd</u>a
again rose up, and, seeing his brother in that fastened condition, came
to the front well armoured and with an exceedingly strong weapon called
S’akti. Seeing the Asura coming, She instantly fastened him down like
his brother. Taking

 

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

 

the powerful Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a like hares and laughing
wildly, Kâlî went to Ambikâ, and said :-- “I have brought the two beasts
very auspicious as offerings in this sacrificial war. Kindly accept
these.” Seeing the two Dânavas brought, as if they were the two wolves,
Ambikâ told her sweetly :-- O Thou, fond of war! Thou art very wise; so
dost not commit the act of envy nor dost leave them; think over the
purport of my words and know that it is Thy duty to bring the Devî’s
work to a successful issue.

 

62-65. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of Ambikâ, Kâlikâ
spoke to Her again :-- “In this war-sacrifice there is this axe which is
like a sacrificial post; I will offer these two as victims to Thy
sacrifice. Thus no act of envy will be committed (i.e., killing in a
sacrifice is not considered as envy).” Thus saying, the Kâlikâ Devî cut
off their heads with great force and gladly drank their blood. Thus
seeing the two Asuras killed, Ambikâ said gladly :-- Thou hast done the
service to the gods; so I will give Thee an excellent boon. O Kâlikâ! As
Thou hast killed Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a, henceforth Thou wilt be
renowned in this world as Châmu<u>nd</u>â.

 

Here ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of the Fifth Book on the killing of
Cha<u>nd</u>a and Mu<u>nd</u>a in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](bk05ch27.md)
