[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch31)  [Next](bk05ch33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXII**

 

**On the King Suratha’s going to the forest**

 

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

 

1-4. Janamejaya said :-- O Best of Munis! The glory of Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ
has been fully described by you. By whom was She worshipped in the
ancient times after the reading and hearing of Her three glorious deeds
(the killing of Madhu Kai<u>t</u>ava, etc.)? Who was it that derived the
best effects by worshipping the Devî, the Bestower of all desires? When
and with whom was She pleased and then offered boons? O Ocean of mercy!
Kindly narrate fully all these things to me. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Describe
to me also the rules how the meditation, worship and Homa of the Great
Devî are conducted. Sûta said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>is! Kri<u>sn</u>a
Dvaipâyana, the son of Satyavatî, was very glad to hear these questions
of Janamejaya and began to describe how the worship, etc., of the Mahâ
Mâyâ, the Devî Bhagavatî are to be done.”

 

5-21. Vyâsa said :-- O King! In days of yore in Svârochi<u>s</u>a
Manvantara there was a king, named Suratha, very liberal-minded and
devoted to govern well his subjects. He was truthful, active and
energetic, and devoted to his Guru; he always served the twice-born and
he never used to hold any sexual intercourse except with his legal wife.
He was generous, not liking to quarrel with anybody, and expert in the
science of archery. While he was thus governing his kingdom, the
Mlechchas, the hill tribes, turned out his enemies. They destroyed the
city of Kolâ, became very haughty and turbulent and desired to conquer
the whole earth by their sheer force. Thus accompanied by the great
four-fold army

 

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

 

elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry they came to conquer the
dominion of the King Suratha. A dreadful fight then ensued between the
King and the dreadful Mlechchas. O King! The Mlechcha forces were not at
all numerous whereas the armies of the king were large; still the
Mlechchas were lucky to win the battle. The King, defeated, fled to his
own city which was a strongly fortified place. The good King, wise in
statesmanship when he saw that his ministers had gone over to the
enemies’ party, became very anxious and thought whether it was advisable
for him to wait for a better opportunity, remaining within his own
extensive city, well guarded by a strong wall and ditch or it would be
better to fight on. The King thought also that it would not at all be
advisable to consult with his ministers who were, then, under the
control of his enemies; what then would he do under the circumstances?
Those vicious ministers could at any time deliver him to the hands of
his enemies; what would then happen to him! Those men, that are
avaricious, can do anything in this world; therefore it would never be
advisable to trust them. The people under the sway of greed commit
injury to their fathers, brothers, friends, acquaintances, their Gurus
and the adored Brâhma<u>n</u>as. When the ministers had joined with his
enemies, they could well be classed with the vicious; no doubt in this.
Never could they be trusted under the above circumstances. Thus
pondering over the matter, the King became absent-minded, and, finding
no remedy, went out of the city alone, mounted on a horse. The
intelligent King, helpless, entered into a dense forest and thought
where would he go now? Knowing, then, that there was, at a distance of
three Yojanas from that place, a hermitage of the great ascetic the
Sumedhâ Ri<u>s</u>i, the King went there. (N.B. :-- A Yojana is a
distance measuring four Krosas or eight or nine miles.)

 

22-33. O King! That hermitage was more beautiful than even the Heavens;
it was on the bank of a river; various kinds of trees were there; it was
frequented with wild animals having no enmity with each other; the whole
place was echoed with the sounds of cuckoos. The students were studying
and reverberating the atmosphere with their Vedic chants; hundreds of
herds of deers were running there; rice trees had grown there wildly at
places and their harvests were collected at places; good flowery trees
and others with delicious fruits were seen there; at places fragrant
smells of oblations of ghee, etc., were coming; all these were
delighting to any man who went or stayed there. The King Suratha was
very glad to see that Âs’rama; he became fearless and wanted to stay
there in the hermitage of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>. Fastening his horse at the
root of a tree, the King approached humbly to the Ri<u>s</u>i, and saw
that the

 

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

 

Muni was seated on a deer skin under the shade of dense Sâl trees. He
was peaceful, lean and thin by tapasyâ. His stature was straight; and he
was teaching his disciples and explaining to them the meaning of the
Veda S’âstras.

 

He was void of anger, greed, etc., beyond all the dualities, without any
jealousy, always devoted to the contemplation of his Self, truthful and
full of peace. Seeing him the King was filled with tears and prostrated
before him and fell like a stick before him. The Muni, seeing him thus
asked him to get up and enquired about his welfare. A disciple then at
the sign of the Guru, gave him a Kus’âsan, to take his seat. The King
got up and at his permission took his seat on that kus’âsan; the the
Muni worshipped the King duly by offering to him water to wash his feet,
and Arghya (an offer of green grass, rice, etc). Then the Muni asked
him, “Who are you? What for are you come here? Why are you so anxious?
Tell frankly all these that are not yet known to me. What do you want?
Speak out your mind. Even if that be impracticable, I will no doubt try
my best to accomplish your desired ends.”

 

34-36. The King said :-- “O Muni! I am the King Suratha; defeated by my
enemy, I have left my kingdom, palace, and wife and have come to your
refuge. O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! I am ready to do whatever you order me; on
this surface of the earth there is no one but you who can protect me.
Now I am very much terrified by my enemy; therefore I have come to you.
O Muni! You protect those who come to seek your refuge; I have now come
here to seek your shelter; so save me from this danger.”

 

37-38. The Mahar<u>s</u>i said :-- “O King! Stay here without any fear;
none of your enemies would be able to enter this hermitage by my power
of Tapasyâ, even if they be very powerful. O Best of Kings! You will not
be allowed to kill any animals here; you will have to sustain yourself
on this wild rice, roots and fruits, etc., as the rules of the forest
living permit.”

 

39-48. Vyâsa said :-- Thus hearing his words, the King began to live
there, with all purity and without any fear, on roots and fruits. Once
the King, while taking rest under the shade of a tree, while thinking of
various things, thought of his own house thus :-- “My enemies have, no
doubt acquired my kingdom, but they are vicious and wicked, shameless
Mlechchas and always addicted to sinful deeds; certainly they are
tormenting my subjects. My elephants and horses are not regularly
getting their food and have all become powerless; certainly they are
suffering very much from my enemies. All the servants that were
nourished by me before are now all suffering from troubles, having been
subjected by my enemies. The wicked enemies are certainly squandering
away my hoarded

 

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

 

wealth to bad immoral purposes, in gambling, drinking and in revelling
with prostitutes. Those Mlechchas and my ministers are always intent on
vicious acts; they do not know who are the proper persons to be given
charities; so they will no doubt exhaust away my coffers in doing sinful
acts.” While the King was thus meditating, seated at the root of a tree,
there came one man of the Vais’ya caste looking very distressed. The
King saw and instantly bade him take his seat beside him; then the King
asked the Vais’ya :-- “O Noble One! Of what caste are you? Whence are
you coming to this forest? What is your name? What for you look so pale
and distressed? What calamity has befallen to you? O Good One! Two
persons become friends whenever they speak seven words amongst them;
according to this rule I am your friend; tell me, therefore, truly all
these things.”

 

49\. Vyâsa said :-- The Vais’ya, hearing these words from the King, took
his seat and felt himself much relieved and thinking that he has met
with a saint, began to speak thus :--

 

50-52. O my Friend! I belong to the Vais’ya caste; my name is Samâdhi; I
was rich, never I had any jealousy towards anybody; always I used to
speak truth and was devoted to religious acts. My wife and sons are very
greedy of money and are irreligious; so they cut off all their
affections and connections with me, very difficult to cut though, and
have driven me out of the house on the pretext that I am very miserly.
Thus forsaken by my relatives, I have now come to this forest. You look
to be a fortunate man; therefore kindly, O Dear One! give me now your
introduction and oblige.

 

53-55. The King said :-- I am the King Suratha; lately I had a defeat
from the dacoits; moreover my ministers deceived me; consequently I am
deprived of my kingdom and have now come here. O Best of Vais’yas!
Fortunately you have come to me today as my friend. We two will repose
here gladly in this beautiful forest covered with trees. O Intelligent
One! Now quit your sorrow; be calm and quiet and rest with me, at your
leisure, here happily.

 

56-58. The Vais’ya said :-- O King! My friends and relatives must have
been helpless, very sorrowful and they are distressed at my absence;
they must have been troubled very much by diseases and misfortunes no
doubt and have become very anxious. O King! I cannot remain quiet; my
mind is being troubled with the thought how my wife and sons are
spending their times now in pain or happiness? I am always thinking when
I would see again my sons, wife, relatives, friends, acquaintances and
my house? I cannot make me calm and quiet.

 

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

 

59-60. The King said :-- O Intelligent One! What pleasure can you expect
to see your wicked sons and treacherous relatives who have driven you
out of your house? Even the enemies are far better, provided they do
good to us; what sorts of friends are they who impose on us afflictions
and sorrows. Do you, therefore, make your mind calm and quiet and remain
here in greatest peace and happiness.

 

61\. The Vais’ya said :-- O King! Even those that are wicked and cruel
cannot quit their relatives. Today my mind is greatly agitated with the
thought of my relatives; I cannot remain quiet.

 

62\. The King said :-- My mind too, is incessantly troubled with the
thought of my kingdom. Come; let both of us go to the Muni and ask him
what is the medicine for the cure of these our mental agonies.

 

63-64. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus making their determinations, they
went humbly to the Muni to ask him what were the causes of their
sorrows? The King then went close to him and bowing down before him,
took his seat and began to ask calmly and quietly the Muni who was
sitting calm and serene.

 

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Fifth Book on the King
Suratha’s going to the forest in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](bk05ch33.md)
