[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch02)  [Next](bk05ch04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter III**

** **

**On the Daitya armies getting ready**

 

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

 

1-14. Vyâsa said :--  The very powerful Asura Mahi<u>s</u>a, puffed up
with vanity on his getting the boon, obtained sovereignty and brought
the whole world under his control! He, being the paramount power, began
to protect the sea-girt earth acquired by the power of his own arms,
over which he had the sole sovereignty, there being no other rival king
nor any cause of the slightest fear. His Commander-in-Chief was then the
very powerful Chik<u>s</u>ura, maddened with pride; and Tâmra was in
charge of the Royal Treasury, guarded by many soldiers. There were,
then, many generals Asilomâ, Vi<u>d</u>âla, Udarka, Vâskala, Trinetra,
Kâla, Bandhaka and others, very proud, and each in charge of his own
corps respectively and occupying this sea-girt earth. O king! The
powerful kings that reigned before were made subservient and tributary;
and those, that fought valiantly befitting the K<u>s</u>attriya line,
were slain by Mahi<u>s</u>a. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as over the earth became
subservient to Mahi<u>s</u>a and gave their Yajña offerings to him. When
that Mahi<u>s</u>âsura got the sole sovereign sway of this world, he,
proud of his boons, desired to conquer the Heavens. Then Mahi<u>s</u>a,
the Lord of the Daityas, desirous to send an envoy to Indra, the Lord of
S'achî, instantly called for the messenger and spoke to him thus :-- Go,
O hero! O valiant one! to Heaven. Act as my messenger and tell Indra
fearlessly thus :-- “O thousand-eyed one! Quit the Heavens; go anywhere
you like, or offer your service to the high-souled Mahi<u>s</u>a! He is
the lord; and if you take refuge unto him, he will certainly protect
you. Therefore, O Lord of S'achî, better seek the protection of
Mahi<u>s</u>a. If, O Balasûdana! Not willing, wield your Vajra at once;
we know your powers; you were, in days of yore, conquered by our
ancestors. O chief of the Sûras! You are the paramour of Ahalyâ; your
strength is well known, give battle or go anywhere you like.”

 

15-21. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing the messenger's words, Indra became very
indignant and laughed and said :-- I did not know, O you stupid, that
you were maddened with vanity; I will shortly give medicines for your
master's disease. Now I will extirpate him by the roots; wise persons do
not slay messengers; I therefore let you go. Better go and tell him what
I say :-- “Son of a buffalo! If you are willing to fight, better come
and do not delay. O Enemy of horse! (Buffaloes and horses are always at
war with each other) Your strength is well known to me; you are a grass
eater and your appearance is stupid, idiotic; out of your horns I will
make a good bow. You depend on your horns for your strength;

 

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

 

that I well know. You are clever in striking with your horns; you don't
know anything about warfare; therefore I will out off your both the
weapons and render you powerless. You are very much puffed up with
vanity due to that.”

 

22\. Vyâsa said :-- Indra having spoken thus, the messenger quickly
returned to his haughty master Mahi<u>s</u>a and saluting, spoke :--

 

23-28. The messenger said :-- Indra counts you not even a fig, as he is
surrounded by his Deva forces and considers himself quite sufficient. It
ought one's servant to speak true and pleasant before one's master; how
can I utter the words before my master, that are spoken by that brute
Indra. Whereas the well known maxim reigns in my mind withal that I am
your well-wishing servant and I ought to speak truth before you, my
master, and that truth is to be pleasant to hear also. If pleasant words
I speak only, then I fail in my duty; at the same time, harsh words
ought not to be spoken by me, your sincere well-wisher. My Lord! The
cruel poison-like words that come from the mouth of an enemy, how can I,
a servant of yours, utter those harsh sayings! O Lord of the Earth! I
will never be able to utter those rude sayings that Indra has spoken.

 

29-53. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing the messenger's words full of meaning the
grass-eater Mahi<u>s</u>a Dânava got very angry and, waggling his tail
behind his back, passed urine; then his eyes reddened with anger, he
called the Dânavas before him and said :--O Dânavas! The Lord of the
Devas is firmly resolved on battle; therefore collect your forces; we
will have to conquer that devil, the chief of the Sûras. Who can stand
for him a my rival here! If hundreds and thousands of warriors like
Indra come I do not fear any of them at all; O Dânavas, we will
thoroughly put a end to him. His heroism is before those only that are
peaceful and quiet before the ascetics that have become lean and thin by
the penances; he is licentious and can only seduce other's wives by
craftiness and arts. He is a thorough rogue and hypocrite, vicious and
faultfinding; otherwise why does he put obstacles before others,
depending for his strength only on the beauties of the Apsarâs or
heavenly prostitutes. He is treacherous to his very core; therefore he,
being afraid at the very outset, took oaths, and entered into agreement
with the high-souled Namuchi; afterwards, when his time turned
favourable, that villain broke his treaty and treacherously killed him.
Again the powerful Vi<u>sn</u>u is a thorough master of treachery and
hypocrisy, the mine in taking oaths and can only show his vanity and is
expert in that. He can assume many forms at will by his Magic power. For
these very reasons Vi<u>sn</u>u had to take the form of a boar and

 

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

 

kill Hira<u>n</u>yâk<u>s</u>a; and again he had to take up a man-lion
form to kill Hira<u>n</u>ya Kas'îpu. O Dânavas! Never shall I surrender
myself to Vi<u>sn</u>u, for I never place my trust in the words or deeds
of Vi<u>sn</u>u and his Devas. What can Indra or Vi<u>sn</u>u do against
me, when the most powerful Rudra is not able to fight against me in the
battle-field! I will instantly defeat Indra, Varu<u>n</u>a, Yama,
Kuvera, Fire, Sun and Moon and get possession of their Heavens. On our
conquering the Devas, we all shall get our share of Yajñas and we along
with other Dânavas drink the Soma juice and enjoy ourselves in Heaven. O
Dânavas! I have got the boon; what do I now care for the Devas. My death
is not from men too. What can a woman do to me? O my emissaries! Call
without any delay the chief Dânavas from the nether regions and the
mountains and make them my generals? O Dânavas! I can alone conquer all
the Devas; only to make the war arrangements look nice, that I am taking
you to defeat them. There is no fear of mine from the Devas, consequent
on the boon conferred on me. I will kill them by my hoofs and horns. I
am not to be killed by Suras, Asuras, as men; therefore get yourselves
ready to conquer the Devas. O Dânavas! After conquering the Heavens we
will be garlanded with Pârijâta wreaths and we will enjoy the Deva women
in the Nandana Garden. We will drink the milk of the heavenly milching
cow (the cow that yields all desires) and, intoxicated with the heavenly
drinks, we will hear and see the music and singing the dancing of the
Gandarbhas there. You will all be served there with various bottles of
wine by Urvasî, Menakâ, Rambhâ, Ghritâchî, Tillottamâ, Pramadvarâ
Mahâsenâ, Mira Kesî, Madotkatâ, Viprachitti and others. Then be all
ready at once for this auspicious occasion to march to Heavens and fight
there with the Suras. And be pleased to call that pure-souled Muni
S'ukrâchârya, the son of Bhrigu and the Guru of the Daityas and worship
him and tell him to perform sacrificial ceremonies for the safety and
victory of the Dânavas. O king! Thus, ordering the chief Dânavas, the
wicked Mahi<u>s</u>a went to his abode, with gladness.

 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Fifth Book on the Daitya armies
getting ready in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Vedavyâsa of 18,000 verses.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk05ch04.md)
