[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch10)  [Next](bk05ch12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XI**

 

**On the appearing of the Dânava Tâmra before the Devî**

 

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

 

1-3. Vyâsa said :-- The King Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, maddened with pride,
heard the messenger’s words and called the aged and experienced
ministers and said thus :-- O Ministers! What am I to do now? Better
judge you all well, and speak out definitely to me. Is it that this Devî
has been created by the Devas like the Mâyâ of Sambarâsura and thus has
appeared before us? You are all dexterous and know where to apply the
four means of success, viz., conciliation, gift or bribery, sowing
dissensions, and war; and therefore you would better tell me which one
of the above four, I am to adopt now.

 

4-7. The ministers said :-- O King! One should always speak true and at
the same time pleasant; the wise ones should then select only those
which are beneficial and apply them. O King! As a medicine, though
bitter, cures diseases, so true words, though appearing unpleasant, lead
to beneficial results. Those that are simply pleasant, are generally
injurious as to their effects. O Lord of the Earth! The bearers and
approvers of truth both are very rare; truth speakers also are very
difficult to be seen; laudatory sycophancy is found in a great measure
in this world. O King! Nobody in the three worlds knows what will be
good or what will lead to inauspicious results? How can we then
definitely pronounce our judgment in this difficult matter?

 

8-9. The King said :-- Let each of you say separately, according to his
own intellect, what is his opinion; I will hear them all and consider

 

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

 

for myself. Clever persons should hear the opinions of several persons,
then judge for himself what is the best and then adopt that as what is
to be done.

 

10\. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing his words, the powerful Virûpâk<u>s</u>a
came out foremost of all and began to say pleasant words to the King.

 

11-16. O King! Please take for certain, what has been spoken by that
ordinary woman, swelled with vanity, as words simply to scare you. The
efforts and courage of a woman are known to all; who will be afraid
therefore, to hear abusive language from a woman, praising her ownself
in matters of warfare? O King! You have conquered the three worlds by
your own heroic valour; now if you acknowledge your inferiority, out of
fear to a woman, you would be subject to very much disgrace in this
world. Therefore, O King! I will go alone to fight with Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ
and I will kill Her. You can stay here now without any fear. O King! See
my prowess now; I am just now going with my army and I will kill that
violent Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ, maddened with pride, or I will tie Her down by
a coil of snakes and bring Her before you; then that Lady, seeing
Herself helpless, will become quite submissive to you; there is no doubt
in this.

 

17-30. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing these words of Virûpâk<u>s</u>a, Durdhara
said :-- O King! Virûpâk<u>s</u>a is very intelligent; what he has said
just now is all reasonable and true. O King! You are intelligent; hear
my words full of truth also. As far as I think, I consider that woman
with beautiful teeth as passionate. For that woman of broad hips has
expressed a desire to bring you under control by making you fearful; the
mistresses, proud of their beauty generally use such words when they
become passionate. When they behave in this way, people call these
amorous gestures. These crooked words of mistresses are the chief causes
in attracting dear persons unto them. Those who are skilled in the art
of love affair, some of them can know these things thoroughly well. O
King! That woman has said, “I will pierce and kill you by arrows, face
to face, in the battlefield.” The sense of this is different. The wise
persons that are clever and experienced in the art of finding out the
cause, declare that the above sentence is pregnant with deep and
esoteric meaning. You can easily see that the handsome women have no
other arrows with them; their side-glances are their arrows. And their
words carry their hidden meanings, and, expressing their desires, are
their flowers. O King! Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a even have no
powers to shoot arrows at you; how can, then, that helpless woman, who
appears so passionate, dart real arrows at you? O King! That lady said
:-- “O Stupid! I will kill your King by my arrow-like eye-sight.” But
the messenger was wanting in that power to appreciate; so he, no doubt,
understood her words in their

 

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

 

contrary sense. The saying of that lady, “I will lay your lord in the
death-bed in the battle-field” is to be taken in the light of inverted
sexual intercourse, where woman is above the man. Her utterance, “I will
take away the vitality (life) of your lord” is also significant. The
semen virile is known as the vitality (life). Therefore the above
expression means that she will make you devoid of your virility. There
can be no other meaning. O King! Those women that are excellent shew by
too much of their covert expressions (innuendos) that they select and
like very much their beloved. The experts only in these amorous affairs
will be able to appreciate these things. Knowing thus, dealings ought to
be made with Her so that the harmony in amorous sentiments be not
broken. O King! Sâma (conciliation) and Dâna (gifts) are the two means
to be adopted; there is no other way. By these two, that Lady, whether
she be proud or angry, is sure to have brought under control; I will go
now and bring Her before you by such sweet words. O King! What is the
use of my talking too much? I will make Her submissive to you like a
slave girl.

 

31-44. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing those words of Durdhara, the Dânava Tâmra,
who was very experienced in finding out the real nature, said :-- “I am
telling you what is sanctioned by virtue and is at the same time full of
sweet amorous feelings, pregnant with deep meanings. Kindly hear; O
Giver of honour! This intelligent woman is not at all passionate nor
devoted to you; nor has that woman used any covert expressions to you. O
Great Hero! This is strange indeed that a Lady, beautiful, handsome, and
of strange features, at the same time alone and helpless, has come here
to fight. A good-looking woman, powerful, and having eighteen hands is
never heard of, nor ever seen by me in these three worlds. She is
holding in each of Her hands powerful weapons. O king! All these seem to
be the contrary actions of Time. O King! I saw ominous dreams during the
night; and I conclude, therefore, that great dangers are over our heads.
Early in the morning twilight, I saw in my dream that a woman, wearing a
black raiment, was weeping in the inner courtyard; that some
inauspicious events are forthcoming can be easily judged from the above.
O King! The birds were screaming hoarsely in every house and various
calamitous events were seen in various houses; at this time that woman,
firmly resolved, was challenging you to fight; it, therefore seems to me
that there is something very serious in this matter. O Lord! This woman
is neither human, nor a Gandharvî, nor the wife of any Asura. Only to
cause delusion to us, she, this wondrous Mâyâ has been created by the
gods. O King! In no case, weakness is to be resorted; it is wise by all
means to fight as best as possible; what is inevitable will come to
pass; this is my opinion. No one is able to unriddle the doings

 

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

 

of the Devas, whether they would be auspicious or inauspicious.
Therefore intelligent ones should weigh pros and cons carefully and
remain patient and steady. O King! Life or death is at the hands of
Destiny; Nobody, therefore, can do it otherwise.”

 

45-51. Hearing this, Mahi<u>s</u>âsura said :-- “O Highly fortunate
Tâmra! Better, then, stand for fight, fully resolved and go to that
Lady, beautiful, and conquer Her according to rules of justice and bring
Her before me. In case She does not come under your control in fight,
kill Her; but if She comes round, then show Her honour; do not kill Her.
O All-knowing! You are a great hero and at the same thoroughly
conversant with Kâma S’âstra (science of love); therefore conquer that
Fair One by any means you can. O valiant Tâmra, of mighty prowess! Go
then with a mighty force and ponder over again and again and find out
Her intention. Is She prompted by passion or by real inimical feeling or
by any other motive? Try to find out whose Mâyâ is this? Know all these
beforehand; then find out the remedy; next fight with Her according to
your strength and prowess. Weakness should not be shown nor merciless
behaviour is to be resorted; you should behave with Her according to the
bent of Her mind.”

 

52\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Thus hearing the King’s words, Tâmra coming
as if under the sway of Death, saluted the king Mahi<u>s</u>a and
marched away with his army.

 

53-66. That wicked Dânava, who, on his way, began to see all the fearful
inauspicious signs, indicative of Death, became surprised and was caught
with fear. When he arrived at the spot, he saw the Devî standing on a
lion, while She was decorated with all the weapons and instruments, and
all the Devas were chanting hymns to Her. Tâmra, then bowed down before
Her with humility and modesty and addressed Her with sweet words,
according to the rules of the policy of conciliation. “O Devî!
Mahi<u>s</u>a, the lord of the Daityas, has become enchanted on hearing
Your beauty and qualifications and has become desirous to marry You. O
Beautiful One! You would better be graciously pleased with that
conqueror of the Immortals, the Mahi<u>s</u>âsura; O Thou of delicate
limbs! Make him your husband and enjoy all the exquisite pleasures of
the Nandana garden as best as you can. The end and aim of attaining this
human form, beautiful in every respect and the abode of all bliss, is to
enjoy, in every way, all the pleasures of human existence and to avoid
the sources of all troubles. This is the rule.

 

“O Thou of beautiful thighs like those of the young of an elephant! Your
soft and delicate lotus-like hands are fit to play only with nice balls
of

 

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

 

flowers; why then are You holding in Your hands all the weapons and
arrows? What is the use of holding ordinary arrows, when those two
eye-brows like bows, are existing with You? What need have you to take
ordinary arrows when you are graced with those piercing eye sights, your
arrows. The war is exceedingly painful in this world; those who know
thus ought never to fight. It is only those human beings that are
prompted by greed that fight with each other. What to speak of those
sharpened arrows, one ought not to fight with flowers even; O Devî! You
can well say who is it that feels pleasure, when one’s own body is
pierced? Therefore, O Delicate One! Gladly you can worship
Mahi<u>s</u>a, the lord of the world and the object of worship of the
Devas and Dânavas. Then he will satisfy all your desires. What more to
say, you will no doubt be his queen-consort. O Devî! If one tries one’s
best, it is doubtful whether one would be crowned with success;
therefore keep my this request; you will surely get all the best
pleasures. O Beautiful! You are well acquainted with all the politics;
therefore you better enjoy thoroughly the pleasures of the kingdom for
full many years. And if you marry Mahi<u>s</u>a you will have beautiful
sons and those sons again will be kings; and enjoying the pleasures of
your full grown womanhood, you will no doubt, be happy in your old age.”

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Fifth Book on the appearing of the
Dânava Tâmra before the Devî in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk05ch12)
