[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk05ch07)  [Next](bk05ch09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On the description of the origin and the form of the Devî**

 

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

 

1-4. Vyâsa said :-- Soon the Devas reached Vaikun<u>t</u>ha, protected
by Vi<u>sn</u>u; they at once began to look at the exquisite
indescribable beauty of the place. At intervals they saw nice lovely
divine houses, shining and appearing very splendid; pools and lakes were
seen in front of them beautified with Kalhâra lotus flowers. They began
to see, at other places, rivers flowing; swans, cranes, Chakravâkas and
other aquatic birds were swimming there easily and warbling lovely
sounds. At other places again, beautiful gardens came to their sight
adorned exquisitely by Champaka, As'oka Mandâra, Bakula, Âmrâtaka,
Tilaka, Kuruvaka and Mallikâ and various other flower trees, the cuckoos
were seen there cooing melodiously, bees humming gently and peacocks
dancing beautifully.

 

5-6. In the centre was situated the golden palace of Hari, towering to
heavens, the rooms and quadrangles were all charming; at places, they
were bedecked with gems and jewels and adorned with various paintings.
There was the Divine Seat in the centre, composed wholly of gems and
jewels; and Vi<u>sn</u>u was occupying this place. There were
Vi<u>sn</u>u's Pârisadas or attendants, Sunanda, Nandana, and others;
they were so much devoted to their master that their hearts never become
attached to any other thing; so they were devotedly singing His praises
and chanting His hymns with undivided attention.

 

7-10. There were dancing the Apsarâs (celestial nymphs) and the Devas,
Gandarbhas, and Kinnaras were singing in melodious tunes. Those who love
the chanting of the Vedas, such calm-tempered Munis were reciting the
Vedic Sûktas and thus highly extolled Him. The two lovely gate-keepers
Jaya and Vijaya were waiting at the entrance gate with golden sticks in
their hands; the Devas coming nigh the city of Vi<u>sn</u>u caught sight
of them and said :-- “Any of you may go and inform Vi<u>sn</u>u that
Brahmâ, Rudra, and the whole host of gods are waiting at His door to see
Him.”

 

11\. Vyâsa said :-- O king! Hearing their words, Vijaya went away at
once to Vi<u>sn</u>u; and, saluting Him, informed Him of the arrival of
the Devas.

 

12-13. Vijaya said :-- O Lord! Thou destroyest the enemies of the gods;
hence Thou art the most worshipped of them. O Lord of Ramâ! The whole
hosts of gods have come and are waiting at Thy door, O Bibhu!

 

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

 

Brahmâ, Rudra, Indra, Varu<u>n</u>a, Fire and Yama and other gods,
anxious to see Thee, are all praising Thee by proper hymns.

 

14-32. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing Vijaya's words, Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of
Ramâ became very anxious and soon went out of his room to see the Devas.
Hari came up to them and seeing the Devas waiting at the doors very
morose and tired, cheered them up by casting a favourable glance full
affection and love. The gods bowed down and praised hymns to Jagannâtha
the Deva of the Devas, the enemy of the Daityas and revealed in the
Vedas. O Deva of the Devas! Thou art the Creator, Preserver and the
Destroyer of the worlds; Thou art the ocean of mercy and the sole refuge
of this Universe; O Lord! We have come to Thee as our Great Refuge;
therefore dost Thou save us from the present difficulty. Thus praised by
the gods, Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- O Immortals! Take your respective seats
and speak how are you all? Why have you all in a body come here? Why are
you so much depressed and worn out with cares? Why do you look so
melancholy? Say soon for what purpose you with Brahmâ and Rudra have
come here. The Devas said :-- “O Lord! The Asura Mahi<u>s</u>a is very
cruel and wicked; always addicted to vicious acts; now that most sinful
Dânava has become very much puffed up with pride and is tormenting us
always. What more shall we say than this, he is appropriating to himself
the share of the Yajñas performed by the Brâhmins; we are therefore,
terror-stricken and are wandering in mountains and fastnesses. O
Destroyer of Madhu! He has become unconquerable due to his being granted
the boon; considering, therefore, the gravity of our situation we have
taken refuge unto Thee. O Kri<u>sn</u>a! Thou art acquainted with all
the tricks and Mâyâ of the Daityas; therefore Thou art capable to kill
them. Therefore Thou alone art able to deliver us from the present
difficulty; be pleased, therefore; to Devîse means for that purpose. The
Creator Brahmâ has granted him this boon that the demon could not killed
by any man; therefore we are asking you where can we get a female who
will be able to kill that hypocrite in battle. Mahi<u>s</u>a has turned
out very wicked on the strength of that boon; say, therefore, who
amongst Umâ, Lak<u>s</u>mî, S'achî, or Vidyâ or any other woman will be
able to kill him. Therefore, O Gracious One to faithful worshippers and
attendants! Thou art the Preserver of this world; now Devîse specially
the cause of his death and carry out the purpose of the gods.” Vyâsa
said :-- O king! Vi<u>sn</u>u on hearing their words, spoke smiling “We
fought before; but this Asura could not at that time be killed. Hence if
some beautiful female Deity be now created out of the collective energy
and form of the S'aktis of each of the Devas, then that Lady would be
able easily to destroy that Demon

 

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

 

by sheer force. The Lady Deity then sprung from the collective energy of
ours, would at once be able to destroy that Mahi<u>s</u>a, elated on his
getting the power, though he is skilled in hundreds of Mâyâs (magics).
Therefore ask ye now all, with your wives respectively, boons from that
portion which resides in you all in the form of Fiery Energy, that the
collected energy thus manifested may assume the form of a Lady. We will
then offer unto Her, all the Divine weapons, the trident, etc., that
belong to us. That Deity, then, full of energy and with all the weapons
in Her hands would kill that wicked Demon, vicious and swelled with
vanity.”

 

33-46. Vyâsa said :-- On Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of the Devas, saying
thus, came out spontaneously, at once, of the face of Brahmâ, the
brilliant fiery energy, very difficult to conceive. That energy looked
red like gems and pearls, hot, at the same time, a little cool, having a
beautiful form, and encircled by a halo of light. O King! The
high-souled Hari and Hara, of mighty valor, were astonished to see this
Fire, emitted from Brahmâ. Next came out of the body of S'ankara, His
fiery spirit, quite in abundance and very wonderful to behold; it was
silvery white, terrible, unbearable, and incapable of being seen even
with difficulty. It extended like a mountain and looked horrible as if
the incarnation of the Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a like another Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a
(S'iva is the incarnation of Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a that destroys everything).
It was very surprising to the Devas and very fearful to the Daityas.
Next a dazzling light of blue colour emanated from the body of
Vi<u>sn</u>u. The light that came out of the body of Indra was hardly
bearable, of a beautiful variegated colour, and comprised in itself the
three qualities. Thus masses of lights came out respectively from
Kuvera, Yama, Fire and Varu<u>n</u>a. The other Devas, too, gave their
shares of fiery lights, very lustrous and splendid. Then these all
united into a great Mass of Fire and Light. Like another Himalayan
mountain shone full their lustrous Divine light; Vi<u>sn</u>u and the
other Devas were all extremely surprised to see this. While the Devas
were thus looking steadfastly on that Fire, an exquisitely handsome Lady
was born out of it, causing excitement and wonder to all. This Lady was
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî; composed of the three qualities of the three
colours, beautiful, and fascinating to the universe. Her face was white,
eyes were black, her lips were red and the palms of her hands were
copper-red. She was adorned with divine ornaments. The Goddess was now
manifest with eighteen hands, though She had a thousand hands (in Her
unmanifested state). Now She became manifest out of the mass of fire,
for the destruction of the Asuras.

 

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

 

47-52. Janamejaya said :-- O Best of the Munis! O Kri<u>sn</u>a! You are
highly fortunate and you are all-knowing. Kindly describe, in detail the
birth of Her body. O Deva! Please say whether the energies of all the
gods united into one or remained separate? Whether Her body and Her
limbs were all luminous. Was it that Her face, nose, eyes, etc., and all
other parts of Her body were created out of the different fires
respectively or whether was it that those limbs were fashioned when the
different fires blended into one huge mass? Describe, in detail, the
origin of the body and the several limbs thereof; also inform me the
limbs that were produced out of the corresponding Deva's fiery part; as
well tell me the several ornaments and several weapons given by the
several Devas respectively. I am very desirous to hear all these from
your lotus-like mouth. O Brahmâ<u>n</u>! Hearing from your lotus-like
mouth the life and doings of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, the sweet juice as they
are, I am as yet not satiated (and am desirous to hear more).

 

53\. Sûta said :-- Veda Vyâsa, the son of Satyavatî, hearing his words
addressed him in the following sweet words :--

 

54\. “O Best of Kuras! Very fortunate you are. I will describe in
detail, to the best of my understanding, the origin of Her body.

 

55\. Even Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'a and Indra are never competent
enough to describe Her form properly.

 

56\. As I already told you that She sprung at the instant the word was
spoken, how then can I ascertain the form or likeness of the Devî.

 

57\. She is constant, She is always existent; though She is one, yet She
assumes different forms for the fulfilment of the Deva's ends, whenever
their positions become serious.

 

58-59. Though the actor is one, yet for the entertainment of the
spectators, he assumes different forms in the stage, so the
Nirgu<u>n</u>â Devî, though formless, assumes in Her pastime, many
different forms of Sâttvic, Râjasic or Tâmasic qualities, to fulfill the
Deva's purposes.

 

60\. There are various names given to Her, according as the works done
by Her vary immensely in their natures, just as the meanings of one root
vary, some being principal and some secondary, according to the meanings
and objects they convey.

 

61\. O King! I will now describe to you as far as my knowledge goes, the
Excellent Form that came out of that mass of Celestial Light.

 

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

 

62\. Her grand beautiful white lotus-like face was created out of the
fiery energy of S'ankara.

 

63\. Her glossy black beautiful hairs of the head, overhanging to the
knees, were formed out of the light of Yama; these all came to a fine
pointed end.

 

64\. Her three eyes came out of the energy of Fire; the pupils of those
eyes were of a black colour; the middle parts were of a white colour and
the ends were red.

 

65\. The two eyebrows of the Devî were black and came out of the spirit
of Sandhyâ (twilights); they were nicely curved and were looking
spirited, like the bow of the Cupid and they were shedding, as it were,
cooling rays.

 

66\. From the light of Vâyu (air), Her two ears were created; they were
not very long, nor very short, beautiful like the swinging seat (rocking
chair) of the God of Love.

 

67\. Her nose was fashioned out of the fire of Kuvera, the Lord of
wealth; it looked like the til flower, glassy and exquisitely charming.

 

68\. O King! Her pointed rows of glossy and brilliant teeth, looking
like gems, came out of the energy of Dak<u>s</u>a; they looked like the
Kunda flowers.

 

69\. Her lower lip was deep red and it came out of the fire of
Aru<u>n</u>a (the charioteer of the Sun); Her beautiful upper lip came
out of the energy of Kârtika.

 

70\. Her eighteen hands came out of the Tejas of Vi<u>sn</u>u and Her
red fingers came out of the Tejas of the Vasus.

 

71\. Her breasts came out of the energy of Soma and Her middle (navel)
with three folds was created out of the spirit of Indra.

 

72\. Her thighs and legs were from Varu<u>n</u>a and Her spacious loins
came out from Earth.

 

73-74. O King! Thus from the various Tejas, contributed by the Devas,
that Heavenly Lady came out. Her body and the several parts thereof were
beautiful; Her form was incomparably graceful and the voice was
exquisitely sonorous and lovely. The Devas, oppressed by
Mahi<u>s</u>âsura, became overpowered with joy seeing this well
decorated Devî, having beautiful eyes and teeth, and charming in all
respects.”

 

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

 

75\. Vi<u>sn</u>u then addressed all the Devas to give all their
auspicious ornaments and weapons, He said :-- “O Devas! Better give, all
you the various arms and weapons, endowed with strength, created out of
your own weapons and give them all today to the Devî.”

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Fifth Skandha on the description of
the origin and the form of the Devî in S'rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk05ch09.md)
