[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch06)  [Next](bk06ch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On Indra’s living under disguise in the Mânas Lake**

 

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

 

1-16. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Now seeing V<u>r</u>itra slain,
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Deva of the Devas, went to Vaikun<u>t</u>ha; but, with
this fear reigning supreme in his mind that it was He that virtually
slew him. Indra, too, then became afraid of the sin committed by him and
returned to his Heavens. The Munis, too, became very anxious and thought
what great sin they have committed in cheating V<u>r</u>itrâsura. It is
the company of Indra that now made their name “Munis” as meaningless.
The Munis thought thus :-- “Oh! V<u>r</u>itra on our words trusted Indra
and we have thus turned out today traitors in company with that traitor
Indra. Attachment and affection is the cause of all mischief. Fie on
that attachment! It is, as it were, tied by the cord of affection that
we had sworn falsely on oath and thus deceived V<u>r</u>itra. Those that
deliberately guide others to vicious acts or those that advise or incite
others to do sinful acts or those that side with the sinners certainly
partake of the fruits of the sin committed. Vi<u>sn</u>u, too, committed
the sin, though he had Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a preponderance, when he entered
into the thunderbolt and thus helped Indra in killing V<u>r</u>itra. It
seems that henceforth the people, when selfish, won't

 

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

 

hesitate to commit afterwards any sinful act when they will see that
Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u could have done, in concert with Indra, such a
vicious thing. Of the four virtues Dharma, Artha, Kâma, and
Mok<u>s</u>a, Dharma and Mok<u>s</u>a are very rare in the three worlds.
Artha (wealth) and Kâma (desires) are everywhere recommended as
excellent and therefore held very dear; Dharma is now merely in name and
is the cause of the vanity of the Pundits (no one now really practises
Dharma with devotion). Thus arguing, the Munis became very much
afflicted in their minds and went back to their own hermitages
respectively, broken-hearted and absent-minded. O Bharata! Hearing of
the death of his son by Indra, Vis’vakarmâ wept very much and he become
disgusted very much with the affairs of the world. He went to the place
where lay his son V<u>r</u>itra and became pained very much to see him
in that state; and he performed his cremation and other funeral
obsequies according to the prescribed rules. He then bathed, performed
his Tarpa<u>n</u>am (peace-offering) and funeral ceremonies due to a
person in the first year of his death. Then his heart became afflicted
with sorrow and he cursed the vicious Indra saying that as Indra had
killed his son, enticing him by falsely swearing on oath, so Indra, in
his turn would suffer a heavier suffering, to be inflicted by Vidhi (the
Great Creator of Universe). O King! Thus cursing Indra, Vis’vakarmâ,
very much afflicted due to the loss of his son, went to the top of the
Mountain Meru and began to practise a hard tapasyâ.

 

17\. Janamejaya said :-- “O Grandsire! First tell me what happiness or
pain did Indra derive by killing V<u>r</u>itra, the son of
Tva<u>st</u>â.”

 

18-40. Vyâsa said :-- O fortunate One! What are you asking? and what is
the nature of your doubt?  The fruit of one's Karma is certainly to be
enjoyed, whether it be auspicious or inauspicious. Be he weak or strong.
Be he a Deva, an Asura or a human being, everyone in fact, will have to
suffer for one's Karma, good or bad, to its full extent, whether it be
done a little or too much. See! It was Vi<u>sn</u>u that gave advice to
Indra and entered into his thunderbolt and helped him when Indra was
ready to kill V<u>r</u>itra; but when there had been Indra's difficult
time, Vi<u>sn</u>u did not help Indra in any way. Therefore, O King! It
is clear that when one's time is favourable, everybody turns out
friends; but when Fate turns adverse, nobody is seen to come forward to
help. When Fate is against anybody, one's father, mother, wife, or
brother, servant, friend or one's own son becomes quite incapable to
help anybody. The man, who does good or bad acts, suffers for his deeds.
When V<u>r</u>itra was killed, everyone went back to their respective
homes; but Indra, the Lord of S’achî, became very much deprived of his
energy and brilliancy due to the sin of his kill-

 

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

 

ing a Brâhmi<u>n</u>; all the Devas, then, blamed him as a Brâhmaghataka
(the killer of a Brâhmi<u>n</u>). They talked further that no other body
would have been able to even indulge the idea of killing a Muni who was
an intimate friend and who placed full confidence on him when Indra had
sworn on oath that he would be a friend to V<u>r</u>itra. O King!
Everywhere then there was this gossip in the assemblages of the gods, in
their gardens, at the meetings of the Gandharbas that Indra had deceived
V<u>r</u>itra who had relied on him, on the words of the Munis and then
killed him by pretext, and so had done, indeed, a horrible crime. Indra
had now forsaken the eternal proofs of the Vedas; and he had become a
Bauddha; therefore he could have easily killed V<u>r</u>itra. No other
body, save Vi<u>sn</u>u and Indra, could have acted contrary to their
words, as clearly evidenced by the manner in which V<u>r</u>itra had
been killed. These remarks, similar to those mentioned above, became
everywhere current and Indra heard all of them, tending to his own
disgrace. O King! Fie on that man's life that is blamed everywhere! Fie
on that man whose fame has been marred amongst the people. Such a person
becomes laughed at by his enemies, when seen by them on the way. The
royal saint Indradyumna (Râjar<u>s</u>î) was made to get down, though
sinless, from Heavens when his good deeds expired. Why, then, would not
vicious persons be made to descend? The king Yayâti had to get down from
Heavens for his very little fault and had to pass eighteen Yugas in the
form of a crab. What more can be said than the fact that even the
Bhagavân Achyut Hari had to take several incarnations in the wombs of
boar, crocodile, etc., out of the curse from a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, due to
his cutting off the bead of the wife of Bhrigu. Though omnipresent, yet
he had to take the appearance of a dwarf and had to beg from the King
Vali's palace. What more troubles and miseries than this can be
inflicted on those that had sinned viciously. O Ornament of Bharata!
Râmchandra, too, had to experience, due to the curse of Bhrigu, terrible
miseries on the bereavement of Sîtâ Devî. Similarly Indra, too, for his
sin of killing a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, was so much terrified that he could not
get his healthy condition though he remained in his own house, endowed
with all sorts of prosperity and wealth. Seeing, then, Indra lustreless,
knowledge-less, almost void of consciousness, and overwhelmed with fear,
his wife S’achî, the daughter of Pulomâ, spoke to him thus :-- “O Lord!
Your dreadful enemy has been killed; why are you, then, sighing so much,
being afflicted with so much terror? O Lord! You have destroyed your
enemy; then why are you so much anxious? why are you then so much
remorseful and drawing such deep heavy sighs like an ordinary man? I am
not seeing any other powerful enemy of yours; then, why do you look so
anxious and bowed down with cares, as if you look quite unconscious.”

 

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

 

41-44. Indra said :-- “O Devî! True that I have no other powerful enemy,
yet I do not find peace nor any happiness. I fear for the sin
Brâhmahattyâ in my house. O Devî! This Nandana Garden, the city of
Kuvera, the lord of riches, this nectar forest, the sweet music of the
Gandbarbas, the beautiful dance of the Apsarâs, all these now do not
give the least pleasure to me. What more can I say than this that the
beautiful Lady like you, most beautiful amidst the three worlds, and
other beautiful ladies, the Heavenly cow, the Mandâra tree (one of the
five trees of the celestial region), the Pârijâta tree (the flower
tree), the Santâna tree, the Kalpa tree (yielding all desires) and the
Harichandan (saffron tree) and others cannot give pleasure to me. What
to do, where to go, so that I get happiness, O Beloved! This thought
makes me uneasy. And so I am not able to get happiness in my own
thought.”

 

45-60. Vyâsa said :-- Thus speaking to his most distressed wife, Indra
got out of his house and went to the exceedingly beautiful lake, named
Manasarovara. Indra there entered into the tubular stalk of the lotus,
his body becoming very lean and thin out of the fear and sorrow. Nobody
could recognise him as he was overpowered by his terrible sin. He then
began to behave himself, as regards feeding and enjoying, like a snake;
and he became ovewhelmed with thought, helpless, and his organs were out
of order, He remained hidden in the water. When Indra, the king of the
Devas, thus fled away out of the fear of his Brâhmahattyâ sin, the other
Devas became very anxious; everywhere various evil signs manifested
themselves. The Ri<u>s</u>is, Siddhas and Gandharbas were very much
panic-stricken, as various disturbances and violent symptoms covered all
over the world without any king. Grains began to grow very scanty, due
to want of rains; the streams were almost dry and very little water was
there in the tanks. In such a state of anarchism, all the inhabitants of
the celestial regions, the Devas and Ri<u>s</u>is consulted and
installed the king Nahu<u>s</u>a in the place of Indra. O King!
Nahu<u>s</u>a, though virtuous, became, under the sway of
Rajogu<u>n</u>a, influenced by lust and thus he got very much addicted
to worldly enjoyments. He began to amuse himself in the Garden of
Paradise, surrounded by the Apsarâs or celestial nymphs. One day he
heard of the excellent qualifications of S'achî Devî, the wife of Indra,
and desired to acquire her. Then he spoke to the Ri<u>s</u>is :-- The
Devas and you, united, have installed me in the office of Indra; but why
does not the Indranî (the wife of Indra), come to me so long? If you
want to do what I like, then quickly bring S'achî here before me for my
gratification. I am now Indra and therefore the god of the Devas and all
the worlds; therefore bring today quickly Indranî to my house. Hearing
thus the words

 

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

 

of the king Nahu<u>s</u>a, the Devas and Devar<u>s</u>îs became anxious
and went to S'achî, and, with their heads bowed down, spoke thus :-- “O
Wife of Indra! The wicked Nahu<u>s</u>a is now desiring you; he became
angry and told as to send you to him quickly; O Devî! We have made him
Indra and are therefore under him; what shall we do now under these
circumstances?” S'achî, the wife of Indra, hearing their words, became
absent-minded and spoke to Brihaspati, thus :-- “O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! I
now take refuge unto you.”

 

61-62. Brihaspati said :-- “O Devî! Do not be afraid of Nahu<u>s</u>a;
he has been deluded by Moha. O Child! I won't forsake the eternal
religion and thus I won't give you over to the hands of Nahu<u>s</u>a.
No doubt that wretch suffers the severest torments in Hell to the end of
Pralaya (the Great Dissolution) who quits and hands over the distressed
person under one's refuge to another. O Good One! Be comfortable; I will
never forsake you.”

 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Sixth Book on Indra's living under
disguise in the Mânas Lake in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk06ch08)
