[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch30)  [Next](bk07ch01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXI**

 

**On the glory of Mâyâ**

 

<span id="page_593">p. 593</span>

 

18-22. O Muni! When my Father learnt the cause of my cares, he smiled
and spoke to me in sweet words :-- “O Child! The Devas, the high-souled
Munis, the wise ascetics and the Yogis subsisting on air only are not
able to conquer this Mâyâ. O Nârada! The power of Mâyâ is so very great
that I, Vi<u>sn</u>u and S’ambhu, the Lord of Umâ, none are able to know
Her power.

 

That Mahâmâyâ is creating, preserving and dissolving this world by Time,
Karma, and Nature and other efficient causes. O Child! Know Her to be
inconceivable and unapproachable. O Intelligent One! Do not be sorry nor
should you be surprised about Mâyâ’s great strength, for we all are
deluded by Her.

 

23-25. O Dvaipâyan! Thus advised by my Father, my wonder disappeared. I
then asked permission of my Father Padma Yoni (Lotus-born) and went out
on tour round the sacred places of pilgrimages and on my way, seeing by
and by the chief Tîrthas, I have now come here. Therefore, O Muni! Dost
thou relinquish your sorrows for the extinction of the Kuru’s family and
remain here and pass your time in great joy and happiness. One must bear
the fruits of one’s Karma, good or bad; knowing this fully roam at your
will wherever you like.

 

26-40. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Mahar<u>s</u>i Nârada thus kindling
knowledge in me, went away; I also thought over his words. On the banks
of the river Sarasvatî, I composed this Devî Bhâgavat to pass away my
time during the excellent period of Sârasvata Kalpa. This Purâ<u>n</u>am
is excellent; it is composed on the authority of the the Vedas; all
doubts are removed by it; many nice events are narrated here. Therefore,
O King! Not the least doubt should be entertained. As a magician makes
the wooden dolls dance in his hands at his will, so this
world-enchanting Mâyâ is making this world, moving and non-moving, dance
from Brahmâ down to the blades of grass and all human beings. O King!
Know Mâyâ’s triple Gu<u>n</u>as to be the cause of this mind consisting
of five organs of senses, that follows the Chitta (mind, buddhi and
Ahamkâra). Actions arise from the causes thereof; there is no doubt in
this; what doubt, then, there can arise that all these creatures of
different temperaments will come out of the different Gu<u>n</u>as of
Mâyâ. Peaceful, terrible and stupid become the persons in contact with
the Mayic Gu<u>n</u>as. How, then, can they exist, bereft of them? As
the cloth cannot exist without threads, so the embodied beings cannot
exist in the world without the triple Gu<u>n</u>as of Mâyâ. There is no
doubt in this. As a pot cannot be made without clay, so these bodies,
Devas, human or birds, cannot be created without the Gu<u>n</u>as.
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u

 

<span id="page_594">p. 594</span>

 

and S’iva, too, are possessed of those three Gu<u>n</u>as and therefore
they become sometimes happy and satisfied, sometimes unhappy and
dissatisfied and sometimes they become sad and remorseful as they are
then under the influence of one Gu<u>n</u>a or the other. Brahmâ happens
at times to be full of wisdom and knowledge, his temper peaceful, sweet
and pleasant and his soul rapt in Samâdhi, when he becomes possessed of
Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>a; again when he is void of Sâttva and filled with Râjo
Gu<u>n</u>a, His temper becomes unpleasant and his appearance gets dark
and awful everywhere; and when he becomes grossly Tâmasic, He becomes
sorrowful and bereft entirely of intelligence.

 

41-51. Vi<u>sn</u>u, when resting in Sâttva, becomes peaceful,
sweet-tempered, and full of knowledge; when Râjo Gu<u>n</u>a
preponderates in Him, He becomes void of sweetness and becomes awful to
all the beings. Rudra becomes, too, peaceful and pleasant under the
Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>a, awful and void of sweetness under the Râjo
Gu<u>n</u>a, and becomes sad and stupid under the Tâmo Gu<u>n</u>a. O
King! When Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes’vara and the solar and lunar
Kings, the fourteen lords of Manvantaras, Manu and others are under the
control of the mayic Gunas, what to speak of other ordinary mortals, men
and the other Jîvas. The whole world is under the control of Mâyâ; the
Devas, men and all other beings. None should doubt on this point. All
the embodied beings labour under the directions of Mâyâ; never can they
work independently. This Mâyâ is again always residing in the Highest
Essence, the Samvit or the Universal Pure Consciousness. Thus Mâyâ is
dependent on the Highest Goddess, Who is of the nature of Samvit, and,
stimulated by Her, resides in the hearts of all the Jîvas. Therefore one
ought to meditate, worship and bow down before the Bhagavatî, the
Creatrix of Mâyâ and Who is of the nature of Samvit, Pure Existence,
Intelligence and Bliss. Thus She becomes gracious and merciful and
liberates the Jîvas, giving them Her realisation and drawing together
Her own Mâyâ away from them. This whole cosmos is nothing but Mâyâ and
the Consciousness (Samvit) of the nature of Brâhma<u>n</u> is the Lord
of Mâyâ. For this reason that Beautiful One in the triple worlds, the
Devî Bhagavatî is known by the name Bhuvanes’varî, the Great Lady of the
worlds.

 

52-60. O King! If the Jîvas can fix their hearts on that Samvit, then
Mâyâ, born of the real and unreal, is quite unable to do any harm to
them. No other Deva than the Bhuvanes’varî, of the nature of pure
existence, intelligence and bliss is able to remove this Mâyâ. O King!
Darkness cannot destroy darkness; the Sun, Moon, Lightning or Fire can
destroy it. Therefore it is highly incumbent on us to worship the

 

<span id="page_595">p. 595</span>

 

Lady of Mâyâ, the Samvit, the Mother with a cheerful heart to remove the
Mâyâ and Her Gu<u>n</u>as. O King! Now I have narrated to you all the
events concerning the killing of Vritrâsura that you asked. What more do
you want to hear now. O One devoted to vows! I have now described the
first half of that Purâ<u>n</u>a, which describes in detail the glory of
S’rî Devî Bhagavatî. This Purâ<u>n</u>a, the secret of this Mother of
the whole Universe, is not to be disclosed indiscriminately to anybody.
Those that are peaceful, self-restrained, devoted, and possessed of
Bhakti to the Devî, the disciples that are devoted to their Gurus and
the eldest son, those are the fit recipients thereof. Whoever reads or
hears with greatest devotion this Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, equivalent to the
Vedas, fraught with sound proofs and the essence of all talks, becomes,
in this world, possessed of great wealth, becomes wise and passes his
time in the greatest happiness. There is no doubt in this.

 

Here ends the Thirty-first Chapter on the Sixth Book on the glory of
Mâyâ in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses
by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

\[The Sixth Book Finished.\]

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk07ch01.md)
