[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch27)  [Next](bk06ch29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVIII**

 

**On Nârada’s getting the feminine form**

 

<span id="page_582">p. 582</span>

 

1-11. Nârada said :-- O Thou whose only wealth consists in asceticism! I
am now describing to you all those good stories; hear attentively. O
Muni! This Mâyâ and Her Power are incomprehensible even by those who are
the foremost amongst the Yogins. This whole Universe, moving and
non-moving, from Brahmâ to the blade of grass, is enchanted by that
Unborn and Incomprehensible Mâyâ; therefore no one can escape from the
hands of that Mâyâ. One day I wanted to see Hari, of wonderful deeds,
and went out with lute in my hand from Satyaloka, to the lovely S’veta
Dvîpa (the residence of Vi<u>sn</u>u) singing the beautiful Sâma hymns
in tune with the seven Svaras. I saw there Gadâdhara, the Deva of the
Devas, with four arms holding disc in one of his hands. He resembled a
newly-formed rain-cloud of S’yâma colour. He was illumined with the
lustre of the Kaustubha jewel in his breast. He was wearing an yellow
apparel. His head was beautified with a lustrous crown. Thus the
Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a was playing in amorous movements with the
daughter of the ocean, fully capable to give one delight and enjoyment.
Seeing me, the lovely Devî Kamalâ, dear to Vâsudeva, full of youth and
beauty, decorated with ornaments, endowed with all auspicious signs,
superior to all the women, went away at once (to another room) from the
presence of Janârdana. The breast of Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî was becoming
visible even through the cloth thrown over it; therefore she went
hurriedly to the inner compartment. Seeing this I asked Janârdana, the
Deva of the Devas, the Lord of the worlds, and holding a garland of
forest grown flowers thus :-- “O Bhagavân! O Slayer of Mura! O
Padmanâbha! Why has Kamalâ Devî, the Mother of all the Lokas, on seeing
me coming here, gone out of Your presence. O Lord of the worlds! I am
not a rogue nor a cheat; I have conquered my passions and am become an
ascetic; I have conquered even Mâyâ. Therefore O Deva! What is the cause
of the departure of the Kamalâ Devî from here? Kindly explain this to
me.”

 

12-20. Nârada said :-- O Dvaipâyana! Hearing my words, expressive of my
pride, Janârdana smiled and spoke to me in words sweet like the sound of
a lute :-- “O Nârada! The rule in such cases is this :-- The wife of any
man whatsoever ought not to stay before any other male outsider than her
husband. O Nârada! It is very hard to conquer Mâyâ; even those, who by
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma have conquered their Prâ<u>n</u>a Vâyu, their organs of
senses and their food, even those Sâmkhya Yogins and the Devas are not
able to conquer Mâyâ. The words that you have just now uttered that you

 

<span id="page_583">p. 583</span>

 

have conquered Mâyâ are not fit to come out of your mouth; for by your
knowledge of music, it seems that you are enchanted with the sounds of
the music. Brahmâ, I, S’iva, and the other Munis, none of us has been
able as yet to conquer that Unborn Mâyâ; how, then, can it be possible
that you or any other man can conquer that Mâyâ! Any embodied being, be
he a Deva, a human being, or a bird, no one is able to conquer that Mâyâ
Unborn. Whoever is endowed with the three Gu<u>n</u>as, be he a knower
of the Vedas, or a Yogin, or conqueror of his passions, or all knowing,
is not able to conquer Mâyâ. The Great Time (Kâla) though formless, is
one form of Mâyâ and fashions this universe. All the Jîvas are
subservient to this Kâla, be he a good literary person, or of a mediocre
nature, or an illiterate brute. This Kâla sometimes makes even a
religious man that knows Dharma confounded and deluded; so you know the
nature of Mâyâ is very incomprehensible and Her ways mysterious.” (Note:
This Kâla is of the fourth dimension, time and space.)

 

21-23. O Dvaipâyana! Thus saying, Vi<u>sn</u>u stopped. I was greatly
astonished and asked that Eternal Vâsudeva, the Deva of the Devas, the
Lord of the World, “O Lord of Ramâ! What is the form of Mâyâ? How is
She? What is the measure of Her strength? Where She resides? Whose
substratum is She? Kindly tell these to me. O Preserver of the Universe!
I am greatly desirous to see Mâyâ; Shew Her to me quickly. O Lord of
Ramâ! I am very eager to know Mâyâ. Be graciously pleased to describe
tome the glory of Mâyâ.”

 

24-36. Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- Mâyâ resides everywhere throughout this
whole Universe; Her nature consists of the three Gu<u>n</u>as; She is
the substratum of all; She is omniscient, and acknowledged by all;
invisible, and of diverse forms. O Nârada! If you want to see Mâyâ, then
come quickly and mount with me on Garu<u>d</u>a; we both will go
elsewhere and I will shew you that Mâyâ, invincible by those who have
not conquered themselves. O Son of Brahmâ! Don’t be depressed when you
see Mâyâ. Thus saying, Janârdana Hari remembered Garu<u>d</u>a and
instantly he came to Hari. Janârdana mounted on him and gladly made me
also get up on his back and took me with Him. In a moment Garu<u>d</u>a,
went, at his command, with the speed of wind to the forest where the
Bhagavân desired to go. Mounting on Garu<u>d</u>a we passed and saw on
our way beautiful forests, nice lakes, rivers, towns, villages, huts of
cultivators, towns close to the mountains, huts for cow-keepers in
cowsheds, the beautiful hermitages of the Munis, lovely Jhils, tanks and
lakes beautified with big lotuses, flocks of ewes, packs of wild boars,
etc., till, at last, we came to a place close to Kanauj. I saw there a
beautiful divine tank; nice lotuses blossomed there, spreading their
sweet fragrance all around; the bees

 

<span id="page_584">p. 584</span>

 

were making lovely humming noise and ravishing away the minds of men;
various flowers, lilies, etc., were beautifying the place; Geese,
Kâra<u>nd</u>avas, and Chakravâkas and other acquatic fowls were playing
with their cackling noise, the water was very sweet like milk; the tank
was defying, as it were the ocean. Seeing such a wonderful tank, the
Bhagavân told me :-- “O Nârada! See, how beautiful is this deep tank
with its clear waters, and adorned all over with lotuses! The sweet
voiced flamingoes are roaming on the lake making lovely sounds!

 

37-54. We will bathe in this tank and then go to the city Kanauj. Thus
saying, He made me descend quickly from Garu<u>d</u>a and He himself
also got down. Then the Bhagavân smilingly caught hold of my fore-finger
and repeatedly praising the glory of the tank took me to its bank. We
rested a while on the cool umbrageous beautiful bank when S’rî Bhagavân
said :-- “O Muni! Better bathe you first in this tank; next I will bathe
in this very holy pool of water. O Nârada! Look! Look! How clear
crystal-like is the water of this pool like the heart of a saint; see
how it smells also fragrantly in contact with the lotuses on it.” When
the Bhagavân spoke thus to me; I kept my lute and deer skin aside and
gladly went to the edge of the tank. Washing then my hands and feet I
tied my hair lock and, taking Kus’a grass, I performed my Âchaman and,
purifying myself, began to bathe myself in that tank. While I was
bathing, Hari was looking at me; by the time I took a dip, I saw that I
quitted my male form and got a beautiful female form. Hari took away,
then, my deer skin and lute and mounting on Garu<u>d</u>a went away in a
moment to His own residence. Getting the female form and decorated with
excellent ornaments, my memory of my previous male form vanished at
once; I forgot all about my famous lute and forgot also Jagannâtha, the
Deva of the Devas. I then came out of the tank in that enchanting woman
form, saw the pool of water filled with clear limpid water and adorned
with lotuses. Seeing that, I began to think :-- “What is this?” and I
became very much astonished. While I was thus meditating in my woman
form, a king, named Tâladhvaja, came there, all on a sudden, on a
chariot, accompanied by numerous elephants and horses. The King looked
like a second Cupid; he was decorated with various ornaments on his
various limbs; he was just entering into his youth and he looked very
enchanting. The King saw me at once and looking at me decked with divine
ornaments and my moon-like face, was greatly astonished and asked me :--
“O Kalyâ<u>n</u>i! Who are you? Are you the daughter of a man or of a
Nâga (serpent) or of a Gandharva or of a Deva? I see you are now in your
youth; why are you alone here? O Lovely-eyed!

 

<span id="page_585">p. 585</span>

 

Has any fortunate person married you? Or are you still unmarried? Speak
all these truly to me. O Fair-haired One! What are you looking at in
this tank? O One enchanting, as it were, like the Cupid! What is your
desire? Say, O Slanting-eyed! My mind is ravished to hear your
cuckoo-like voice. O One of thin waist! Choose me as your husband and
enjoy various excellent things as you like.”

 

Here ends the Twenty-eighth Chapter of the Sixth Book on Nârada’s
getting the feminine form in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](bk06ch29.md)
