[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch24)  [Next](bk06ch26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXV**

 

**On the cause of Moha of Vyâsa Deva asked before Nârada**

 

<span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

 

1-10. Vyâsa said :-- OKing! The mother became astonished to hear me.
Becoming very anxious for a son, she began to speak to me. O Child! The
wife of your brother, the daughter Ambâlikâ of Kâs’îrâj, is a widow; she
is very sorrowful; she is endowed with all auspicious signs and endowed
with all good qualities; better cohabit with that beautiful young wife
and get a child according to the tradition of the S’i<u>st</u>as.
Persons born blind are not entitled to kingdoms. Therefore take my word
and procreate a beautiful son and thus keep my honour. O Muni! Hearing
the mother’s words, I began to wait in Hastinâpura till Ambâlikâ, the
daughter of Kâs’îrâj, finished her ablutions after menstruation. That
King’s daughter, of curling hairs, came to me alone at her
mother-in-law’s order, and became very much abashed. Seeing me an
ascetic with matted hairs on my head and void of every love sentiment,
perspiration came on her face; her body turned pale and her

 

<span id="page_572">p. 572</span>

 

mind void of any love towards me. When I saw that lady trembling and
pale beside me, I angrily spoke :-- “O One of beautiful waist! When you
have turned out pale, considering your own beauty, let your son be of a
pale colour.” Thus saying I spent there that night with Ambâlikâ. After
enjoying her I took farewell from my mother and went to my place.

 

11-21. In due course, the two daughters of the King gave birth to two
sons respectively, one blind and the other pale. The son of Ambikâ was
named Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra; and the son of Ambâlikâ was named
Pâ<u>nd</u>u, as his colour was pâ<u>nd</u>u (pale). Mother became
absent-minded when she saw the two sons in those states. After one year
she again called me and said :-- “O Dvaipâyana! These two persons are
not so fit to become kings; therefore beget one more son beautiful and
according to my liking.” When I consented, she became very glad and, in
due course, asked Ambikâ to embrace me and give birth to a son, endowed
with extraordinary qualities, and fit to preserve the line worthy of the
Kuru dynasty. The bride did not then say anything on account of her
bashfulness. But when I went in the night time according to my mother’s
order, to the sleeping room, Ambikâ sent to me a maid-servant of
Vichitravîrya, full of youth and beauty, and adorned with various
ornaments and clothings. That maid-servant of beautiful hairs and of a
swan-like gait adorned with garlands and red sandal-paste, came to me
with many enchanting gestures and making me take my seat on the cot,
became herself merged in love sentiments. O Muni! I became pleased with
her gestures and amorous sports and passed the night, full of love
towards her and played and cohabited with her. At last I gladly gave her
the boon, “O Fortunate One! Your child, begotten by me, will be endowed
with all good qualities, will be of good form, will be conversant with
all the essences of Dharma, calm and quiet and truthful.”

 

22-34. In due course, a child named Vidura was born to her. Thus I had
three sons; and in my mind grew up Mâyâ and affection that these were my
sons. When I saw again those three sons, heroic and full of manliness,
the only cause of my sorrow due to the bereavement of my son S’uka
vanished away from my mind. O Lord of Dvîjas! Mâyâ is very powerful and
extremely hard to be abandoned by those who are not masters of their
senses; She enchants even the wise, though She does not possess any form
nor any substratum nor any support. I could not find any peace, even in
the forest, as my mind was attached to my mother and children. O Muni!
My mind then began to oscillate like a pendulum and I remained sometime
in Hastinâpura and sometime on the

 

<span id="page_573">p. 573</span>

 

banks of the Sarasvatî. I could not stay in a certain fixed place. By
discrimination, the knowledge sometimes flashed in my mind :-- Whose
sons are these? The attachment is nothing but merely a delusion. On my
death they would not be entitled to perform my S’râddha ceremony. These
sons are begotten by ways and manners not sanctioned by Dharma; what
happiness can they bring to me? O Muni! The powerful Mâyâ has caused
this delusion in me. What! Knowing this Samsâra to be unreal, Alas! I
have fallen into this well of the Darkness of delusion. Thus I repented
when I thought over the matter deeply and when I was alone in a solitary
place. When, subsequently, through the mediation of Bhî<u>s</u>ma, the
powerful Pâ<u>nd</u>u got the kingdom, I became pleased to see the
prosperity of my son. O Muni! This is also the creation of Mâyâ. The
daughter of the King S’ûrasena, named Kuntî, and the daughter of the
King of Madra, named Mâdrî became the two beautiful wives of
Pâ<u>nd</u>u. Pâ<u>nd</u>u was cursed by a Brâhma<u>n</u>a that he would
die if he cohabited with any woman; he therefore became dispassionate
and quitting his kingdom, went to the forest with his two wives. Hearing
Pâ<u>nd</u>u gone to the forest I felt pain and went to my son who was
staying with his wives and consoling him, came to Hastinâpura, where I
held a conversation with Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra and then came back to the
banks of the river Sarasvatî.

 

35-50. Pâ<u>nd</u>u in his forest life, got five sons out of his wives
by the Devas Dharma, Vâyu, Indra, and the twin As’vins. Dharma, Vâyu,
and Indra begat respectively of Kuntî the three sons Yudhi<u>st</u>hira,
Bhîmasena and Arju<u>n</u>a; and the two As’vins begat of Mâdrî the two
sons Nakulu and Sahadeva. Once Mâdrî, full of youth and beauty, was
staying alone in a solitary place and Pâ<u>nd</u>u seeing her embraced
her and due to the curse, died. When the funeral pyre was ablaze, the
chaste Mâdrî entered into the fire and died a Satî. Kuntî was prevented
from doing so, as she was to nurse and look after her young children.
The Munis then took the sorrowful Kuntî, the daughter of S’ûrasena,
bereft of her husband to Hastinâpur and handed her over to the
high-souled Bhî<u>s</u>ma and Vidura. When I came to hear this, my mind
was greatly agitated to see the pain and pleasure that other people
suffered. Bhî<u>s</u>ma, Vidura, and Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra began to
nourish and support Yudhi<u>st</u>hira and others as they considered
them the sons of their dearest Pâ<u>nd</u>u. The cruel and wicked sons
of Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra, Duryodhana and others united with each other and
began to quarrel horribly with the sons of Pâ<u>nd</u>u.
Dro<u>n</u>âchârya came there accidentally and Bhî<u>s</u>ma treated him
with great respect and requested him to stay in Hastinâpura and educate
the sons of Kuru. Kar<u>n</u>a was the the son of

 

<span id="page_574">p. 574</span>

 

Kuntî, when she was young and unmarried; and he was quitted by her no
sooner he was born. The charioteer Sûta (or carpenter) Adhiratha found
him in a river and nourished him. Kar<u>n</u>a was the foremost of the
heroes and therefore the great favourite of Duryodhana. The enmity
between Bhîma and Duryodhana, etc., began to grow greater day by day.
Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra, thinking the difficult situation of his children,
fixed the residence of the sons of Pâ<u>nd</u>u at the Vâra<u>n</u>âvata
city so that the quarrels might die away. Out of enmity, Duryodhana
ordered his dear friend Purochana to build there a house of lac for the
Pâ<u>nd</u>avas. O Muni! When I heard that Kuntî and her five sons were
burnt in the lac-house, I became merged in the ocean of sorrows and
thought that they were my grandsons. I was overwhelmed with sorrow and
began to search after them in deep forests day and night till at last I
found them in Ekachakrâ city, lean and thin and very much distressed
with sorrow.

 

51-63. I became very glad to see them and sent them soon to the city of
the King Drupada. Wearing the deer’s skin, they went there dejected with
sorrow in the Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s dress and stayed in the royal court. The
victorious Arju<u>n</u>a shewed prowess and pierced the mark (the eye of
the fish) and obtained Kri<u>sn</u>â, the daughter of the King Drupada.
By the order of the mother Kuntî, the five brothers married her. O Muni!
I became very glad to see that they were all married. The
Pâ<u>nd</u>avas , then, accompanied by Pânchâlî, soon went to
Hastinâpura. Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra then fixed Khândavaprastha as the
residence of the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas. Vi<u>sn</u>u, the son of Vâsudeva,
then performed the Yajñâ with the victorious Arju<u>n</u>a and satisfied
the Great Fire. The Pâ<u>nd</u>avas next performed the Râjasûya
sacrifice and that made me very glad. Seeing the affluence and
prosperity of the Pâ<u>nd</u>avas and the great assembly hall beautiful
and exquisitely artistic, Duryodhana was burnt up, as it were, with
malice and made arrangements for play in dice, very injurious in its
consequences. S’akuni was expert in playing deceitfully and
Yudhi<u>st</u>hira the son of Dharma, was not expert in this play. So
Duryodhana made S’akuni play for him and stole away all that
Yudhi<u>st</u>hira had and insulted, at last, in the royal assembly, the
daughter of Drupada, Yajñâsenî and gave her much trouble. The
Pâ<u>nd</u>avas then went with Pânchâlî in an exile in the forest for
twelve years. And I was very much grieved to hear this O Muni! Though I
know all about the Sanâtan Dharma, yet I was deluded and merged in these
worlds of pains and pleasures. Who am I? To whom do these sons belong?
My mind roams day and night on the thought of all these. O Muni! What
shall I do? And whither shall I go? I don’t find happiness anywhere; my
mind is, as it were, floating in a

 

<span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

 

rocking machine and it is never being fixed. O Best of Munis! You are
all-knowing; solve my doubts so that my mental fever may be quietened
and I may be happy.

 

Here ends the Twenty-fifth Chapter on the cause of Moha of Vyâsa Deva
asked before Nârada in S’rî Mad Devi Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](bk06ch26.md)
