[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch13)  [Next](bk06ch15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIV**

 

**On the birth of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha from Mitrâ Varu<u>n</u>a**

 

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

 

1-2. Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavân! Mahar<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha
was the mind-born son of Brahmâ; how is it then that you have named him
as Maitrâ-Vâru<u>n</u>î. Is it that he got this name by some action or
by some Gu<u>n</u>as? Kindly tell me the origin of this name, O Best of
speakers!”

 

3-4. Vyâsa said :-- O King! It is quite true that the illustrious
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha was the noble son of Brahmâ but he had to quit that
body due to the curse of the King Nimi and he had to take a second body
from Mitrâ Varu<u>n</u>a; hence he is named in this world as
Maitrâ-Vâru<u>n</u>î.

 

5-6. The King said :-- “O Bhagavân! How was it that the religious
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, the best of the Munis, the son of Brahmâ was cursed by
the King? Oh! The Munis have to suffer the dreadful curse of
K<u>s</u>attriya kings! This seems very wonderful to me. O Knower of
Dharma! Why did that king curse the innocent Muni? I am very curious to
hear the cause of this; kindly tell me the cause of the curse.”

 

7-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I told you already in particular all the
causes of these. This Samsâra is pervaded by the three Gu<u>n</u>as of
Mâyâ, Sâttva, Râja and Tâma. Whether the kings practise their Dharma or
the ascetics practise their tapas, all their actions are interpenetrated
with these Gu<u>n</u>as; therefore they cannot shine so brightly. The
Kings, Munis performed very severe penances and austerities under the
influence of lust, anger, greed and Ahamkâra. O King! All, whether they
be the K<u>s</u>attriyas or the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, who perform their
sacrifices overpowered with this Râjo Gu<u>n</u>a, really, none of them
performs these actions guided by Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>a. The King Nimi was
cursed by the Ri<u>s</u>i and the Ri<u>s</u>i was cursed again by the
King Nimi; thus they met with greater calamities and painful sufferings,
the fruits from the hands of the powerful Fate. O King! In this world of
the three Gu<u>n</u>as, it is very difficult for the beings to get the
Dravya S’uddhi, Kriyâ S’uddhi, and the pure effulgent Chitta S’uddhi, O
King! Know this as the influence wielded

 

<span id="page_531">p. 531</span>

 

by the Highest S’akti, the Mother of this Universe. Nobody is able to
overstep it; but he, whom She favours, can cross in a moment this world,
bounded by the three Gu<u>n</u>as. What more can be said than the fact
that Hari, Hara, and Brahmâ and the other Gods cannot free themselves
without Her grace. Moreover, the sinners like Satyavrata and others
become free when Her Grace comes upon them. Nobody in these three worlds
can know what reigns in Her mind; again, this is also a certain fact
that She gets Herself bound by Her own will to Her devotees. Therefore
it is extremely desirable that one should have recourse to Sâttvikî
devotion for the complete removal of faults and sins. And as the
devotion with attachment and vanity is always injurious to men,
therefore it is highly beneficial to quit it; there is no doubt in this.
O King! There was a king named Nimi, born of the family of
Ik<u>s</u>âku. He was beautiful, well qualified, virtuous, truthful,
charitable, endearing to his people, a sacrificer, of pure conduct and
manners, ready to govern his subjects, intelligent and endowed with
knowledge. For the benefit of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, that high-souled
king established a city named Jayantupur in close vicinity to the
hermitage of Gautama. Thus some time passed when this Râjasik idea arose
in his mind that “I will perform a sacrifice extending for a good many
years when I will give exhorbitant Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs (remunerations
to the priests and Brâhmi<u>n</u>s).” Getting permission from his own
father Ik<u>s</u>âku, he began to collect all the ingredients necessary
for the sacrifice, as advised by the high-souled persons. He invited the
all-knowing Munis and ascetics, versed in the Vedas and in conducting
sacrifices, e.g., Bhrigu, Angirâ, Vâmadeva, Gautama, Vas’i<u>st</u>ha,
Pulastya, Richika, Pulaha, Kratu and others, all well-versed in the
Vedas. Then that religious King Nimi, collecting all the materials
necessary for sacrifice worshipped his own Guru Vas’i<u>st</u>ha and
then spoke to him (the Guru) with great humility. O Best of Munis! I
will perform a sacrifice; kindly perform this my sacrificial act; you
are my Guru and therefore you know everything; so do this sacrifice for
me. All the articles for this purpose are brought and cleansed. O Guru!
Know that for five thousand years I mean to be engaged in this
sacrifice, this is my Sankalpa (will). I will worship the Goddess Ambikâ
in this sacrifice and for Her satisfaction I am arranging for it
according to the prescribed rules. Hearing the King Nimi’s words,
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha said :-- “O best of Kings! Indra, the King of the
Devas, has already selected me for his sacrificial ceremony. Now Indra
is ready to do the sacrifice for the propitiation of the Highest S’akti
and I have initiated him for five hundred years. Therefore, O King! You
will have to wait till I complete the Indra’s Yajñâ. After fully
completing all his works, I will come here. Therefore, O King! Wait till
then.”

 

<span id="page_532">p. 532</span>

 

31-42. The King said :-- “O Best of Munis! I have already invited other
Munis for this sacrifice and have collected all the materials; how,
then, can I wait for you? O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! You are the foremost of
those versed in the Vedas and you are the family Guru of the noble
Ik<u>s</u>âku. How is it, then, avoiding my work you are ready to go
elsewhere O Best of Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! Under the uncontrollable greed of
wealth you have lost all senses and you are ready to go away without
doing my work. This does not behove you.” O King! Though thus tempted by
the King Nimi, the Ri<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha went to the Indra’s
sacrifice. The King, too, became absent-minded and selected for the
sacrifice the Ri<u>s</u>i Gautama. He then commenced his sacrificial
ceremony close to the ocean by the side of the Himâlayân range and gave
profusely the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs. The King Nimi was engaged in this
sacrificial act for five thousand years. In this the Rittviks (priests)
were worshipped with sufficient wealth and cows; they were extremely
glad. Then, when the five hundred years extending sacrifice of Indra was
completed, the Ri<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha came to see the King Nimi’s
sacrifice and waited there to see the King. The king was then asleep; so
the servants did not awake him from his sleep; and the King did not come
to the Ri<u>s</u>i. Feeling insult at this, the Mahar<u>s</u>i
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha became infuriated with rage. Not seeing the King, he
became very angry; and, subject to this, he cursed the King, When I am
your lifelong Guru, especially when I prohibited you and you have
forsaken me and selected another Guru and by your sheer force you are
initiated, then be devoid of your body. Let your body fall off today.

 

43-50. Vyâsa said :-- The King’s attendants, hearing thus the curse
given by Vas’i<u>st</u>ha to the King, instantly awoke him from his
sleep and informed him that the Ri<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha not seeing
you, became very angry. The King Nimi, quite sinless, went then to the
angry Vas’i<u>st</u>ha and humbly spoke to him the following reasonable
words, pregnant with meaning. O Knower of Dharma! I am your Yajamâna;
though I repeatedly requested you to perform my sacrifice, yet you
quitted me out of the covetousness and went somewhere else. I cannot be
charged with any fault. You are the foremost of Brâhmi<u>n</u>s; and
knowing that contentment is the substance of your Dharma, you did not
feel ashamed to do this blameable act. You are the son of Brahmâ; and,
being versed in the Vedas and Vedângas, you are yet unaware of the
subtle and very difficult nature of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>ic religion. Now
you want to cast your own fault on my shoulders and you are trying in
vain to curse me. Anger is more to be blamed than Châ<u>nd</u>âla! The
wise men should overcome it by all means. When you, infuriated with
rage, have been able to curse me for nothing, then I now curse you, “Let
your this body, inflamed with

 

<span id="page_533">p. 533</span>

 

anger, drop off.” O King! Thus the King cursed the Muni and the Muni
cursed the King; and both of them were, therefore, very sorry.

 

51-52. Vas’i<u>st</u>ha then became troubled with cares and took shelter
with Brahmâ and informing him about the great curse given by the King
Nimi said :-- Father! The King has cursed me saying, “Let your body fall
off today. Now the great trouble due to the falling off of the body has
arisen. What am to do now?

 

53-69. O Father! Kindly tell me from whom shall I take my birth and take
such means as I can get a body like what I have now. Also by Your
unbounded power, do so that I can retain the knowledge in that body as I
have at present; You are fully competent to do this.” O King! Hearing
thus the words of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, Brahmâ spoke thus to his dear son
:-- Go and enter into the Tejas (essence) of Mitrâ Varu<u>n</u>a and
remain contented; then you will get, in due time, a body not born of any
womb and you will be again religious, truthful, knower of the Vedas,
all-knowing and worshipped by all; there is no doubt in this. When
Brahmâ said this, the Mahar<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha bowed down to the
Grand Sire, and circumambulating him, went to the abode of
Varu<u>n</u>a. Then he quitted his excellent body; and, with his subtle
body, the part of his Jîva, entered into the body of Mitrâ
Varu<u>n</u>a. Then once on a time Urvas’î, exquisitely beautiful and
lovely, surrounded by her comrades, went wilfully into the abode of
Varu<u>n</u>a. Mitrâ-Varu<u>n</u>a, the two Devas became very passionate
to see that Apsarâ (the celestial nymph) endowed with youth and beauty
and being enchanted with the arrows of cupid, and, being senseless,
addressed to the Deva Kanyâ Urvas’î, beautiful in all her parts, thus
:-- “O Lovely One! Seeing you, we are very much troubled with the arrows
of cupid; O Beautiful One! Select us and remain and enjoy here at your
pleasure.” When they said thus, Urvas’î became attached to them; and,
under their control, began to stay in the house of Mitrâ Varu<u>n</u>a.
When Urvas’î began to remain there, strongly attached to them, the semen
of Mitrâ Varu<u>n</u>a dropped in an uncovered jar. And the two
beautiful sons of the Ri<u>s</u>is were born out of that; Agasti was the
first child and Vas’i<u>st</u>ha the second. Thus, out of the semen of
Mitrâ Varu<u>n</u>a, the two ascetics were born. The first Agasti turned
out a great ascetic in his childhood and resorted to forest;
Ik<u>s</u>âku the best of Kings, selected Vas’i<u>st</u>ha as his family
priest. O King! Ik<u>s</u>âku, the best of Kings, nursed him for the
welfare of his own line; the more so, because to know that he was the
Muni Vas’i<u>st</u>ha; and thus he was very pleased with him.
Janamejaya! Thus I have described to you about the getting of another
body by Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, due to the curse of Nimi, and have also
described his re-birth in Mitrâ-Varu<u>n</u>a’s family.

 

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha from Mitrâ Varu<u>n</u>a in S’rî Mad Devi Bhâgavatam,
the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](bk06ch15)
