[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch01)  [Next](bk06ch03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter II**

** **

**On the birth of V<u>r</u>itrâsura**

 

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

 

1-11. Vyâsa said :-- The extremely covetous Indra, then, mounted on his
Airâvata elephant and determined to kill the Muni. He went to him and
saw him immersed in deep Samâdhi, firmly seated in his posture and with
his speech controlled. At that time, a halo of light emanated from

 

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

 

his body and he looked like a second Sun and a blazing fire. Indra
became very sad and dejected when he saw that. Indra then thought within
himself thus :-- “Oh! Can I slay this Muni, free from any vicious
inclinations, and endowed with the power of Tapas, blazing like a fire!
This is quite against the Dharma. But, Alas! He wants to usurp my
position; how can I, then, neglect such an enemy?” Thus cogitating,
Indra hurled at the Muni his swift going, infallible thunderbolt, the
Muni remaining engaged in his penance and shining like the Sun and Moon.
The ascetic, struck thus, fell on the ground and died, like a mountain
peak struck by thunder falling on the ground and presenting a wondrous
sight. Indra became very glad when he killed the Muni; but the other
Munis then cried aloud :-- “Oh! We are killed! Alas! What a crime has
Indra committed today! Oh! The vicious Indra has killed today this jewel
amongst the Munis without any offence! Let, then, this sinner reap the
fruits of his sinful act without any delay.” Indra, then, went back soon
to his own abode; on the other hand, the high-souled Muni, though
killed, looked as it were, living by the lustre of his own body. Indra,
then, seeing him lying like a living man thought that the Muni might get
alive and so became very sad. While he was thus arguing in his mind, he
saw before him a wood cutter named Tak<u>s</u>a and began to speak to
him for his own selfish ends thus “O Artisan! Cut all the heads of this
Muni and keep my word; this highly lustrous Muni is looking as it were
alive; therefore, if you sever his heads, he cannot be alive.”
Tak<u>s</u>a then cursed him and spoke thus.

 

12-14. “O King of the Devas! The neck of this Muni is very big and
therefore cannot be severed; my axe is not at all fit for this work .
Specially I cannot do such a blameable act. You have done a very heinous
crime, quite against the law of the good persons; I fear sin; I will not
be able to cut the heads of a dead man. This Muni is lying dead; what
use is there in severing his head again? O Pâkas'âsana! The killer of
the demon Pâka! Why do you fear in this?”

 

15\. Indra said :-- “O Artisan! This Muni is my dire enemy. Life seems
to be still lingering in his body; his body is still lustrous, I fear if
the Muni be alive again!”

 

16\. Tak<u>s</u>a told :-- “Do you not feel shame in doing this heinous
crime, when you know everything? Do you not fear God for the crime of
killing a Brâhmi<u>n</u>?”

 

17\. Indra said :-- I will make Prâyas'chitta (penance) afterwards for
the washing away of my sins; but my duty at present is to kill my enemy.

 

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

 

O Fortunate One! The wise men, clever in polity, say that enemies must
be killed by any excuse whatsoever.

 

18\. Tak<u>s</u>â then replied :-- “O Maghavan! You are doing this
sinful deed out of your avarice; but, O Lord! I have no cause
whatsoever; how then without any cause, can I engage myself in such a
vicious act?”

 

19-20. Indra said :-- “O Tak<u>s</u>an! I will allot a share to you
wherever there will be a sacrifice. The human beings will invariably
offer to you the head of the animal killed at any sacrifice. Now cut his
head according to this rule.”

 

21-42. Vyâsa said :-- O King! That Tak<u>s</u>â became very glad when he
heard thus from Indra and struck off the heads of the Muni with his very
strong axe. O powerful King! When the three heads, thus severed, fell to
the ground, thousands and thousands of birds came out of those heads in
quick succession. The three groups of birds Kalavinkas, Tittiris and
Kapinjalas came out very rapidly from the three heads in due succession.
The Kapinjala birds came out of that mouth that used to chant the Vedas
and used to drink Soma; the Tittiri birds came out of that mouth that
used to see all the quarters as if it drank them; and the Kalavinka
birds came out of that face that used to drink wine. Indra became very
glad to see the birds thus coming out of his mouths and went back at
once to his Heavens. O King! No sooner Indra went back, than
Tak<u>s</u>â came back to his own house and felt himself very pleased to
receive his share of sacrificial things. On returning to his home, Indra
thought that he had done his duty in slaying his powerful enemy. It did
not pass in his mind that he had committed the Brahmahattyâ sin (i. e.,
that he had killed a Brâhmi<u>n</u>). When Vis'vakarmâ heard that his
virtuous son had been killed, he became very angry (in his mind) and
said that as Indra had killed his qualified son engaged in asceticism
without any offence, he would create another son to kill Indra. Let the
Devas see his strength and power of Tapasyâ and let Indra, too, reap the
far-reaching effects of his own Karma. Thus saying, Vis'vakarmâ
distressed with anger, offered oblations in the sacrificial Fire,
reciting Mantram from the Atharvan Vedas, with the object of producing a
son. When Homa was performed for eight nights consecutively, a man
quickly came out of that burning fire, as if he was the Incarnate of
Fire itself. Seeing the lustrous son before him, come out of the fire
and endowed with power and energy, Vis'vakarmâ said “O Indra's enemy!
Grow by my power of asceticism.” When Vis'vakarmâ spoke these words,
burning with anger, that brilliant fiery son began to grow, towering
high above the Heavens. Within a moment that man looked a second God of
Death and appeared like a

 

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

 

mountain and shone like the God Himself. Then he spoke to his own father
Vis'vakarmâ, who was very distressed “O Father! Put my name. Pray, what
use can I be to you? Why do you look so aggrieved and anxious; please
explain to me all the causes. I make a firm vow today that will remove
the cause of your sorrow. Father ! Of what avail is that to his father
when he is not able to remove his sorrows!” O Father! Shall I drink the
ocean or crumble the mountains to dust or shall I obstruct the passage
of the rising Sun or shall I kill Indra, Yama, or the other host of
Devas or shall I root out the earth and throw it with all beings into
the ocean?”

 

43-53. O King! Hearing thus the sweet words of his son, Vis'vakarmâ
gladly told his mountain-like son “O my Son! You are capable to save me
from troubles (Vrijina) hence you are named V<u>r</u>itra. O highly
Fortunate One! Your brother, named Tris'irâ, was a great ascetic; his
three faces were all very strong. He was thoroughly conversant with the
Vedas and the Vedangâs and well versed in all the other knowledges. He
remained always engaged in practising asceticism, surprising to the
three worlds. Indra killed my qualified son with his thunderbolt; that
wicked soul severed the three heads without any offence. Therefore, O
Best of beings! Kill that vicious, shameless, deceitful, wicked Indra
guilty of the sin of Brahmahattyâ.” O King! Thus saying, Vis'vakarmâ
very much confounded with the breavement of his son, created various
divine weapons. He prepared weapons specially suited to kill Indra, the
best axes, tridents, clubs, S'aktis, Tomaras and bows made of horns and
arrows, Parighas, Pattis'as, divine discus like the Sudars'an Chakra,
divine inexhaustible arrow cases with arrows, nice Kavacha, very
substantial air-like swift-going chariot looking like a cloud and
capable to carry great loads; all these he created and gave over to his
son. O King! Vis'vakarmâ, the best of architects, excited by anger, made
ready all the equipments necessary for war and gave them to his son
V<u>r</u>itrâsura and sent him to kill Indra.

 

Here ends the Second Chapter of the Sixth Book on the birth of
V<u>r</u>itrâsura in the Mahâ Purânam S’rî Mad Devî  Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](bk06ch03.md)
