[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch16)  [Next](bk06ch18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On the continuance of the family of Bhrigu**

 

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

 

1-3. Janamejaya said :-- “Munis! How did the Bhârgava wives cross this
endless sea of troubles and how was the family of Bhrigu re-established
on the surface of this earth? And what did the greedy Haihayas, the
vilest of the K<u>s</u>attriyas, do after they killed the Bhârgavas?
Describe all these in detail and satisfy my curiosity. O Thou, Ocean of
austerities! I am not satisfied with the drink of your nectar like

 

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

 

words, very holy and leading to happiness in this world and to good
merits in the next.”

 

4-28. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I will now narrate to you the sin
destroying virtuous story how the Bhârgava wives crossed their great
hardships and the ocean of troubles, very difficult to cross. The
Bhârgava wives, when they were very much harassed by the Haihayas, went
to the Himâlayâs, overwhelmed with terror and disappointment. There on
that mountain they erected an earthen image of S’rî Gaurî Devî by the
banks of the Ganges and worshipped Her and, firmly resolved to die,
began to fast. The Devî Jagadambikâ appeared to those religious women in
their dreams and said :-- “A son will be born of My essence to one of
you from one of her thighs; that son will redress all your wants.” Thus
speaking, the Devî Bhagavatî disappeared. Those women when they woke up
were very glad; one of them that appeared very clever, becoming very
much anxious out of the fear of the K<u>s</u>attriyas; preserved the
foetus in one of her thighs for the propagation of the family. Her body
became luminous; she then fled, overwhelmed with terror. The
K<u>s</u>attriyas, seeing that Brâhma<u>n</u>î, came quickly upon her
and said :-- “See! This pregnant Bhârgava wife is flying away hastily;
seize her and take away her life.” Thus saying, all of them raised their
axes, and pursued her. Then that woman seeing them coming, wept out of
fear. She cried, out of terror, for the preservation of the child in her
womb; and the child seeing her mother helpless and distressed, trembling
with fear and with tears in her eyes having no one to protect her and
awfully oppressed by the K<u>s</u>attriyas as if a pregnant deer has
been attacked by a lion and is crying about, angrily burst out of the
thigh of his mother, and quickly came out like a second Sun. That good
looking boy took away the power of sight of those K<u>s</u>attriyas by
his brilliant lustrous light; no sooner the Haihayas saw that boy than
they got blind. Like those that are born blind; they then began to roam
in the caves of mountains and thought within themselves, what an evil
turn of Fate had overtaken them! They thought thus :-- “Oh! The mere
sight of that boy has turned us blind; what a great wonder is this!
Certainly this is due to the influence of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>î wife; this
is, no doubt, the great effect of her virtue of chastity. We have
greatly oppressed the Bhârgava women. They have become very sorry and
distressed; now we cannot tell what more evils do these women, of true
resolve, inflict on us!” Thus pondering, those K<u>s</u>attriyas

deprived of their eyes, helpless, and their minds bewildered, took
refuge of those Brâhmi<u>n</u> ladies. The ladies, seeing them again
come, were the more terrified; but those K<u>s</u>attriyas bowed down
before them with

 

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

 

folded hands for the restoration of their sights and said :-- “O Mother!
We are your servants. Be gracious unto us. O Auspicious Ones! We are
vicious K<u>s</u>attriyas; O Mothers! What an amount of offence we have
committed to you. O Beautiful Ones! We have become blind, no sooner we
have seen you. O Angry Ones! No more we can see your lotus-like faces,
as if we are born blind; O Mother! The spirit of your asceticism is so
very wonderful! We are sinners; therefore by no means we can get our
sight; therefore we have taken refuge unto you all; better give us back
our eyesight and preserve our honour. O Mother! Blindness is more
dreadful than death; therefore do you show your mercy on us. Be pleased
unto us and restore our eyesights and make us your slaves; no sooner we
get back our sights, we will cease from these vicious acts and go to our
homes. In future, we will never commit such heinous acts; from today we
all become servants of the Bhârgavas and we will serve them. Forgive all
our sins that we committed unconsciously; we promise that, in future,
there will no more be any enmity between the Bhârgavas and
K<u>s</u>attriyas. O good-looking Ones! You pass your days happily with
your sons; we ever bow down before you. O Auspicious Ones! Be graciously
pleased unto us; no more we will cherish any inimical feelings towards
you.”

 

29-44. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Bhârgava lady heard their words and
was thunderstruck and seeing those K<u>s</u>attriyas bowing down before
her, blind and distressed, consoled them and said, “O K<u>s</u>attriyas!
I have not taken away your sights nor am I displeased in any way with
you. Now hear what is the real cause. This child of Bhârgava, born of my
thigh, is exceedingly angry towards you and has therefore made your
eyesight still and to no purpose. For the greed of wealth, you have
slain the close relatives of this boy, those that were quite innocent
and virtuous ascetics and you have slain their children that were in
their mothers’ wombs; this boy has come to know all those things. O
children! When you were slaying the children of the Bhârgavas in their
mothers’ wombs, I then bore within my thighs this child for one hundred
years. This son of mine though as yet in the womb, has mastered all the
Vedas within so very short a time for the propagation of the Bhârgava
clan. Now this Bhârgava son is infuriated with anger for your slaying
his father and is now ready to kill you all. My son! Whose divine
effulgence has destroyed your eyesights, is born of grace of the Highest
Goddess, the Bhagavatî Bhuvanes’varî; therefore do not consider this boy
as an ordinary being. Now bow down with humility before this my son
Aurvya (born from the thighs); this son may be pleased by your bowing
down and may restore you your eyesights.

 

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

 

Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>
lady, the Haihayas began to praise the boy with hymns. With great
humility, they bowed down to the best of the Munis, born of the thighs.
The Ri<u>s</u>i Aurvya, then, became pleased and spoke thus to the
Haihayas who were deprived of their eyesights :-- “Better go back to
your own homes. O Kings! And read these following words derived from my
this story. Whatever is inevitable and created by the hands of gods must
come to pass. Knowing this, no one ought to be sorrowful on any such
matters. Let you all regain your eyesights as before and forego your
anger and go to your own homes respectively at your own will. Let the
Ri<u>s</u>is, too, get peace and happiness as before.” When the
Mahar<u>s</u>i Aurvya ordered thus, the Haihayas got back their
eyesights and went at their leisure to their own homes; on the other
hand the Brâhmi<u>n</u> lady went to her own hermitage, with her
Divine-spirited child and began to nourish him. O King! Thus I have
described to you the story of the killing of the Bhârgavas and how the
K<u>s</u>attriyas, actuated by greed, did so very vicious acts.

 

45-48. Janamejaya said :-- “O Ascetic! Hearing this exceedingly
heart-rending act of the K<u>s</u>attriyas, I come to know, that greed
is the sole cause of it and both the parties had suffered so much,
simply out of this insatiable greed. O King of Munis! I want to ask you
one more question in regard to this point. How the sons of the Kings
came to be known Haihayas in this world? Amongst the K<u>s</u>attriyas,
some are called Yâdavas for they ware descended from the family of Yadu;
some were known as Bhârata, for they were descended from Bhârata. But
was some king named Haihaya born before in their family or were they
known as such on account of other actions? I desire to hear of it.
Kindly describe

this to me and oblige.”

 

49-56. Vyâsa said :-- O King! I am describing in detail to you of the
origin of the Haihayas. Hear. The sins are destroyed and the merits
accrue on hearing this story. O King! Once on a time Revanta, the son of
the Sun, very beautiful and of boundless lustre, was going to
Vi<u>sn</u>u in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, mounted on the beautiful
Uchchais’rava, the jewel of the horses. When he was going on horseback
with a desire to see the God Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî saw
that child of the Sun. The Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî, born out of the
churning of the ocean, on looking at the beautiful appearance of her
brother Horse, also born out of the churning of the ocean, became very
much astonished and steadily gazed on him. The Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u,
capable to show both favour and disfavour, saw the beautiful Revanta, of
good figure, coming on horseback; and lovingly asked Lak<u>s</u>mî :--
“O Beautiful One! Who is coming here on horseback, as

 

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

 

it were, enchanting to the three worlds!” At that time, the Goddess
Lak<u>s</u>mî was accidentally looking intently on the horse; so she did
not reply, though repeatedly asked by the Bhagavân.

 

57-68. The Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî, always restless, was very much intent on
the horse and was enchanted and She was looking steadily with great
affection on the horse. Seeing this, the Bhagavân became angry and said
:-- “O Beautiful-eyed One! What you are looking at so intently? Are you
so much enchanted with the sight of the horse that you are not speaking
to me a single word, though I am repeatedly asking you so often! You
lovingly dwell on all the objects; hence your name is Ramâ; your mind is
also very restless, therefore you would be known as Chanchalâ Devî (the
restless Devî). O Auspicious One! You are restless like ordinary women;
you can never stay steadily for a certain time at any one place. While
sitting before Me, you are enchanted with the sight of a horse; then you
be born as a mare in that world of men, full of dreadful troubles, on
the surface of the earth. The Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî became very much
affrightened at the sudden curse given by Hari, a matter as it were
ordained by the Devas, and began to cry aloud, shuddering with pain and
sorrows. Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî, then of sweet smiles, frightened, bowed
down with great humility to her own lord Nârâya<u>n</u>a and said thus
:-- O Deva of the Devas! O Govinda! You are the Lord of this world and
the Ocean of mercy. O Kes’ava! Why have you inflicted on me so dreadful
a curse for such a minor fault of mine! O Lord! I never saw you before
so very angry; Alas! Where has now gone that affection, so natural and
undying, that you showed towards me! O Lord! It is not proper to hurl a
thunderbolt on one’s own relations; but it is advisable to cast it on
the enemies. I am always fit for receiving boons from you. Why have you
made me now an object, fit for curse. O Govinda! I will quit this life
in Your presence. I will never be able to live, separated from You. O
Lord! Be graciously pleased and say when shall I be free from this
dreadful curse and regain Your happy companion?

 

69\. The Bhagavân said :-- “O Devî! When you will get a son in the world
like me, you will no doubt come again to be my companion.”

 

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter on the continuance of the family of
Bhrigu in the Sixth Book in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk06ch18.md)
