[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch12)  [Next](bk06ch14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIII**

 

**On the description of the battle between Âdi and Baka after the
discourse on S’unahs’epha**

 

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

 

1-6. Indra said :-- “O Prince! The King Haris’chandra promised before to
Varu<u>n</u>a that he would celebrate for his propitiation the great
Naramedha sacrifice when he would offer his own son as a victim to be
immolated. O Prince! You are very intelligent; can’t you grasp this idea
that your father has become merciless due to his suffering in this
illness and no sooner you go there than he will make you the victim and
tie you

 

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

 

to the sacrificial post when you will be slaughtered.” The indomitable
Indra thus prohibiting the son, he began to stay there deluded by the
Mâyâ of the great Mahâ Mâyâ. O King! Thus whenever the prince heard of
his father’s severe illness, he wanted to go to his father, Indra
repeatedly used to go to him and prevent him from doing so. On the other
hand, the King Haris’chandra became very much afflicted, and, seeing his
family Guru all-knowing well-wisher Vas’i<u>st</u>ha close by, asked
him, “O Bhagavân! what am I to do now? I am now very impatient with the
agonies of this disease and am very weak; besides I am very much afraid
of it. Kindly give me a good advice and save me.”

 

7-9. Vas’i<u>st</u>ha said :-- “O King! There is a good remedy for the
cure of your disease. It is stated in the S’âstras that the sons are of
thirteen kinds; Aurasa, K<u>s</u>attraja, Datrima, Krîtrima; etc.
Therefore pay the reasonable price and buy one good Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy
and perform your sacrifice with that boy. O King! Thus Varu<u>n</u>a
will be pleased and you will be cured of your disease.”

 

10-24. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the words of
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, the King Haris’chandra addressed to his minister :--
“O Minister-in-Chief! You are very sharp and intelligent, therefore you
better try your best and seek in my kingdom a Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy. In
case a poor Brâhmi<u>n</u> be willing, out of his love for money, to
give over his son, then give him any amount he wants and bring his son.
O Minister! By all means, bring a Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy for this sacrifice;
in other words, do not be miserly or act lazily to perform my business.
You should pray to any Brâhmin thus :-- Take this money and give your
son, who will be sacrificed in a sacrificial ceremony as a victim.” Thus
ordered, the minister sought for a Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy in towns after
towns, villages after villages, and houses after houses. Till, at last,
he came to know that in his kingdom there was a poor distressed
Brâhmi<u>n</u> named Ajîgarta, who had three sons. Then the minister
gave to the Brâhmi<u>n</u> that he wanted and purchased his second son
named S’unahs’epha and brought him before the King. And handed him over
to the King, saying that this Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy is fit for the
sacrificial victim. The King then gladly brought the best
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s versed in the Vedas for the performance of the
sacrifice, and collected all the articles requisite for the purpose.
When the sacrifice was commenced, the great Muni Vis’vâmitra, seeing
S’unahs’epha tied, prohibited the King and said :-- “O King! Do not be
so bold as to sacrifice this boy; let this boy be free. O long-lived
One! I am asking this thing from you today and if you obey it, certainly
it will do good to you. O King! This boy S’unahs’epha is crying; his
cries are paining my heart and I am feeling pity for him. Hear my word
and free this

 

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

 

boy out of mercy. See! The purehearted K<u>s</u>attriyas, in ancient
days, used to sacrifice their own bodies and thus preserve others’
bodies, so that they might attain the Heavens. And now you are killing
this Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy forcibly so that you may preserve your own body;
judge how vicious is this your act! Be merciful to this boy. O King!
Everyone likes his own body to the same extent; you are feeling this
yourself; therefore if you take my word, then quit this boy.”

 

25-36. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The King Haris’chandra was ailing very
much; hence be did not pay any heed to the Muni’s words and did not quit
the boy. Thereupon the very fiery spirited Vis’vâmitra became very angry
with the King. Then Vis’vâmitra, the son of Kus’ika, the foremost of the
knowers of the Vedas, shewed mercy on S’unahs’epha and gave him the
“Varu<u>n</u>a Mantram.” S’unahs’epha, very much afraid to lose his
life, earnestly repeatedly remembered Varu<u>n</u>a and uttered that
mantram in pluta tone (lengthened or prolonged). Varu<u>n</u>a, too, the
ocean of mercy, knowing that the Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy was praising him
with hymns came up to that spot and freed S’unahs’epha from his bondage
and freed the King also from his disease and went back to his own abode.
Thus the Mahar<u>s</u>i Vis’vâmitra became very glad to rescue the
Muni’s son from the jaws of death. The King Haris’chandra did not
observe the words of Vis’vâmitra; hence the son of Gâdhi harboured
within his heart anger towards the King. One day while the King
Haris’chandra was riding in a forest and there, at midday, on the banks
of the river Kaus’ik, when he desired to kill a boar, Vis’vâmitra in the
garb of an old Brâhmi<u>n</u> asked from him everything that he had,
including his dominion and thus cunningly took away everything from the
King. The Mahar<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, seeing his Yajamâna
Haris’chandra suffering much, became wounded and felt pain in his mind.
One day when he met casually with Vis’vâmitra in a forest, he said :--
“O wicked K<u>s</u>attriya! A disgrace to your family! You have in vain
put on the garb of a Brâhmi<u>n</u>; your religion is like a crane; you
ate full of vanity; you boast for nothing. The best of kings,
Haris’chandra is my client; be is faultless; still, O Fool! Why are you
giving him so much trouble. As you are religious as a crane is
religious, so take your birth as a crane.” Vis’vâmitra, thus cursed by
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, cursed Vas’i<u>st</u>ha in return, and said :-- “O
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha! As long as I will remain a crane, so long you also
remain as S’arâli or Â<u>d</u>i bird.”

 

37-42. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The two angry Munis thus cursed each other
and the two were born as Crane and S’arâli or Âdi bird. The crane
Vis’vâmitra built its nest on the top of a tree on the Mânasarovara lake
and began to live there. Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, too, assumed the form of an
Âdi bird,

 

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

 

and built his nest on the top of another tree and lived there. Thus the
two Ri<u>s</u>is spent their days in full enmity towards each other.
These two birds used to shriek so terribly loud that they became a
nuisance to all; they fought daily with each other. They used to strike
each other with beaks and wings and nails and thus they were covered all
over their bodies with cuts and wounds and they were smeared with blood.
They began to look like Kims’uka trees. Thus the two Ri<u>s</u>is, in
the shape of birds, in their states of bondage, due to each other’s
curse, passed many years there.

 

43\. Janamejaya said :-- “O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Kindly tell me how
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha and Kaus’ika, the two Ri<u>s</u>is, became free from
their curses; I am very curious to hear this.”

 

44-54. Vyâsa said :-- Brahmâ, the Grandsire of his subjects, came there
with all the Devas, filled with mercy, on seeing those two Ri<u>s</u>is
at war against each other. Brahmâ, the Lotus-seated, made them desist
from such a fight, consoled them and freed both of them from each
other’s curses. Then the Devas went back to their own abodes and the
illustrious lotus-seated Brahmâ went to the Satyaloka, seated on his
Swan. Mahar<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha and Vis’vâmitra became then
friends and were tied with bonds of affection at the advice of Brahmâ;
they went back to their own Âs’ramas. O King! Now see, that the
Mahar<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, the son of Mitrâ-Varu<u>n</u>a, fought
for nothing with Vis’vâmitra, so painful to both the parties. Who, then,
amongst the human beings, the Dânavas or the Devas can conquer his
Ahamkâra (egoism) and be always happy? Therefore the Chitta-S’uddhi, the
purity of the heart (that purity which imparts to man the blessedness of
God-vision) is very difficult even for the high-souled persons; with the
greatest caution and utmost effort one has to practise for that. To
those persons, that are void of this Chitta S’uddhi, it is all vain to
go to places of pilgrimage, to make charities, to practise tapasyâ, to
be truthful; in fact, anything, which is the means to attain Dharma,
becomes useless. O King! S’raddhâ (Faith) is of three kinds :-- (1)
Sâttvikî, (2) Râjasikî and (3) Tâmasikî to all persons in all their
religious matters. The Sâttvik faith is the only one of the three that
yields entire results; and it is very rare in this world. The Râjasik
faith, done according to due rules, yields half the results thereof and
the Tâmasik faith is fruitless and inglorious; the Tâmasik faith arises
with those persons that are overwhelmed with lust, anger, greed, etc.
Therefore, O King! Keep to the company of the good and hear the
S’âstras, Vedânta, etc., and free the heart of worldly desires and then
concentrate it to the worship of the Devî and live in a sacred place of
pilgrimage. Men afraid and troubled with the defects of the Kâlîyuga,
should always

 

<span id="page_530">p. 530</span>

 

take the name of the Devî, sing praises, and meditate on Her lotus feet.
Thus the Jîvas will not have any fear of Kâlî and the fallen vicious
persons will easily be able to cross this ocean of the world and be
free. There is no doubt in this.

 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description of
the battle between Â<u>d</u>i and Baka after the discourse on
S’unahs’epha in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](bk06ch14)
