[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch25)  [Next](bk06ch27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVI**

 

**On the description by Nârada of his own Moha**

 

<span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

 

1-13. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When I asked him why this delusion overtook
me, Mahar<u>s</u>i Nârada smiled and said :-- “O son of Parâs’ara! You
are thoroughly acquainted with all the Purâ<u>n</u>as. Why then are you
making this question about the cause of my Moha (delusion). No embodied
soul can exist in this Samsâra without this Moha. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u,
Rudra, and the other Devas, S’anaka, Kapila and the other Ri<u>s</u>is,
all these are surrounded by Mâyâ and are thus travelling in this path of
Samsâra. The people know me as a Jñânin; but I, too, am deluded like an
ordinary man. I am now speaking to you as certain as anything my of
previous history now. I was deluded by Mâyâ; hear it attentively. O Son
of Vâsavî! Great troubles and pains were felt by me before, due to this
Moha, for my wife. One day Parvata and I, the two Devar<u>s</u>is, went
out together from the Devaloka to see the excellent portion of the earth
named Bhârata and came to the Martyaloka or the land of the mortals. We
then began to travel over various places and saw the places of
pilgrimages and the holy places and the beautiful hermitages of the
Munis. Before we went out from the Devaloka, we consulted with each
other and entered into this agreement that we would not hide our
feelings from each other, whether they be good or bad, while we would
travel over the face of the earth. Whether it be our desire to get food,
or wealth or women for enjoyment, whatever arises in the mind of any of
us, we would express that freely amongst ourselves. Thus making an
agreement, we went out in right earnest as Munis to travel over the face
of this earth. Thus roaming all over the face of the earth, at the end
of the summer season, when the rainy season commenced we came to the
beautiful city of the King named S’anjaya. The King showed us great
respect and worshipped us with devotion. Since then we remained for four
months at his house.

 

14-33. During the four months of the rainy season, the roads are always
almost impassable; it is, therefore, wise to stay at one place. For
eight months, the Dvîjas should always remain abroad on some work

 

<span id="page_576">p. 576</span>

 

or other. Thinking all these, we two began to stay in the house of the
King S’anjaya. That liberal minded King gladly and with respect kept us
as his guests and tendered to us all our requirements. The King had a
very beautiful daughter named Damayantî, with good teeth. The King
ordered her to take care of us. That large-eyed princess, of great
discrimination, was very energetic, day and night. She began to serve
both of us. In due time she gave us water for our bath, excellent meat,
food, towels for cleaning and rubbing our faces, in fact, everything
what we desired. She kept ready for us whatever we desired, fans, seats,
beds, whatever were necessary for us. Thus she began to serve. We were
also engaged in the study of our Vedas and in those practises that were
approved by the Vedas. O Dvaipâyana! I used to sing, then, with lute in
my hands, the sweet lovely Sâma Gâyatrî songs in tunes and good Svaras.
The princess herself appreciated the songs and when she heard these Sâma
songs ravishing to one’s mind, she became attached to me and showed
signs of affection. Day by day the attachment towards me grew stronger.
Seeing her attached to me, my mind also became attached to her. Thus
that princess indulged in amorous sentiments towards me and began to
make slight distinctions between the food and other things offered to me
and Parvata. I got warm water for my bath and Parvata used to get cold
water; I got nice curds when food was served to me whereas Parvata got
only whey. I got nice white bedding for myself to sleep on whereas
Parvata had merely a dirty sheet to lie down. Thus the princess began to
serve me with great love and devotion but not so she served Parvata. The
fair lady began to look at me with eyes of love; not so towards Parvata.
Parvata was very much surprised to see all this and thought within
himself, “What is this?” Parvata, then, asked me in private :-- “O
Nârada! Speak out to me truly in detail. The princess shews with much
gladness and affection her deep love towards you; she serves you with
dainty dishes but she behaves not so with me. I therefore suspect when I
see all these distinctions made between you and me, that the daughter of
the King S’anjaya wants with her heart and soul to make you her husband.
And you also want to make her your wife. 1 have come to know this by
signs and symptoms; for affection and love reigning inside can be made
out by outward expressions of eyes and face. Whatever this be, O Muni!
Now speak truly to me; do never tell a lie. When we went out from the
Heavens, we made out that agreement; now remember that.”

 

34-42. Nârada said :-- Thus questioned suddenly by Parvata, I became
very much abashed and said :-- “O Parvata! This large-eyes princess is
ready to marry me and I am also very much attracted towards

 

<span id="page_577">p. 577</span>

 

her.” When Parvata heard all these, he became very much angry and
uttered repeatedly, “Fie! O Nârada! Fie! O Nârada! First you swore on
oath and then you deceived me afterwards. Therefore, O Deceiver of
friends! I curse you and let your face become that of a monkey.” When
the high-souled Parvata cursed thus, the face turned immediately into
that of a monkey, elongated and distorted. I did not excuse him, though
he was my sister’s son. I also got angry and cursed him, “Certainly,
your journey to the Heavens will be stopped. You will not be able to go
to Heaven. O Parvata! When you cursed me so heavily for so trivial a
fault of mine, I see you are very mean. Whatever it be, you will have to
remain on earth so long.” At this Parvata became very sad and went out
of the city. My face became immediately like that of a monkey. The
daughter of the King became very sorry to see my face thus distorted
into that of a monkey. I did not see her glad as she was before; but her
desire to hear my playing with my lute remained the same as before.

 

43-52. Vyâsa said :-- O Muni! What happened next? How did you get
yourself rid of your curse and how did you get your man-like face?
Whither did Parvata Ri<u>s</u>i go! When and how did you again re-unite
with each other? Kindly describe all these to me in detail. Nârada said
:-- “O Highly Intelligent One! What shall I say about the nature of
Mâyâ? When Parvata went away angrily, the daughter of the King began to
serve me with greater care than before. I remained there, though Parvata
went away, and seeing my face monkey-like, I became very dejected and
sorry and was specially troubled with the care and anxiety what would
happen to me hereafter? The King S’anjaya saw that his daughter
Damayantî was slipping into her youth and asked the prime minister about
her marriage. He said :-- “The time of marriage of my dear daughter has
now come; I will now marry her in accordance with due rites and
ceremonies. Now tell me particularly about a prince worthy of her, as we
like, in beauty, qualifications, largeheartedness, calmness, patience
and heroism and who is of a good family.” The minister said :-- “O King!
There are many princes on the face of this earth, worthy in all
respects, of your daughter. Whomever you like, you can call on him and
give him your daughter with elephants, horses, chariots, wealth, gems
and jewels.”

 

53-57. Damayantî, knowing the intention of his father informed the King
of her own desire by her nurse and attendant. The nurse went to the King
and said :-- “When my father will sit at his ease and comfort you would
go and speak to him in private that I am enchanted with the

 

<span id="page_578">p. 578</span>

 

enchanting Nâda sound of the great lute played by the Mahar<u>s</u>i
Nârada and have selected him as my bridegroom. No other person will be
dear to me. O Father! Marry me with Nârada and thus fulfil my desire; O
Knower of Dharma! I won’t marry anybody but Nârada. O Father! I am now
merged in the Nâda-ocean (sound ocean) of bliss, sweet and joyful, void
of anything destructive of happiness, void of Nakra, alligators, and
fishes, Timingala, etc. (injurious animals) and without any salty taste;
my mind won’t be satisfied with any other thing.”

 

Here ends the Twenty sixth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the description
by Nârada of his own Moha in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](bk06ch27)
