[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch29)  [Next](bk06ch31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXX**

 

**On the glory of Mahâ Mâyâ**

 

<span id="page_588">p. 588</span>

 

1-14. Nârada said :-- O Best of Munis! The King was greatly astonished
to see me dip in the tank in a female figure and get up from the tank in
a male figure and thought, “Where is my dearest wife? And how is this
Nârada Muni suddenly come here!” The King, not seeing his wife, lamented
very much and cried frequently, “O my dear Wife! Where have you gone,
leaving me here thus. Without you, O One of spacious hips! My life,
palace and

 

<span id="page_589">p. 589</span>

 

kingdom, all, are quite useless. O Lotus-eyed one! What shall I do? O
Smiling One! Why is not my life getting out of my body, suffering thus
from thy separation? Without you, my sentiment of love has left me for
ever. O Large-eyed One! Now I am lamenting for you. O Dear! Better give
me your sweet reply; the love that you expressed at our first union,
where has it gone now? O One with good eyebrows! Are you sunk in the
water and have you given up your life? Or are you devoured by fishes or
crocodiles? Or are you carried away by Varu<u>n</u>a, the Deva of the
waters, to my great misfortune? O One of beautiful limbs! You are
blessed, as you have gone away with your sons; O sweet-speaking One!
Your affection for them was not artificial. Is it right for you to go up
to the Heavens, attached by affection for your sons, leaving me your
distressed husband alone, thus weeping for your separation? O Dear! I
have lost both, you and my sons; yet death is not carrying me away; O!
How hard is my lot! What to do? Where to go? Râma is not now in this
world. He knew what was the pain caused by the separation from one’s
dearest wife. Oh! The cruel Fate has ordained very unwisely with great
inconsistency the periods of parting from one another at different
periods; when their minds and all other things are exactly the same in
all circumstances of pleasure and pain. The practice of Satî (burning
with one’s deceased husband), as ordained by the Munis, is certainly for
the good of the chaste women; but it would have been good no doubt, were
there such practices allowed for the men to burn themselves with their
deceased wives.” Bhagavân Hari then spoke to the lamenting King in
reasonable words and consoled him thus :-- “O King! Why are you thus
troubling yourself with pain and sorrow? Where has gone your dearest
wife? Have you not heard anything of S’âstras? or Have you not taken any
shelter of any wise man!

 

15-27. Who was your wife? Who are you? Of what nature was your union and
disunion and where did it take place? The union of wives and sons in
this S’amsâra is momentary like the meetings of persons on boats, while
crossing a river. O King! Now go home, there is no use in your weeping
thus in vain; the union and disunion of men are always under the control
of Fate, the Daiva; therefore the wise should not lament for them. O
King! Your union with the woman took place here; and now you have lost
that beautiful, thin-bodied, large-eyed woman here also. Her father and
mother you have not seen; you have got her like what is heard in the
story of the crow and the Tâl fruit; as you got her wonderfully, so you
have lost her wonderfully. O King! Do not grieve; Time cannot be ruled
over; go home and

 

<span id="page_590">p. 590</span>

 

enjoy yourself subservient to Time. That beautiful woman has gone away
in the manner she came to you; you ought to do your stately affairs in
the way as you used to do before as the ruler of all. O King! Consider
that if you weep day and night, that women will never return; why then
are you giving vent to your sorrows in vain? Go now and have recourse to
the path of the Yoga and thus while away your time. The enjoyable things
come in course of time and they go away again in due course; therefore
in this world of no gain whatsoever, the wise should never lament.
Continuous pleasure or continuous pain does not always take place;
pleasure and pain are never steady; they rotate always like a rotary
instrument. Therefore, O King! Make your mind calm and quiet and rule
happily your kingdom; or make over the charge of the kingdom to your
sons and retire to the forest. This human body is seldom obtained; it is
frail; therefore getting that body it is advisable to practise the
realisation of the Supreme. O King! This organ of generation and this
tongue reside also with the beasts, the peculiarity of human body is
that knowledge can be realised in it; not in any other

inferior births. Therefore leave your home, leave your sorrows for your
wife; all this is the Mâyâ of Bhagavân; by Her the world is deluded.”

 

28-37. Nârada said :-- Bhagavân Hari speaking thus, the King bowed down
to Him, the Deva of the Devas and finishing the bathing duties returned
to his home. He then became possessed of dispassion and discrimination
and making over the charge of his kingdom to his grandsons retired to
the forest and realised the Supreme Knowledge. When the King went away,
the Bhagavân began to laugh and laugh, seeing me again and again. I then
told him, “O Deva! You have deceived me. I now come to know how great is
the power of Mâyâ. O Janârdana! Now I remember all that I did in my
feminine form. Tell me, O Hari! O Deva of the Devas! How I lost my
previous consciousness, when I got down into the tank and bathed in it.
O Lord of the world! Why was I enchanted, when I got the female form and
when I got the King as my husband like S’achî’s getting Indra. The same
mind I had; the old Jivâtmâ was there and the previous subtle body was
there; how, then, I lost their memories? O Lord! Give out the cause of
it and clear my doubts; a great doubt has arisen in my mind. Many
enjoyments I had in my female form, drinking liquor and other prohibited
things I tasted; O Slayer of Madhu! What is the cause of all these? I
could not know then that I was Nârada, as I now recognise clearly what I
was in and what I did in my female form. Say the Why of all these
things.”

 

38-53. Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- “Know, O Intelligent Nârada! That all this

 

<span id="page_591">p. 591</span>

 

is merely the Pastime of Mâyâ. There are many states going on in the
bodies of all the living beings. The embodied beings have got their
waking, dream, deep sleep and Tûriya (beyond all the three
above-mentioned) states; then why you doubt that when there is another
body, there would be also the change in the states? When a man sleeps,
he knows not anything, he does not hear anything; but when he gets
awake, he again comes to know everything completely. The Chitta gets
itself moved by sleep; then mind gets different states by dreams and
there arises a variety of feelings. A mad elephant is coming to kill me,
and I am not able to fly away. What to do? Where to go? There is no
place where I can quickly go; thus, in dreams, there arise different
mental states. Sometimes we see in dreams that our departed grandfathers
are come in our houses. I am seeing them, talking with them and I am
dining with them. Whatever pain and pleasure are felt in dreams, when
they awake, they know of what happened in their dreams and can also
describe in details, recollecting what had then happened. O Nârada! Know
the power of Mâyâ incomprehensible as the things seen in dreams cannot
be certainly known that all those are false. O Muni! Neither I, nor
S’ambhu, nor Brahmâ can measure the power wielded by Mâyâ and Her three
Gu<u>n</u>as, very hard to fathom. How, then, can any ordinary mortal
know them! Therefore, O Nârada! None is able to fathom the Mâyâ. This
world, moving and non-moving, is fashioned out of the triple
Gu<u>n</u>as of the Mâyâ; nothing whatsoever can exist without them. The
predominant Gu<u>n</u>a in Me is Sâttva; but Râjas and Tâmas exist in
me; being the Lord of this world, I cannot override the three
Gu<u>n</u>as. So your father, Brahmâ, is predominant in Râjo
Gu<u>n</u>a; but Sâttva and Tâmas never leave Him, Our Mahâ Deva is
predominant in Tâmo Gu<u>n</u>a, but Sâttva and Râjo are always with
him. Therefore, no being can exist as separate from the three
Gu<u>n</u>as; this point I have settled in S’ruti. Therefore, O Lord of
the Munis! Quit this endless Moha for the world, caused by Mâyâ, and
very hard to get over and worship Bhagavatî, Who is of the nature of
Brâhma<u>n</u>. O Intelligent One! Now you have seen the power of Mâyâ;
and you have enjoyed many things produced by Mâyâ and you have realised
the extremely wonderful nature of Her. Then why do you ask me further on
this point?”

 

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the glory of Mahâ
Mâyâ in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devi Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses
by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](bk06ch31.md)
