[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch03)  [Next](bk06ch05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

** **

**On the defeat of the Devas by V<u>r</u>itra**

 

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

 

1-17. Vyâsa said :--- O King! The Suras that wanted to create hindrance
in V<u>r</u>itra's tapasyâ, seeing him firmly resolved, became
disappointed in the fulfilment of their objects and returned to their
own abodes. Thus full one hundred years passed away. The four-faced
Brahmâ, the Grandsire of the Lokas, came there mounted on his carrier
the Swan, and said :-- “O V<u>r</u>itra! Be happy; now quit your
meditation and ask boon; I will grant you the boon that you choose. O
Child! Your body has become very lean and thin through your penance. I
am now very pleased to see your this very hard tapasyâ. Welfare be to
you. Now ask the boon that you desire.” Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing
thus the clearly distinct nectar-like sweet words of the Creator Brahmâ,
V<u>r</u>itra shed tears of joy and suddenly stood up. And going to him,
bowed down gladly before His feet, and, with folded hands, spoke to Him,
Who is desirous to grant him boons, in a tremulous voice. O Lord! Today
I have been fortunate to see Thee who art generally seen with great
difficulty; and I have acquired thus the posts of all the Devas; O
Lotus-seated One! I have got an insatiable desire burning within me.
Thou art omniscient, Thou knowest everything; still I am speaking out my
mind. O Lord! Grant that my death does not occur with iron, wood, dry or
wet substances or with bamboos or any other weapons and let my strength
and valour be increased very much in the battle; for, then, I will be
unconquerable by all the Devas with all

 

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

 

their armies. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus prayed for, Brahmâ said to him
smiling :-- “O Child! get up; I grant that your desired boon will always
be fulfilled; now go to your own place. Your death won't occur with dry
or wet substances or with stones or wood. I say this truly unto you.”
Thus granting the boon, Brahmâ went to His Brahmâloka. V<u>r</u>itra,
too, became very glad on receiving his desired object, and returned to
his own abode. The highly intelligent V<u>r</u>itra informed the father
about the boon granted to him; Vis'vakarmâ became very glad to hear it.
O highly fortunate One! Let all bliss and good fortune come unto you;
kill Indra, my greatest enemy. Go and kill the murderer of my son
Tris'irâ, the vicious Indra and return to me. Be victorious in the
battle and become the Lord of all the Devas and remove my mental agony
due to the killing of my son. A son becomes then really a son when he
obeys the commands of his father and when he feeds plentifully good many
people on the Srâddha day (after his father's death) and when he offers
Pi<u>nd</u>a at Gayâ. Therefore, O Son! Keep my words and try to remove
my sorrows. Know this as certain that Tris'irâ never vanishes from my
mind. Tris'irâ was very truthful, amiable and good-natured; he was an
ascetic and foremost amongst the Vedic scholars. The wicked Indra killed
my dear son without any offence.

 

18-33. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing the father's words, that extremely
indomitable V<u>r</u>itrâsura mounted on his chariot and quickly got out
of his father's house. The proud Asura, then, marched to the battle,
accompanied with his vast army, to the sounding of the conch-shells and
war drums. V<u>r</u>itra, versed in politics and morals, exhorted his
soldiers before marching and said :-- “To-day we will kill Indra and
possess the kingdom of the Immortals, freed of all enemies.” O King!
Thus, accompanied by his soldiers, and raising a tremendous war-cry
terrifying to the Devas, the Asura set out for battle. O Bhârata! The
King of the Devas, knowing that the Asura is quite at hand, became
overwhelmed with terror and ordered at once the soldiers to be ready for
the battle and called quickly all the Lokapâlas and sent them all for
the battle. The highly lustrous Indra, the tormentor of the foes,
arrayed his troops in order according to Gridhra Vyûha (the method in
which the vultures arrange themselves while flying) and stayed there. On
the other hand V<u>r</u>itra, the slayer of enemies, dashed unto that
place with all swiftness. A dreadful fight then ensued between the Devas
and Dânavas; the two parties, desirous to get victory over the other,
fought awfully hard. When the blaze of the battle fire shone to a very
high pitch, the Devas dropped with sorrow while the Asuras became

 

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

 

excited with joy. The Devas and Dânavas struck each other with Tomaras,
Bhindipâlas, axes, Paras'us, Pattis'as, and various other weapons. When
the dreadful battle rose to a high pitch causing horripilation,
V<u>r</u>itra became very angry and suddenly caught hold of Indra and
denuding him of all clothes and armours swallowed him; he, then,
remembering his former enmity, became very glad and stayed there. When
Indra was thus devoured by V<u>r</u>itra, the Devas were overwhelmed
with terror and cried out frequently, with great distress :-- “O Indra!
O Indra!” All the Devas became very dejected and grieved in their hearts
to see Indra denuded of his armour and clothes in the belly of
V<u>r</u>itra and bowed down to B<u>r</u>ihaspati and said :-- “O Indra
of the Brâhmans! You are our best Guru what are we to do now? Though the
gods tried their best to save Indra still V<u>r</u>itra has devoured
him. We are all powerless, what can we do without Indra? O Lord! Perform
quickly magic spells (Abhichâra process) which will lead to our Indra's
liberation.”

 

34\. B<u>r</u>ihaspati said :-- “O Suras! The king of the gods is
swallowed by V<u>r</u>itra, he has been quite disabled; but Indra is
living in his bowels; attempt therefore must be made that he comes out
while living.”

 

35-54. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Devas became very anxious to see Indra
in that plight and took all the ways and means carefully how he might be
freed. Then they created a state tending to cause yawning, very powerful
and irresistible and calculated to destroy one's enemy.
V<u>r</u>itrâsura then yawned and his mouth got widely opened and
extended. In the meanwhile Indra, the destroyer of one's enemies'
strength, contracted all his limbs and came out of the expanded mouth of
the Asura and fell down. Since that time, this state of yawning has
become prevalent amongst the beings. The Devas were all glad to see
Indra thus come out. When Indra thus got out, he fought again with
V<u>r</u>itra for 10,000 years (Ajuta years). The fight was very
dreadful, causing horripilation. On one side all the Devas joined in the
battle; on the other side, the pre-eminently powerful V<u>r</u>itra, the
son of Vis'vakarmâ fought. When V<u>r</u>itrâsura got more and more
energy in the battle, Indra became gradually dwindled and was at last
defeated. Indra became very much grieved when he found himself defeated;
the Devas also were very dejected to see this. Indra and the other Devas
quitted the battle-field and fled away. V<u>r</u>itrâsura too, quickly
arrived and occupied the Heavens. V<u>r</u>itra began to enjoy by force
the Heavenly gardens and took the Airâvata elephant. O King! The Asura,
the son of Tvastâ, took away all Vimânas (the self-moving chariots of
gods), Uchchais'rava, the best of horses, the heavenly cow, the giver of
desires, the Pârijâta tree, the Apsarâs, and all other jewels of the
Heavens. The Devas, on the other hand, deprived of their shares in
sacrifices

 

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

 

and driven away from their Heavens, suffered very much.
V<u>r</u>itrâsura became puffed up with vanity, when he got possession
of the Heavens. Vis'vakarmâ, too, became very happy at that time and
began to enjoy pleasures along with his son. O Bharata! The Devas, then,
united with the Munis and they began to consult about their own welfare.
When the Devas took Indra with them and went to Mahâ Deva in the Mount
Kailâs'a and bowed down to His feet very humbly and, with folded hands,
spoke thus :-- O Deva of the Devas! O Mahâ Deva! Thou art the Mahes'vara
and the unbounded Ocean of Mercy! We are defeated by V<u>r</u>itrâsura
and we are very much terrified. Save us, O S'ambhu! Thou dost good to
all the beings; dost thou tell us, therefore, truly what are we to do
now, when that powerful Dânava has dispossessed us of our Heavens. O
Mahes'a! Now dislodged, where are we to go? We are not finding any
remedy by which our miseries can be destroyed. O Bhûta Bhâvana! We are
very much pained; help us; O merciful One! That V<u>r</u>itrâsura has
become intoxicated with vanity due to his being granted the boon.
Therefore destroy him.

 

55-57. S'ankara said :-- “O Devas! We will keep Brahmâ in the front and
let all of us go to the residence of Hari and there consult with Him how
to destroy this unruly V<u>r</u>itra. The Janârdana Vâsudeva is fully
capable to do all actions. He is powerful, knower of pretexts, highly
intelligent, ocean of mercy, and fit to be asked by all for protection.
Without Him, the Deva of the Devas, no success is possible in any
action. Therefore all of us ought to go there for the success in our
undertaking.”

 

58-62. Vyasa said :-- O King! Thus settling their plan of action, Indra
and other Devas took S'ankara and Brahmâ with them and went to the abode
of Hari, who protects all and is gracious to His devotees. They, then,
began to chant Puru<u>s</u>asûkta hymns to Him and thus they praised the
God Hari, the Guru of this Universe. The Janârdan Hari, the Lord of
Kamalâ, then, appeared before them and, after showing his respect,
addressed them thus :-- O Lord of the several Lokas! What have brought
you all together with Brahmâ and S'ankara hither? O best of Suras!
Please tell me the reason of your coming here. Vyasa said :-- O King!
Thus hearing Hari's words, the Devas could not reply anything; rather
almost all of them remained with an anxious look with their hands
folded, overwhelmed with cares.

 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the defeat of the
Devas by V<u>r</u>itra in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk06ch05)
