[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch17)  [Next](bk06ch19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVIII**

 

**On the origin of the Haihaya Dynasty**

 

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

 

1-5. Janamejaya said :-- How did the Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî, the daughter
of the ocean, come to be born as a mare, when cursed by the Bhagavân in
His moment of anger, and what did Revanta do at that time? In what
country was the Devî born as a mare and how did She pass Her time alone
like one whose husband had gone abroad. O Muni! How long and in what
forest unfrequented by persons did she pass her time, thus deprived of
the companion of her husband and what did she do at that time? When was
she reconciled with her husband Vâsudeva? and how did she get a son,
when she lived in a state of separation from her husband. O best of
Âryas! I am very curious to hear this excellent story. So describe this
in full details to me.

 

6\. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus questioned by Janamejaya, the
Dvaipâyan Muni began to recite the story in its full details.

 

7-24. Vyâsa said :--O King! I will now describe to you the pleasing
story of the Purâ<u>n</u>as in a clear distinct language; hear. Revanta,
the son of the Sun, became terrified to see Vâsudeva, the Deva of the
Devas cursing the Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî and, after bowing down to Janârdan,
the Lord of the world, went off. Seeing the anger of Vi<u>sn</u>u, the
Lord of the world, he went quickly to his father and informed him of the
curse delivered by Nârâya<u>n</u>a to the Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî. And the
Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî, the lotus-eyed, thus cursed, got the permission of
Nârâya<u>n</u>a and with a grieved heart bowed down to him and came down
to the world of mortals. She took the form of a mare and went to the
spot where the wife of the Sun (named Chchâyâ) practised her asceticism
in ancient times. The place was the confluence of the river Kâlindi and
the Tamasâ, and decorated with lovely forests and trees situated north
of the mountain named Supar<u>n</u>âk<u>s</u>a, yielding all desires.
There she meditated with her whole heart the auspicious Mahâdeva
S’ankara, the Giver of all desires, thus :-- That Mahâdeva is holding
the Tris’ûla (the trident) on his arms; His forehead is adorned with
beautiful cooling semi-Moon; He has five faces, each face having three
eyes; His throat is coloured blue; He has ten arms; His body is white
like camphor; He wears a tiger’s skin; His upper garment is of
elephant’s skin; and snakes are his holy thread; He is holding the
one-half of the body of Gaurî and his neck is adorned with garlands of
human skulls. The Goddess Lak<u>s</u>mî, the daughter of the ocean,
assuming the form of a mare, thus practised severe asceticism in that

 

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

 

place of pilgrimage. O King! With a feeling of intense dispassion
(Vairâgyam) towards the worldly things, She spent the divine one
thousand years in the meditation of Mahâdeva, the God of the Gods. After
that period, the Highest Lord Mahâdeva, mounting on His bull, came there
with His consort Pârvatî and appeared before the Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî,
perceptible by his eyes. Appearing thus with His host of His own
persons, He then spoke to Lak<u>s</u>mî, dear to Hari, now practising
ascetism in the form of a mare, “O Auspicious One! You are the Mother of
this whole Universe and your Husband is the Creator of these worlds and
is capable to give all desires. Why are You, then, practising
asceticism, when He is present? What is the cause of this? O Devî! Why
are You praising hymns to me, instead of to Vâsudeva S’rî Hari, Who is
capable to yield enjoyments and final liberation, and Who is the
Preserver and the Lord of this world. O Devî! Work should be done
according to the authority of the Vedas; it is stated in the Vedas that
the husband is the lord of a woman; therefore it is never advisable to
fix one’s mind entirely on another person. The eternal Dharma of women
is to serve their husbands; whether the husband be a saint or a sinner,
the woman, desirous of her welfare, should serve her husband in every
way. O Daughter of the Ocean! Your husband Nârâya<u>n</u>a is fit to be
served by all and He is capable to yield all desires. Why are you then
worshipping Me, and leaving the Lord of the Goloka, the Deva of the
Devas.”

 

25-32. Lak<u>s</u>mî said :-- O Deva of the Devas! O Seat of
Auspiciousness! I know that You are soon pleased with Your servant. My
husband has cursed me. O Ocean of mercy! Kindly save me from this curse.
O S’ambhu! When I informed my husband of my mental agonies, graciously
and mercifully He then pointed out how I might be freed of this curse
thus :-- “O Kamale! When Your son will be born, then You will be freed
of this curse and will, no doubt, come back and live in this Heaven of
Vaikuntha.” Thus spoken, I have come in this hermitage to make tapas and
to worship Thee, knowing that Thou art the Bhagavân, the Lord of
Bhavanî, the Lord of all and the Giver of all desires. O Lord of the
Devas! How can I get a son without the intercourse of My husband? Though
I am guiltless, my husband has forsaken me and is living in
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. O Mahes’vara! Thou art doing good to all persons; and
if Thou art pleased with me, then grant me a boon. O Lord! I know full
well that there is no distinction between Him and Thee. O Lord of
Girîjâ! This truth I have come to learn from my husband. O Hara! You are
the same thing that He is and what is He is the same as You; there is
not the least doubt in this. O Thou, full of auspiciousness! Recognising
the Sameness without any distinction between Him and Thee,

 

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

 

I am meditating on Thee. Had it been otherwise, then I would certainly
have been guilty when I take Thy refuge and meditate on Thee.

 

33-36. S’ankara said :-- “O Devî, the daughter of the Ocean! Tell truly
before me how you have been able to realise the identity between Him and
Me. The Devas, Munis and the Mahar<u>s</u>is, versed in the Vedas, get
their understandings baffled by wrong argumentations and never realise
the identity without any difference between us. Almost everywhere you
will perceive that many of my devotees blame me. Specially in this Kâlî
Yuga due to the influence of Time, this happens to a very great extent
in many cases. O Auspicious One! Let that go! How have you come to know
this matter, which is difficult even for the liberal-minded persons to
comprehend. Know that this perception of the identity between me and
Hari is very rare.”

 

37-38. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When Mahâdeva asked thus with great
pleasure, the Devî Kamalâ, the darling of Hari, gladly replied the
essence of the matter to Mahâdeva.

 

39-43. Lak<u>s</u>mî said :-- “O Deva of the Devas! One day Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u, seated in the Padmâsana posture, was immersed in deep
meditation. I was very much astonished at this. When His meditation was
over and when He was in a pleasant mood, I asked Him with great
humility, O Deva of the Devas! I know that You are the Lord of the world
and Master of this whole Universe; when Brahmâ and the other Devas were
united and churned the great ocean, I came out of the waters and looked
all around to know who is the superior one whom I can select as my
husband and then, thinking You as the superior to all the Devas, I
accepted You as my husband. Now whose meditation You are doing again? A
great doubt has thus occurred in my mind. O Lord! You are my most
Beloved; now disclose to me your innermost desire and thought.”

 

44-49. Vi<u>sn</u>u said :-- “O Beloved! Hear now, whom I am meditating.
I am meditating in the lotus of My heart that Mahâdeva Mahes’vara, the
Highest of all the Devas. Mahâdeva, the Deva of the Devas, of
indomitable prowess, sometimes meditates on Me and sometimes I meditate
on the Lord of the Deva, S’ankara, the Destroyer of Tripurâ. I am dear
to S’iva as his life is dear to him and S’ankara is similarly dear to
me. The hearts of us both are attached to each other in the most secret
way possible; therefore there is not the least difference betwixt us
both. O large-eyed One! Those men who being my devotees hate S’ankara,
certainly go to hell. I speak this very truly unto you.” O Mahes’vara!
When I asked him this question when he was all alone, that Deva of the
Devas, the Highest Vi<u>sn</u>u thus said to me. Therefore I am
meditating on You, knowing that You are His beloved. O Mahes’a! Now find
out means by which I can mix with My husband.

 

<span id="page_549">p. 549</span>

 

50-59. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Mahâdeva, skilled in speech, hearing thus
the words of Lak<u>s</u>mî, consoled Her with sweet words and said :--
“O Beautiful! Be peaceful; I am pleased with Your tapasyâ; soon You will
come in contact with Your husband. There is not the least doubt in this.
When I will send the Bhagavân, the Lord of the world, He will come
before you in the shape of a horse, to satisfy your desires. I will send
the Madhusûdana, the Deva of the Devas, in such a manner, as he will
come in the form of a horse, passionately attached to you. O One of good
eye brows! Thus you will get a son equivalent to Nârâya<u>n</u>a; and
the son will be the King on this earth and will be undoubtedly
worshipped by all. O fortunate One! After you get your son, you will go
to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha with Nârâya<u>n</u>a and will reside there as His
Beloved. Your son will be famed by the name of Ekavîra; and from him
will propagate the Haihaya dynasty on the earth. O Kamale! You were
blind by prosperity, and, becoming passionate, you forgot the Devî
Parames’varî, residing in your heart. Therefore you have experienced
such a result. Therefore, to expiate that sin, take Her refuge by all
means. O Devî! If your heart remained attached to the Highest Devî the
blissful Bhagavatî, your heart would never have got attached to the
Uchchais’ravâ horse. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus granting boons to
Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî, He with his consort Umâ vanished away in her
presence.

 

60-62. Kamalâ Devî, lovely in all respects, whose toe nails are always
rubbed by the gems on the coronets of the Devas, began to meditate on
the lotus-feet of Ambikâ and in expectation of his beloved Hari, in the
shape of a horse, praised and chanted hymns frequently to the Highest
Goddess, in words choked with feelings of intense love.

 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Sixth Book on the origin of the
Haihaya Dynasty in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](bk06ch19.md)
