[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch08)  [Next](bk06ch10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IX**

** **

**On Indra’s getting the fruits of Brahmahattyâ and on the downfall of
king Nahu<u>s</u>a**

 

<span id="page_511">p. 511</span>

 

1-2. Vyâsa said :-- Indra was quite surprised to see in this state of
solitude his dear wife S'achî, large-eyed and overwhelmed with much
sorrow and spoke thus :-- “O Beloved! I am remaining here alone this
desolate place unnoticed by all the Jîvas; O Auspicious faced One! How
have you come to know this! And how is it that you have come here!”

 

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

 

3-5. S'achî said :-- O Lord of the Devas! I have been able to know this
place where you are staying by the grace of Bhagavatî's Feet and I will
get you back by Her grace. The Devas and Munis all united have installed
the King Nahu<u>s</u>a in your throne. That fellow says “O fair One! I
am now made the King Indra; therefore you worship me as your husband.”
And thus oppresses me always. O Destroyer of other's strength! That
vicious one speaks to me thus; I am weak; What can I do to him?

 

6\. Indra said :-- “O Beautiful One! I am now here waiting for the
proper opportunity; O auspicious One! You should also make your mind
calm and remain there, and wait for the proper time.”

 

7-12. Vyâsa said : -- O King! After Indra had spoken thus, S'achî Devî
became sorrowful, drew a deep sigh and, trembling, said :-- “O Fortunate
One! How can I stay there? That vicious man, puffed up with vanity and
proud of his position will forcibly bring me under his control. The
Devas and Munis say this to me out of his fear :-- O Beautiful One! The
Lord of the Devas is now very much distressed with the arrows of the
Cupid; therefore go and worship him. O Tormentor of foes! How can the
Brâhmi<u>n</u> Brihaspatî protect me, being himself powerless and under
the control of the Devas. O Lord! This is now my grave anxiety; I am a
weak woman, having none to protect me and therefore always under the
guidance of a man. Fate is now against me; how can I keep myself
religious? I am a chaste woman, devoted to my husband; I have got no
shelter there; who will protect me when I fall into misery!

 

13-21. Indra said :-- “O Beautiful One! I will now tell you one means
which, if you adopt, will no doubt preserve your character in times of
crisis. Women cannot preserve their chastity when they are protected by
others by thousand and one means; for lust penetrates into their
restless minds and carries them to impure ways. It is the good and pure
character that preserves a woman from a vicious course; therefore O
Smiling One! You adopt this good conduct and character and remain steady
in your place. In case that deceitful wicked King Nahu<u>s</u>a shows
his violence upon you, then take time and secretly cheat him, O
Madâlase! Go to him when there will be no other body present and say
:--“O Lord of the world! Please come to me on a conveyance carried by
the Ri<u>s</u>is (great ascetics), I will then be very delighted and
gladly yield myself to you; this is certainly my vow.” O Beautiful One!
When you will say thus, that King, blinded by passion, will engage the
Munis for the carriers of his conveyance. The ascetics, then, will be
angry and curse him; the

 

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

 

Munis will certainly burn him by the fire of their wrath; and the Divine
Mother will no doubt help you. He who remembers the lotus-feet of the
Ambikâ Devî never meets with any difficulties; and if there arises any
difficulty, know certainly that it is for his immeasurable benefit.
Therefore worship, with your whole heart, the Mother of the Universe,
Who resides in the jewelled island (Mani Dvîpa) according to the words
of the Guru Brihaspatî.

 

22-25. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus the Indra's words, S'achî
Devî said “Let it be so” and went to Nahu<u>s</u>a, filled with
confidence and inspiration to carry on the future work. Nahu<u>s</u>a
was very glad to see S'achî Devî and spoke thus :-- “O Sweet-speaking
One! Are you all right? I am now completely yours; you have fulfilled my
word; therefore I say truly that I am your servant. O Gentle-speaking
One! When you have come to me, know that I am very glad. O Smiling One!
Do not feel any shame before me. I am now your devotee; worship me. O
large eyed One! Speak out what is that dear thing that I can do for you?
I will carry that out at once.”

 

26-27. S'achî said :-- “O Lord Vâsava! You have done all the works; now
I have got one desire to ask from you, kindly fulfil this and then I
will be yours. O One full of auspiciousness! Now fulfil my desire; I am
speaking this to you.”

 

28\. Nahu<u>s</u>a said :-- “O Thou, having a face sweet like the Moon!
Speak out your desire; I will carry it out. O Beautiful One with nice
eye-brows! Even if that be unattainable, I will give that to you.”

 

29-31. S'achî said :-- “O King of Kings! I cannot trust you; Swear on
oath that you will fulfill my desire. O King! A truthful King very rare
on this earth; I will speak out my desire when I will be convinced that
you are bound by truth. O King! When you will fulfil my desire, I will
always remain under your control; this I speak truly to you.”

 

32\. Nahu<u>s</u>a said :-- “O Beautiful One! On all the sacrifices and
gifts that I have ever made, I swear, on all my merits, that I will
certainly carry out your word.”

 

33-37. S'achî said :-- “Indra has got for his vehicles the horse
Uchchais'ravâ, the Airâvata elephant and the chariot; Vâsudeva has got
vehicle Garu<u>d</u>a; Yama has got his buffalo; S'ankara his Bull;
Brahmâ his Swan; Kartika has got his peacock and Ganes'a has got his
mouse. But now, O Lord of the Devas! I want to see your vehicle, never
witnessed before: I want to see the Munis and the great ascetics,
observing vows, to be your vehicle; this is not Vi<u>sn</u>u's, Rudra's
nor of the Devas, and Râks'asas. O King! Let the Munis carry your
conveyance, this is my ever burning desire. O King of this earth! I know
you the highest of all Devas; let your glory and splendour increase ever
and ever; this is the intense desire reigning in my heart.”

 

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

 

38-56. Vyasa said :-- O King! Hearing S'achî's words, Nahu<u>s</u>a,
weak in intellect, laughed and beguiled by the Mâyâ of Bhagavatî began
to praise her and said at once :-- “O Beautiful One! Truly you have made
a nice suggestion of my vehicle. O One having luxuriant hairs! I will
soon carry out your words. O Sweet-smiling One! Whoever is effeminate
and of weak virility, he is never able to engage the Munis as his
carriers; no doubt, my unbounded strength will be rendered manifest when
I come to you on a vehicle carried by the Munis. What wonder is there
that the seven Ri<u>s</u>is (the seven stars of the constellation Great
Bear) and all the Devar<u>s</u>is would carry me, knowing me as the most
capable and superior in all the three worlds by virtue of my sheer
asceticism?” Vyâsa said :-- O King! The King Nahu<u>s</u>a became very
pleased and dismissed S'achî Devî. He, then, with a heart flamed with
passion, called the Munis and said: --“O Munis! I am now become Indra
and endowed with all powers thereof; therefore you all do my work
without being at all surprised. I have got the seat of Indra but Indrânî
is not coming to me. I called her to my presence and when I informed her
of my desire, She had spoken to me with affection the following words:--
O Indra of the Devas! O Giver of one's honour! Better come to me on a
vehicle carried by the Munis and do thus the one thing for me that I
like. O Mahar<u>s</u>is! To carry out this task is, indeed, difficult
for me; therefore do you all unite and, out of mercy, do this for me in
all its completeness. My heart is being always burnt, as I am very much
attached to the wife of Indra; so I take refuge unto you to do this
wonderful work for me.” Though this request was very indecent and
greatly humiliating yet the Munis agreed to it, out of pity, and also
impelled, as it were, by the great Fate. When the Great Seers, the Munis
consented to this proposal, the King, whose heart was very much attached
to the daughter of Pulomâ, became very glad and getting on the beautiful
vehicle carried by the Munis, told them, move on quickly (Sarpa, Sarpa).
Then the King Nahu<u>s</u>a, getting very much impassioned, touched with
his feet the heads of the Munis, and, being as it were smitten by the
arrows of cupid, began to whip frequently the Ri<u>s</u>i Agastya, the
best of the ascetics, who devoured the Râk<u>s</u>asa Vâtâpi, who was
the husband of Lopâmudrâ and who drank out the ocean, saying move on,
move on (Sarpa, Sarpa another meaning of which is Snake). The Muni,
then, became very angry, on being thus whipped, and cursed him saying
:-- “'O Wicked One! As you are whipping me, saying Sarpa, Sarpa, so go
and remain in the dense forest as a huge snake. When many years will
elapse and when you will crawl on your own limb and suffer intense
troubles, after that you will again come to heaven. You will be free
from the curse when you will see the King Yudhi<u>st</u>hira and hear
from him the answers to several questions.”

 

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

 

57-67. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus cursed, the King Nahu<u>s</u>a began
to chant hymns to that best of the Munis, and, while praising, fell from
the Heavens and instantly turned into a snake. Brihaspatî, then, quickly
went to the Mânasarovara Lake and informed Indra everything in detail.
Indra became very glad on hearing in detail of the downfall of the King
Nahu<u>s</u>a from Heaven and remained there gladly. When the Devas and
Munis saw this downfall into the earth of Nahu<u>s</u>a, they all went
to the Lake Mânasarovara where Indra was staying. They then all
encouraged Indra and honoured him by bringing him back to the Heavens.
All the Devas and Ri<u>s</u>is installed Indra on the throne and then
performed the Inauguration ceremony of the all auspicious Devî. On
getting back his own throne. Indra, too, began to sport in the beautiful
Nandana Garden with his dear consort S'achî, in the home of the Devas.
Vyâsa said :-- O King! Indra had to suffer such severe hardships on
account of his slaying the Mahar<u>s</u>i Vis'varûpa, the Lord of the
Asuras. Subsequently through the grace of the Devî, he got back his own
seat. O King! Thus I have narrated before you  to my best, this
excellent story of the killing of Vritrâsura and thus have answered your
question. O Ornament of the Kuru family! The fruits will be exactly
according to the Karma done. The effects of the Karma done must be borne
whether they be auspicious or inauspicious. (So Indra had to suffer for
his Karma, the killing of a Brâhma<u>n</u>a.)

 

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Sixth Book on Indra's getting the
fruits of his killing a Brâhma<u>n</u>a and on the downfall of the King
Nahu<u>s</u>a from the Heavens in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](bk06ch10.md)
