[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch19)  [Next](bk06ch21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XX**

 

**On the son born of mare by Hari**

 

<span id="page_553">p. 553</span>

 

1-2. Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavân! A great doubt has arisen in my
mind on this subject. Who was it that took away that son, when both
Lak<u>s</u>mî and Nârâya<u>n</u>a left it, in that forlorn state, in a
forest without any person there to look after?”

 

3-11. Vyâsa said :-- O King! No sooner Lak<u>s</u>mî and Nârâya<u>n</u>a
departed from that place, one Vidyâdhara, named Champaka, mounting on a
beautiful celestial car came there at his free will, sporting with a
woman named Madanâlasâ. There they saw that one lovely child,
exquisitely beautiful like a Deva’s son, was playing alone as it liked.
They then, quickly descended from their chariot and picked it up.
Vidyâdhara became very glad as a beggar becomes glad, when he gets a
hoard of jewels. On taking that newly born beautiful child like a Cupid,
Champaka gave it to the Devî Madanâlasâ. Madanâlasâ took it and became
very much astonished; and her hairs stood at their ends. She clasped it
to her bosom and kissed it frequently. O Bhârata! Taking that child on
her lap as if her own child, Madanâlasâ embraced it and kissed it and
got the highest happiness. Then both of them took that child and mounted
on the car. The lean Madanâlasâ then laughingly queried :-- “O Lord!
Whose child is this? Who has left it in this forest? It seems to me Mahâ
Deva, desirous to give me a son, has given it unto me.”

 

12-18. Champaka said :-- I will just now go and ask the all-knowing
Indra whose child is this, whether it is of a Deva, Dânava or Gandharva.
If he orders, I will purify this child found thus in this forest by the
Veda Mantrams and then accept it as my own. It is not advisable to do a
thing suddenly without knowing all the details. Thus saying to his wife
Madanâlasâ, Champaka went with a gladdened heart hurriedly to the city
of Indra with that child in his arms. Champaka gladly bowed down at the
feet of Indra and gave him all the information he knew about the child
and stood at one side with folded hands and spoke, “O Lord of the Devas!
I have got this child, beautiful as Cupid, in the sacred place of
pilgrimage at the confluence of the Jumnâ and the Tamasâ. O Lord of
S’achî! Whose child is this? and why did they forsake it there? If

 

<span id="page_554">p. 554</span>

 

you kindly permit, I will take this child as my own son. This child is
very beautiful and liked very much by my wife; it is also the rule laid
down in the S’âstras that one can accept any child as the Kritrima son.
Therefore it is my earnest desire that I purify this child by the Veda
Mantrams and take it legally as my own son.”

 

19-24. Indra said :-- O Highly Fortunate One! Bhagavân Vâsudeva,
assuming the form of a horse, has produced this child out of the womb of
Kamalâ in the form of a mare. He intends to give over the child, capable
to destroy enemies to Turvasu, the son of Yayâti, and thus will get a
great purpose achieved by the child. That King, very religious, will be
sent by Hari today and he will come for the child in that beautiful
sacred place of pilgrimage. You better go back as early as possible and
keep the child there as it was before till that king comes to that spot
at the instance of the Devadeva Vi<u>sn</u>u. Do not waste a minute
more. The King will be very sorry if he does not find the child there.
Therefore O Champaka! Quit the attachment that you have for this child.
You should know that this child will be famous in this earth as Ekavîra
(only one hero).

 

25-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus hearing the Indra’s words, Champaka
took the child and went back immediately to the spot whence he picked it
up and keeping the child there as it laid, mounted on his car and went
to his abode. At that instant, the husband of Lak<u>s</u>mî, the Lord of
the three worlds, went to the King, mounted on His car, beaming with
effulgent rays. When the Bhagavân was descending from His aerial car,
the King Turvasu was very glad to see Him and bowed down and laid
himself prostrate on the ground. The Bhagavân, then, comforted the King,
his own devotee, and said, “Get up, my child! Do away with your mental
distress.” The King also eagerly and full of devotion, began to utter
verses in praise of the Bhagavân. O Lord of Ramâ! You are the presiding
Deity of the Devas; Lord of the whole worlds, Ocean of Mercy and Giver
of advice to all men. O Lord! Your sight is very rare even to the Yogis;
being myself of a very slow dull intellect; I have been fortunate enough
to see you. O Lord! This shews Your mercy.

 

31-54. Vyâsa said :-- O Bhagavân! O Infinite One! Those who are free
from any desires and free from any attachment to worldly things, they
alone are entitled to see Thee. O Deva of the Devas! I am bound in
thousand and one desires. I am quite unfit to see Thee. There is no
doubt in this. When Turvasu, the best of the kings, praised thus,
Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u became pleased and began to speak in the following
pleasant words :-- “O King! I am pleased with your asceticism; now ask
your

 

<span id="page_555">p. 555</span>

 

desired boon; I will grant it immediately.” The King bowed down again to
the feet of Vi<u>sn</u>u and said :-- “O Murâri! For the sake of a son,
I have practised this tapasyâ; grant me a son like my Self.”
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the First-born of the Devas, hearing this King’s
request spoke to him in infallible words :-- “O son of Yayâti! Go to the
confluence of the Yamunâ and Tamasâ. For you I have kept there today a
son as you like and of indomitable prowess. O King! That child is
begotten by me in the womb of Lak<u>s</u>mî.” The King became very glad
to hear the sweet pure words of the Bhagavân. Thus granting him the
boon, Vi<u>sn</u>u went with Ramâ to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. The King Turvasu,
the son of Yayâti, hearing these words, became exceedingly gladdened in
his heart and mounting on a chariot, whose speed cannot be checked, went
to the spot where lay the child. The king, of extraordinary genius, went
there and saw that the exceedingly beautiful child, catching hold of his
toe by one of his soft hands was sucking it by his mouth and was playing
on the ground. The child was born of Nârâya<u>n</u>a out of the womb of
Kamalâ. Therefore it resembled like Him. On looking at that beautiful
lovely child, the famous King Harivarmâ’s face got cheered up with the
intensest delight. The King took it up with both of his hands and got
merged in the Ocean of Bliss and taking gladly the scent of its head
embraced it happily. On looking at the beautiful lotus-face of the
child, the King, choked with tears from his eyes and with feelings of
joy said :-- “O Child! Nârâya<u>n</u>a has given me, the child jewel in
you; so save me from the terrors of the hell named Put. O Child! For
full one hundred years I have practised a very hard tapasyâ for the sake
of you. Pleased with that, the Lord of Kamalâ has given you to me for
the happiness of my worldly career. Your Mother Ramâ Devî has forsaken
Her own child for the sake of me and has gone away with Hari. O Child!
That Mother is blessed whose face beams with joy by seeing the smiles in
your lotus-face. O Delighter of my heart! The Lord of Ramâ, the Deva of
the Devas, has made you, as it were, to serve as a boat for me for
crossing to the other side of this Ocean of World.” Thus saying, the
King took the child and gladly went home. Knowing that the King had come
very close to his city, the King’s Minister and the city people, the
subjects came forward with the priest and many other presents and
offerings. The bards, singers and Sûtas came in front of the King. The
King as he entered into his city looked affectionately on his subjects
and gladdened their spirits by enquiries of welfare. Then worshipped by
the citizens, the King entered into the city with his child. As the King
went along the royal road, the subjects showered on his head the flowers
and fried rice. Then taking the child by his two arms, the King entered
into his prosperous palace with his ministers.

 

<span id="page_556">p. 556</span>

 

The king next handed over the newly-born lovely child, as beautiful as
Cupid, to the hands of his queen. The good queen took the child and
asked the king :-- “O King! Whence have you got this new born child as
fascinating as the God of Love? Who has given this child to you? O Lord!
Speak quickly. This child has stolen away my mind.” The King gladly
replied :-- “O Beloved! The Lord of Kamalâ, the Ocean of Mercy has given
me this child; O Quick-eyed One! This child is born of Nârâya<u>n</u>a’s
part and out of the womb of Kamalâ. O Devî! This child has strength,
energy, patience, gravity and all other good qualities.” Then the queen
took the child in her arms and got the unbounded bliss. Great
festivities began to be performed in the palace of the King Turvasu.
Charities were given to those that wanted; music and singing of various
sorts were performed. In this ceremony for the sake of his child, the
king Turvasu put the name of the child as “Ekavîra.” Getting thus the
child equivalent in form and qualities to Hari, the powerful Indra-like
king became happy and freed from his debt due to his family line, became
very cheerful and glad. O King! The king, powerful like his enemies,
began to enjoy in his own palace with his all-qualified child, that was
given to him by Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Lord of all the Devas. He was
always served by his dear wife and all sorts of pleasures and he felt
himself enjoying as a King would do.

 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the son born of
mare by Hari, in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](bk06ch21)
