[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch14)  [Next](bk06ch16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XV**

 

**On the Nimi’s getting of another body and the beginning of the story
of Haihayas**

 

<span id="page_534">p. 534</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- “The getting back of another similar body by
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha is certainly described by you. Now tell me how the King
Nimi got another body.”

 

2-31. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Ri<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha only got
back his body; but the King Nimi did not get back his body what had been
cursed by Vas’i<u>st</u>ha. The priests engaged at the sacrifice by Nimi
began to consider, when the Ri<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha cursed him, in
the following way :-- Oh! What a wonderful thing is this? Before the
sacrifice is complete, the King Nimi has been cursed; this is against
what we had expected; What can we do? What is inevitable must come to
pass; how can we thwart it? By various Mantrams, they kept alive the
body of the King in which breathing was still going on a little; and
they prevented the body from decaying by worshipping the body with
various Mantra S’aktis and kept it in a stationary state. When the
sacrificial ceremony was completed, the Ri<u>s</u>is began to praise the
gods with hymns whereon the Devas became pleased and came to that spot.
When the Munis informed the Devas fully of the condition of the King’s
body, the Devas spoke to the sorrowful King thus :-- “O Performer of
good vows! We are all pleased with your sacrifice; now ask boons from
us. O King! You ought to get an excellent birth as the fruit of
performing this sacrifice. So ask what body, the body of a Deva or of a
man, you desire? Or you can ask, if you like, for another similar body,
that your priest Brihaspati has got quitting his first body whereby he
has become proud and is now staying in the Loka of Yama.” O King! At
these words the King Nimi was very glad and spoke to them thus :-- O
Devas! I have no aspiration for the body that is always liable to
destruction; I therefore want to reside on the top of the eyelids of all
the beings. Therefore I ask this boon that I be able to move in the
shape of Vâyu (air) on the top of the eyes of all the beings. Thus said,
the Devas spoke to the soul of Nimi :-- “O King! Pray to the most
auspicious Deity, the Devî, the Highest Goddess. She has been pleased
with this sacrifice; therefore your prayer will certainly be granted.”
Hearing thus, the King began to pray with various hymns with intense
devotion, in tremulous voice, the Devî. The Devî became pleased and

 

<span id="page_535">p. 535</span>

 

appeared before him. Seeing Her shining like a crore of suns and looking
exceedingly lovely and beautiful, all the persons there became very
happy. They began to think themselves as very blessed and as having done
all what they had to do. Knowing the Devî Bhagavatî pleased, the King
asked this boon from her :-- “O Devî! Give me that knowledge, pure and
simple, whereby final liberation is obtained. Also, I may be able to
reside on the top of the eyes of all the beings.” The Devî, the Lord of
the Devas, the Mother of the World being highly pleased, said thus :--
“O King! At the expiry of this your Prârabdha Karma, you will acquire
pure knowledge and you will reside on the tops of the eyes in the shape
of Vâyu, and through your residing there the beings will twinkle, i.e.,
open and close their eyes. The men, beasts, and birds will twinkle due
to your residing there; but the Immortals will always remain with a
steadfast gaze; they will not twinkle.” Thus granting him the boon, and
addressing all the Munis the Bhagavatî, the Highest Deity, disappeared.
When the Devî disappeared from their sight, the Munis then thought much
and they took the body of the King Nimi to burn it duly. For the sake of
getting a son from Nimi, the high-souled Munis performed Homa ceremony
(oblations to the fire) and placing the piece of wood Arani on his body
began to utter Mantrams and burned his body. When the woods were thus
burned, a son, endowed with all auspicious signs, looking like a second
Nimi, was born to them. As this son was born due to the burning of the
Aranis, the boy was named Mithi, and as it came out of the body of
Janaka, the boy was named Janaka. O King! As the King Nimi lost his
body, i.e., became Videha through the curse of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, all his
descendants were known as Videha. Thus the son of Nimi was well known as
the King Janaka. He built a beautiful city on the banks of the Ganges;
the city became famous also by his name (Janakapuri). The King Janaka
beautified this city with many forts, arcades, markets and many nice
buildings and palaces; and his city was full of wealth and grains. O
King! All the Kings of this line became famous by the name of Janaka and
all were endowed with the Supreme knowledge and known as Videha. O King!
I have now described to you the story of the King Nimi who got
disembodiedness (Videhatva) out of the curse.

 

32-35. The King said :-- “O Bhagavân! You have described the cause why
the King Nimi was cursed; my mind has grown very doubtful and restless
on hearing it. The Ri<u>s</u>i Vas’i<u>st</u>ha was the son of Brahmâ
and the best of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s; especially he was the royal priest;
how was it, then, that he was cursed by the King! Why did not the King
Nimi forgive him as he was the Guru and a Brâhmi<u>n</u>? Why he became
angry, when he performed such a great, auspicious sacrifice? He

 

<span id="page_536">p. 536</span>

 

was born of the family of Ik<u>s</u>âku and he knew well the truths of
the religion; then how was it that he became subject to anger and cursed
his own Guru Brâhmi<u>n</u>.”

 

36-46. Vyâsa said :-- O King! It is very hard and rare for the persons
not possessed of self-restraint to forgive; especially when one is fully
capable, it is very rare to find one in the three worlds, who can
forgive. He who has forsaken all attachments and has conquered hunger
and sleep and is always engaged in the Yoga practices, even that ascetic
Muni is not capable to conquer completely lust, anger and greed and
Ahamkâra, etc., the passions raging in the mortal coil. None existed
before in this whole world who conquered his passions! None exists now
and none will be born ever-after. Hardly will be seen any in this earth,
or the Heavens, or the Loka of Brahmâ or in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, even in
Kailâsa, that has conquered completely his passions! What can be said in
regard to the ordinary mortals of this earth when the sons of Brahmâ,
the Mahar<u>s</u>is, ascetics, Ri<u>s</u>is are all pierced by the
Sâttva, Râjas, or Tâmo Gu<u>n</u>as. Behold! The Kapila was the Knower
of S’ankhyâ and always engaged in his Yoga practices and he was a pure
and holy soul; yet, by strange combinations of Fate, he became angry and
burnt to ashes the sons of the King Sagara. O King! Out of Ahamkâra,
these three worlds are created; therefore this world and Ahamkâra are
related to each other as effect and cause; how then the Jîvas that are
born of this Samsâra can extricate themselves from this Ahamkâra?
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a are also pierced by those three
Gu<u>n</u>as; different feelings are seen in their different bodies.
Therefore it need hardly be said that the manifestation of the pure
Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>a alone is not to be seen in any of the human beings;
for the three Gu<u>n</u>as reside in a mixed way in all persons.
Sometimes the Sâttva preponderates; sometimes the Râjas and sometimes
the Tâmas preponderates. Sometimes they reside together, the three
balancing one other.

 

47-63. O King! Only that Eternal Highest Puru<u>s</u>a is undecaying and
untainted and can hardly be measured or seen by all the beings. That
Highest Soul, the Highest of the High, is Nirgu<u>n</u>a (void of the
three Gu<u>n</u>as); and She who resides in all the beings and is hardly
knowable by the small intellectual persons, that Highest S’akti, the
Incarnate of Brahmâ, is also Nirgu<u>n</u>a (void of attributes).
Paramâtmâ (the Highest Soul) and the Highest Force are also One; their
Forms are not different. When such a knowledge arises, then the Jîvas
can be free from all sins and faults and blemishes. From that knowledge
comes the liberation, this is sounded in the Vedânta S’âstra like
<u>D</u>in<u>d</u>ima S’abda (thousands of small drums). He, who comes
to know That, is freed from the endless cycle of birth and death
composed of the three Gu<u>n</u>as; there is no doubt in this.

 

<span id="page_537">p. 537</span>

 

O King! Knowledge is of two kinds :-- The first is considered as coming
from sound; this comes out of the knowledge of the meaning of the Vedas
by the help of intellect. But this is full of fancies, agreements and
doubts some of which are bad and some are good. The beings are led into
errors by these discussions; errors cause destruction of intellect; and
when the intellect is gone, the knowledge also goes away with it.
Whereas the second kind of knowledge comes from intention or feeling
within the depths of heart and brain and it is called Aparok<u>s</u>a
Jñâna. This knowledge is very rare to the beings. When one comes in
contact with a Sad-Guru (a good teacher), then one gets this
Aparok<u>s</u>a Jñâna. From the sound knowledge, no successful results
can issue; and, therefore it cannot give Aparok<u>s</u>a Jñâna. Hence
great effort is to be made for getting this Aparok<u>s</u>a Jñâna. O
King! As darkness cannot be destroyed merely by talking of light,
without lighting any lamp, so the knowledge of sound merely cannot
destroy the darkness of the inside. That Karma (action) is called True
Karma which does not lead to bondage, and that Knowledge is the True
Knowledge which leads to liberation. Other actions are only meant for
one’s own selfish enjoyments and other knowledges are merely the skill
in arts. Good behaviour, doing good to others, having no anger,
forgiveness, patience, and contentment are the best brilliant fruits of
True Knowledge. O King! Without knowledge, without asceticism, and
without the Yoga practices, the lust and other passions can never be
destroyed. The minds of the Jîvas are naturally restless and without
control; all the beings are completely under the sway of their minds;
thus they roam on the surface of the earth as good, middling and bad.
Lust, anger, etc., orginate from this mind; and when mind is conquered,
then those feelings can no more arise. O King! Therefore it was that
Yayâti forgave when S’ukrâchârya did wrong before. The King Nimi could
not forgive Vas’i<u>st</u>ha in the same way. Yayâti; the best of kings,
though cursed by S’ukrâchârya, the son of Bhrigu, did not curse in
return but he took upon himself the old age. O King! Some kings are
naturally peaceful, whereas some other kings are wicked by their nature.
Therefore, in this matter, whose fault is this, how can we ascertain?
See! In ancient times the Haihayas, out of their greed of wealth, and
being thus insensible destroyed completely, out of anger, the
Brâhmi<u>n</u> priests of the family of Bhrigu. What more than this that
those K<u>s</u>attriyas did not consider the sin Brahmahattyâ; rather
out of their dire anger, they cut to pieces the sons of those
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, that were in embryos in their mother’s wombs.

 

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Sixth Book on the Nimi’s

 

<span id="page_538">p. 538</span>

 

getting of another body and the beginning of the story of Haihayas, in
the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk06ch16)
