[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch02)  [Next](bk07ch04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter III**

** **

**On the bestowing of the daughter of the King S’aryâti to Chyavana
Muni**

 

<span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

 

1-11. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus the King, troubled with cares asked
his soldiers, in an angry mood. Next he asked his friends in sweet
words. The princess, seeing his father and his soldiers sorrowful,
thought

 

<span id="page_602">p. 602</span>

 

of her piercing the two eyes of the Muni with a thorn and thus spoke to
the King :-- O Father! While sporting in that forest, I came to see a
very hard anthill covered with creepers and shrubs wherein I found two
holes, O King! Through those small openings, I saw the two shining
things as if they were fireflies and thinking them so I pierced them
with thorns. At this time a faint voice I heard coming from that
anthill. “Oh! I am killed!” I then took out my thorns and found them wet
with water. “What is this!” I asked myself and was thunderstruck with
fear; but I could not know what I pierced in that anthill. Hearing these
gentle words of her daughter, the King S'aryâti thought that that act
had no doubt insulted the Muni and went at once to the anthill. He broke
the anthill that covered the Muni and saw the suffering Chyavana aged in
practising Tapasyâ, very much in pain. The King prostrated flat before
the Muni and then with folded hands, praised him with hymns and humbly
said to him :-- “O Intelligent One! My daughter has done this wrong act
while sporting; Therefore O high-souled One! What she had done
unknowingly, do you forgive out of your own high-hearted-ness and
liberality. I have heard that the ascetics are always void of anger;
therefore now you have to forgive this daughter of the offence and thus
shew your kindness.”

 

12-16. Vyâsa said :-- The Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana, hearing thus the
King's words and specially seeing his humble and distressed nature, said
:-- O King! I never was angry a bit; your daughter had pained me; yet I
am not angry and have not cast on her any curse; you better see, that I
am innocent; much pain is felt by me due to my eyes being pricked. O
King! It seems that you are sorry and troubled for that sin. Who can
acquire happiness in this world who has committed a great offence to a
Bhakta of the Devî, in spite he gets even S'iva as his Protector. O
King! On the one hand, I am now worn out by old age, and then, on the
other hand, I am deprived of my eyes; what shall be now my means? Please
say, who will take care of the blind man?

 

17\. The King said :-- O Muni! The anger of the ascetics is transient;
you are in practice of your tapasyâ; so your anger is a thing of
impossibility. So kindly forgive the offence of the daughter. I have got
many persons who will incessantly take care of you.

 

18-22. Chyavana said :-- “O King! There is none of my relations with me;
then I am now made blind; how shall I go on with my tapasyâ? I do not
think that your servants will take care of me. O King! If you think it
your duty to please me, then do my word,

 

<span id="page_603">p. 603</span>

 

give me your lotus-eyed daughter to serve me and take care of me. O
King! I will be very glad if I acquire your daughter; she will serve me
when I will be engaged in my tapasyâ. O King! This, if observed, will
satisfy me and all the troubles that are now with you and your army will
no doubt disappear. O King! Think and grant me your daughter; I am an
ascetic observing vows and if you give over your daughter to me, you
will not incur any sin nor any fault.”

 

23-31. Vyâsa said :-- O Bharata! Hearing thus the Muni's words, the King
S'aryâti was immersed in cares and could not say anything whether he
would or would not give over his daughter to him. The King thought, “My
daughter is very fair like a Devakanyâ and this Muni is aged, ugly and
specially he is blind; how then can I be happy if I give over my
daughter to him. Who is there so stupid and vicious that knowing his
good and bad, he for his own selfish happiness wants to deprive his
beautiful daughter of the enjoyments of her married life. How will that
fair eyebrowed daughter of mine pass her days happily in the company of
this aged Muni when she will be overpowered by passion. The more so when
the young beautiful ladies are not able to conquer their passions though
possessed of husbands of their own standard and liking, how then can my
daughter conquer her passion on getting this old blind husband! The
exquisitely beautiful Ahalyâ married Gautama; but, seeing the youthful
beauty of that lovely lady, Indra deceived her and took away her
chastity. Till at last, her husband Gautama finding that action contrary
to Dharma, cursed him. Now through the severe curse of that
Brâhma<u>n</u>a many troubles may arise; so I cannot in any case give my
daughter Sukanyâ over to him.” Thus thinking and absent-minded the King
went back to his home and, being very distressed, called his ministers
to form a council. O Ministers! What am I to do now? Is it advisable to
give over my daughter to the Muni? Or is it better to suffer these
pains? Judge and say what is the best course for me.

 

32\. The Ministers said :-- “O King! What shall we say in this critical
juncture? How can you bestow your exceedingly beautiful daughter to that
ugly unfortunate ascetic?”

 

33-45. Dvaipâyana said :-- At this moment, seeing her father and
ministers troubled very much with cares, Sukanyâ understood at once
everything by signs and hints; she then smilingly said to her dear
father :-- “O Father! Why are you looking so sad with cares? Perhaps you
are very much troubled and sad for me. O Father! I have pained that
Muni; so I will go and console him; what more than this that I will

 

<span id="page_604">p. 604</span>

 

give up myself at his feet and please him.” Hearing these words of
Sukanyâ, the King spoke to her very gladly before all the ministers. O
Daughter! The Chyavana Muni is blind, aged and of a worn figure,
especially of a very irritable temper; and you are a mere girl; how will
you be able to serve him in that dreadful forest? You are like Rati in
beauty and loveliness; how can I bestow my daughter to that aged worn
out, blind Muni for my own pleasure! The father marries the daughter to
him who has got relations, who is of a proper age, strong, who has got
unequalled grains and wealth, gems and jewels; never to a man void of
wealth. O broad-eyed One! You are exquisitely handsome; and that ascetic
is very old; see what an amount of difference lies between you two. The
Muni, moreover, has past his marriageable age; so how can I give over my
daughter. O Lotus-eyed! You always dwell in beautiful places; how can I
now make you dwell for ever in thatched huts? O Cuckoo avoiced one!
Rather will I and my soldiers die than to bestow you to that blind
husband. Let whatever come it may, I will never lose patience;
therefore, O One of good hips! Be quiet. I will never give you to that
blind man. O my Daughter! I don’t care a straw whether my kingdom and my
body live or die, but I will never be able to give you over to the
ascetic. Hearing thus the father's words, Sukanyâ began to speak with a
glad face the following sweet and gentle words :--

 

46-48. O Father! Do not trouble yourself for nothing with cares on my
account. Give me over now to that best of Munis; then all the persons
will be happy, no doubt. I will derive my intense pleasure there in that
dense forest by serving with intense devotion my old husband, who is
very holy. I have got not the least inclination towards these worldly
enjoyments which are the sources of all troubles for nothing, My heart
is now quiet. Therefore, O Father! I will become a chaste wife to him
and act according to his liking.

 

49-54. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The Ministers were greatly amazed on
hearing these words and the King also became greatly pleased and took
her to the presence of the Muni. Going before him, he bowed down to the
Muni and said :-- “O Lord! Please accept duly this daughter for your
Sevâ.” Thus saying, the King betrothed his daughter to him according to
rules. Chyavana Muni also became very glad to receive her. The Muni took
the daughter willingly for his Sevâ but refused other dowries that the
King presented. Thus the Muni became pleased; immediately the soldiers
began to evacuate and were very glad. Seeing this, the King's heart
became filled with joy. When the King, thus finishing

 

<span id="page_605">p. 605</span>

 

the betrothal ceremony of his daughter wanted to return home, the thin
bodied princess then told her father :--

 

55-64. Sukanyâ said :-- “O Father! Take away all my ornaments and
clothings and give me for my use an excellent deer skin and one bark. O
Father! I will dress myself like the wives of Munis and serve my husband
in such a way as will bring to you the unparallelled undying fame in
Heaven, Earth and the Nether regions; also I will serve my husband's
feet so that I can derive the highest happiness in the next world. I am
now full of youth, especially beautiful; do not think a bit that as I am
wedded to an aged ascetic, that my character will be spoilt. As
Vas'is<u>th</u>a's wife Arundhati has attained celebrity in this world,
so I will also attain success; there is no doubt in this. As the chaste
wife Anasûyâ of Mahar<u>s</u>i Artri has become widely known in this
world so will I be known also and establish your fame.” The exceedingly
religious King hearing all these words of Sukanyâ gave her deer skin and
all other articles wanted. The King could not help weeping, when he saw
that his daughter had dressed herself like the daughter of a Muni. He
stood fixed, very sad, on that very spot. All the queens were
exceedingly filled with sorrow to see the daughter dressed in bark and
deer-skin. Their hearts quivered and they began to weep. O King! Then
the King S'aryâti bade good bye to the Muni, leaving there his daughter.
He went with a grievous heart and returned to his own city, accompanied
by the ministers.

 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Seventh Book on the bestowing of the
daughter of the King S'aryâti to the Chyavana Muni in S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](bk07ch04)
