[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch04)  [Next](bk07ch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On the getting of youth by Chyavana Muni**

 

<span id="page_609">p. 609</span>

 

1-6. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing their words, the princess began to
tremble; but holding on patience she spoke to them in reserved terms
thus :-- You are the sons of Sûrya and you are the acknowledged deities
amongst the gods; specially you know everything, I am a chaste virtuous
woman. You ought not to speak to me in the above mannner. O Twin Devas!
Father has betrothed me to the Muni practising the Yoga Dharma; besides
I am chaste; how can I behave like a prostitute! This Sun is the Witness
of the actions good or bad of all people; He is therefore looking on our
actions also. Besides you both are born in the family of the high-souled
Kas'yapa. Thus it is utterly wrong for you to utter such (irreligious
and infamous) words. You know well the course of Dharma, what is
religious and what is irreligious in this world which has got nothing
substantial; how can a family woman leave her husband and serve another?
Go wherever you like, O Sinless Devas! I am the daughter Sukanyâ of the
King S'aryâti, devoted to my husband. Otherwise I will curse you.

 

7-11. Vyâsa said :-- O Bharata! Hearing these words, the As'vins were
greatly surprised, and, afraid of the Muni, spoke again :-- “O Princess!
We are very much pleased to see your chastity; therefore, O Beautiful
Woman! Ask boon from us; we will grant it for your welfare. O honoured
Woman! We, the physicians of the gods, will certainly make your husband
exceedingly beautiful and young, O Smart and Intelligent One! When we
three will be exactly the same in figure, age and lustre! you better can
make one of us your husband.” Hearing their words Sukanyâ became greatly
amazed and went to her own husband and spoke everything what they, the
God's physicians, said.

 

12-17. Sukanyâ said :-- “O Husband! The As'vins, the Sûrya's sons, have
come close to our Âs'rama. I have seen the two Devas and their bright
bodies. Seeing me beautiful they were overpowered with passion and told
me, “We will, be sure, make your blind husband, young, bright and give
him his two eyes again; but you will have to make one condition. Hear it
:--Your husband will be exactly like us and you will

 

<span id="page_610">p. 610</span>

 

have to select your husband amongst three of us.” O Holy One! Hearing
this as strange, I now come to inform you. Now judge and say what I am
to do now. The Deva's Maya is very difficult to comprehend; the more so,
when I do not know their intentions! O Omniscient One! I will act as you
desire.”

 

18-19. Chyavana said :-- “O Beloved! Go just now, at my word, to the
As'vins and bring them, O auspicious One! before me. What more shall I
say than this :--  Go and observe, what they say, as early as possible.
There is no need to think over this matter.”

 

20-25. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus getting the permission from her
husband, Sukanyâ went immediately to them and said :-- “O As'vins! You
are the chief gods; now do as you say. I agree to observe what you
desire.” Hearing her words, the two Devas then went to the Muni's
Âs'rama and told the princess :-- “Let your husband enter in the midst
of the water.” The aged Chyavana Muni went down quickly in the midst of
waters to attain a good form. Next the two As'vins entered into the
water of that tank. A few minutes after, the three persons came out of
the tank. All were equally bright, equally beautiful, equally young and
their limbs were decorated equally with earrings and various other
ornaments. They all spoke simultaneously :--“O Auspicious One! There is
no other woman beautiful like you, especially your face is very clean
and fair; therefore select any one of us three as your husband. O Fair
One! Whomever you love most, choose him.”

 

26-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Sukanyâ then saw their bodies are equally
bright and beautiful; not the least difference is to be found in beauty,
age, voice and dress. She became doubtful on seeing their equal
appearances. The princess, not being able to distinguish her husband,
became very anxious and thought :-- “What am I to do now? Whom to
choose? They are exactly the same. I cannot distinguish who is my real
husband? This may be the magic set up by the two As'vins. However, I am
put to a great crisis. I won't ever select another who is not my
husband. Therefore my death is well nigh; what to do now? The third form
seen now may be also a Deva's son.” Thus cogitating, she resolved to
meditate on the Highest Prakriti, the Lady of the Universe, the most
Auspicious One. Then the thin-bellied princess began to sing the hymns
of the Bhagavatî.

 

31-38. Sukanyâ said :-- “O World-Mother! Under most painful
circumstances I take refuge unto Thee; preserve my chastity; I bow

 

<span id="page_611">p. 611</span>

 

down to Thy feet. O Devî! Salutations to Thee, born of lotus. O Thou,
the dear consort of S'a<u>n</u>kara! Salutations to Thee. O Thou
favourite to Vi<u>sn</u>u, O Mother of the Vedas! O Sarasvatî!
Salutations to Thee, Thou hast created the world, moving and unmoving;
Thou art preserving it without being least excited; again Thou art
swallowing it for the peace and well-being of all. What more, Thou art
the Most Worshipful Mother of Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes'a. Thou
always illuminest the understanding of the illiterate and Thou always
grantest liberation to the Jñânins. Thou art the Prime Prakriti in
fullness and the Beloved of the Prime Puru<u>s</u>a. Thou grantest
Bhukti (enjoyment) and Mukti (freedom) to the souls that are cleansed
and pure; Thou givest pain to those that are entirely void of knowledge
and Thou grantest happiness to those that are endowed with Sattva
Gu<u>n</u>a. O Mother! Thou bestowest Siddhi (the success, the eight
supernatural powers), fame, and victory to the Yogis! Being merged in an
ocean of bewilderment, I come now to take refuge unto Thee. O Mother!
The two Devas are playing hypocrisy with me; thus puzzled I can’t fix my
mind whom to select; therefore I am merged in an ocean of sorrow. Save
me by showing my real husband. O Omniscient One! Knowing my vow of
chastity dost Thou enlighten me so that I can know my husband.”

 

39-58. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus pleased by the Sukanyâ's prayers, the
Devî Tripurâ Sundarî then imparted to her the pleasant Sattva Jñân
(knowledge pertaining to Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a). She then looked again at
the three personages, and though they were similar in appearance and
beauty, instantly she recognised mentally her husband and chose him.
When Sukanyâ selected the Muni Chyavana, the two Devas became greatly
pleased to see that. The two Devas were pleased by the grace of
Bhâgavatî; they were further pleased to see the Dharma of chastity and
granted her the boon. They then bade good-bye to Chyavana and were ready
to start to their own place when Chyavana being very much pleased to get
through their grace, his beauty, youth and wife, interrupted them,
saying “O high-minded Devas! You have done much good to me. I used to
feel pain every day, in spite of my having this wife having good hairs!
But owing to your mercy, I cannot describe how happy I am now in this
world of woes and troubles. I was very aged and blind and was without
any enjoyment but it is you that coming to this forest have brought to
me eyes, youth and exquisite  beauty. Therefore, O twin Devas! I desire
to do something good to you in return. Fie on him, who does not return
anything for the good that he has received from a beneficent friend.
That man remains indebted

 

<span id="page_612">p. 612</span>

 

for ever in this world; therefore I am desirous to give you two now
whatever you want. O twin Devas! Even if the Devas or the Asuras find it
difficult to attain, I will give that to you to free myself of the debt
I owe to you. I am greatly pleased at your good deed; therefore be kind
enough to speak out whatever you desire.” They began to consult with
each other, and spoke to the Muni Chyavana who was seated with Sukanya
beside him :-- “O Mahar<u>s</u>i! We have got all our desires by the
grace of Father! Still it is difficult for us to drink some libation
along with the other Devas and we thirst after that very strongly. At
the great sacrifice of Brahmâ in the Golden Mountain (Kanakâchala),
Indra, the King of the Devas, ordered us not to drink Soma, as we were
physicians. Therefore, O Knower of Dharma! O Ascetic! You will certainly
do us a great favour if you can make us drink the Soma juice; we would
be very glad and have our desires satisfied.” Thus hearing the words of
the As'vins, Mahar<u>s</u>i Chyavana gladly spoke to them the following
gentle words, O Twin Devas! I was blind and aged; but now I am become a
young and beautiful man, and it is by your grace that I have got back my
wife. Therefore I speak this truly before you that at the great
sacrifice of the lustrous King S'aryâti, I will gladly make you drink
the Soma in the presence of Indra, the King of the Devas. Hearing these
words of the Muni, the twin As'vins were greatly pleased and went back
to the world of the Devas. And the Muni Chyavana, too, returned to his
own As'rama with his wife Sukanyâ.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the getting of youth
by Chyavana Muni in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am of
18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk07ch06)
