[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch15)  [Next](bk07ch17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On the story of S’unahs’epha**

 

<span id="page_647">p. 647</span>

 

1-4. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When Varu<u>n</u>a went away, the King was
very much laid down with that dropsy and daily his pains began to
increase and he began to suffer extreme pains. O King! The prince, on
the other hand, heard, in the forest, of the illness of his father and
filled with affection, wanted to go to his father. A year had passed
away and the prince desired very gladly to go to his father and see him.
Knowing this, Indra came there. He came instantly in the form of a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>  and with favourable arguments desisted the prince, who
was about to go to his father.

 

5-31. Indra said :-- “O Prince! It seems you are silly; you know nothing
of the difficult state policies. Therefore it is that you are ready to
go, out of sheer ignorance, to your father. O Fortunate One! If you go
there, your father will get his sacrifice, where a human victim is to be
offered, performed by the Vedic Brâhma<u>n</u>as and your flesh will be
offered are oblations to the blazing Fire. O Child! The souls of all the
beings are very dear; it is for that reason, for the sake of soul, that
sons, wife, wealth and jewels are all dear. Therefore, though you are
his dear son, like his son, yet he will certainly have you killed and
get Homas offered, to free himself from the disease. O Prince! You ought
not to go home now; rather when your father dies, you would certainly go
there and inherit your Kingdom.” O King! Thus hindered by Vâsava, the
prince remained in that forest for one year more. But when the prince
again heard of the severe illness of his father, he wanted again to go
to his father, resolved to court the death of his ownself. Indra also
came there in the form of a Brâhma<u>n</u> and, with reasonable words,
repeatedly advised him not to go there. Here, on the other hand, the
King Haris’chandra became very much distressed and troubled by the
disease and asked his family priest Vas’i<u>st</u>ha Deva :-- “O
Brâhma<u>n</u>a! What is the sure remedy for the cure of the disease?”
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, the Brahmâ’s son, said :-- “O King! Purchase one son
by giving his value; then perform the sacrifice with that purchased son
and you will be free from the curse. O King! The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, versed
in the Vedas, say that sons are of ten kinds, of whom the son, purchased
by paying its proper value, is one of them. So buy one son. There will
very probably be within your kingdom a Brâhmi<u>n</u> who might sell out
of avarice, his son. In that case Varu<u>n</u>a Deva will certainly be

 

<span id="page_648">p. 648</span>

 

pleased and grant your happiness.” Hearing these words of the
high-souled Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, the King became glad and ordered his
minister to look after such a son. There lived in that King’s dominion
one Brâhmi<u>n</u>, named Ajigarta, very poor; he had three sons. The
minister spoke to him to purchase his son :-- “I will give you one
hundred cows; give one son of yours for the sacrifice. You have three
sons named respectively S’unahpuchcha, S’unahs’epha and S’unolangula.
Give me out of them one son and I will give you one hundred cows as his
value.” Ajigarta was very much distressed for want of food; so when he
heard the proposal, he expressed his desire to sell his son. He thought
that his eldest son was the rightful person to perform funeral obsequies
and offer Pi<u>nd</u>a and he therefore did not spare him. The youngest
son, too, he did not spare also, as he considered that his own. At last,
he sold his second son for the price of one hundred cows. The King then
bought him and made him the victim for the sacrifice. When that boy was
fastened to the sacrificial post, he began to tremble and very much
distressed with sorrow began to cry. Seeing this, the Munis cried out in
a very pitiful tone. When the King gave permission for the immolation of
that boy, the slaughterer did not take weapons to slaughter him. He told
that he would never be able to kill the boy, since he is crying in a
very pitiful tone. When he thus withdrew himself from his work, the King
then asked his councillors :-- O Devas! What ought to be done now?
S’unahs’epha then began to cry in a very pitiful voice; the people
present there began to discuss and there arose a great noise on the
affair. Then Ajigarta stood up in the midst of the assembly and spoke
:-- “O King! Be patient; I will fulfil your desire. I am desirous of
wealth and if you give me double the amount, I will slay immediately the
victim; and you can complete early your sacrifice.” O King! He who is
hankering after money, can always entertain

feelings of enmity even towards his own son. There is no doubt in this.

 

32-35. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing those words of Ajigarta,
Haris’chandra gladly spoke to him :-- “I will immediately give you
another hundred excellent cows.” Hearing thus, the son’s father,
avaricious of wealth, immediately resolved and became ready to slay his
son. All the councillors seeing the father ready to slay his son, were
struck with sorrow and began to lament exclaiming “Alas! This wretch, a
disgrace to his family, is now ready to kill his own son. Oh! We never
saw before such a cruel vicious person. This Brâhmi<u>n</u> must be a
Demon in a Brâhmi<u>n</u> body!

 

<span id="page_649">p. 649</span>

 

36-38. Fie on you! O Châ<u>nd</u>âla! What a vicious work are you now
going to do? What happiness do you derive by slaying the son, the jewel
of jewels, only to get some wealth? O Sinner! It is stated in the Vedas
that the soul takes its birth from one’s body; so how are you going to
slay your soul!” When the hue and cry arose in the assembly,
Vis’vâmitra, the son of Kaus’ika, went to the King and, out of pity,
said :--

 

39-56. O King! S’unahs’epha is very piteously crying; so let him be
free; and then your sacrifice will be complete and you will be free of
your disease. There is no virtue like mercy and there is no vice like
killing (Himsâ). What is written about killing animals in the sacrifice,
is only meant for the persons inclined to sensual objects and to give
them a stimulus in that direction. O King! He who wants his own welfare
and who wants to preserve his own body ought not to cut another’s body.
He who pities equally all the beings, gets contended with a trivial gain
and subdues all his senses; God is soon pleased with him. O King! You
should treat all the Jîvas like yourself and thus always spend your
life, so dear to all. You desire to preserve your body by taking away
the life of this boy; similarly why would he not try to preserve his own
body, the receptacle of happiness and pleasures. O King! You have
desired to kill this innocent Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy; but he will never
overlook this enmity of yours done in previous lives. If anybody kills
another willingly, though he has got no enmity with him, then the one
that is killed will certainly kill afterwards the slayer. His father,
out of greed for money, is deprived of intellect and so has sold away
his son. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> is certainly very cruel and sinful. There is
no doubt in this. When one goes to Gayâ or one performs an As’vamedha
sacrifice or when one offers a blue bull (Nila Vri<u>s</u>abha), one
does so on the consideration that one would desire to have many sons.
Moreover the King has to suffer for one-sixth of the sins committed by
anyone in his Kingdom. There is no doubt in this. Therefore the King
ought certainly to prohibit any man when he wants to do a sinful act.
Why then did you not prevent this man when he desired to sell his son? O
King! You are the son of Tris’anku; especially you are born in the Solar
line of Kings. So how have you desired, being born an Âryâ, to do an act
becoming an An-Âryâ (non-aryan). If you take my word and quickly free
this Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy, you will certainly derive virtue in your body.
Your father was converted into a Châ<u>nd</u>âla by a curse but I sent
him in his very body to the Heavens. And you are well acquainted with
this fact. Therefore, O King! Keep my word out of your love for that.
This boy is very pitifully crying; so free him. I pray this from you in
this your Râjasûya sacrifice and if you do not keep my word, you will
incur the

 

<span id="page_650">p. 650</span>

 

sin of not keeping my word. Do you not realise this? O King! You will
have to give anything that a man wants from you in this sacrifice; but
if you do otherwise, sin will attack you, no doubt.

 

57-59. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of Kaus’ika, the King
Haris’chandra spoke thus :-- O son of Gâdhi! I am suffering very much
from the dropsy; I will not be able therefore to free him. You can pray
for some other thing. You ought not to throw obstacles in this my
sacrifice. Vis’vâmitra became very angry at this, and seeing the
Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy very distressed, became sorrowful and mourned very
much.

 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of
S’unahs’epha in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk07ch17.md)
