[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch14)  [Next](bk07ch16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XV**

 

**On the story of the King Haris’chandra**

 

<span id="page_643">p. 643</span>

 

1-7. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When there was going on in the King’s
palace, the grand festivities for the son’s birth ceremonies,
Varu<u>n</u>a Deva came there in the holy Brâhmi<u>n</u> form. “Let
welfare be on you.” Saying this, Varu<u>n</u>a began to say :-- “O King!
Know me to he Varu<u>n</u>a. Now hear what I say. O King! Your son is
now born; therefore perform sacrifices in honor to me with your son. O
King! Your defect of not having a son is now removed; so fulfil what you
promised before.” Hearing these words, the King began to think “Oh! Only
one lotus-faced son is born to me; how can I kill it. On the other hand,
the powerful Regent (Lokapâla) of one quarter is present in
Brâhma<u>n</u>a form; and it never behoves one to show disrespect to a
Deva or to a man who wishes welfare to us. Again it is very difficult to
root out the affection for a son; so what am I to do now? How shall I
preserve my happiness due to the birth of my son.” The King, then, with
patience bowed down to him and worshipped him duly and humbly spoke to
him in beautiful words, pregnant with reason.

 

8-10. O Deva of the Devas! I will obey your order no doubt and I will
perform your sacrifice according to the Vedic rites and with profuse
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs (remuneration to priests, etc.) But, when in a
sacrifice human beings are immolated as victims, both the husband and
wife are entitled to the ceremony. Father becomes purified on the tenth
day and mother on the expiration of one month after the son’s birth; so
how can I perform the sacrifice until one month expires! You are
omniscient and the master of all the beings; and you know what is Nitya
Dharma. So, O Varu<u>n</u>a Deva! I want one month time; and show mercy
thus on me.

 

11-19. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The King Haris’chandra saying thus,
Varu<u>n</u>a Deva spoke to the King :-- “O King! Welfare be unto

 

<span id="page_644">p. 644</span>

 

you! Do your duties; I am now going back to my place. O King! I will
come again after one month. Better finish the natal ceremonies and the
Nâmakara<u>n</u>a ceremony regularly and then perform my sacrifice.” O
King! When Varu<u>n</u>a Deva turned his back, the King began to feel
happiness. Then the King gave as gifts millions of cows, yielding plenty
of milk and ornamented with gold, and mountains of Til, sesamums to the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s versed in the Vedas and kept his name, with formal
ceremonies as Rohitâs’va. When one month became complete, Varu<u>n</u>a
Deva came again in a Brâhmi<u>n</u> form and frequently said :-- “O
King! Start the sacrifice just now!” The King, on seeing the God of
Waters, at once fell into an ocean of anxieties and sorrows; he then
bowed down and worshipping him as a guest, spoke to him with folded
palms :-- “O Deva! It is to my great fortune that you have landed your
feet at my place; O Lord! My house has been sanctified to day. O Deva! I
will do, no doubt, your desired sacrifice according to the rites and
ceremonies. But see, the victims that have not their teeth come as yet
are not fit for a sacrifice; so the versed Pundits say; so I have
settled I would perform your great sacrifice, as desired by you, when
the teeth will come out of my son.”

 

20-41. Vyâsa said :-- O Lord of men! Hearing thus, Varu<u>n</u>a spoke
“Let it be so” and went away. The King Haris’chandra became glad and
passed his days in enjoyments in his household. When the teeth of the
child got out, Varu<u>n</u>a knew it and came again in a Brâhmi<u>n</u>
garb in the palace and spoke “O King! Now commence my sacrifice.” Seeing
the Brâhmi<u>n</u> Varu<u>n</u>a there, the King, too, bowed down and
gave him a seat and shewing all respects to him, worshipped him. He sang
hymns to him and very humbly said with his head bent low :-- “O Deva! I
will perform your desired sacrifice with plenty of
Dak<u>s</u>’i<u>n</u>âs according to rites and ceremonies. But the
child’s Chû<u>d</u>âkara<u>n</u>a (the ceremony of tonsure) is not yet
done; so the hairs that were at the birth time are still there and the
child cannot be fit for sacrifice as long as those hairs exist. So I
have heard from the elderly persons. O Lord of Waters! You know the
S’âstric rules; kindly wait till the Chû<u>d</u>âkara<u>n</u>a is over.
When the child will have his head shaven, I will certainly perform your
sacrifice; there is no doubt in this.” Hearing these words,
Varu<u>n</u>a spoke to him again :-- “O King! Why are you deceiving me
like this so often? O King! Now you have all the materials ready for the
sacrifice; only for your filial affection you are deceiving me. However,
if, after the ceremony of tonsure, you do not perform my sacrifice, I
will be angry and I will curse you. O King! I am going for the present;
but see do not tell lies, being born in the family of Ik<u>s</u>âku.”
Instantly Varu<u>n</u>a

 

<span id="page_645">p. 645</span>

 

disappeared; the King, too, felt himself happy in his household. When
the ceremony of tonsure was commenced and grand festivities were held,
on the occasion Varu<u>n</u>a soon came again to the King’s palace. The
queen was then sitting before the King with the child in her lap when
Varu<u>n</u>a came up there. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> Varu<u>n</u>a then
appeared like a Flaming Fire and spoke to the King in a clear voice :--
“O King! Start the sacrifice.” Seeing him, the King was confused with
terror and with folded palms, quickly bowed down to him. After
worshipping him duly, he very humbly said :-- “O Lord! Today I will
perform your sacrifice. But kindly hear with attention my saying and
then do what is advisable. O Lord! If you approve of this as reasonable,
I then open my heart to you. The three Var<u>n</u>as Brâhma<u>n</u>as,
K<u>s</u>attriyas, and Vais’yas become Dvîjas (twice-born) only when
they are duly purified according to proper rules and ceremonies; without
any such purifications they are certainly S’ûdras. So the Pundits versed
in the Vedas declare. My child is now an infant only; so it is like a
S’ûdra. When his thread ceremony (Upanayan) will be performed, he will
then be fit for the sacrifice; this the Veda S’âstras declare. The
K<u>s</u>atttriyas are so purified in their eleventh year; the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as in their eighth year and the Vais’yas in their twelfth
year. So, O Lord of the Devas! If you feel pity for your this humble
servant, then wait till the Upanayana ceremony is over, when I will
perform your grand sacrifice with my son. O Bibhu! You are the Lokapâla;
specially you are conversant with all the S’âstric rules and have
acquired the knowledge of Dharma. If you think my saying as true, then
go to your home.”

 

42-51. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing these words, Varu<u>n</u>a’s heart was
filled with pity and so he went away instantly, saying “Let it be so.”
Varu<u>n</u>a going away, the King felt very glad and the queen, knowing
the welfare of the son became glad too. Then the King gladly performed
his state duties. After some time, the child grew ten years old.
Consulting with the peaceful Brâhma<u>n</u>as as well as his ministers,
he collected materials for the Upanayana ceremony befitting his
position. When the eleventh year was completed by his son, the King
arranged everything for the thread ceremony but when his thoughts turned
to Varu<u>n</u>a’s sacrifice, he became very sad and anxious. When the
thread ceremony began to be performed, the Brâhmi<u>n</u> Varu<u>n</u>a
came there. Seeing him, the King instantly bowed down and standing
before him with clasped palms, gladly spoke to him :-- O Deva! My son’s
Upanayana being over, now my son is fit for the victim in the sacrifice;
and by your grace, my sorrow that was within me as not having a son, has
vanished. I speak truly before

 

<span id="page_646">p. 646</span>

 

you that, O Knower of Virtue! after some mere time I have desired to
perform your sacrifice with plenty of Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs. In fact,
when the Samâvartan ceremony will be over, I will do as you like. Kindly
wait till then.

 

52-62. Varu<u>n</u>a said :-- O Intelligent One! You are very much
attached to your son now and so by various reasonable plays of
intellect, you are repeatedly deceiving me. However, I am going home
today at your request but know certain that I will come again at the
time of the Samâvartan ceremony. (N. B.:-- Samâvartan means the return
home especially of a pupil from his tutor’s house after finishing his
course of study there.) O King! Thus saying, Varu<u>n</u>a went away and
the King became glad and began to perform duly his various duties. The
prince was very intelligent; and as he used to see Varu<u>n</u>a coming,
now and then, at the time of the ceremonies, he became very anxious. He
then made enquiries outside hither and thither and came to know of his
own being about to be killed and he desired to quit the house instantly.
He then consulted with the minister’s sons and came to a final
conclusion and went out of the city to the forest. When the son had gone
to the forest, the King became very much afflicted with sorrow and sent
messengers in quest of him. When some time passed away, Varu<u>n</u>a
came to his house and spoke to the distressed King :-- “O King! Now
perform your desired Sacrifice.” The King bowed down to him and said :--
“O Deva! What shall I do now? My son has become afraid and has gone
away. I do not know where he has gone. O Deva! My messengers have
searched for him in difficult places in mountains, in the hermitages of
the Munis, in fact, in all the places; but they have not been able to
find him out anywhere. My son has left his home; order now what I can
do. O Deva! You know everything; so judge I have got no fault in this
matter. It is certainly luck and nothing else.”

 

63-66. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of the King,
Varu<u>n</u>a became very much angry and when he saw that he was
deceived so many times by the King, he then cursed, saying :-- “O King!
As you have cheated me by your deceitful words, so you be attacked by
dropsy and be severely pained by it.” Thus cursed by Varu<u>n</u>a, the
King was attacked with that disease and began to suffer much. Cursing
thus, Varu<u>n</u>a went back to his own place and the King was much
afflicted with that terrible disease.

 

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the story of the
King Haris’chandra in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk07ch16)
