[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch10)  [Next](bk07ch12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XI**

 

**On the story of Tris’anku**

 

<span id="page_629">p. 629</span>

 

1\. Janamejaya said :-- “O Intelligent One! Did the prince Tris’anku
free himself afterwards of the curse inflicted on him by the Muni
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha.”

 

2-8. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Satyavrata, cursed by Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, was
transformed into a demoniacal state (Pis’âchatva); but he became a great
devotee of the Devî and passed away his time in that Âs’rama. One day he
repeating slowly the nine-lettered Mantram of the Bhagavatî, wished to
perform the Puras’chara<u>n</u>a ceremony (repeating the name of a deity
attended with burnt offerings, oblations, etc.) of the said Mantra, came
to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, bowed down to them with great devotion and
purity and said :-- “O venerable gods of the earth! Kindly hear me;

 

<span id="page_630">p. 630</span>

 

I with my head bowed down pray to you, that you all be my priests
(Ritt-vigs). You are all versed in the Vedas; so kindly do for me duly
the Homa ceremony equal to one-tenth part of Japam, for my success. O
Brâhma<u>n</u>as! My name is Satyavrata; I am a prince; you ought to do
this work for me for my welfare.” Thus hearing the prince’s words the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as said :-- “O Prince! You are cursed by your Guru and you
are now turned into a demoniacal state. You have now no right to the
Vedas; especially you are now in the Pis’âcha state; it is blamed by all
the persons; so now you are not fit to be initiated into the ceremony.”

 

9-14. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing them, the prince got very sad and
dejected and thought “Fie on my life! What shall I do now in living even
in the forest. My father has forsaken me; I am banished from the
kingdom; again, by the Guru’s curse, I have got this Pis’âcha state; I
therefore can’t decide what to do.” The prince, then, collecting fuel,
prepared the funeral pile for himself, remembered the Chandikâ Devî and
repeating Her Mantram, resolved to jump into the fire. Lighting the pyre
in front, the prince bathed and standing, with clasped palms, began to
chant the hymns to Mahâ Mâyâ before entering into the fire. At this
moment, the Devî Bhagavatî, knowing that the prince was ready to burn
himself, came instantly to the spot on the back of the lion, by the
aerial route. She manifested Henself before him and spoke in a voice
deep like a rain-cloud.

 

15-17. “O Virtuous One What is all this? What have you settled all
these? Never throw yourself in fire; be patient. O Fortunate One! Your
father is now aged; he will give you his kingdom and will go to the
forest for tapasyâ; therefore, O Hero! Do leave your depression of
spirits. O King! Tomorrow the ministers of your father will came to you
to take you there. By My Grace, your father will install you on the
throne and, in due time, he will conquer his desires and will go
undoubtedly to the Brahmâ loka.”

 

18-32. Vyâsa said :-- O Fortunate One! Thus saying, the Devî vanished at
that spot; the prince, too, desisted from his purpose of entering into
the fire. In the meanwhile, the highsouled Nârada went to Ayodhyâ and at
once informed everything to the King. The King became very sad and began
to repent very much, hearing the son’s resolve to burn himself. The
virtuous King, grieved at heart, for his son, said to his ministers :--
“You all are aware of the turning out of my son. I have forsaken my
intelligent son Satyavrata; though he was very spiritual and worthy to
get the kingdom; yet, at my command, he

 

<span id="page_631">p. 631</span>

 

instantaneously went away to the forest. Void of wealth, he, practising
forgiveness, passed his time in study, particularly in spiritual
knowledge; but Vas’i<u>st</u>ha Deva, cursed him and made him like a
Pis’âcha. Very much distressed by pain and sorow, he was ready to burn
himself but the Mahâ Devî preventing him, he desisted from this purpose.
So go hurriedly and, consoling my powerful eldest son, bring him at once
to me. I am now calm and quiet and of a retiring disposition; so I am
determined to practise tapasyâ. My son is now capable to govern the
subjects; I will now install my son on the throne and retire to the
forest.” So he gladly sent his ministers to his son. The ministers, too,
gladly went there and consoled the prince and, with respect, brought him
to the Ayodhyâ city. Seeing Satyavrata with matted hair on his head,
with dirty clothes, and thin and worn out with cares, the King began to
think within himself “Oh! What a cruel act have I done, though I know
everything about religion, in banishing my intelligent son, quite fit to
govern my kingdom.” Thus thinking, he embraced his son by his arms and
consoling him, made him sit by his throne. The King, versed in politics,
then began to speak gladly with suffocated feelings of love to his son
sitting by the side of him.

 

33-53. O Son! Your highest duty is to keep your mind always on religion
and to respect the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. Never speak falsely anywhere nor
follow any bad course in any way. Rather the words of the spiritual good
persons ought to be fully observed; the ascetics ought to be worshipped.
Senses must be controlled and the wicked cruel robbers are certainly to
be slain. O Son! For one’s success, one should consult with one’s
ministers and keep that as secret by all means. Any enemy howsoever
insignificant he may be, a clever King should never overlook him. The
ministers, if they be attached to other masters and if they come round
afterwards, don’t trust them. Spies should be kept to watch friends and
foes alike. Show your living regards to the religion always, and make
charitable gifts. One ought not to argue in vain and always avoid the
company of the wicked. O Son! You should worship the Mahar<u>s</u>is and
perform various sacrifices. Never trust women, those who are
inordinately addicted to women, and the gamblers. Never is it advisable
to be addicted too much to hunting. Always shew your back to gambling,
drinking, music and to the prostitutes and try to make your subjects
follow the same. Early in the morning at the Brahmâ  Muhûrta everyday
you should get up from your bed and bathe and perform other analogous
duties. O Son! Be initiated by the Guru in the Devî Mantra, and worship
with devotion the Supreme Force, the Bhagavatî. Human birth is crowned
with success by worshipping Her Lotus Feet, O Son!

 

<span id="page_632">p. 632</span>

 

He who performs once the great Pûjâ of the Mahâ Devî and drinks the
Chara<u>n</u>âmrita water (water with which Her feet are worshipped) has
never to enter again in the womb of his mother; know this as certain.
That Mahâ Devî is all that is seen and She Herself is again the Seer and
Witness, of the nature of Intelligence. Filled with these ideas, rest
fearless like the Universal Soul. Do your daily Naimittik (occasional)
duties, go to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s assembly and calling on them ask the
conclusions of the Dharma S’âstras. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, versed in the
Vedas and Vedantas, are objects of venerations and must be worshipped.
Give, then, them always according to merits, cows, lands, gold, etc.
Don’t worship any Brâhmi<u>n</u> who is illiterate. Don’t give to
illiterates more than their belliful wants. O Child! Never trespass
Dharma, out of covetousness, and remember always not to insult ever
afterwards any Brâhma<u>n</u>as. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s are the cause of
the K<u>s</u>attriyas, the more so they are the terrestrial gods; honour
them with all your care! In this never flinch from your duties. Fire
comes out of water; the K<u>s</u>attriyas come out of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as; iron comes out of stones. The powers of these flow
everywhere. But if there be any clash between one thing and its source,
then that clash dies away in the source. Know this as quite certain. The
King who wants his own welfare and improvement must by gift and humility
shew his respect especially to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. Follow the maxims of
morality as dictated in the Dharma S’âstras. Amass wealth according to
rules of justice and fill the treasury.

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Seventh Book about the story of
Tris’anku in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk07ch12.md)
