[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch16)  [Next](bk07ch18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On the freeing of S’unahs’epha and the curing of Haris’chandra**

 

<span id="page_650">p. 650</span>

 

1-6. Vyâsa said :-- O King! When Vis’vâmitra saw that the boy was crying
very pitifully, he went to him with a merciful heart and said :-- “O
Child! I am giving you the Varu<u>n</u>a Mantra; recollect this within
your mind and if you go on repeating that Mantra silently, you will
certainly fare well.” The sorrowful S’unahs’epha, hearing thus from
Vis’vâmitra, began to repeat silently in his mind the above Mantra,
clearly pronouncing each letter. O King! No sooner S’unahs’epha repeated
that Mantra than the kind-hearted Varu<u>n</u>a came suddenly before the
boy, greatly pleased with him. Everyone in the assembly became
thoroughly surprised to see Varu<u>n</u>a Deva come there and they all
became glad and chanted hymns in honour of him. The diseased
Haris’chandra was also thoroughly surprised, fell to his feet, and with
folded palms began to sing hymns to Varu<u>n</u>a, standing before him.

 

7-14. Haris’chandra said :-- “O Deva of the Devas! I am very vicious; my
intellect is much defiled; I am a sinner before you; O Merciful One! Now
show your mercy and sanctify this humble self. I was very much troubled
on not having a son; so I had disregarded your words; now show your
mercy on me; what offence can cling to him whose intellect is already
out of order? A beggar does not see his own faults; I am also in want of
a son; so I could not see my defects. O Lord! Being afraid of the
terrors of hell, I have deceived

 

<span id="page_651">p. 651</span>

 

you. Those, who are sonless, cannot find rest anywhere. Especially he is
barred from the Heavens. Being terrified by this dictate of S’âstra, I
have shown disregard to your words. O Lord! You are wise and I am
ignorant; especially I am extremely afflicted by this terrible disease;
I am also deprived of my son; so you ought not to take any notice of my
faults. O Lord! I do not know where my son has gone; O merciful One!
Perhaps he, being afraid of his life, has fled away to some forest. For
your satisfaction, I have now commenced your sacrifice with this
purchased boy; I gave an equivalent value and I have purchased this boy.
O Deva of the Devas! Your sight only has taken away my infinite
troubles; now if you be pleased, I can be free of my this disease dropsy
and my troubles will all be over.” Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing thus
the words of that diseased King, Varu<u>n</u>a, the Deva of the Devas,
took pity on him and thus spoke.

 

15-22. Varu<u>n</u>a said :-- “O King! S’unahs’epha is uttering hymns of
praise to me; he has become very distressed; so quit him. Your
sacrifice, too, is now completed; now let you be free from your present
disease.” Thus saying, Varu<u>n</u>a freed the King of his disease in
the presence of all his councillors; the King became possessed of a
beautiful body and got himself completely cured and shone bright before
the assembly. Shouts of victory arose from the midst of the sacrificial
ground when the Brâhmi<u>n</u> boy was freed of his bonds of rope, by
the mercy of the high-souled Deva Varu<u>n</u>a. The King became very
glad on his being recovered immediately from his disease and
S’unahs’epha, too, became free from his anxiety and pacified when he got
himself liberated from his being immolated on the sacrificial post. Then
the King Haris’chandra completed his sacrifice with great modesty.
Afterwards S’unahs’epha addressed the councillors with folded palms and
said :-- O Councillors! You know well the Dharma; O Speakers of truth!
Kindly specify according to the dictates of the Vedas. O Omniscient
ones! Whose son am I now? Who is my most respectful father? Please
deliver your judgment and I will take his refuge.

 

23-34. When S’unahs’epha spoke thus, the members of the assembly began
to speak to each other, “The boy must be of Ajigarta; whose else can he
be? This boy is born of the limbs of Ajigarta; and he has nursed him
according to his might. So he must be his son; whose else can he be?”
Vâma Deva then told the people of the assembly, “The father of the boy
sold his son for money; the King purchased him. So he can be said as the
son of the King; or he may be called the son of Varu<u>n</u>a, in as
much as he freed him from his rope bondage. For, he

 

<span id="page_652">p. 652</span>

 

who nourishes another with food, who saves one from one’s fear, who
protects one by giving money, who bestows learning to anybody and he who
gives birth to any of the above five classes of persons can be called
his father.” O King! Thus some one turned out to be in favour of
Ajigarta, some other in favour of the King; but nobody came to any
definite conclusion. When matters stood in this doubtful condition, the
omniscient all-respected Vas’i<u>st</u>ha Deva addressed the disputing
members thus :-- “O high-souled Ones! Kindly hear what the S’rutis say
on this point. When the father has cut off his filial attachment and has
sold his son, his fatherly connection has ceased then. No doubt this boy
was purchased by the King Haris’chandra. But when the King fastened him
to the sacrificial post, he cannot be called as the father. Again when
this boy singing hymns in honour of Varu<u>n</u>a, he being glad freed
him of his bondage, so Varu<u>n</u>a cannot be called his father. For
whoever praises a god by the great Mantra, that Deva becomes pleased
with him and gives him wealth, life, cattle, kingdom and even final
emancipation. Rather Vis’vâmitra saved the boy by giving him in his
critical moment the powerful great Mantra of Varu<u>n</u>a; hence the
boy can be called as the son of Vis’vâmitra and of none else.”

 

35-40. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing the words of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, all
the members of the assembly gave their unanimous consent and Vis’vâmitra
with his heart filled with love, exclaimed, “O Son! Come to my house.”
And caught hold of his right hand. S’unahs’epha, too, accompanied him
and went away. Varu<u>n</u>a also went to his own abode with a gladdened
heart. The councillors, too, departed. Freed from his disease, the King
gladly began to govern his subjects. At this time his son Rohitâ heard
all about Varu<u>n</u>a and became very glad and leaving the impassable
forest passes and mountains, returned home. The messengers informed the
King of the arrival of the prince; the King heard and his heart
overflowed with love and he gladly came there with no delay.

 

41-48. Seeing the father coming, Rohitâs’va became filled with love and
overpowered with sorrow for long separation began to shed tears and fell
prostrate at his feet. The King raised him up and embraced him gladly
and smelling his head enquired of his welfare. When the King was thus
asking his son, taking him on his lap, the hot tears of joy flowed from
his eyes and fell on the head of the prince. The King and the prince
then began to govern together his kingdom. The King described in detail
all the events of the sacrifice where human victims are immolated. He
started next the Râjasûya sacrifice, the best of all sacrifices, and
duly worshipping the Muni Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, made him the

 

<span id="page_653">p. 653</span>

 

Hotâ in that sacrifice. When this grand sacrifice was finished, the King
respected the Muni Vas’i<u>st</u>ha with abundant wealth. Once, on a
time, the Muni Vas’i<u>st</u>ha went gladly to the romantic Heaven of
Indra; and Vis’vâmitra, too, went there also and both the Munis then met
with each other. The two Mahar<u>s</u>is took their seats in that
Heaven. But Vis’vâmitra was astonished to see Vas’i<u>st</u>ha greatly
respected in Indra’s hall of assembly and asked him, thus :--

 

49\. “O Muni! Where have you received this great honour and worship? O
Highly Fortunate One! Who has worshipped you thus? Speak out truly.”

 

50-53. Vas’i<u>st</u>ha said :-- “O Muni! There is a King named
Haris’chandra; he is very powerful and my client; that King performed
the great Râjasûya sacrifice with abundant Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs. There
is no other King truthful like him; he is virtuous, charitable, and ever
ready in governing his subjects. O Son of Kaus’ika! I have got my
worship and honour in his sacrifice. O best of Dvîjas! Are you telling
me to speak truly? Again I speak truly to you that there never was a
King truthful, heroic, charitable, and very religious like him nor there
will be such a one.”

 

54\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing such words, the Vis’vâmitra, of a
very angry temper, spoke to him with his reddened eyes :--

 

55-59. “O Vas’i<u>st</u>ha! Haris’chandra obtained a boon from
Varu<u>n</u>a when he made a certain promise; then he cheated
Varu<u>n</u>a with deceitful words. So he is a liar and cheat. Why are
you praising then that King? O Intelligent One! Let us now stake all our
virtues that we have earned since our birth by our asceticism and
studies. You have praised exceedingly that King who is a great cheat;
but if I cannot prove him to be a liar of the first order, I will lose
all my virtues from my birth; but if it be otherwise, then all your
virtues will be destroyed.” Thus the two Munis quarrelled with each
other and making this stake, departed from the Heavens and went to their
respective Âs’ramas.

 

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter in the Seventh Book on the freeing of
S’unahs’epha and the curing of Haris’chandra in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am
S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk07ch18)
