[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch34)  [Next](bk07ch36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

# Chapter XXXV

### On the Yoga and Mantra Siddhi

### <span id="page_718">p. 718</span>

1\. Himâlayâ said :-- "O Mahes'varî! Now tell me the Yoga with all its
Amgas (limbs) giving the knowledge of the Supreme Consciousness so that,
I may realise my Self, when I practise according to those instructions.

2-10. S'rî Devî said :-- "The Yoga does not exist in the Heavens; nor
does it exist on earth or in the nether regions (Pâtâla). Those who are
skilled in the Yogas say that the realisation of the identity between
the Jivâtma and the Paramâtmâ is "Yoga." O Sinless One! The enemies to
this Yoga are six; and they are lust, anger, greed, ignorance, vanity
and jealousy. The Yogis attain the Yoga when they become able to destroy
these six enemies by practising the accompaniments to Yoga. Yama,
Niyama, Âsana, Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma, Pratyâhâra, Dhâra<u>n</u>â, Dhyâna, and
Samâdhi, these are the eight limbs of Yoga. Yama includes Ahimsâ
(non-injuring; non- killing); truthfulness; Asteyam (non-stealing by
mind or deed); Brahmacharya (continence); Dayâ (mercy to all beings);
Uprightness; forgiveness, steadiness; eating frugally, restrictedly and
cleanliness (external and internal). These are ten in number. Niyama
includes also ten qualities :-- (1) Tapasyâ (austerities and penances);
(2) contentment; (3) Âstikya (faith in the God and the Vedas, Devas,
Dharma and Adharma); (4) Charity (in good causes); worship of God;
hearing the Siddhântas (established sayings) of the Vedas; Hrî or
modesty (not to do any irreligious or blameable acts); S'raddhâ (faith
to go do good works that are sanctioned); (9) Japam (uttering silently
the mantrams, Gâyatrîs or sayings of Purânas) and (10) Homam (offering
oblations daily to the Sacred Fire). There are five kinds of Asanas
(Postures) that are commendable: Padmâsan, Svastikâsan, Bhadrâsan,
Vajrâsan and Vîrâsan. Padmâsan consists in crossing the legs and placing
the feet on the opposite thighs (the right foot on the left thigh and
the left foot on the right thigh) and catching by the right hand brought
round the back, the toes of the right foot and catching by the left hand
brought round the back the toes of the left foot; sitting then straight
and with ease. This is recommended by the Yogis (and by this one can
raise oneself in the air).

*N. B.* -- The hands, according to some, need not be carried round the
back; both the hands are crossed and placed similarly on the thighs.

11-20. Place the soles of the feet completely under the thighs, keep

<span id="page_719">p. 719</span>

the body straight, and sit at ease. This is called the Svastikâsan.
Bhadrâsan consists in placing well the two heels on the two sides of the
two nerves of the testicle, near the anus and catching by the two hands
the two heels at the lower part of the testicles and then sitting at
ease. This is very much liked by the Yogis. Vajrâsan (diamond seat)
consists in placing the feet on the two thighs respectively and placing
the fingers below the thighs with the hands also there, and then sitting
at ease. Vîrasan consists in sitting cross on the hams in placing the
right foot under the right thigh and the left foot under the left thigh
and sitting at ease with body straight.

Taking in the breath by the I<u>d</u>â (the left nostril) so long as we
count "Om" sixteen, retaining it in the Su<u>s</u>umnâ so long as we
count "Om" sixty-four times and then exhaling it slowly by the Pingalâ
nâ<u>d</u>i (the right nostril) as long as we count "Om" thirty-two
times. (The first process is called Pûraka, the second is called
Kumbhaka, and the third is called Rechaka). This is called *one*
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma by those versed in the Yogas. Thus one should go on
again and again with his Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma. At the very beginning, try
with the number twelve, *i. e.*, as we count "Om" twelve times and then
increase the number gradually to sixteen and so on. Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma is
of two kinds :-- Sagarbha and Vigarbha. It is called Sagarbha when
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma is performed with repeating the I<u>st</u>a Mantra and
Japam and meditation. It is called Vigarbha Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma when "Om"
is simply counted and no other Mantram. When this Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma is
practised repeatedly, perspiration comes first when it is called of the
lowest order; when the body begins to tremble, it is called middling;
and when one rises up in the air, leaving the ground, it is called the
best Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma. (Therefore one who practises Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma
ought to continue it till he becomes able to rise in the air).

21-30. Now comes Pratyâhâra. The senses travel spontaneously towards
their objects, as if they are without anyone to check. To curb them
perforce and to make them turn backwards from those objects is called
"Pratyâhâra," To hold the Prâna Vâyu on toes, heels, knees, thighs,
sacrum genital organs, navel, heart, neck, throat, the soft palate,
nose, between the eyebrows, and on the top of the head, at these twelve
places respectively is called the "Dhâra<u>n</u>â." Concentrate the mind
on the consciousness inside and then meditate the I<u>st</u>a Devatâ
within the Jîvâtmâ. This is the Dhyâna. Samâdhi is identifying always
the Jîvâtmâ and Paramâtmâ. Thus the sages say. (Samâdhi is of two kinds
(1) Samprajñâta, or Savikalpak and (2) Nirvikalpak. When the ideas

<span id="page_720">p. 720</span>

the Knower, Knowledge and the Thing Known, rernain separate in the
consciousness and yet the mind feels the one Akhan<u>d</u>a
Sachchidânanda Brahma and his heart remains, there, that is called
Samprajñâta Samâdhi; and when those three vanish away and the one Brahma
remains, it is called Asamprajñâta Samâdhi). Thus I have described to
you the Yoga with its eight limbs. O Mountain! This body composed of the
five elements, and with Jîva endowed with the essence of the Sun, the
Moon, and the Fire and Brahma in it as one and the same, is denominated
by the term "Vis'va." There are the 350,000 nâ<u>d</u>is in this body of
man; of these, the principal are ten. Out of the ten again, the three
are most prominent. The foremost and first of these three is Susumnâ, of
the nature of the Moon, Sun, and Fire, situated in the centre of the
spinal cord (it extends from the sacral plexus below to the Brahmaradhra
in the head at the top where it looks like a blown Dhustûra flower). On
the left of this Su<u>s</u>umnâ is the I<u>d</u>â Nâ<u>d</u>î, white and
looking like Moon; this Nâ<u>d</u>î is of the nature of Force,
nectar-like. On the right side of the Su<u>s</u>umnâ is the Pingalâ
Nâ<u>d</u>î of the nature of a male; it represents the Sun. The
Su<u>s</u>umnâ comprises the nature of the all the Tejas (fires) and it
represents Fire.

31-41. The inmost of Su<u>s</u>umnâ is Vichtrâ or Chitri<u>n</u>î
Bhûlingam nâ<u>d</u>î (of the form of a cobweb) in the middle of which
resides the Ichchâ (will), Jñâna (knowledge) and Kriyâ (action) S'aktîs,
and resplendent like the Millions of Suns. Above Him is situated Hrîm,
the Mâyâ Vîja Harâtmâ with "Ha" and Chandravindu repesenting the Sound
(Nâda). Above this is the Flame, Kula Ku<u>n</u>dalinî (the Serpent
Fire) of a red colour, and as it were, intoxicated. Outside Her is the
Âdhâra Lotus of a yellow colour having a dimension of four digits and
Comprising the four letters "va", "s'a", "<u>s</u>a", and "sa". The
Yogis meditate on this. In its centre is the hexagonal space
(Pî<u>t</u>ham). This is called the Mûlâdhâra for it is the base and it
supports all the six lotuses. Above it is the Svâdhi<u>st</u>hâna
Chakra, fiery and emitting lustre like diamond and with six petals
representing the six letters "ba", "bha", "ma", "ya", "ra", "la". The
word "Sva" means "Param Lingam" (superior Male Symbol). Therefore the
sages call this "Svâdhi<u>st</u>hân Chakram. Above it is situated the
"Ma<u>n</u>ipura Chakram" of the colour of lightning in clouds and very
fiery; it comprises the ten Petals, comprising the 10 letters <u>d</u>a,
<u>d</u>ha, <u>n</u>a, ta, <u>t</u>ha, <u>d</u>a, <u>d</u>ha, <u>n</u>a,
pa, pha. The lotus resembles a full blown pearl; hence it is
"Ma<u>n</u>ipadma." Vi<u>sn</u>u dwells here. Meditation here leads to
the sight of Vi<u>sn</u>u, Above it is "Anâhata" Padma with the twelve
petals representing, the twelve letters Ka, Kha, Gha, m\#\#\#, (cha),
(chha), (Ja), (Jha,) Îya, <u>t</u>a, and <u>t</u>ha. In the middle is
Bânalingam, resplendent like

<span id="page_721">p. 721</span>

the Sun. This lotus emits the sound S'abda Brabma, without being struck;
therefore it is called the Anâhata Lotus. This is the source of joy.
Here dwalls Rudra, the Highest Person."

42-43. Above it is situated the Vis'uddha Chakra of the sixteen petals,
comprising the sixteen letters a, â, i, î, u, û, ri, <u>r</u>i, li, lri,
e, ai, o, ar, am, a<u>h</u>. This is of a smoky colour, highly lustrous,
and is situated in the throat. The Jîvâtmâ sees the Paramâtmâ (the
Highest Self) here and it is purified; hence it is called Vis'uddha.
This wonderful lotus is termed Âkâs'a.

44-45. Above that is situated betwixt the eyebrows the exceedingly
beautiful Ajñâ Chakra with two petals comprising the two letters "Ha,"
and K<u>s</u>a. The Self resides in this lotus. When persons are
stationed here, they can see everything and know of the present, past
and future. There one gets the commands from the Highest Deity (*e. g.*
now this is for you to do and so on); therefore it is called the Ajñâ
Chakra.

46-47. Above that is the Kailâs'a Chakra; over it is the Rodhi<u>n</u>î
Chikra. O One of good vows! Thus I have described to you all about the
Âdhâra Chakras. The prominent Yogis say that above that again, is the
Vindu Sthân, the seat of the Supreme Deity with thousand petals. O Best
of Mountains! Thus I declare the best of the paths leading to Yoga.

48\. Now hear what is the next thing to do. First by the "Pûraka",
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma, fix the mind on the Mulâdhâra Lotus. Then contract and
arouse the Kula Ku<u>nd</u>alinî S'aktî there, between the anus and the
genital organs, by that Vâyu.

49\. Pierce, then, the Lingams (the lustrous Svayambhu Âdi Lingam) in
the several Chakras above-mentioned and transfer along with it the heart
united with the S'akti to the Sahasrâra (the Thousand petalled Lotus).
Then meditate the S'aktî united with S'ambhu there.

50-51. There is produced in the Vindu Chakra, out of the intercourse of
S'iva and S'aktî, a kind of nectar-juice, resembling a sort of red-dye
(lac). With that Nectar of Joy, the wise Yogis make the Mâyâ S'aktî,
yielding successes in Yoga, drink; then pleasing all the Devas in the
six Chakras with the offerings of that Nectar, the Yogi brings the
S'aktî down again on the Mûlâdhâra Lotus.

<span id="page_722">p. 722</span>

52\. Thus by daily practising this, all the above mantras will no doubt,
be made to come to complete success.

53-54. And one will be free from this Samsâra, filled with old age and
death, etc. O Lord of Mountains! I am the World Mother; My devotee will
get all My qualities; there is no doubt in this. O Child! I have thus
described to you the excellent Yoga, holding the Vâyu (Pavana
Dhâra<u>n</u>a Yoga).

55\. Now hear from Me the Dhârâ<u>n</u>â Yoga. To fix thoroughly one's
heart on the Supremely Lustrous Force of Mine, pervading all the
quarters, countries, and all time leads soon to the union of the Jîva
and the Brahma.

56-58. If one does not quickly do this, owing to impurities of heart,
then the Yogi ought to adopt what is called the "Avayava Yoga." O Chief
of Mountains! The Sâdhaka should fix his heart on my gentle hands, feet
and other limbs one by one and try to conquer each of these places.
Thereby his heart would be purified. Then he should fix that purified
heart on My Whole Body.

59-62. The practiser must practise with Japam and Homam the Mantram till
his mind be not dissolved in Me, My Consciousness. By the practice of
meditating on the Mantra, the thing to be known (Brahma) is transformed
into knowledge. Know this as certain, that the Mantra is futile without
Yoga and the Yoga is futile without the Mantra. The Mantra and the Yoga
are the two infallible means to realise Brahma. As the jar in a dark
room is visible by a lamp, so this Jîvâtmâ, surrounded by Mâyâ is
visible by means of Mantra to the Paramâtmâ (the Highest Self). O Best
of Mountains! Thus I have described to you the Yogas with their
A<u>n</u>gas (limbs). You should receive instructions about them from
the mouth of a Guru; else millions of S'âstras will never be able to
give you a true realisation of the meanings of the yogas.

Here ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Yoga and
the Mantra Siddhi in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'ri Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36](bk07ch36)
