[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch17)  [Next](bk07ch19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVIII**

 

**On the origin of the quarrel between Haris’chandra and**
**Vis’vâmitra**

 

<span id="page_654">p. 654</span>

 

1-6. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Once on a time Haris’chandra went out to the
forest on an hunting excursion; and, while roaming to and fro, he saw
that a very beautiful lady was crying. The King, seeing this, took pity
on her and asked :-- “O Fair One! Why are you in this forest crying
alone? O Large eyed One! Has someone pained you? What is the cause of
your sorrow? Express this quickly before me. Why have you come here in
this dreadful lonely forest? What are the names of your husband and your
father? O Beautiful One! In My kingdom, no demon can give any trouble to
another’s lady; I will immediately kill him who has given you this
trouble. O thin-bellied One! Be comfortable; do not weep; tell me why
you are in this sorrowful state; know that no sinner can remain within
my territory.” Hearing the words of the King, the lady wiped out her
tears by her hand and began to say :--

 

7-8. O King! I am Siddharupi<u>n</u>î, of the nature of success; to get
me, Vis’vâmitra is practising terrible austerities. So these troubles
have arisen from him, the son of Kaus’ika. O King! For this reason I am
sorry in Your kingdom. O One of good vows! I am a gentle lovely Lady;
still that Muni is giving me so much trouble.

 

9-16. The King said :-- “O Large-eyed One! No longer you will have to
suffer any more pains. Be patient. I will go and make the Muni desist
from his tapasyâ.” Thus comforting the lady, the King went hurriedly to
the Muni Vis’vâmitra and, bowing down to him said with clasped palms :--
O Mahar<u>s</u>i! Why are you ailing your body by this terrible severe
austerity! O Highly intelligent One! For what great noble cause are you
practising this hard tapasyâ; speak truly to me. O Son of Gâdhi! I will
fulfil your desires; there is no need of your practising this severe
penance; please get out of it immediately. O Mahar<u>s</u>i! You know
everything; so what shall I say anything further? See! It ought not
anyone to practise this extremely dreadful tapasyâ, causing troubles to
the people within my territory. Thus prohibited by the King
Haris’chandra, the Muni became very angry at his heart and went towards
his own hermitage. The King, too, went back to his palace. The Muni on
his arrival at his hermitage, began to cogitate in his mind, “Why has
the King unjustly desisted me from

 

<span id="page_655">p. 655</span>

 

my tapasyâ” and also the discussions that took place between him and
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha. Vis’vâmitra became very angry at his heart and ready
to take the vengeance of this. He thought over on many points and
created a terrible demon of a dreadful appearance in the form of a boar
and sent it to the territory of the King Haris’chandra.

 

17-28. That terrible boar, of huge body, entered into the kingdom,
raising a dreadful sound. The guards became afraid at his terrible
noise. Entering into the forest, that boar began to whirl round and
round and destroy the Mâlati forest, at another place the Kadamba
forest, and at others the Yûthikâ forest. At other places he began to
dig up the earth by his tusks and root out the Champaka, Ketakî, Mallikâ
and various other trees. At other places again, he rooted out nice
gentle Us’îra, Karavîra, Muchukunda, As’oka, Vakula, Tilaka and other
trees and so massacred the nice gardens and forests. The forest guards,
then, taking their weapons, rushed forward on that boar. Those that were
making garlands and the florists became very distressed and uttered
uproars of consternation. That boar, as if an incarnate of Death, though
routed out with flights of arrows, could not be terrified; rather when
he began to harass the guards very much, they became very much afraid
and being very distressed took the refuge of the King and, trembling,
said :-- “O King! Protect us. Protect us.” And they cried piteously.
Seeing the guards terrified and distressed, the King asked them :-- Whom
do you fear so much and why you are so distressed? Speak truly before
me. O Guards! I do not fear the Deva nor the Demons; so tell me who has
created this panic amongst you. I, no doubt, will send that vicious
cheat unto the door of Death by this arrow, who has come against me in
this world. What sort of enemy is that? What is his form? What is his
power and where is he residing now; speak this quickly to me. Be that
enemy a Deva or a Dânava, I will slay him immediately by the multitude
of arrows.

 

29-31. The Mâlâkâras said :-- The enemy is not a Deva, nor a Dânava,
Yak<u>s</u>a nor a Kinnara; it is a boar of a huge body that has entered
into the forest. Very powerful, he is uprooting by his teeth all the
beautiful flower trees; in fact, he is ruining all the gardens and
forests. O King! We shot arrows on him, struck him with cudgels and
hurled stones at him so much; yet he did not get a bit afraid; rather he
turned back to kill us.

 

32-51. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words, the King’s fury knew
no bounds and, immediately getting on horseback, he went towards the
garden and forest. Then the horsemen, elephant drivers, charioteers and
infantry, all followed him. When the King went there,

 

<span id="page_656">p. 656</span>

 

he saw the terrible boar, of a huge body, whirling round and round and
making the peculiar sound in the forest; and he witnessed also the
destroyed condition of the forest and became very angry. He then drew
his bow and arrows and fell down on him to take away his life. Seeing
the King coming angrily towards him with bow and arrows in his hands,
the boar began to sound more terribly and ran forward before him. The
King saw the boar coming towards him with his mouth wide opened and
began to shower arrows upon him to kill him. The boar immediately made
those arrows useless, and very violently and quickly jumped and passed
away, over the King. When the boar passed away, the King angrily drew
his bow with great care and shot sharpened arrows at him. One moment the
boar came in the King’s sight; and at another moment he vanished away;
thus the boar began to flee, uttering all sorts of sounds. The King
Haris’chandra then became very angry and drawing his bow pursued him,
mounting on a horse, swift like the wind. The soldiers then entered the
forest and scattered hither and thither; the King alone pursued the
boar. The sun entered unto the meridian; and the King came to be alone
in a lonely forest. His horse was fatigued, and he, too, was tired of
hunger and thirst. The boar went away out of sight. The King also missed
his way in that dense jungle and became greatly absorbed with intense
cares and anxieties. He then began to think, “Where shall I now go?
There is none to help me in this dense jungle. Especially I don’t know
the right path.” While he was thus thinking, he saw, all on a sudden, a
river with clear water in that lonely forest. He became much delighted
to see the flowing river and, alighting from horseback, he drank that
water and made the horse also drink it. He became much relieved by
drinking; and though he was much bewildered not to find the right track,
he wanted now to go to his own city. At this moment Vis’vâmitra came up
there in an old Brâhmi<u>n</u> form; the King also looking at him bowed
down to the Brâhmi<u>n</u> garbed Vis’vâmitra, who then spoke to the
King :-- “O King! Welfare be unto you! What for have you come here? O
King! What object have you got in view in this lonely forest? Be calm
and quiet and speak everything before me.”

 

52-58. The King said :-- “O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! One powerful boar of a huge
body entered into my garden and spoilt altogether all the gentle flower
trees there. To desist that boar, I pursued him with bow in hand and
went out of the city. That powerful boar, very swift and, as it were, a
magician, has escaped my sight and gone away where I do not know. I
pursued him and have come now to this place and I do not know where my
soldiers have gone. O Muni! Now I am deprived of my men,

 

<span id="page_657">p. 657</span>

 

I am hungry and thirsty. I do not know which is the road to my city; nor
do I know where my soldiers have gone. O Dear Lord! It is to my great
fortune that you have come in this lonely forest. Now I want to return
to my home; kindly shew me the way. I have completed my Râjasûya
sacrifice. I always give everyone whatever he wants. This is known to
everybody. O Dvîja! If you want money for your sacrifice, then come with
me to Ayodhyâ and I will give you abundance of wealth. I am
Haris’chandra, the famous King of Ayodhyâ.”

 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the origin of
the quarrel between Haris’chandra and Vis’vâmitra in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](bk07ch19.md)
