[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch23)  [Next](bk07ch25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIV**

 

**On the stay of Haris’chandra in the burning ground**

 

<span id="page_672">p. 672</span>

 

1\. S’aunaka said :-- “O Sûta! Now describe as quickly as you can in
detail what the King Haris’chandra did afterwards in the house of the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla.

 

2-14. Sûta said :-- When Vis’vâmitra went away, the mind of the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla was filled with joy. He already gave to Vis’vâmitra that
amount of jewels; so he tied now the King and, telling him, “Do you now
stand on the path of falsehood?” began to beat him with sticks. The King
was already very much tired of the bereavements from his dear ones; now
being beaten by the Châ<u>nd</u>âla, his senses were lost. In this state
the Châ<u>nd</u>âla took him to his house and fastened him with a chain.
Then the Châ<u>nd</u>âla’s troubles were over and he fell asleep. The
King lived in the Châ<u>nd</u>âla’s house in that state fettered by a
chain; but he did not take any food there. Incessantly he wept for his
wife and son and others. “Alas! That thin lady, seeing the sad face of

 

<span id="page_673">p. 673</span>

 

her son is now remembering me with a morose face. She is now perhaps
thinking, with a grieved heart, that whenever the King will get the
money, he will pay off the promised money to the Brâhmi<u>n</u> and then
will free us from this yoke of slavery. Alas! When will that day come
when will he see me and this crying child and speak with us. When the
son will cry, saying, ‘I will go to my father; father!’ When will he
come and speak with the child? That fawn eyed gentle woman does not know
that I am now placed under a Châ<u>nd</u>âla. Alas! I am deprived of my
kingdom, friends; and I have sold away my wife and son; now I am bound
in the chain of slavery of a Châ<u>nd</u>âla. Alas! So many miseries
have fallen on me all one after another.” Thus thinking incessantly
about his dear consort and son, the King passed his days in the house of
that Châ<u>nd</u>âla. Four days passed; and on the fifth day the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla came there and rebuked the King with very harsh words
and freed him from his fastenings and said, “Go to the burial ground and
collect the clothings of the dead bodies. There is a wide S’masân
(burial ground) on the southern part of Kâs’î; go and protect that and
whatever is due to you, justly take that; do not leave it. Take this
Jarjara club and go there quickly. Say to all that you are the messenger
of Vîravâhu and this staff is his.”

 

15-33. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus Haris’chandra became a
Châ<u>nd</u>âla’s servant and was engaged in collecting the cloths of
the dead persons. Thus ordered by the Châ<u>nd</u>âla, whose duty was to
collect the rags of the dead bodies, the King went to the burial ground.
To the south of the city Kâs’î, was situated the dreadful S’masâna,
scattered over with the garlands of the dead, bad odours were emitting
on all sides and it was covered all over with smoke. Hundreds of jackals
were yelling there and the ground was being reverberated by their
yells.  Vultures, jackals and dogs were at many places dragging the dead
bodies. At other places were scattered heaps of bones; the whole ground
was covered with the putrid smell of the dead. At some places it seemed
that from within the funeral pyre, the half-burnt dead bodies were
laughing wildly with their teeth wide open from their mouths. Thus the
dead bodies looked terrible when being placed under fire. Lots of dead
bodies were brought there and there was a great tumultuous uproar made
by the cries of their friends and relatives. Oh! My son! My friend! My
relative! My brother! My child! My dear wife! Oh! My cousin! Oh! My
grandfather! Oh! My father! My grandson! My acquaintance! Where hast
thou gone leaving me here! Come once and let me have a sight of thee!
With such dreadful sounds as these, the burial ground was being echoed.
Flesh, marrow, fat all were being burnt in the

 

<span id="page_674">p. 674</span>

 

fire and a peculiar sound So<u>n</u>, So<u>n</u> was being produced
there and creating voidness in the minds of the people. The fire was
burning with a crackling noise. Thus the S’masâna looked very terrible
as if the universe was being destroyed at the end of a Kalpa. The King
Haris’chandra arrived there; and, with extreme pain, he began to give
vent to his sorrows. “My ministers, servants! Where are you all now?
Where is kingdom that I got by a succession of inheritance! O my Son! O
my dear wife! Where are you staying now, at what a long distance,
leaving me here out of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s anger. Without Dharma man
can never get auspicious fruits. So men should carefully earn Dharma.”
The King, whose body was covered with dust and dirt, thought thus
repeatedly; and at last, remembering the Chândâla’s words, went out in
quest of the dead. Out of this eventful cares and anxieties, his body
became lean like a stick; still he ran, to and fro, and calculated thus
:-- “This dead body will fetch for its price one hundred gold mohurs;
out of this, this belongs to the King; this to me, and this to the
Châ<u>nd</u>âla.” So he thought constantly and his state became awful.
His face, arm, belly and feet and the other parts of body were all
covered over with ashes and dust; the King wore a ragged cloth where
hundred places were sewn over; his toes were all besmeared with all
sorts of flesh, marrow, fat and other things. He began to satisfy his
hunger out of the food that was prepared for all sorts of dead bodies;
and, taking their garlands, he encircled his head with them. Day and
night he did not sleep and always he sighed and sighed, crying, Alas!
Alas! Thus one year passed away, as if it had been three hundred years.

 

Here ends the Twenty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the stay of
Haris’chandra in the burning ground in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 25](bk07ch25.md)
