[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch19)  [Next](bk07ch21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XX**

 

**On the earnestness of Haris’chandra to pay off the
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â**

 

<span id="page_661">p. 661</span>

 

1-4. Haris’chandra said :-- “O Muni! I will not take my food until I pay
you your Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â in gold; know this to be my resolve;
therefore O One of good vows! Discard all your anxieties for
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â. I am the King of the Solar dynasty; especially
since the time I have completed my Râjasûya Sacrifice, I give to
everyman whatever he desires. So, O Lord! How can it be possible that I
will not give what I have voluntarily promised myself? O Best of Dvîjas!
I will certainly pay off your debt. I must give you the gold as you
desire; be calm and patient; but you will have to wait one month; and on
getting the money I will pay it off to you.”

 

5-8. Vis’vâmitra said :-- “O King! Kingdom, treasury and strength are
the three sources of income; but you are now deprived of all these.
Whence, now, do you expect to get gold? O King! Vain are your hopes to
get money; what am I to do now? You are now wealthless and how can I,
out of greed, give you trouble? O King! Better say ‘I will not be able
to give you Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â,’ and I will then quit my strong
expectation and go away as I like. And you, too, can think that you have
no gold, so how can you give money and so you can go wherever you like
with your wife and son.”

 

9-20. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these words of the Muni, at his
time of departure, the King said :-- “O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! Be patient and
I will certainly give you your Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â. O Dvîja! My wife,
son and I myself are all healthy; so selling these, I will give you the
money; there is no doubt in this. O Lord! Kindly enquire whether there
is anyone who can purchase us and I will agree to become the slave with
my wife and son. O Muni! You can sell all of us and the price you get,
you can take two and a half loads of gold out of that and be pleased.”
Thus saying, the King went to Benares where S’a<u>n</u>kara was staying
with his dear consort Umâ. The King saw the beautiful city, the sight of
which makes one’s heart dance with more joy and he said that he had
become blessed. Then he went to the banks of the Bhâgirathî and bathed

 

<span id="page_662">p. 662</span>

 

in the Ganges and offered peace-offerings (Tarpa<u>n</u>) to the Devas
and the Pitris and completing the worship of his I<u>s</u>ta Deva (his
own Deity) looked around where he would go. The King entering into the
beautiful city of Benares began to think that no human being is
protecting this city but S’iva Himself is protecting it. So if he lives
there, he would not be living in a city which has been given away by him
to Vis’vâmitra. The King, then, distressed much with pain and trouble
and being very much bewildered, began to journey on foot with his wife
and son and entered into the city and placed his confidence. At this
moment he saw the Muni Vis’vâmitra, wanting Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â and
humbly bowed down and spoke with folded palms :-- “O Muni! My dear wife,
my son and I myself are living here; you can take any of us and have
your work done; or say what other work we will have to do for you.”

 

21\. Vis’vâmitra said :-- “You promised that you would pay
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â at the end of one month; and today that one month
is completed; if you remember, then give me the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â.”

 

22\. The King said :-- “O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! You are wise and are endowed
with the power of tapas (asceticism); as yet one month is not complete;
still half a day is remaining; wait till then; and no longer.”

 

23-27. Vis’vâmitra said :-- “O King! Let it be. I will come again and if
you do not give me then, I will curse you. Thus saying Vis’vâmitra went
away. The King then thought within himself how be would pay him back
what he had promised. There is no influential friend of mine in this
Benares city who can help me with money; where then can I get the
requisite money. I am a K<u>s</u>attriya. Pratigraha (begging or
accepting any gift) is forbidden to me and how can I beg or accept any
gift! According to the code of Dharma, the offering of sacrifices (on
one’s own behalf), studying, and giving are the three duties ordained to
a King. And if I die not paying a Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, I will be polluted with the sin of stealing a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>’s property and I will then be born a worm or will became
a Preta. So to sell myself (and pay off the debts) is better than this.”

 

28-33. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! When the King was thus thinking
humbly with his face bent downwards, and in a distracted state of mind,
his wife spoke to him with tears in her eyes and in a voice, choked with
feelings :-- “O King! Discard all cares and keep your own Dharma, Truth.
He who is divorced from Truth is forsaken like a Preta. O Best of all
men! To keep one’s Truth is one’s Dharma; there is no other Dharma
superior to it; so the sages declare. He whose

 

<span id="page_663">p. 663</span>

 

words turn out false, his Agnihotra, study, and gifts and all action,
become fruitless. Truth is very much praised in the Dharma S’âstra and
this Truth raises up and saves the virtuous souls. Similarly falsehood,
no doubt, drags a vicious man to hell. The King Yayâti performed the
Horse sacrifice, and the Râjasûya sacrifice and went to Heavens but once
he spoke falsely and so he was dislodged from the Heavens.”

 

34\. The King said :-- “O Thou, going like an elephant! I have my son
who will multiply my line; speak out what Thou wishest to say.”

 

35\. The Queen said :-- “O King! The wives are meant for sons (your
having me has been fulfilled as there is your son). So sell me for the
money value and give the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>.
Let you not deviate from the Truth.”

 

36-45. Vyâsa spoke :-- Hearing this, the King fainted. Afterward
regaining consciousness, he wept with a grievous heart. O gentle One!
What you have uttered just now has caused me much pain; am I such a
Sinner as to forget entirely all your conversations and your sweet
smiles! Alas! O Sweet-smiling One! You ought not to speak such words. O
Fair One! How have you been able to utter these harsh words not fit to
be spoken! Speaking thus, the King became impatient at the idea of
selling his wife and fainted and fell to the ground. Seeing him fainted
and lying flat on the ground, the Queen became grievously hurt and spoke
with great compassion. O King! Whose evil have you done that you have
fallen into this calamity? Alas! He who is accustomed to sleep in a room
adorned with carpets is today like a humble man, sleeping on the ground!
The King who gave crores and crores of golden mohurs to the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, that same King, my husband is lying now on the ground!
Alas! What a painful thing! O Fate! What has this King done to you that
You have thrown this Indra and Upendra like King in this dire calamity!
Thus saying, the beautiful queen (of good hips) very much grieved by the
sight of her husband’s pain fell down unconscious on the ground. Then
the boy prince, seeing father and mother both senseless, lying on the
ground, became very much troubled, and, becoming hungry, cried, “O
Father! O Father! I am very hungry; give me food to eat; O Mother! O
Mother! My tongue is being parched; give me food to eat,” and the boy
began to weep repeatedly.

 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the earnestness
of Haris’chandra to pay off the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses, by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](bk07ch21.md)
