[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch36)  [Next](bk07ch38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SEVENTH BOOK

# Chapter XXXVII

### On Bhakti Yoga

### 

1\. The Himâlayâs said :-- "O Mother! Now describe your Bhaki Yoga, by
which ordinary men who have no dispassion get the knowledge of Brahma
easily.

2-10. The Devî said:--"O Chief of Mountains! There are three paths,
widely known, leading to the final liberation (Mok<u>s</u>a). These are
Karma Yoga, Jñâna Yoga and Bhakti Yoga. Of these three, Bhakti Yoga is
the easiest in all respects; people can do it very well without
incurring any suffering to the body, and bringing the mind to a perfect
concentration. This Bhakti (devotion) again is of three kinds as the
Gu<u>n</u>as are three. His Bhakti is Tâmasî who worships Me, to pain
others, being filled with vanity and jealousy and anger. That Bhakti is
Râjâsic, when one worships Me for one's own welfare and does not intend
to do harm to others. He has got some desire or end in view, some fame
or to attain some objects of enjoyments and ignorantly, and thinking
himself different from Me, worships Me with greatest devotion. Again
that Bhakti is Sâttvikî when anybody worships Me to purify his sins, and
offers to Me the result of all his Karmas, thinking that Jîva and
Îs'vara are separate and knowing that this action of his is authorized
in the Vedas and therefore must be observed. This Sâttvikî Bhakti is
different from the Supreme Bhakti as the worshippers

<span id="page_729">p. 729</span>

think Me separate; but it leads to the Supreme Bhakti. The other two
Bhaktis do not lead to Parâ Bhakti (the Supreme Bhakti or the Highest
unselfish Love.)

11-20. Now hear attentively about the Parâ Bhakti that I am now
describing to you. He who hears always My Glories and recites My Name
and whose mind dwells always, like the incessant flow of oil, in Me Who
is the receptacle of all auspicious qualities and Gu<u>n</u>as. But he
has not the least trace of any desire to get the fruits of his Karma;
yea he does not want Sâmîpya, Sâr<u>st</u>i, Sâyujya, and Sâlokya and
other forms of liberations! He becomes filled with devotion for Me
alone, worships Me only; knows nothing higher than to serve Me and he
does not want final liberation even. He does not like to forsake this
idea of Sevya (to he served) and Sevaka (servant who serves). He always
meditates on Me with constant vigilance and actuated by a feeling of
Supreme Devotion; he does not think himself separate from Me but rather
thinks himself "that I am the Bhagavatî." He considers all the Jîvas as
Myself and loves Me as he loves himself. He does not make any difference
between the Jîvas and myself as he finds the same Chaitanya everywhere
and mainfested in all. He does not quarrel with anybody as he has
abandoned all ideas about separateness; he bows down, and worships the
Chândâlas and all the Jîvas. He who becomes filled with devotion to Me
whenever he sees My place, My devotees, and hears the Sâstras,
describing My deeds, and whenever he meditates on My Mantras, he becomes
filled with the highest love and his hairs stand on their ends out of
love to Me and tears of love flow incessantly from both his eyes; he
recites My name and My deeds in a voice, choked with feelings of love
for Me. \[*N. B.*--The Parâ Prema Bhakti is like the maddening rush of a
river to the Ocean; thence in the shape of vapour to the highest;
Himâlayân Mountain peaks to be congealed into snow where various plays
of bright colours take place.\]

21-30. O Lord of the mountains! He worships Me with intense feeling as
the Mother of this Universe and the Cause of all causes. He performs the
daily and occasional duties and all My vows and sacrifices without
showing any miserly feeling in his expenditure of money. He naturally
longs to perform My festivities and to visit places where My Utsabs are
held. He sings My name loudly and dances, being intoxicated with My
love, and has no idea of egoism and is devoid of his body-idea, thinking
that the body is not his. He thinks that whatever is Prârabdha (done in
his previoas lives) must come to pass and therefore does not become
agitated as to the preservation of his body and soul. This sort of
Bhakti is called the Parâ Bhakti or the Highest Devotion. Here the

<span id="page_730">p. 730</span>

predominent idea is the idea of the Devî and no other idea takes its
place. O Mountain! He gets immediately dissolved in My Nature of
Consciousness whose heart is really filled with such Parâ Bhakti or All
Love. The sages call the limiting stage of this devotion and dispassion
as Jñâna (knowledge). When this Jñâna arises, Bhakti and dispassion get
their ends satisfied. Yea! He goes then to the Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa, when
his Ahamkâra does not crop up by his Prârabdba Karma, though he did not
fail to give up his life in devotion. O Mountain! That man enjoys there
all the objects of enjoyments, though unwilling and at the end of the
period, gets the knowledge of My Consciousness. By that he attains the
Final Liberation for ever. Without this Jñâna, the Final Liberation is
impossible.

31-33. He realises Para Brahma who gets in this body of his the above
Jñâna of the Pratyak Âtmâ in his heart; when his Prâ<u>n</u>a leaves his
body, he does not get re-birth. The S'ruti says :-- "He, who knows
Brahma, becomes Brahma." In the logic of Kan<u>t</u>ha, Châmîkara, (gold
on the neck) the ignorance vanishes. When this ignorance is destroyed by
knowledge, he attains all his knowledge the object to be attained, when
he recoginises the gold on his neck.

34-37. O Best of Mountains! This My consciousness is different from the
perceived pots, etc., and unperceived Mâyâ. The image of this Paramâtmâ
is seen in bodies other than the Âtmâ as the image falls in a mirror; as
the image falls in water, so this Paramâtmâ is seen in the Pitrilokas.
As the shadow and light are quite distinct, so in My Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa,
the knowledge of oneness without a second arises. That man resides in
the Brahma Loka for the period of a Kalpa who leaves his body without
attaining Jñâna, though he had his Vaîrâgyam. Then he takes his birth in
the family of a pure prosperous family and practising again his Yoga
habits, gets My Consciousness.

38-45. O King of Mountains! This Jñâna arises after many births it does
not come in one birth; so one should try one's best to get this Jñâna.
If, attaining this rare human birth, one does not attain this Jñâna,
know that a great calamity has befallen to him. For this human birth is
very hard to attain; and then the birth in a Brâhmi<u>n</u> family is
rarer; moreover amongst the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, the knowledge of the Veda
(the Consciousness is exceedingly rare.) The attaining of the six
qualities (which are considered as six wealth), restraint of passions,
etc.; the success in Yoga and the acquisition of a pure real Guru, all
these are very hard to be attained in this life. O Mountain! The
maturity and the activities of the organs of the senses, and the
purification of the body according to the Vedic rites are all very
difficult to attain. Know this again that to get a desire for final
liberation is acquired by the merits acquired in many births. That man's
birth is entirely futile, who attaining all the above qualifications
does not try his best to attain this Jñâna, So one should

<span id="page_731">p. 731</span>

try one's best to acquire the Jñâna. Then, at every moment, he gets the
fruits of the As'vamedha sacrifice. There is no doubt in this. As *ghee*
(clarified butter) resides potentially in milk, so the Vijñâna Brahma
resides in every body. So make the mind the churning rod and always
churn with it. Then, by slow degrees, the knowledge of Brahma will be
attained.

Man attains blessedness when he gets this Jñâna; so the Vedânta says:
Thus I have described to you in brief, O King of Mountains! all that you
wanted to hear. Now what more do you want?

Here ends the Thirty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the glories
of Bhakti in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, S'ri Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of
18,000 Verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 38](bk07ch38)
