[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch13)  [Next](bk07ch15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIV**

 

**On the going to Heavens of Tris’anku and the commencement of
Haris’chandra’s narrative**

 

<span id="page_639">p. 639</span>

 

1-8. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Settling in his mind what to do, the great
ascetic Vis’vâmitra collected all the materials necessary for the
sacrifice and invited all the Munis. Thus invited by Vis’vâmitra, the
Munis became informed all about the Sacrifice; but, owing to the

 

<span id="page_640">p. 640</span>

 

fact that the Muni Vas’i<u>st</u>ha prevented them, none of them went to
the sacrifice. When Vis’vâmitra, the son of Gâdhi, came to know this, he
became very anxious and very sad and came to the King Tris’anku and sat.
The Mahar<u>si</u> Kaus’ika then became angry and said :-- “O King!
Vas’i<u>st</u>ha preventing the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s have all refused to come
to the sacrifice. But, O King! See my power of tapasyâ; I will
immediately fulfil your desires; I will instantly send you to the
Heavens, the abode of the Gods.” Thus saying, that Muni took water in
his hand and repeated the Gâyatrî Mantram. He gave to the King all the
Pu<u>n</u>yams (merits) that he collected for himself up to then. Giving
him thus all the Pu<u>n</u>yams, he spoke to the King :-- “O King! Throw
away all idleness and go to the abode of the Gods you wanted to go. O
King of Kings! Gladly go to the Heavens by the power of all the merits
collected by me for a long time and let you fare well there.”

 

9-20. Vyâsa spoke :-- O King! When the King of the Vipras, Vis’vâmitra,
spoke thus, the King Tris’anku, by virtue of the Muni’s Tapas, got high
up in the air without any delay like a quick flying bird. Thus getting
up and up, when the King reached the abode of Indra, the Devas, seeing
the terrible Châ<u>nd</u>âla-like appearance of Tris’anku, spoke out to
Indra :-- “Who is this person coming like a Deva with a violent speed in
the air? Why does he look like a Châ<u>nd</u>âla and is so
fierce-looking?” Hearing thus, Indra got up at once and saw that one,
the meanest of the human beings and knowing him to be Tris’anku,
reproachingly said to him :-- You are a Châ<u>nd</u>âla, quite unfit for
the Devaloka; so where are you going? You ought not to remain here; so
go immediately back to the earth. O Destroyer of the enemies! Indra
speaking thus, the King dropped from the Heavens and, like a Deva whose
merits had been exhausted, fell down immediately. Tris’anku then cried
out frequently “O Vis’vâmitra! O Vis’vâmitra! Being displaced from the
Heavens I am now falling very violently; so save me from this trouble.”
O King! Hearing his cry and seeing him getting down, Vis’vâmitra said
:-- “Wait, wait.” Though displaced from Heaven, the King by virtue of
the Muni’s Tapas, remained stationed at that place in the middle of the
air. Vis’vâmitra then began to do Âchaman (sip water) and commenced his
great Sacrifice to create another new creation and a second Svargaloka
(Heaven). Seeing his resolve, the Lord of S’achî became very anxious and
eagerly came to the son of Gâdhi without the least delay and said :-- “O
Brâhma<u>n</u>a! What are you going to do? O Saint! Why are you so very
angry? O Muni!

 

<span id="page_641">p. 641</span>

 

There is no necessity to create another new creation. Order now what I
am to do.”

 

21\. Vis’vâmitra said :-- “O Lord of the Devas! The King Tris’anku has
become very miserable to have a fall from the Heavens. Therefore this is
now my intention that you gladly take him to your own abode.”

 

22-31. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Indra was thoroughly aware of his
determined resolve and very powerful asceticism; so he accepted to do
according to his word, out of terror. The Lord Indra then gave the King
a bright and divine body and made him take his seat in an excellent car
and taking leave of Kaus’ika went with the King to his own abode.
Vis’vâmitra became glad to see Tris’anku go to the Heavens with Indra
and remained happy in his own Âs’rama. The King Haris’chandra now
hearing that his father has gone to Heaven by virtue of his Tapas, began
to govern his kingdom with a gladdened heart. The King of Ayodhyâ began
then to live constantly with his clever wife full of youth and beauty.
Thus time passed away; but the beautiful wife did not become pregnant.
The King became very sorry and thoughtful. He then went to the holy
hermitage of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha and bowing down informed him of his mental
agony due to his getting no son. O Knower of Dharma! You are skilled in
the Science of Mantrams. Especially you know everything of Daiva (Fate).
So, O Giver of honour! Do for me so that I get a son. O Best of
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! There is no salvation for one who has not got any son;
you are well aware of this. Then why do you overlook my case when you
can remove my sorrow. Even these sparrows are blessed who nourish their
offsprings. And I am so very unfortunate that, day and night, I am
immersed in cares and anxieties, due to my not having any son.

 

32\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing these pitiful utterances of the
King, Vas’i<u>st</u>ha thought over in his mind and spoke to him
everything in particular.

 

33-41. Vas’i<u>st</u>ha said :-- “O King! True you have spoken that in
this world there is no other sorrow more painsgiving than the state of
not having any issue. Therefore, O King! you worship with great care the
water-god Varu<u>n</u>a. He will crown your efforts with success. There
is no other god than Varu<u>n</u>a to grant sons. So, O Virtuous One!
Worship Him and you will get success. Both Fate and Self-exertion are to
be respected by men; how can success come unless efforts are made. O
King! Men who realise the Highest Truth should make efforts, guided by
just rules; success comes to those who work; else never one is to

 

<span id="page_642">p. 642</span>

 

expect success.” Hearing these words of the Guru, of unbounded energy,
the King made a fixed resolve and bowing himself down, went away to
practise tapasyâ. On the banks of the Ganges, in a sacred place, seated
on Padmâsan, the King became merged in the meditation of the God
Varu<u>n</u>a with noose in his hand and thus practised severe
asceticism. O King! When he was doing this, the god Varu<u>n</u>a took
pity on him and gladly came before his sight. Varu<u>n</u>a, then, spoke
to the King Haris’chandra :-- “O Knower of Dharma! I am glad at your
tapasyâ. So ask boons from me.”

 

42-43. The King said :-- “O God! I am without any son; give me a son,
who will give me happiness and will free me from the three debts that I
owe to the Devas, the Pitris and the Ri<u>s</u>is. Know that with that
object I am doing this Tapasyâ.” Then the God Varu<u>n</u>a, hearing
these humble words of the sorrowful King, smiled and said.

 

44-45. O King! If you get your desired well-qualified son, what will you
do for me to my satisfaction? O King! If you perform a sacrifice in
honour of me and fearlessly sacrifice your son there like an animal, I
will then grant you your desired boon.

 

46-47. The King :-- “O Deva! Free me from this state of sonless-ness; O
Water God! When my son will be born, I will do your sacrifice with my
son as an animal in that. This I speak truly to you. O Giver of honour!
There is no suffering more unbearable than this one, not to have any
son; so grant me a good son so that all my sorrows be vanished.”

 

48\. Varu<u>n</u>a said :-- “O King! You will get a son as you desire;
go home; but see what you have spoken before be fulfilled and turned
true.”

 

49-55. Vyâsa said :-- Hearing these words from Varu<u>n</u>a,
Haris’chandra went back and told everything about his getting the boon
to his wife. The King had one hundred exquisitely beautiful wives of
whom, S’aivyâ was the lawful wife and queen and was very chaste. After
some time, that wife became pregnant and the King became very glad to
hear this and her longings in that state. The King performed all her
purificatory ceremonies, and when ten months were completed, and on an
auspicious Nak<u>s</u>atra and on an auspicious day, she gave birth to a
son, like that of a Deva son. On the birth of his son, the King,
surrounded by the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, performed his ablutions and first of
all performed the natal ceremonies and distributed innumerable jewels
and much

 

<span id="page_643">p. 643</span>

 

wealth; and the King’s joy knew no bounds at that time. The liberal King
gave away, in special charities, wealth, grains, and various jewels and
lands and had the performance of music, dancing and other things.

 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going to
Heavens of Tris’anku and the commencement of Haris’chandra’s narrative
in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses, by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](bk07ch15)
