[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch28)  [Next](bk07ch30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIX**

 

**On the birth of the Bhagavatî in the house of Dak<u>s</u>a**

 

<span id="page_692">p. 692</span>

 

1-19. Vyâsa said :-- O King! Thus I have described the glory of the
Devî. Now I will narrate, as far as I can, the excellent lives of the
kings of the the Solar and the Lunar dynasties respectively. They

 

<span id="page_693">p. 693</span>

 

all attained their excellent glories, simply because they were favoured
by the Grace of the Highest S’akti; they were all the great devotees of
the Supreme Deity. All their prowess, bravery, prosperity and all their
glory, know that those all were derived from the mere parts of the Parâ
S’akti. O King! Those Kings and others as well were able to out off the
Tree of this World by the Axe of their Knowledge, simply because they
were the devotees of the Parâ S’akti. So with all the care possible, the
Lady of the Universe is to be worshipped and served. Men should avoid
worshipping any other gods, as people avoid the husk to get the grain
inside. O King! By churning the ocean of the Vedas, I have got the jewel
as the lotus-feet of the Parâ S’akti; and I think that I have discharged
all my duties and think myself satisfied and successful. Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u Rudra, and Is’vara are the four feet and Sadâ S’iva is the
plank overhead; thus these five form the seat on which the Devî is
seated. There is no other deity superior to Her. To show this (to the
ordinary ignorant people) the Mahâ Devî has taken this seat composed of
the five Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra, Is’vara and Sadâ S’iva. Superior
to these five, what is stated in the Vedas as Vyaktam and in which all
this Universe is sewn, as it were, crosswise and lengthwise, lying in
and through, that is Bhuvanes’varî, the Goddess of the Universe.

 

\[Note: Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Rudra, Is’vara and Sadâ S’iva are the
Regents or the presiding Deities of earth, water, fire, air and
Âkâs’a\]. No man can be free unless he until the Goddess. When men will
be able to encircle the Âkâs’a, of the fourth dimension, as if it were
an antelope skin, then they will be able to root out the miseries of the
world, without knowing the nature of the Devî (i.e., impossible). Thus
the S’vetâs’vataropani<u>s</u>ada says :-- “Those that were engaged in
meditation, Dhyâna Yoga, they saw the Devî covered by the Gu<u>n</u>as
Sâttva, Râjas and Tâmas and the forces incarnate respectively of the
several Devas.” So to make the human birth a success, first avoid all
companies, be it out of shame, or fear, or devotion, or out of love;
then bring the mind and keep it steady in your heart and then be devoted
to Her and consider Her as the Supreme. This is the Vedânta Dindima (the
declaration of the Vedânta). Whoever takes the name of the Devî, either
in sleeping, going or resting or in any other condition, he is certainly
freed from the bondage of the world, no doubt. O King! So worship the
Mâhes’varî with all the care that you can. Go on step by step; first
worship Her Virâ<u>t</u> Rûpa (cosmic form); then Sûk<u>s</u>ma Rûpa
(subtle form) and then her Antaryâmî Rûpa (inner form, ruling within).
Thus when your heart is purified, worship the Parâ S’akti, of the nature
of Brahmâ, beyond this Mâyâ, this Prapa<u>n</u>cha Ullâsa, of the nature
of Existence,

 

<span id="page_694">p. 694</span>

 

Intelligence and Bliss. When the Chitta (heart) melts in Parâ S’akti,
then comes the real Ârâdhanâ (the real worship). So dilute your heart in
Her. O King! Thus I have described to you the sanctifying deeds of the
extremely devoted kings of the Parâ S’akti, who were noble minded and
religious. One who will hear this will acquire fame, dharma,
intelligence, good end, and merits that have no equal. Now what else do
you like to hear?

 

20-22. Janamejaya said :-- “O Bhagavân! In olden times, the World mother
Parâ S’akti handed over Gaurî to Hara, Lak<u>s</u>mî to Hari, and
Sarasvatî to Brahmâ, born of the lotus from the navel of Hari. Now I
hear that Gaurî is the daughter of Himâlayâ as well of Dak<u>s</u>a; and
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî is the daughter of the K<u>s</u>iroda ocean (ocean of
milk). They were all originated from the Prime Devî; how, then, Gaurî
and Lak<u>s</u>mî came to be the daughters of others? O great Muni! This
is next to impossible; so my doubt arises. O Bhagavân! You are quite
competent to cut off all my doubts; so by your axe of knowledge, cut off
my present doubt.”

 

23-44. Veda Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hear. I am telling you this wonderful
secret. You are greatly devoted to the Devî; so nothing there can be
that I cannot disclose to you. Since the time the Great Mother gave over
to Hara, Hari and Brahmâ, Gaurî, Lak<u>s</u>mî and and Sarasvatî,
respectively, these three Devas, Hara, etc. were performing their tasks,
preserving, etc. O King! Once on a time, certain Dânavas, named
Halâhalas were born. In time, they became very powerful and in a short
time conquered the three worlds. What more than this, that they being
elated with the boon granted to them by Brahmâ, took their forces and
invested the Mount Kailâs’a and the Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha regions!

 

Seeing this, Mahâ Deva and Vi<u>sn</u>u both made preparations for war.
A terrible fight ensued between both the parties. For sixty thousand
years the battle lasted incessantly but the result was stalemate.
Gradually there was a great cry of consternation in the two parties.
When S’iva and Vi<u>sn</u>u with great effort destroyed the Dânavas. O
King! S’iva and Vi<u>sn</u>u then returned to their own houses and began
to brag of their powers before their own S’aktis Gaurî and
Lak<u>s</u>mî; whereas the Demons were killed on account of the S’aktis
of Gaurî and Lak<u>s</u>mî. Seeing them boast, Gaurî and Lak<u>s</u>mî
laughed not sincerely whereon the two gods were very much angry. They
under the magic spell of the Prime Mâyâ insulted them and even used
offensive languages. Gaurî and Lak<u>s</u>mî quitted them and
disappeared. A great uproar then arose in the worlds.

 

<span id="page_695">p. 695</span>

 

Both Hari and Hara became lustreless due to their insulting the two
S’aktis. They become powerless and unconscious and turned out mad.
Seeing this Brahmâ became very anxious. Hari and Hara are the two chief
Deities; how then these two have become unable to perform the actions of
the world! What is the cause? Why this calamity has sprung up out of
season? Will there be a Pralaya (a general dissolution) of the world out
of some offence, when no actions are being done! I know nothing about
this. So how can I find a remedy! Being thus very distressed, he began
to meditate with his eyes closed in the fourth dimensional space in the
heart. O King! The Lotus born Brahmâ then found out by his meditation
that this calamity was brought about by the great wrath of the Parâ
S’akti. He then tried to find out the remedy until Hari and Hara did not
regain the former natural position. Brahmâ began by his own S’akti to
carry on the functions of them both, viz., that of preservation and
destruction for some time. The religious-minded Prajâpati quickly called
his son Manu and Sanaka, etc., the Ri<u>s</u>is, for bringing peace on
the two great Gods! When they came to him, the great ascetic four-faced
Brahmâ told them :-- “I am now busy with many more works; so I am unable
carry on my tapasyâ? By the wrath of the Highest Force, Hari and Hara
have become somewhat distracted; so for the satisfaction of the Parâ
S'akti I am performing the three functions, i.e., those of Creation,
Preservation and Destruction. So you both practise this hard tapasyâ
with the greatest devotion and bring about Her satisfaction. O sons! Do
such as Hari and Hara gain their former states and then be united with
their own S’aktis respectively. Your fame will increase thereby, no
doubt. Rather that family where the two S’aktis will take their birth,
will purify the whole world and that man himself will be crowned with
success.”

 

45\. Vyâsa said :-- O King! The pure-hearted Dak<u>s</u>a and other
mind-born sons of Brahmâ, hearing the words of the Grandsire expressed
their desire to worship the Parâ S’akti and went to the forest.

 

Here ends the Twenty-ninth Chapter of the Seventh Book on birth of the
Bhagavatî in the house of Dak<u>s</u>a in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 30](bk07ch30)
