[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch33)  [Next](bk07ch35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SEVENTH BOOK

# Chapter XXXIV

### On the Knowledge and Final Emancipation

### <span id="page_714">p. 714</span>

1-22. The Devî said :-- "O Devas! You are not at all worthy to see this
My Wonderful Cosmic Form. Where are Ye! and where is this My Form! But
it is my affection towards the Bhaktas that I have shewn to you all this
great form of mine. Nobody can see this form without My Grace; the study
of the Vedas, the Yoga, the gift, the Sacrifice, the austerities or any
other Sâdhanas are quite incompetent to make this form visible to
anybody. O King of mountains! Now hear the real instructions. The Great
Self is the only Supreme Thing in this world of Mâyâ (Illusions). He it
is that under the various Upâdhis of an actor and enjoyer performs
various functions leading to the Dharma (righteousness) and the Adharma
(unrighteouss). Then he goes into various wombs and enjoys pleasure or
pain according to his Karma. Then again owing to the tendencies
pertaining to these births he becomes engaged in various functions and
gets again various bodies and enjoys varieties of pleasures and pains. O
Best of Mountains! There is no cessation of these births and deaths; it
is like a regular clockwork machine; it has no beginning and it goes on
working to an endless period. Ignorance or Avidyâ is the Cause of this
Samsâra. Desire comes out of this and action flows thence. So men ought
to try their best to get rid of this Ignorance. O King of Mountains!
What more to say than this that the Goal of life is attained when this
Ignorance is destroyed. The highest goal is attained by a Jîva, when he
becomes liberated, while living . And Vidyâ is the only thing that is
able and skilful in destroying this Ignorance. (As darkness cannot
dispel darkness, so) the Karma done out of Ignorance is Ignorance
itself; and such a work cannot destroy Ignorance. So it is not proper to
expect that this Avidyâ can be destroyed by doing works. The works are
entirely futile. The Jîvas want again and again the sensual enjoyments
out of this Karma. Attachment arises out of this desire; discrepancies
creep in and out of this ignorant attachment great calamities befall
when such faults or discrepancies are committed. So every sane man ought
to make his best effort to get this Jñânam (knowledge). And as it is
also enjoined in the S'rutis that one ought to do actions (and try to
live one hundred years) so it is advisable to do works also. Again the
S'rutis declate that the "final liberation comes from

<span id="page_715">p. 715</span>

Knowledge" so one ought to acquire Jñânam. If both these be collectively
followed, then works become beneficial and helping to Jñânam. (Therefore
the Jîvas should take up both of these.) Others say that this is
impossible owing to their contradictory natures. The knots of heart are
let loose by Jñânam and the knots are knit more by Karma. So how can
they be reconciled? They are so very diametrically opposite. Darkness
and light cannot be brought together, so Jñânam and Karma cannot be
brought together. Therefore one ought to do all the Karmas as best as
one can, as enjoined in the Vedas, until one gets Chittas'uddhi (the
purification of one's heart and mind). Karmas are to be done until S'ama
(the control of the inner organs of senses), Dama (the control of the
outer organs of senses), Titik<u>s</u>â (the power to endure heat and
cold and other dualities), Vairâgyam (Dispassion), Sattva Sambhava (the
birth of pure Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a in one's own heart) take place. After
these, the Karmas cease for that man. Then one ought to take Sannyâsa
from a Guru (Spiritual Teacher) who has got his senses under control,
who is versed in the S'rutis, attached to Brahma (practising the Yogic
union with Brahma). He should approach to him with an unfeigned Bhakti.
He should day and night, without any laziness, do S'rava<u>n</u>am,
Mananam, and Nididhyâsanam (hearing, thinking and deeply realising) the
Vedânta sayings. He should constantly ponder over the meanings of the
Mahâvâkyam "Tat Tyam Asi." "Tat Tyam Asi" means Thou art That; it
asserts the identity of the Supreme Self (Brahma) and Embodied Self
(Jîvâtmâ). When this identity is realised, fearlessness comes and he
then gets My nature. First of all, he should try to realise (by
reasoning) the idea conveyed by that sentence. By the word "Tat" is
meant Myself, of the nature of Brahman; and by the word "Tvam" is meant 
"Jîva" embodied self and the word "Asi" indicates, no doubt, the
identity of these two. The two words "Tat" and "Tvam" cannot be
apparently identified, as they seem to convey contradictory meanings
("Tat" implying omniscience, omnipresence, and other universal qualities
and "Tvam" implying non-omniscience and other qualities of a limited
nature). So to establish the identity between the two, one ought to
adopt Bhâgalak<u>s</u>manâ and Tyâgalak<u>s</u>manâ. \[*N.
B.*—Bhâgalak<u>s</u>manâ -- kind of Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>â or secondary
use of a word by which it partly loses and partly retains its primary
meaning also called Jahadajahallak<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>â. Tyâga Laksmanâ --
a secondary use of a word by which it loses partly its primary meaning.

23-40. The Supreme Self is Brahma -- Consciousness, endowed with the
omniscience, etc., and.the Embodied Self is Limited Jîva Consciousness,
etc.) Leaving aside their both the adjuncts, we take the Consciousness,

<span id="page_716">p. 716</span>

when both of them are indentical and we come to Brahma, without a
second. The example is now quoted to illustrate what is called
Bhâgalak<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>â and Tyâgalak<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>â. "This is that
Devadatta" means Devadatta seen before and Devadatta seen now means one
and the same person, if we leave aside the time past and the time
present take the body of Devadatta only. This gross body arises from the
Pa<u>n</u>chîkrita gross elements. It is the receptacle of enjoying the
fruits of its Karma and liable to disease and old age. This body is all
Mâyâ; therefore it has certainly no real existence. O Lord of Mountains!
Know this to be the gross Upâdhi (limitation) of My real Self. The five
Jñanendriyas (organs of senses), five Karmendriyas (working organs), the
Prâ<u>n</u>a Vâyus, mind and Buddhi (rational intellect), in all, these
seventeen go to form the subtle body, Sûk<u>s</u>ma Deha. So the Pundits
say. This body of the Supreme Self is caused by the Apanchîkrita five
original elements. Through this body, pain and pleasure are felt in the
heart. This is the second Upâdhi of the Âtman. The Ajñâna or Primeval
Ignoranee, without beginning and indescribable, is the third body of the
Âtman. Know this also to be my third Upâdhi. When all these Upâdhis
subside, only the Supreme Self, the Brahman remains. Within these three
gross and subtle bodies, the five sheaths, Annamaya, Prâ<u>n</u>amaya,
Vijñânamaya, and Ânandamaya always exist. When these are renounced,
Brahmapuchcha is obtained. That is Brahma and My Nature, too. This is
the Goal of "Not this, Not this" the Vedânta words. This Self is not
born nor It dies. It does not live also, being born. (But it remains
constant, though It is not born). This Self is unborn, eternal,
everlasting, ancient. It is not killed, when the body is killed. If one
wants to kill it or thinks It as slain, both of them do not know; this
does not kill nor is it killed. This Âtman, subtler than the subtlest,
and greater than the greatest, resides within the cave (the Buddhi) of
the Jîvas. He whose heart is purified and who is free from Sankalpa and
Vikalpa (doubt and mental phenomena), knows It and Its glory and is free
from sorrows and troubles. Know this Âtman and Buddhi as the charioteer,
this body as the chariot, and the mind as the reins. The senses and
their organs are the horses and the objects of enjoyments are their
aims. The sages declare that the Âtman united with mind and organs of
senses enjoys the objects. He who is non-discriminating, unmindful, and
always impure, does not realise his Âtman; rather he is bound in this
world. He who is discriminating, mindful, and always pure reaches the
Goal, realises the Highest Self; and he is not fallen again from That.
That man becomes able to cross the Ocean of Samsâra and gets My

<span id="page_717">p. 717</span>

Highest Abode, of the nature of everlasting Existence, Intelligence and
Bliss, whose charioteer is Discrimination, and who keeps his senses
under control by keeping tight the reins of his mind. Thus one should
always meditate intensely on Me to realise the nature of Self by
S'ravanam (hearing), Mananam thinking and realising one's own self by
one's Self (pure heart).

41-44. When by the constant practice, as mentioned above, one's heart is
fit for Samâdhi (being absorbed in the Spirit), just before that, he
should understand the meanings of the separate letters in the seed
Mantra of Mahâmâyâ. The letter "Ha" means gross body and the letter "Ra"
means subtle body and the letter "Î" means the causal body; the (dot
over the semicircle) is the fourth "Turîya" state of Mine. Thus
meditating on the separate differentiated states, the intelligent man
should meditate on the aforesaid three Vîjas in the Cosmic body also and
he should then try to establish the identity between the two. Before
enteriing into Samâdhi, after very carefully thinking the above, one
should close one's eyes and meditate on Me, the Supreme Deity of the
Universe, the Luminous and Self-Ellulgent Brahmâ.

45-50. O Chief of Mountains! Putting a stop to all worldly desires, free
from jealousy and other evils, he should (by constant practice of
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma) make equal according to the rules of Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma,
the Prâ<u>n</u>a (the inhaled breath) and Apâ<u>n</u>a (the exhaled
breath) Vâyûs and with an unfeigned devotion get the gross body
(Vais'vânara) indicated by the letter "Ha" dissolved in the subtle body
Taijasa. The Taijasa body, the letter "Ra" is in a cave where there is
no noise (in the Su<u>s</u>um<u>n</u>â cave). After that He should
dissolve the Taijasa, "Ra" into the Causal body "Î". He should then
dissolve the Causal body, the Prâjña "Î" into the Turîya state Hrîm.
Then he should go into a region where there is no speech or the thing
spoken, which is absolutely free from dualities, that Akha<u>nd</u>a
Sachchidânanda and meditate on that Highest Self in the midst of the
Fiery Flame of Consciousness. O King of Mountains! Thus men by the
meditation mentioned above, should realise the identity between the Jîva
and Brahma and see Me and get My Nature. O Lord of Mountains! Thus the
firmly resolved intelligent man, by the practice of this Yoga sees and
realises the nature of My Highest Self and destroys immediately the
Ignorance and all the actions thereof.

Here ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the
Knowledge, Final Emancipation in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](bk07ch35.md)
