[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch35)  [Next](bk07ch37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SEVENTH BOOK

# Chapter XXXVI

### On the Highest Knowledge of Brahma

### <span id="page_722">p. 722</span>

1-4. S'ri Devî said :-- "O Himâlayâs! Thus making one's own self
attached to the Yoga by the above-mentioned process and sitting on a
Yoga posture, one should meditate on My Brahma Nature with

<span id="page_723">p. 723</span>

an unfeigned devotion. (How the knowledge of that Formless Existence and
Imperishable Brahman arises, now hear.) He is manifest, near, yea, even
moving in the hearts of all beings. He is the well-known Highest Goal.
Know that all this whatever, waking, dreaming, or sleeping, which moves,
breathes or blinks, is founded on Him. He is higher than Being and
Non-being: higher than the Wisdom, He is the Best Object of adoration
for all creatures. He is brilliant, smaller than the smallest and in Him
the worlds are founded and the Rulers thereof. He is the Imperishable
Brahman. He is the Creator (Life), the Revealer of Sacred Knowledge
(speech) and Omniscient (or the Cosmic Mind). This is the Truth. He is
immortal, O Saumya! Know that He is the target to be hit.

*Note*. -- The words "higher than wisdom" mean higher than Brahmâ.
(Brahmâ is the highest of all Jîvas, higher than Brahmâ means higher
than all creatures. The word Vijñâna denotes Brahmâ as we find in the
following speech of Brahmâ in the Bhâgavat Purâ<u>n</u>a) "I, the Wisdom
Energy (Vijñâna-S'akti) was born from the navel of this Being resting on
the Waters and possessed of the Infinite Powers."

Vi<u>sn</u>u is called "Pra<u>n</u>a," because he is the leader of all
(Prâ<u>n</u>a-netri). He is called Vâk, because He is the Teacher of
all; Vi<u>sn</u>u is called Manas because He is the adviser of all
(Man<u>t</u>ri). He is the Controller of all the Jîvas.

The third verse lays down that Brahman is to be meditated upon or that
the Manana should be performed; as the second verse teaches that Dhyâna
or concentration also is necessary.

5-6. Take hold of the Mystic Name as the bow, and know that the Brahman
is the aim to be hit. Put on this the great weapon (Om), the arrow (of
the mind) sharpened by meditation. Withdraw thyself from all objects,
and with the mind absorbed in the idea of Brahman, hit the aim; for
know, O Saumya! That Imperishable alone to be the Mark. The Great
name"Om" is the bow, the mind is the arrow, and the Brahman is said to
be the mark. It is to be hit by a man whose thoughts are concentrated,
for then he enters the target.

*Note*. -- Thus S'rava<u>n</u>a, Manana, and Dhyâna of Brahman have been
taught. This is the method of Brahma-upâsanâ.

7\. In Him are woven the heavens, and the interspaces, and mingle also
with the senses. Know Him to be the one Support of all, the

<span id="page_724">p. 724</span>

Âtman. Leave off all other words (as well as the worship of other
deities). This (Âtman) is the refuge of the Immortals.

"He is the bridge of the Immortal"--the words Amrita or Immortal means
Mukta Jîvas. In the Vedânta Sûtra I, 3-2, it has been taught that the
Lord is the refuge of the Muktas. So also that "He is the Highest Goal
of the Muktas."

8-9. In Him the life-webs (nâ<u>d</u>is) are fastened, as the spokes to
the nave of a chariot; He is this (Âtman) that pervades the heart, and
by his own free will manifests Himself in diverse ways (as Visva,
Taijasa, etc., in waking, sleeping, etc., states); and also as One as
Prâjña in the dreamless state. Meditate on the Âtman as Om (full of all
auspicious qualities and who is the chief aim of the Vedas), in order to
acquire the knowledge of the Paramâtman, Who is beyond the
Prak<u>r</u>iti and the S'ri Tattva. Your welfare consists in such
knowledge.

*Note*. -- This shows that Brahman is the Antaryâmin Puru<u>s</u>a. He
resides in the heart where all the 72,000 Nâ<u>d</u>is meet, as the
spokes meet in the navel of the wheel. He moves within the organs, not
for His own pleasure, but to give life and energy to them all. The Om
with all its attributes must be constantly meditated upon. He manifests
Himself in manifold ways in the waking and dreaming stews as Vis'va and
Taijasa; while He manifests as One in the state of Su<u>s</u>upti or
Dreamless sleep as Prâjñâ. He is beyond darkness; He has no mortal body.
Meditate on such Vi<u>sn</u>u in the heart in order to get the Supreme
Brahman, with the help of the Mantra Om. The result of such meditation
is that there is the welfare of yours--all evils will cease, and you
will get the bliss of the manifestation of the Divinity--your Real Self
within your Heart.

10\. He who is All-Wise, and All-Knowing, whose Greatness is thus
manifested in the worlds, is to be meditated upon as the Âtman residing
in the Ether, in the Fourth Dimensional Space, in the shining city of
Brahman (the Heart). He is the Controller of the mind and the Guide of
the senses and the body. He abides in the dense body, controlling the
heart. He, the Âtman, when manifesting Himself as the Blissful and
Immortal, is seen by the wise through the purity of the heart.

11\. The fetters of the Jîvas are cut asunder, the ties of Linga-dehas
and Prak<u>r</u>iti are removed (the effects of all) his works perish,
when He is seen who is Supremely High (or when the Supremely High looks
at the Jîva.) \[*Note*.--Vi<u>sn</u>u is Parâvare, because Parâ or High
Beings like Ramâ; Brahmâs, etc., are Avara or inferior in His
comparsion.\]

<span id="page_725">p. 725</span>

 \[*Note*. -- This shows the result of Divine Wisdom in the last verse.
The Avidyâ covers both Îs'varâ and Jîva. It prevents Îs'vara being, seen
by Jîva, and Jîva, seeing Îs'vara. It is a direct bondage of Jîva and a
metaphorical fetter of Îs'vara. Avidyâ is the name given to
Prak<u>r</u>iti in Her active state. When Her three qualities Sattva,
Rajas and Tamas, are actively manifest. Destruction of Avidyâ means
putting these Gu<u>n</u>as in their latent state. There is a great
difference between the destruction of the Avidyâ--fetters as taught in
this verse, and the unloosening of them as previously described in this
verse! There Avidyâ still remained, for it was merely a Parok<u>s</u>a
or intellectual apprehension of Truth. Here Avidyâ itself is destroyed
by Aparok<u>s</u>a or Intuitive Knowledge of Brahman.

The bonds are five :-- The lowest is the Avidyâ bond, then the Lingadeha
bond, then the Pramâchchâdaka Prak<u>r</u>iti bond, the Kâma bond, and
the Karma bond. When all these bonds are destroyed, then the Jñânî goes
by the Path of Light to the Sântâmka Loka. Before proceeding further all
have to salute the S'is'u-mâra--the Dweller on the threshhold--the hub
of the Universe.

The Sis'umâra literally means the Infant Killer and means the porpoise
and is the name of a constellation, in the north, near the Pole. It
corresponds perhaps with the Draco or the Ursâ Minor. For a fuller
description of it, see Bhagam Purâ<u>n</u>a Book 5, Chapter 23. Here it
is a mystical reference to a Being of an exalted order, which every
Jñânî passes by, in his way beyond this Universe. It may correspond with
the ring-pass-not of the 'Secret Doctrine'! It is the name of Hari,
also, as we find the following verse "The Supreme Hari, the Support of
infinity of worlds and who is called Sis'umâra, is saluted by all
knowers of Brahma, on their way to the Supreme God.\]

12\. The Brahman (called Sis'umâram) free from all passions and parts
(manifests in the external world) in the highest Golden Sheath (the
Cosmic Egg). That is pure, that is the highest of Lights, it is that
which the knowers of Âtmân know. \[*Note*. -- "He is in the Centre of
the Cosmic (as Sis'umâra, the Light of all Cosmic Suns). He is even in
the centre of our Sun and illumining all planets."\]

In the first respect He is meditated upon as Sis'umara and in the second
as Gâyatrî." \[*Note*.--In man, the Brahman manifests in the heart or
the Auric Egg, called the city of Brahman. In the Universe, He manifests
Himself in the Cosmic Egg, called the "Golden Sheath." These are the two
places where Brahman may be meditated upon.

<span id="page_726">p. 726</span>

This verse has been explained in two different ways: First, as applying
to S'is'umâra and secondly, as teaching how to meditate on
Nârâya<u>n</u>a in the Sun. The "Golden Sheath" would then mean the
Solar sphere. The Supremely High Brahman resides in the excellent Golden
Sheath. He is Pure and Without parts.\]

13\. The Sun does not shine there in His Presence nor the Moon and the
Stars (for His Light is greater than theirs, they appear as if dark in
that Effulgence, like the candle-light in the Sun. Nor do these
lightnings, and much less this fire shine there. When He shines,
everything shines after Him; by His Light all this becomes manifest.

Him the Sun does not illumine nor the moon and the stars. Nor do these
lightnings; much less this Fire illumines Him. When He illumines all
(the Sun, etc.,) then they shine after (Him with His light). This whole
Universe reveals His Light (is His Light and its Light is His).
*Note*.--The Sun, etc., do not illumine Him, *i.e.*, cannot make Him
manifest.

14\. The Eternally Free is verily this Brahman only. He is in the West,
in the North and the South, in the Zenith and the Nadir. The Brahman
alone is; it is He who pervades all directions. This Brahman alone is it
who pervades. This Brahman alone is the Full (that exists in all time
the Eternity). This Brahman is the Best:--

This (idam) Brahman is alone the Vis'vam or Infinity or Full
(pûr<u>n</u>âm). This alone is the Best, the Highest of all. As the word
"idam" is used several times in this verse, it qualifies the word
Brahman and not "vis'vam," \[*Note*.--The Brahman was taught to be
meditated upon fully in the Heart and the Hira<u>n</u>maya Kos'a. But
lest one should mistake that He is thus limited in those two places, one
is to infer that they are selected as the best.\]

15-16. The man who realises thus is satisfied and has all that he wants
to do and is considered as the best. He becomes Brahman and his Self is
pleased and he neither wants anything nor becomes sorry. O King! Fear
comes from the idea of a second; where there is no second, fear does not
exist. No danger then arises for him to be separated from Me. Nor I also
get separated from him.

17\. O Himâlayâs! Know that I am he and he is I. Know that I am seen
there where My Jñânî resides.

18\. Neither I dwell in any sacred place of pilgrimage, nor do I live in
Kailâsa nor in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha nor in any other place. I dwell in the
heart lotus of My Jñânî.

<span id="page_727">p. 727</span>

19\. The blessed man who worships once My Jñânî, gets Ko<u>t</u>i times
the fruit of worshipping Me. His family is rendered pure and his mother
becomes blessed. He whose heart is diluted in the all-pervading Brahma
Consciousness, purifies this whole world. There is no doubt in this.

20\. O Best of Mountains! I have now told everything that you asked
about Brahma Jñâna. Nothing now remains to be further described.

21\. This Brahma Vidyâ (science of the knowledge of Brahma) is to be
imparted to the eldest son, who is devoted and of good character and to
him who is endowed with the good qualities as enumerated in the S'âstras
and not to be given to any other person.

22\. He who is fully devoted to his I<u>st</u>a Deva and who is equally
devoted to his Guru, to him the high-minded persons should declare the
Brahma Vidyâ.

23\. Verily, he is God himself, who advises this Brahma Vidyâ; no one is
able to repay the debts due to him.

24\. He who gives birth to a man in Brahma, is, no doubt, superior to
the ordinary father; for the birth that a father gives is destroyed; but
the birth in Brahma that is given by the Guru is never destroyed.

25\. So the S'ruti says :-- Never do harm to the Guru who imparts the
knowledge of Brahma.

26\. In all the Siddhântas (decided conclusions) of the S'âstras, it is
stated that the Guru who imparts the knowledge of Brahman is the best
and the most honourable. If S'iva, becomes angry, the Guru can save; but
when the Guru becomes angry, S'ankara cannot save. So the Guru should be
served with the utmost care.

27\. So the Guru must be served with all the cares that are possible by
body, mind, and word one should always please Him. Otherwise he becomes
ungrateful and he is not saved.

28\. O Best of Mountains! It is very difficult to acquire Brahma Jñâna.
Hear a story. A Muni named Dadhyam of Atharvana family went to Indra and
prayed to him to give Brahma Jñâna. Indra said: "I would give you
Brahma-Jñâna, but if you impart it to any other body, I would sever your
head." Dadhyarna agreed to this and Indra gave him the Brahma-Jñâna.
After a few days, the two As'vins came to the Muni and prayed for Brahma
Vidyâ, The Muni said :-- "If I give

<span id="page_728">p. 728</span>

you the Brahma-Vidyi, Indra, will cut off my head." Hearing this the two
As'vins said :-- "We will cut your head and keep it elsewhere and we
will attach the head of a horse to your body. Instruct us with the mouth
of this horse and when Indra will cut off your this mouth, we will
replace your former head." When they said so, the Muni gave them the
Brahma-Vidyâ. Indra cut off his head by his thunderbolt. When the
horse-head of the Muni was cut off, the two physicians of the Devas
replaced his original head. This is widely known in all the Vedas.

O Chief of Mountains! He becomes blessed who gets this the Brahma-Vidyâ.

Here ends theThirty-sixth Chapter of the Seventh Book on the Highest
Knowledge of Brahma in the Mahapurâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam,
of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](bk07ch37)
