[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk06ch31)  [Next](bk07ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On the Solar and Lunar Kings**

 

<span id="page_596">p. 596</span>

 

1-5. Sûta said :-- Glad to hear the excellent divine stories of the
Solar and Lunar races, the virtuous King Janamejaya, the son of
Parîk<u>s</u>it, again asked :-- “O Lord! I am now very eager to hear
the increase of the two lines of Kings. O Sinless One! You know
everything. So kindly describe, in detail, the pure histories, capable
to destroy sins, of the kings and their characters. The kings of the
Lunar and the Solar races were great Bhaktas of the Highest S'akti, S'rî
Bhagavatî Devî; this I have heard. O Muni! Who wants not to hear further
on the glorious anecdotes of the Bhaktas of the S'rî Devî?” When the
Râjar<u>s</u>i asked thus, the Muni Kri<u>sn</u>a Dvaipâyan, the son of
Satyavatî began to narrate gladly the several deeds of the Kings.

 

6-13. O King! I am now narrating to you in detail the origin, etc., of
the Lunar and the Solar dynasties as well as of other kings in their
connection. Hear attentively. The four-faced Brahmâ sprang from the
navel of Vi<u>sn</u>u; engaged in practising Tapasyâ, he began to
worship the Mahâ Devî Durgâ, extremely hard to conceive. Mahâ Devî,
pleased at his worship, granted boon to Brahmâ; Brahmâ, the Grandsire of
all the Lokas on thus getting the boon, became ready to create the
world; but he could not create all on a sudden the human beings. Though
the creation was eternally fashioned by the Pramâtmâ Bhagavatî, the
four-faced Brahmâ thinking over in his mind variously, could not quickly
spread it out and accomplish it as a veritable fact. Therefore He, the
Prajâpati, first created mentally the seven mind-born sons. These were
known by the names of Marîchi, Atri, Angirâ, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and
Vais'i<u>st</u>ha. Next sprang Rudra from the anger of Prajâpati, Nârada
from his lap; Dak<u>s</u>a from his right thumb. Thus Sanaka and the
other Ri<u>s</u>is were also his mind-born sons. O King! The wife of
Dak<u>s</u>a was born from the left thumb of Prajâpati; this
all-beautiful daughter is well known in all the Purâ<u>n</u>as by the
name of Vîri<u>n</u>î and Asiknî. Nârada, the chief of the
Devar<u>s</u>is, was born, on some other occasion in her womb.

 

14-17. Janamejaya said :-- “O Brâhmâ<u>n</u>! A great doubt arises in me
to hear that the great ascetic Nârada was born of Dak<u>s</u>a in the
womb of Vîri<u>n</u>î. The Muni Nârada indeed, was the son of Brahmâ;
moreover be was the foremost of the ascetics and especially endowed with
the

 

<span id="page_597">p. 597</span>

 

knowledge of Dharma; how, then, can he be born of the womb of the
Daksha's wife Vîri<u>n</u>î. Well, if that be so, then describe, in
detail, that wonderful story of the birth of Nârada in the womb of
Vîri<u>n</u>î.

 

18-31. O Muni! Under whose curse, the high-souled Nârada though very
wise, had to leave his first body and be born again.” Vyâsa said :-- O
King, Brahmâ, the Self-born, with a view to create offspring, ordered
first Dak<u>s</u>a :-- “Go and multiply innumerable children for the
increase of the world.” Thus ordered by his father the Prajâpati
Dak<u>s</u>a produced five thousand powerful and heroic sons in the womb
of Vîri<u>n</u>î. Seeing all the sons of Dak<u>s</u>a, desirous to
multiply, the Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada urged on, as it were, by Fate, began
to laugh at them. How do you desire to multiply when you know not the
dimensions and capacity of earth; so you will, no doubt, be put to
ridicule and laughter. Rather, if you proceed on work, knowing
beforehand the earth's capacity, your efforts will be fruitful.
Otherwise, your attempt will no doubt, end in failures. Alas! You are
awfully illiterate! Not knowing the dimensions of the world, you are
ready to multiply your progeny; how, then, can you meet with success!
Vyâsa said :-- O King! Hearing, all on a sudden, these words, Haryas'va
and other sons began to speak with each other, “What this Muni has told,
is very true. Let us then ascertain the earth's dimensions; we can
easily multiply afterwards.” Thus saying, they all went out to
reconnoitre the earth. Thus excited at Nârada's words, some went
eastward, some southwards, some towards the north and some went to west
all simultaneously and, as they liked, to make a survey of the earth.
When the sons went away, Dak<u>s</u>a became exceedingly sorry on their
absence. Bent again on multiplying, he begat other sons; those sons
again wanted to procreate. Seeing them, Nârada again laughed and said
:--Alas! What fools are you! Not knowing the dimensions of the earth,
why are you ready to procreate? They were deluded by Nârada's words,
took them as true, and went out as their elder brothers did. Not being
able to see those sons, Prajâpati Dak<u>s</u>a became very sorrowful for
them and cursed Nârada in rage.

 

32-38. Dak<u>s</u>a said :-- “O Evil-minded One! You have destroyed my
sons; so be yourself destroyed; you will have to be born in the womb for
your sin in causing the death of my sons; you have caused my sons to go
abroad; so you must be born as my son.” Thus cursed by Dak<u>s</u>a,
Nârada had to take his birth in the womb of Vîri<u>n</u>î. I heard also
that the Prajâpati Dak<u>s</u>a begat afterwards sixty daughters in her
womb. O King! Dak<u>s</u>a, the great knower of Dharma, then gave up the
sorrows for his sons and married his thirteen daughters to the
high-souled Kas'yapa,

 

<span id="page_598">p. 598</span>

 

ten daughters to Dharma, twenty-seven daughters to the Moon, two to
Bhrigu, four to Ari<u>st</u>anemi, two to Kris'âs'va and the remaining
two to Angirâ. Their sons and grandsons, the Devas and Dânavas, became
powerful but antagonistic towards each other. All of them were heroes
and very Mâyâvis; so, deluded by their greed and jealousy, they
quarrelled amongst each other.

 

Here ends the First Chapter in the Seventh Book on the beginning of the
narrative of the Solar and the Lunar lines of kings in the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk07ch02)
