[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk07ch26)  [Next](bk07ch28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVII**

 

**On the going of Haris’chandra to the Heavens**

 

<span id="page_684">p. 684</span>

 

1-7. Sûta said :-- The King Haris’chandra then prepared the funeral pile
and placed his son on it. Next he and his wife with folded palms merged
themselves in the meditation of the Parames’varî, the Lady of of the
Universe. That Hundred-eyed is reigning within these five Ko<u>s</u>as
(or sheaths) Annamaya, etc. She resides in the sacral plexus of the
nature of Brâhma<u>n</u>, of the Puru<u>s</u>a composed of Anna and
Rasa. And She is the Ocean of Mercy. Wearing the red robe, She is ever
ready with various weapons in Her hands for the preservation of the
Universe. When the King was engaged thus in meditating on Her, Indra and
all the Devas with Dharma in their front came to the King Haris’chandra
with no delay. They all coming up said to the King :-- “O King! Hear. I
am the Grand Sire and here are present Dharma Himself, the Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Sâdhyas, Vis’vadevâs, Maruts, the Lokapâlas, the
Châra<u>n</u>as, the Nâgas, the Gandharbas, Siddhas, Rudras,

 

<span id="page_685">p. 685</span>

 

the twin As’vins, and all the other Devas and Vis’vâmitra himself.
Vis’vâmitra, who going ever the three worlds wishes to make friendship
according to the law ordained by Dharma, is now himself desirous to
grant you your desired objects.”

 

8\. Dharma said :-- “O King! Do not risk such an hazardous undertaking.
I am Dharma; I am satisfied with your patience and forbearance, control
of your senses, and the other Sâttvic qualities and have therefore come
to you.”

 

9-10. Indra said :-- “O Haris’chandra! I have also come to you. So your
good fortune knows no bounds today. You with your wife and son have
conquered the Eternal World. O King! What is hardly attainable by any
human being, you have conquered that, by dint of your own merits. So get
up to the Heavens (vibrations of the Fourth-dimensional Space) with your
wife and son.”

 

11-16. Sûta said :-- Indra then sprinkled over the dead son on the
funeral piles, the nectar, destroying the fatal effect produced by
unnatural death. At that time big showers of flowers were thrown on him
and Dundubhis were sounded. In the meanwhile, the prince got up from the
funeral pile. He got back his former beautiful body and he looked
peaceful, healthy, and greatly satisfied. Haris’chandra embraced his son
instantly in his bosom; the King and Queen also both regained their
former beautiful appearance at that time and were decked with clothes
and garlands. Their hearts were then deeply filled with great joy at
their getting back their desired object and their health. Indra then
said to the King :-- “O Highly Fortunate One! Now ascend to the Heavens
with your son and wife, by dint of your meritorious deeds and get the
holy happy ends of your endeavours.”

 

17\. Haris’chandra said :-- “O King of the Devas! The Châ<u>nd</u>âla is
my master; so until I get freedom from his bondage, I cannot go to the
Heavens without his permission.”

 

18\. Dharma said :-- I am myself that Châ<u>nd</u>âla and had assumed
that form and shewed you the city of the Châ<u>nd</u>âlas. Knowing that
you will suffer.

 

19\. What more than this, that I myself am that very Châ<u>nd</u>âla, I
am that very Brâhmi<u>n</u> and I am that very poisonous serpent who had
smitten your boy. \[Note: This is all the one and the same the Fourth
Dimensional Space.\] Indra said :-- Haris’chandra! Now get up, by virtue
of your own meritorious deeds to that place which is highly covetted by
all the human beings that exist on earth.

 

<span id="page_686">p. 686</span>

 

20-24. Haris’chandra said :-- “O King of the Devas! I bow down to you.
Kindly consider what I say now. All the inhabitants of the city Kos’ala
are in mourning, due to their being separated from me. How then, can I
go to the Heavens leaving my sorrow-stricken subjects here. To abandon
the Bhaktas, the devotees, is to incur the great sin due to the murder
of a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, the killing of a woman, the drinking of liquors and
the killing of a cow. O Indra! It is highly inadvisable to abandon a
Bhakta who is always in service. How can one be happy when one abandons
such devotees. So I will not go to the Heavens without them. You better
go back to the Heavens. O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects can go with
me, I am ready to go with them to the Heavens or to the Hell.”

 

25\. Indra said :-- “O King! Some of them are more sinful, some are more
meritorious; different grades of people exist there. So, O King! How can
you desire all to go simultaneously to the Heavens.”

 

26-29. Haris’chandra said :-- “O Indra! It is through the power of the
citizens that the Kings enjoy their kingdoms, perform great many
sacrifices, and do many engineering works (in excavating tanks, etc.)
There is no doubt in this. So I, too, have done religious acts and
sacrifices through my citizens’ help. They gave me all the articles
necessary for kings. So how can I now quit them so that I may get the
Heavens. O Lord of the Devas! If my subjects have no such Pu<u>n</u>yams
as to enable them to go up to the Heavens, then let the Pu<u>n</u>yams
done by me in giving away charities, in the performance of sacrifices,
and other meritorious works be divided amongst them equally. If I myself
enjoy S’varga for a very long time; but, if by your favour, I can enjoy
with them even one day’s residence in S’varga for my merits, that is
also superior to me.”

 

30-33. Sûta said :-- “Let that be;” saying thus Indra, the Lord of the
three worlds, Vis’vâmitra, and Dharma who were very pleased went
immediately to Ayodhyâ from Kâ<u>s</u>’î by their yogic power. In an
instant they reached Ayodhyâ, filled with the Brâhma<u>n</u>as,
K<u>s</u>attriyas, Vais’yas, and S’ûdras; and Indra exclaimed to them
all :-- “Let all the citizens come before Haris’chandra, without any
delay. Today they all will go to the Heavens by virtue of the
Pu<u>n</u>yams of Haris’chandra.” Thus saying, they took all the men to
Haris’chandra. Then that religious King told his subjects, “Let you all
now ascend with me to the Heavens.”

 

34-40. Sûta said :-- Hearing these words of Indra and their King, they
all became very glad. Then those who were engaged in their worldly
desires, they handed over the charge of their worldly concerns to their
own

 

<span id="page_687">p. 687</span>

 

sons, gladly became ready to go up to the Heavens. The high-minded King
Haris’chandra then installed his son Rohitâs’va on the royal throne and
permitted him to go to the beautiful city Ayodhyâ, filled with jolly and
healthy inhabitants. Next addressing his son and friends, he took leave
of them. Thus, by virtue of his own good deeds, the King Haris’chandra
attained great celebrity. He then got up and took his seat in the aerial
car that has no equal and that goes at will. It was beautifully adorned,
very rare even to the Devas and decked with bells emitting jingling
Kinkini sounds. The high-souled S’ukrâchârya, versed in the S’âstras and
the Guru of the Daityas, seeing, Haris’chandra in the Vimâna, spoke thus
:--

 

41\. Oh! What is the glorious result of forbearance (Titik<u>s</u>â)!
What is the great fruit of charity! Oh! Due to whose influence, the King
Haris’chandra today has attained the same region with Mahendra!

 

42-43. Sûta said :-- Thus I have described to you all the doings of
Haris’chandra. Any man, oppressed with sorrows and troubles, no doubt,
attains constant happiness, if he hears it. What more than this, those
who want S’varga get S’varga, those who want son get sons, those who
want wife get wife, and those who want kingdoms get their kingdoms by
hearing this incident.

 

Here ends the twenty-seventh Chapter of the Seventh Book on the going of
Haris’chandra to the Heavens, in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28](bk07ch28)
