[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch19)  [Next](bk08ch21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XX**

 

**On the narrative of the Talâtala**

 

<span id="page_784">p. 784</span>

 

1-37. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! The cave lower down than Sutala
is Talâtala! The Lord of Tripura, (the three cities) the great Mâyâ
Dânava is the Ruler of this region. Mahes’vara, the Doer of good to the
three Bhuvanas, burnt his three cities; but at last, being pleased with
his devotion, He rescued him. Thus Mâyâ, by the favour of that God, has
regained his own kingdom and the enjoyments thereof. This Mâyâ Dânava is
the Teacher (Âchârya) of the Mâyâvi sect and the cult thereof; and he is
skilled in various Mâyâs or all sorts of the magic powers. All the
fierce demons, of cruel temper, worship him for their prosperities in
their various enterprises. Next to this Talâtala is the most renowned
Mahâtala. The sons of Kadru, the very angry Snakes, live here. They are
many headed. O Vipra! I now mention to you the names of the famous
amongst them :-- Kuhaka, Tak<u>s</u>aka, Su<u>s</u>e<u>n</u>a, and
Kâliya. These all have very wide hoods and they all are very strong;
they all are of cruel temper. Their kinsmen also are so. They are always
afraid of Garu<u>d</u>a, the King of birds. Surrounded with their sons,
wives, friends and acquaintances, they live happily, well skilled in
various sports and pleasures. Lower down this Mahâtala is Rasâtala. The
Daityas, Dânavas and Pa<u>n</u>i Asuras live here. Besides these, there
live the Nivâta Kavachas of the Hira<u>n</u>yapura city and the Asuras
named Kâleyas, the enemies of the Devas. These all are naturally very
energetic and brave; their powers are baffled by the Tejas of the
Bhagavân and they live like snakes in this region. The other Asuras that
were driven and were afraid of the Mantras, uttered by Saramâ, the
messenger of Indra, live here too. O Nârada! Lower down is Pâtâla, where
live Vâsuki, the Chief of the snakes, and others named S’ankha, Kulika,
S’veta, Dhananjaya, Mahâs’ankha, Dhritarâ<u>st</u>ra,
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, Kamvala, As’vatara, and Devopadattaka, all very
angry, of wide hoods, and virulently poisonous. Some of these have five
heads, some seven hoods, some ten; some hundred, some others have
thousand heads, while some others have on their crests exceedingly
luminous jewels. By their rays, they dispel the darkness of the nether
regions; but they are awfully prone to anger. At the bottom of this
Pâtâla, and at a distance of the

 

<span id="page_785">p. 785</span>

 

thirty Yoyanas; the Portion of Bhagavân in the shape of the infinite
Darkness is reigning there. O Devar<u>s</u>i! All the Devas worship this
Form. The devotees call Him by the name of
Sa<u>n</u>akar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a, as He is the manifested emblem of
“Aham” and the common ground where the Seer and the Seen blend into one.
He is the thousand-headed Controller of all, moving and non-moving; He
is of infinite forms; He is S’e<u>s</u>a; this whole universe is being
held as a mustard bean on His head; He is of the Nature Intelligence and
Bliss and He is Self-manifest. When he wants to destroy all this during
the Pralaya, the very powerful Sankar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a Rudra, well
arrayed with the eleven Vyûhas, military (squadrons) arrangements,
springs up from Him. From His Central Eyebrow, looking wide with His
Three Eyes and raising His Trident, resplendent with three flames. All
the (prominent) principal snakes, ruling over many others, come to Him
during the nights filled with devotion and surrounded with Bhaktas
(devotees) and bow down to Him with their heads bent low and look at
each other’s faces, enlightened with the lights from the jewels shining
with clear lustre, on the nails of the red toes of His Lotus-Feet. At
that time their faces become brilliant with the rays emitting from the
jewels on the top of their very gay encircled hoods; and their cheeks
look beautiful and shining. The daughters of the Nâga Râja also do like
this; when very beautiful rays come out of their perfectly excellent
bodies. Their arms are wide extended; they look very clear and they are
beautifully white. They use always Sandalpaste, Aguru and Kâ<u>s</u>mîri
unguents. Being overpowered by the amorous passion, due to their contact
with those scented things, they look at Him with bashful glances and
sweet smiles and expect Âsiss (benedictions) from Him. And then His eyes
roll maddened with love and express signs of kindness and mercy. The
Bhagavân Ananta Deva is of boundless strength; His attributes are
infinite; He is the ocean of infinite qualities. He is the Âdi Deva, of
a very good nature and His Nature is highly luminous. He has abandoned
anger and envy and He wants the welfare of all. All the Devas worship
Him and He is the repository of all Sâttvic qualities.

 

The Devas, Siddhas, Asuras, Uragas, Vidyâdharas, Gandharbas, and Munis
always meditate on Him. On account of His constant Mada Râga the
enthusiasm and intoxication, His sight appears intoxicated and His eyes
look perturbed with emotions. He is always pleasing to those who
surround him and to the Devas by His sweet nectar-like words.

 

The Vaijayantî garland hangs from His neck; it never wanes and it is
always decorated with the fresh and clear Tulasî leaves. The

 

<span id="page_786">p. 786</span>

 

maddened bees make their humming noises incessantly and thus add to the
beauty. He is the Deva of the Devas and He wears a blue coloured cloth
and He is ornamented with only one earring. He (the God Vi<u>sn</u>u)
Undecaying and Immutable; resting His fleshy arms on the Halakakuda (the
lofty portion of the plough), He is upholding the golden girdle as the
elephant Airâvata of Indra upholds the golden girdle. O Nârada! The
devotees describe Him as the Source of this Leelâ of the Universe and
the Controller of the Devas.

 

Here ends the Twentieth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of
the Talâtala in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of
18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](bk08ch21.md)
