[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch17)  [Next](bk08ch19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVIII**

 

**On the narrative of Râhu Ma<u>nd</u>alam**

 

<span id="page_779">p. 779</span>

 

1-9. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Devar<u>s</u>i! The Sphere of Râhu (the
ascending node) is situated one Ayuta Yoyanas below the Sun. Râhu,

 

<span id="page_780">p. 780</span>

 

the son of Simhikâ is moving there like a Nak<u>s</u>attra. This Râhu
swallows up both the Sun and the Moon and He has got immortality and
capability to travel in the sky. The Sun’s rays go up to one Ayuta
Yoyanas. The Asura Râhu thus covers his rays. So the sphere of the Moon
extends upto the twelve thousand Yoyanas. Râhu covers the field of the
thirteen thousand Yoyanas. So he covers both the Sun and the Moon.
Desire to take the vengeance of the previous enmity, he covers them
during the time of Parva (the festivals). This planet wants to cover
them from a distance. Hearing this, the Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u hurls His
Sudars’an Chakra against Râhu. This Chakra (disc) is encircled with the
fiery flames and is very terrible. When all the quarters were filled
with its violent flames, Râhu became instantly alarmed and fled away
from the distance. O Devar<u>s</u>i! This is known as the eclipse known
amongst the mortals. Below the sphere of Râhu, there are the other pure
Lokas situated. O Sattama! The Siddhas, Châra<u>n</u>as, and Vidyâdharas
live in those Lokas. Their dimensions are one Ayuta Yoyanas.

 

10\. O Devar<u>s</u>i! Below them live the Yak<u>s</u>as,
Râk<u>s</u>asas, Pis’âchas, Pretas and Bhûtas with their excellent
Vihâras (residences).

 

11-34. The learned people call this Antarîk<u>s</u>a. It extends upto
where the wind blows violently and where the clouds appear. O Best of
the twice-born! Below this Antarîk<u>s</u>a is this earth, measuring one
hundred Yoyanas. All the articles and things of the earth are found
here; birds herons, cranes and ducks all fly over the earth. The earth
extends upto this. Now is described the configuration of the earth. O
Devar<u>s</u>i! At the lower part of this earth there are seven places
(caves or nether regions). Their diameter is one Ayuta Yoyanas. In all
the seasons, all sorts of enjoyments can be had at these places. The
first is Atala; the second is Vitala. Next come in order :-- Sutala,
Talâtala, Mahâtala. Rasâtala, and lastly (the seventh) the Pâtâla. O
Vipra! Thus the seven holes or regions are reckoned. These are termed
the Vila-Svargas and they yield the happinesses, greater than those of
the Heavens. These are all filled with lovely amorous enjoyments,
prosperity and happiness. They are crowded with gardens and Vihâras (the
places of enjoyments). And these Vihâras are all decorated tastefully so
as to furnish special tastes of enjoyments. The powerful Daityas,
Dânavas, and Snakes enjoy here great happiness incessantly, united
lovingly with their sons, wives and friends. The householders also pass
their time in ease and enjoyments, surrounded by their friends and
attendants. They are all Mâyâvis (Magicians) and their resolves are not
thwarted; they are more than God in this respect and they are filled
with desires. They all live with joy and in enjoyments and they

 

<span id="page_781">p. 781</span>

 

find pleasure in all the seasons. Mâyâ, the Lord of Mâyâ had built
separate cities, as he liked, in those nether regions. Besides he has
created thousands of dwelling-houses, palaces, and town-gates, studded
with gems and jewels.

 

The assembly halls, Chatvaras, and Chaityas are elaborately decorated
and rare even to the Suras. The Nâgas and Asuras live in those houses
with their consorts; doves and pigeons and female Mayinâ birds are
hovering there. In those places many plots marked out artificially and
excellent rows of palatial buildings of the Lords of those Vivaras adorn
there. Very big gardens also exist there. All these cheer the minds;
and, to add to their beauty, many places of fruits and flowers are close
by, fit for the comfort and enjoyments of the ladies. The tanks and
pools of water are crowded with various birds; the lakes are filled with
clear waters and the Pâ<u>t</u>hîna fishes abound there. The aquatic
animals move in the waters, violently agitating them. Various kinds of
lotuses, Kumud, Utpala, Kahlâra, blue lotus, red lotus, are fully blown
in these lakes or reservoirs of water. The gardens there are all
overcrowded with the Vihâras of the inhabitants there and echoed with
the sweet melodious music, pleasing to the senses. For there, these
places seem to vie with the Heavens. No fear is there, whether during
the day or during the night. The gems on the crest of snakes constantly
illumine the environments and there is no darkness there at any time.
The food there is prepared with the divine medicines and they drink and
bathe with these medicinal plants; so no disease attacks them. Old age,
fever, indigestion, paleness, sweats, bad smells, or loss of energy or
any other source of trouble cannot trouble them. The people are always
happy and good. Only they fear the Teja of the Bhagavân and His
Sudars’an disc; and they fear nothing else. When the Teja of the
Bhagavân enters, the women’s abortions take place.

 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of
Râhu Ma<u>nd</u>alam in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam
of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](bk08ch19.md)
