[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch15)  [Next](bk08ch17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On the motion of the planets**

 

<span id="page_775">p. 775</span>

 

S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Now hear the wonderful movements
of the planets and their positions. The auspicious and inauspicious
events of the mankind, are due to the different movements of these
planets. As in a potter’s wheel going round and round, the motion of the
insects crawling on the wheel, appears in a contrary direction, so the
motion of the Sun and other planets moving on the Zodiac composed of the
Râ<u>sî</u>s (12 constellations) which again always moves round the Meru
as an axle, appears different. Their motion from one star to

 

<span id="page_776">p. 776</span>

 

another and from one constellation to another appears so likewise. These
two motions therefore are not contradictory but are consistent; so it is
settled everywhere by the learned Pundits (as being subservient to the
Zodiac). O Nârada! He, Who is the Origin of all, Who is the Âdi
Puru<u>s</u>a, from Whom all these have sprung, Who is endowed with six
extraordinary powers, in Whom all this Prapañcha, this material world
composed of the five elements remains, that Nârâya<u>n</u>a, roaming
about, has divided the Trayî Âtmâ into twelve parts for the perfect
happiness of all and for Karma S’uddhis (the purification of Karma,
acts). The sages furnished with Jñân and Vijñâna have thus argued on the
point, following the path as laid out in the Vedas. The Sûrya
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, moving on in the six seasons, spring, etc., has
established, cold, heat, etc., as the Dharma of the seasons, duly for
the fructification of the Karmas of the individual beings. Those persons
that worship this Âdipuru<u>s</u>a, with devotion, according to the
knowledge of the Vedas the customs and usages of Var<u>n</u>a (castes)
and Âs’rama (Brahmacharya, etc.), and with various performances of
Yogas, get their fruits respectively according to their desires. This
Sun is the Âtman of all the Lokas and resting on the Zodiac between the
Heavens and the Earth, enjoys the twelve months in the twelve
constellations, Aries, etc. These months are the limbs of the year. Two
fortnights make one month. The 21 asterisms go to form one month
according to the Solar measure, of the day and night.

 

The period that the Sun takes to travel over the two constellations is
called Ritu or the Season (i.e., two months). The Scientists say that
this season is the limb of one Samvatsara. The path that the Sun
describes within the three seasons or half the year in the Zodiac is
called one Ayanam. The time taken by the Sun with earth and heavens to
make a circuit of the Zodiac is called one Vatsara or year. This year is
reckoned into five divisions as :-- Samvatsara, Parivatsara,
I<u>d</u>âvatsara, A<u>n</u>uvatsara, and Idvatsara. These are
functioned by the S’îghra, Ma<u>nd</u>a, and uniform motions of the Sun.
So the Munis say. Thus far the motion of the Sun has been described. Now
hear that of the Moon. The Moon is situated one lakh Yoyanas higher than
the Sun and shares with the motion of the Sun for one year; and She
enjoys as well every month with the Sun in the shape of the dark and
bright fortnights. The Moon, the Lord of Night and of the medicinal
plants also enjoys the day and night by the help of one constellation or
2¼ Nak<u>s</u>attras. Thus, by Her S’îghragati, the Moon enjoys the
Nak<u>s</u>attras. During the bright fortnight, the Moon becomes more
and more visible and gives pleasure to the Immortals by Her increasing
phases; and, during the

 

<span id="page_777">p. 777</span>

 

dark fortnight by Her waning phases, She delights the Pitris. She
performs revolution in the day and night by Her both the phases of the
bright and dark fortnights. Thus She becomes the Life and Soul of

all the living beings. The Moon, endowed with the highest prosperity,
travels one Nak<u>s</u>attra in thirty Muhûrtas. She is Full and the
Soul without any beginning. She fructifies the desires (Sankalpas) and

resolves of all; hence She is called Manomaya. She is the Lord of all
the medicinal plants (O<u>s</u>adhis); hence She is called Annamaya. She
is filled with nectar; hence She is called the Abode of Immortality and
She gives Nirvâ<u>n</u>a (the final liberation) to all. Hence She is
called Sudhâkara. She nourishes and satisfies the Devas, Pitris, men,
reptiles and trees; hence She is called “Sarvamaya.” By Her influence
the asterisms travel over the three lakh Yoyanas. The God Himself has
made the Nak<u>s</u>attra Abhijit to revolve round the Meru, along with
the other Nak<u>s</u>attras in the Zodiac; so this is reckoned as the
twenty-eighth Nak<u>s</u>attra. The planet Venus (S’ukra) is situated
above the Moon two lakh Yoyanas high. He sometimes goes before the Sun,
sometimes behind and sometimes along with Him. He is very powerful. His
motion is of three kinds :-- (1) S’îghra, (2) Ma<u>nd</u>a, and (3)
uniform. He is generally favourable to all the persons and does for them
many auspicious things. So it is stated in the S’âstras. O Muni! S’ukra,
the illustrious scion of Bhrigu, removes the obstacles to the rains.
Next to S’ukra, the planet Mercury (Budha) is situated two lakh Yoyanas
high. Like S’ukra, he, too, goes sometimes in front sometimes behind and
sometimes along with the Sun. And his motion too, is of three kinds :--
S’îghra, Ma<u>nd</u>a, and uniform. When Mercury the Son of Moon, is
away from the Sun, then Ativâta (strong winds, hurricanes), Abhrapâta
(the falling of meteors from the clouds) and draught and other fears
arise. The planet Mars, the son of the Earth is situated two lakh
Yoyanas higher. Within three fortnights (45 days) he travels one Râs’î.
This occurs when his motion is not retrograde. This Mars causes all
sorts of mischief, evils, and miseries to mankind. The planet Jupiter is
situated two lakh Yoyanas higher. He passes through one Râs’î in one
year. When his motion is not retrograde, he is always in favour with the
Brahmâ Vâdis. Next to Brihaspati, come the planet Saturn, the son of the
Sun, two lakh Yoyanas higher. He takes thirty months to pass over one
Râs’î. This planet causes all sorts of unrest and miseries to all.
Therefore He is called a Ma<u>nd</u>a Graha (a malefic planet). Next to
it, is situated the Saptar<u>s</u>i ma<u>nd</u>ala, the Great Bear,
eleven lakh Yoyanas higher up. O Muni! The seven planets always do
special favours to all. These circumambulate the Vi<u>sn</u>upada, the
Polar Star.

 

<span id="page_778">p. 778</span>

 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Eighth Book on the motion of the
planets in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk08ch17.md)
