[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch14)  [Next](bk08ch16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XV**

 

**On the motion of the Sun**

 

<span id="page_773">p. 773</span>

 

1-45. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I will now describe the motion
of the Sun. Hear. It is of three kinds; S’îghra (perihelionic), Manda
(Aphelionic), and even. O Surasattama! Every planet has three positions.
The name of the Madhyagati position is Jâradgava, the name of the
northern position is Airâvata; and the name of the southern position is
Vais’vânara. The asterisms As’vinî Krittikâ and Bhara<u>n</u>î are known
by the term Nâgavîthî. Rohi<u>n</u>î, Ârdrâ, and Mrigas’irâ are named
Gaja Vîthî; Pu<u>s</u>yâ, As’le<u>s</u>â, and Punarvasu are named
Airavatîvîthî. The three Vîthîs, above-mentioned are called Uttara
Mârga. Purvaphalgunî, Uttara Phalgunî and Maghâ are named
A’r<u>s</u>abhî Vîthî. Hastâ, Chitrâ and Svâtî are called Govîthî;
Jye<u>st</u>hâ, Vis’âkhâ and Anurâdhâ are named Jâradgavî Vîthî. These
three Vîthîs are named Madhyamâ Mârga. Mûlâ, Purbâ<u>s</u>â<u>d</u>hâ,
Uttarâ<u>s</u>â<u>d</u>hâ are termed Ajavîthî S’rava<u>n</u>â,
Dhani<u>s</u>thâ and S’atabhi<u>s</u>â are termed Mriga Vîthî. Uttara
bhâdrapada, Purvabhâdrapada, and Revatî are called Vais’vânarîvîthî.
These three Vîthîs (paths) are called Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>amârga. During
the Uttarâya<u>n</u>a time, as the Dhruva attracts the rope of air from
both the sides of the Yuga, orbit (or axis), the chariot of the Sun
ascends, (i.e., is drawn up by the rope). Thus when the Sun enters
within the sphere, the motion of the chariot becomes slower and the day
is lengthened and the night is shortened. O Sura Sattama! Know this to
be the course of the path of the Sun.

 

When the cord draws towards the south, the Chariot descends and as the
Sun then comes out of the sphere, the motion becomes quick. The day
shortens and the night is lengthened. Again when the cord is neither
tightened nor is it slackened, rather its motion is exactly mid-way, the
Sun also remains in a medium position and his Chariot enters within a
sphere of equilibrium and the day and night become equal. When the cord
of air, in a state of equilibrium is attracted by the Polar Star, then
it is that the Sun and the Solar system revolves; and when the Polar
Star slackens its attraction over the cord of air, the Sun coming out of
the middle sphere, revolves; and the Solar system also revolves. On the
east of Meru is established the city of Indra and the Devas dwell there.
It is called therefore Devadhânikâ. On the south

 

<span id="page_774">p. 774</span>

 

of the Meru, is the famous city of Yama, the God of Death, named
Samyamanî. On the west of Meru, is the great city of Varu<u>n</u>a,
named Nimnochanî. On the north of Meru is the city of the Moon, named
Vibhâvarî. O Nârada! The Brahmavâdîs say that the Sun first rises in the
city of Indra. At noon the Sun goes to Samyamanî; at evening the Sun
goes to Nimnochanî and He is said to set. In the night the Sun remains
in Vibhâvarî. O Muni! The going of the Sun round Meru is the cause of
all the beings getting themselves engaged in their respective duties.
The inhabitants of the Meru see the Sun always in the central position.
The Sun moves on, eastwards towards the stars, keeping the Meru to his
left; but if the Zodiac be taken into account, it would appear that the
Meru is left towards the south of the Sun. The rising and the setting of
the Sun are always considered in front of Him. O Devar<u>s</u>i! Every
point, every quarter, every person, seeing the Sun says that the Sun has
risen there; again where he becomes invisible, He is considered to set
there. The Sun always exists; so there is no rising nor setting for Him.
It is His appearance and disappearance that make men say that the Sun
rises or sets. When the Sun is in the Indra’s city, He illumines the
three cities, those of Indra, Yama, and the Moon and illumines the
north-east and east-west corners. So when He rests in the city of Fire,
he illumines north-east, east-west, and south-west, the three corners,
and at the same time the cities of Indra and Yama; and so on for the
other cities and corners. O Nârada! The Mont Meru is situated towards
the north of all the Dvîpas and Var<u>s</u>as. So whenever any person
sees the Sun rise he calls that side “east.” But Meru exists towards the
left of the Sun; so it is said. If the Sun travels in 15 (fifteen)
Gha<u>t</u>ikâs, the distance from Indrapurî to Yamapurî, He is said to
travel within that time a distance equal to 2¼ Ko<u>t</u>is, 12½ lakhs
and 25000 Yojanas (22695000 Yojanas). The thousand-eyed and thousand
rayed Sun God is the Manifester of Time. He travels in the aforesaid way
the cities of Varu<u>n</u>a, Chandra and Indra respectively. He is the
diadem of the Svarloka; and the Zodiac is his Âtman. He travels thus, to
mark off time to all persons. O Nârada! The Moon and the other planets
and stars rise and set in the aforesaid manner. Thus the powerful
chariot of the Sun travels in a Muhûrta 142,00000 Yojanas. By the force
of Pravaha Vâyu (air), the Sun God, the Incarnate of the Vedas travels
round the cities, the Zodiac, in one Samvatsara (year). The wheel of the
Sun’s Chariot is one year; twelve months are the spokes; three
Châturmâsyas are the nave and the six seasons are the outer ring or
circumference of the wheel. The learned men call this chariot as the

 

<span id="page_775">p. 775</span>

 

Samvatsara (one year). The axis or axle points to the Meru on one side
and to Mânasottara mountain on the other. The end or circumference of
the wheel marks off other divisions of the time as Kalâ, Kâ<u>st</u>hâ,
Muhûrta, Yâma, Parahara, day and night, and fortnights. The wheel is
fixed on the nave. The Sun goes on this wheel, like an oilman’s on his
oil-machine, round and round the Mânasottara mountain. The eastern side
of the wheel is on that axis and the other part is fixed on the Pole
Star. The dimension of the first axis is (15750000 Yoyanas). The second
axis measures one-fourth of the above (3937500 Yoyanas). It resembles
the axis of an oil-machine. The upper side of that is considered to
belong to the Sun. The seat of the Sun on his chariot measures 36 Lakh
Yoyanas wide. The Yuga measures in length one fourth of the above
dimensions, that of his seat. The Chariot is is moved by seven horses,
consisting of the seven Chhandas, Gâyatrî, etc., driven by Aru<u>n</u>a.
The horses carry the Sun for the happiness of all. Though the charioteer
sits in front of the Sun, his face is turned towards the west. He does
his work as a charioteer in that state. Sixty thousand Vâlakhilya
Ri<u>s</u>is, of the size of a thumb, chant the sweet Vedic hymns before
Him. Other Ri<u>s</u>is, Apsarâs, Uragas, Grâma<u>n</u>îs,
Râk<u>s</u>asas, and all the Devas, each divided in groups of seven,
worship every month that highly lustrous Sun-god. The earth measures
90152000 Kros’a Yuga Yoyanas (1 Kro<u>s</u>a - ¼ Yoyana). The Sun passes
over this distance in a moment. He does not take rest in his this work
even for a day; no, not even for a moment.

 

Here ends the Fifteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the motion of the
Sun in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18000
verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](bk08ch16.md)
