[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch10)  [Next](bk08ch12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XI**

** **

**On the description of the continents and of Bhâratavar<u>s</u>a**

 

<span id="page_764">p. 764</span>

 

1\. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- In this Bhâratavar<u>s</u>a (India) I am
present, as the First of all, in the shape of the Man, at present
existing before you. Let you praise Me incessantly thus:--

 

2-28. Nârada said :-- Thou art the Bhagavân. Obeisance to Thee. Thou art
completely free from attachment and envy and Thou art the incarnate of
Dharma, Jñâna and Vairâgyam (Dispassion). No trace of Ahamkara (egoism)
is in Thee. Obeisance to Thee. Thou hast nothing of wealth; Thou art the
foremost of the family of Ri<u>s</u>is; Thou art Nara Nârâya<u>n</u>a.
Thou art the Parama Hamsa (the highest class of ascetics and renouncers
of the world). Thou art the Highest Guru; Thou art happy with Thyself
and the Leader of all; I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Lord of all, yet
not mixed in the work of creation, etc. Though Thou residest in every
embodied being, yet no hunger and thirst can press Thee; though Thou art
the Witness, yet Thy sight is not at all disturbed by the proximity.
Thou art not at all connected and no desires can come to Thee; Thou art
the Witness. So I bow down to Thee. This path of Yoga had

 

<span id="page_765">p. 765</span>

 

come out of Thee and it is established in Thee. The Bhagavân
Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha has given instructions on the cleverness in Yoga,
thus :-- That leaving aside the egoism of this body, the seat of all
evils, the people at last will take resort to the path of Bhakti and set
their minds on Thee, Who art beyond the pale of the three Gu<u>n</u>as.
If, like the ignorant persons very much attached to this world as well
as the next, the wise pass their time in the thoughts of their sons,
wives, and riches and ultimately become very much pained on the
destruction of this ugly body, persons, versed in Jñâna and Vijñâna be
afraid in the end of their separation fron the body, then their study of
the S'âstras and all their labours become labours merely, without any
effect. When such a thing occurs to the learned, then O Thou, the
Subduer of the knowledge of senses! Thou Thyself givest us instructions
that we may easily think of Thee. Then this terrible clinging to this
ugly body that Thy Mâyâ brings about and which it is very difficult to
discard by other means, will leave us quickly. Nârada, the seer of all,
well qualified with the knowledge of all the Tattvas, the foremost of
the Munis, thus worships it and praises Nârâya<u>n</u>a Who is
unaffected by any of the Ûpâdhis and who corresponds to Nitya and Leelâ
(both Permanent and the Pastime-making). O Devar<u>s</u>i! I now
describe to you the rivers and mountains in Bhâratvar<u>s</u>a. Hear
attentively. Malaya, Mangalaprastha, Mainâka, Chitrakûta,
Ri<u>s</u>abha, Kûtaka, Kolla, Sahya, Devagiri, Ri<u>s</u>yamûka,
S'ris'aila, Vyanka<u>t</u>a, Mahendra, Vâridhâra, Vindhya, S'uktimân,
Rik<u>s</u>a, Pâriyâtra, Dro<u>n</u>a, Chitrakû<u>t</u>a, Gobardhana,
Raivataka, Kakubha, Nîla, Gaurmukha, Indrakîla, Kâmagiri and many other
mountains, that cannot be numbered. Great merits accrue on seeing these
mountains. Hundreds and thousands of rivers issue from these mountains.
Drinking their waters, bathing in them and visiting them and singing
their praises completely destroy the sins of mind, word and body. The
names of the rivers are :-- Tâmrapar<u>n</u>î, Chandravas'â, Kritamâlâ,
Va<u>t</u>odakâ, Vaihâyasî, Kâverî, Ve<u>n</u>â, Payasvini, Tungabhadrâ,
Kri<u>sn</u>avenâ, S'arkarâ, Vartakâ, Godâvarî, Bhîmarathî, Nirbindhyâ,
Payo<u>sn</u>ikâ, Tâpî, Revâ, Surasâ, Narmadâ, Sarasvatî,
Charma<u>n</u>vatî, and the Indus, Andha, and Sone, Ri<u>s</u>ikulyâ,
Trisâmâ, Vedasmriti, Mahânadî, Kaus'ikî, Yamunâ, Mandâkini, Drisadvatî,
Gomatî, Sarayû, Oghavatî, Saptavatî, Susamâ, S'atadru, Chandrabhâgâ,
Marudbridhâ, Vitastâ, Asiknî and Vis'vâ and many other rivers. Those
persons that take their births in this Var<u>s</u>a enjoy the (Divya)
Divine, human, and the lower enjoyments, as the effects of their Karmas,
in accordance with their Sâttvik, Râjasik, and Tâmasik qualities. All
the inhabitants of this Var<u>s</u>a take their Sannyâsa, Vânaprasthas,
etc., in accordance with the rules of their Var<u>n</u>as (castes)
respectively and enjoy

 

<span id="page_766">p. 766</span>

 

beatitudes as dictated (in their S'âstras). The Vedavâdis (the
propounders of the Vedas), the Ri<u>s</u>is, and the Devas declare that
this Var<u>s</u>a is superior to all the other Var<u>s</u>as as the
Grace of God is easily obtained here. They say: Oh! What an amount of
good works, the inhabitants of Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a did in their
previous lives, that by their influence, the Bhagavân Hari has become
pleased with them without their having any Sâdhanâs (good Yogic
practices). Therefore we also desire to have our births there, for there
if we be born amidst the persons there, we would be able serve Hari,
Mukunda in every way. What will severe austerities, gifts, sacrifices,
and practising vows avail us? Even if we go to Heaven, what benefit we
will derive there? Then we would never be able to bring our mind to the
lotus-feet of the Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Our tastes for sense
enjoyments would increase and we would be wholly deprived of Bhagavân.
Far better it is to be born in this Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a as short-lived
persons, than to acquire other places where one can live up to the
period of Kalpa and then be reborn. For the intelligent people of
Bhârata, getting this mortal coil can within a short period devote
themselves to the Bhagavân Hari and be free from rebirth. That place is
never to be visited and served, even if that be Svarga Loka where the
nectar-like ocean of the sayings of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha are not heard;
where there are no assemblages of saints who take refuge of the Lotus
feet of Bhagavân; where the great sacrifices and festivities of the
Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u are not celebrated. Those persons, that do not try
for Mok<u>s</u>a, when they get human births and when they possess
Jñâna, Kriyâ (methods of doing sacrifices and other works for the help
of Jñâna) and Dravya (materials for those sacrifices), are certainly
like beasts and get themselves repeatedly entanged into bondages. The
people of Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a offer oblations to Indra and other
deities, invoking their names separately, with proper rules (Vidhis),
mantras, and puro<u>d</u>âsas (a sacrificial oblation made of ground
rice and offered in Kapâlas or vessels); but the All sufficient Bhagavân
Hari, the Giver of blessings accepts those very gladly.

 

True that He grants unto the people what they ask from Him; but He
hardly gives anybody the Paramârtha, the Highest Goal. The reason being
that the people ask again and again after receiving what they had asked.
So He gives of Himself His own lotus-feet to those who, having abandoned
all their desires, worship Him and Him only with the idea of love. (1)
Thus :-- We are living very happily in the Heavens as the fruit of the
I<u>st</u>âpûrta that we performed fully; yet we want that we may also
be born in Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a with our memory all renewed with the
thought of the Bhagavân Hari. The Bhagavân residing in this
Bhâratvar<u>s</u>a, awards the highest welfare to its inhabitants.

 

<span id="page_767">p. 767</span>

 

29-32. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Devar<u>s</u>i! Thus the Devas of the
Heavens, the Siddhas, the Highest Ri<u>s</u>is, sing the excellent
merits of this Bhâratavar<u>s</u>a. There are the eight Upadvîpas of
this Jambudvîpa :-- When the sons of the King Sagara were searching for
the footprints of the stolen horse (for As'vamedha sacrifice), they
found these Upadvîpas; so it is definitely stated. The names of out and
made these are :-- Svar<u>n</u>aprastha, Chandras'ukra, Âvartana,
Ramâ<u>n</u>aka, Mandaropâkhya, Hari<u>n</u>a, Pânchajanya, and Ceylon.
The length and breadth of Jambudvîpa have been described; now the other
six Dvîpas, Plak<u>s</u>a and others will be described. Hear.

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of
the continents and of Bhâratavar<u>s</u>a in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am,
S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda
Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk08ch12.md)
