[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch02)  [Next](bk08ch04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter III**

** **

**On the description of the family of Manu**

 

<span id="page_747">p. 747</span>

 

1-23. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! When the Bhagavân went away to
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, establishing the Earth in due position and
equilibrium, Brahmâ spoke thus to his son :-- “O Powerful Son of mine, O
Svâyamhhuva! The best of those that are filled with Teja (energy) and
Tapas! Now go on with your work of creation, as you think proper, on
this earth, the Upholdress of all the Jîvas. And worship the
Puru<u>s</u>a, the Lord of Sacrifices, according to the division of
place and time, and with all the necessary materials of various kinds,
high and low, and those that will be useful in performing your
sacrifices. Do Dharma according to the S'âstras, and according to the
Var<u>n</u>a(the different castes) and Âsrama (Brahmâcharya, etc.); thus
by gradually going on step by step in the path of Yoga, your progeny
will be multiplied. Beget lovely sons and daughters, of good fame,
culture, modesty and ornamented with various other good qualifications,
like yourself; then marry your daughters when they will come to the
marriageable age, to proper persons of good qualifications and then fix
your mind thoroughly on the Excellent Puru<u>s</u>a that is the very
Best. O Child! Now go and serve the Bhagavân with devotion as I have
advised you; and you will certainly attain that which is difficult to be
worshipped and obtained. Advising thus his son Svâyambhuva Manu, and
starting him in his work; of creation, the Lotus-born, the Lord of all
the subjects, Brahmâ went away to His own abode. When Brahmâ went away,
having ordered his son to create progeny and subjects, Manu, took that
seriously in his heart and began to do that work. In due time, he had
two powerful sons named Priyavrata and Uttânapâda and three lovely
beautiful daughters endowed with various good qualities. Hear the names
of the three daughters. The first daughter, the purifier of the world,
was named Âkûti; the second was named Devahûti and the third was
Prasûti. The first daughter Âkûti was married to the Mahar<u>s</u>i
Ruchi; the second was married to the Prajapati Karddama; and the third
was married to the Prajapati Dak<u>s</u>a. And know that all the beings
in this world had their origin from this last daughter. Now hear the
progeny of these three daughters and the Mahar<u>s</u>is respectively
:-- By Mahar<u>s</u>i Ruchi was born one son named Yajña, in the womb of
Âkûti; he is the part of

 

<span id="page_748">p. 748</span>

 

the Bhagavân Âdi Purusa Vi<u>sn</u>u; by Mahar<u>s</u>i Karddama, in the
womb of Devahûti was born the Bhagavân Kapila Deva, the famous author of
the S'ânkhya S'âstra; and in the womb of Prasûti, by the Prajâpati
Dak<u>s</u>a were born some daughters only; know that the Devas, men,
beasts and birds were all created by this Prajâpati Dak<u>s</u>a. These
offsprings were the first promulgators in the work of creation. In the
Svâyambhuva Manvantara, the powerful Bhagavân Yajña, by the help of the
Deva named Yâma, saved his mother's Father Manu from the attacks of the
Rak<u>s</u>asas; and the great Lord of the Yogis, the Bhagavân Kapila,
remained for a while in his Âsrama and gave spiritual instructions to
his mother Devahûti, by which Avidyâ could be at once destroyed, and
disclosed his S'ânkhya S'âstra, the great work on the Spiritual
Philosophy and the special Dhyâna Yoga in all its details and finally
went for Samâdhi to the Âsrama of Pulaha where the great Deva Sâmkhyâ
chârya lives up to today. Oh! I bow down to the great Yogâchârya, the
Bhagavân Kapila Deva, the Fructifier of all desires, the more
remembrance of Whose Name makes easily the Yogi realise the meaning of
the Sâmkhya Jñâna. The sins are immediately destroyed of those that hear
or read the holy anecdote of the progeny of the daughters of Manu. O
Child! Now I describe to you the progeny of the sons of Svâyambhuva
Manu. Hear attentively. The hearing of which will enable one to enter
into the highest place. Now is being described the history about the
progeny of those who formed those Dvipas (islands)
Var<u>s</u>as(countries) and oceans for the welfare and happiness of all
the creation and for the use of them. Hear.

 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of the
family of Manu in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, of
18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](bk08ch04.md)
