[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch16)  [Next](bk08ch18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVII**

 

**On the Dhruva Ma<u>nd</u>alam**

 

<span id="page_778">p. 778</span>

 

1-29. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Beyond the Saptar<u>s</u>i
ma<u>nd</u>alam (the Great Bear), thirteen lakh Yojanas higher is
situated, the Vi<u>sn</u>u’s Paramam Padam (the highest place of
Vi<u>sn</u>u). The Great Bhâgavat (devotee of God), the most respectful,
S’rîmân Dhruva, the son of Uttânapâda, is established there with Indra,
Ag<u>n</u>i, Kas’yapa and Dharma and the Nak<u>s</u>attras. The visitors
pay to him always their respects. He is the patron of those who live
till the end of a Kalpa. He is engaged in serving the lotus-feet of the
Bhagavân. He has been made by God Himself the pillar round whom all the
planets, stars, and the luminary bodies are revolving always and with
great force in the Zodiac and in the celestial Heavens. The Devas also
worship him. He, resplendent in his own glory, illumines and manifests
all. As beasts tied to yoke go on tilling, so the planets and stars,
fixed on the Zodiac, go quickly round and round this Dhruva, the Pole
Star; some nearer, some further distant in spheres, propelled by Vâyu.
As the hawks hover round the sky, so the above-mentioned planets, go
completely round and round under their own Karmas and controlled by the
Vâyu in the sky. Thus all the luminaries do not fall to the ground, as
they are kept up in their respective positions by the favour of the
union of Prakriti and Puru<u>s</u>a. Some say that this
Jyoti<u>s</u>chakra, the celestial Heavens (the Zodiac) is S’is’umâra.
It is kept duly in its position for the purpose of holding things up by
the power of the Bhagavân. Hence it does not fall. It is resting with
its body coiled round and with its head lower down. O Muni! Dhruva, the
son of Uttânapâda is staying at the tail end. And, in addition to him,
also at the tail rests Brahmâ, the Sinless Prajâpati, worshipped by the
Gods, Ag<u>n</u>i, Indra and Dharma. Thus the creation is at the tail
and the Saptar<u>s</u>ima<u>nd</u>al is staying at his waist. Thus the
celestial wheel (Jyoti<u>s</u>chakra) is resting with his coils turned
in a right-hand direction. On his right side are found the
Uttarâya<u>n</u>a Nak<u>s</u>attras, fourteen in number from Abhijit to
Punarvasu and on his left side are found the other fourteen
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âyanam Nak<u>s</u>attras from Pu<u>s</u>yâ to
Uttarâ<u>s</u>â<u>d</u>hâ. O Son of Brahmâ! Thus the Nak<u>s</u>attras
form the coil-shaped body of the S’is’umâra, the Zodiac; half the
Nak<u>s</u>attras

 

<span id="page_779">p. 779</span>

 

on the one side and the other half Nak<u>s</u>attras on the other. His
back is on the Heavenly Ganges named Ajavîthî. Punarvasu and
Pu<u>s</u>yâ form the right and left side of the loins; Ârdrâ and
As’les’â form the right and left feet (westward); Abhijit and
Uttarâ<u>s</u>â<u>d</u>ha form the right and left nostrils. O
Devar<u>s</u>i! S’rava<u>n</u>â and Pûrvâ<u>s</u>â<u>d</u>hâ form the
right and left eyes respectively; so say the persons that form the
Kalpanâs (fancies). Dhani<u>st</u>hâ and Mûlâ form his right and left
ears; Maghâ, etc., the eight Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âyanam
Nak<u>s</u>attras form the bones on the left side. O Muni!
Mrigasîr<u>s</u>a, the Uttarâya<u>n</u>a Nak<u>s</u>attras form the
bones on his right side, S’atabhi<u>s</u>â and Jye<u>st</u>hâ form the
right and left shoulders. Agasti (the Canopus) forms the upper jaw and
Yama, the lower jaw. The planet Mars forms his face; Saturn forms his
organ of generation; Brihaspati forms the hump on the shoulders; the
Sun, the Lord of the planets, forms his breast; Nârâya<u>n</u>a remains
in the heart; and the Moon is in his mind. (Note :-- S’is’umâra is also
the constellation Dolphinus and is sometimes meant for the polar star.)
O Nârada! The two As’vins form the nipples on his breast; Us’anâ forms
his navel; the Mercury is his Prâ<u>n</u>a and Apâna; Râhu is his neck
and Ketu is all over his body and the stars are reigning all over the
hairs of his body. This Zodiac is the body composed of the Devas of that
All Pervading Bhagavân. So every intelligent person should daily
meditate this S’is’umâra in the Sandhyâ time, with perfect purity and
keeping himself Mauna (silent), and with his whole heart. Then he should
repeat the following mantras and get up and say :-- “Thou art the
Substratum of all the luminaries, we bow down to Thee; Thou createst and
destroyest all. Thou art the Lord of all the celestials. Thou art the
Âdipuru<u>s</u>a, the foremost of all the Puru<u>s</u>as; we meditate
fully on Thee. The planets, Nak<u>s</u>attras, and the stars are Thy
body. The Daiva is established in Thee alone. Thou destroyest the sins
of those that compose the Mantras. The sins are completely destroyed for
the time being of him who bows down or remembers Thee in the morning,
afternoon and evening.”

 

Here ends the Seventeenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the Dhruva
Ma<u>nd</u>alam in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](bk08ch18.md)
