[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch13)  [Next](bk08ch15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIV**

 

**On the description of the Lokâloka space**

 

<span id="page_771">p. 771</span>

 

1-29. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Next to the ocean of pure water, is the
mountain, called Lokâloka. It marks the sphere between the two countries
Loka and Aloka. O Devar<u>s</u>i! There is a land, all of pure gold
(beyond this ocean of pure water) for a space equal to the distance
between Mânasottara and Meru. This land is like a mirror; there are no
beings here; the reason is, any substance placed on it would at once be
converted into gold and nothing can be obtained out of it. O Nârada! No
living beings can live there and therefore it is named Lokâloka. This is
established always between the Loka and Aloka. The God himself has made
this as the boundary of the three Lokas. The rays of the Sun, the Polar
Star and all the planets are confined to this sphere; rather passing
through its middle, the luminaries shed their lustre on the three Lokas.
O Nârada! This great mountain is so lofty and capacious that the rays of
the luminaries can never go out of it. The learned men say, that the
size, form, and indications of this mountain are such as this is the
one-fourth of five hundred times the size of the earth on its summit.
The self-born Brahmâ has placed very big elephants on all sides of it.
Hear

 

<span id="page_772">p. 772</span>

 

their names. These are <u>R</u>i<u>s</u>abha, Pu<u>s</u>pachûda, Vâmana,
and Aparâjita. These four elephants are said to hold all the Lokas in
their respective positions. The Bhagavân Hari gives strength to these
elephants and to Indra and others who are reckoned to be His Vibhûtis
(powers). He manifesting His S’uddha Sattva and super-extraordinary
powers, and united with A<u>n</u>imâ, Laghimâ, etc., the eight Siddhis,
is reigning there surrounded by His Pâris’adas Vi<u>s</u>vaksena and
others. He is the one God of all; He is without a second. For the
welfare of all, He is holding Sudars’ana and His various other weapons;
and the powers of His arms are great. He is His own Cause and at all
times He pervades all in and through. He is Eternal. This Universe is
upheld by His extraordinary power Mâyâ for its preservation. He remains
in this form till the end of a Kalpa. The inner width described above,
determines the width of Âloka. For it is situated outside the above
Loka. Beyond the mountain Lokâloka, is said to lie the pure path leading
to Yoges’vara within the egg-shaped ellipsoid formed by the Heaven and
Earth. The inner dimension of this ellipsoid is twenty five Ko<u>t</u>i
Yoyanas. When this egg becomes unconscious (lifeless), the Sun enters
within it in the form of Vairâja. Hence the Sun is called
Mârta<u>nd</u>a. He is Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha, when He is born from this
Golden Egg. It is this Sun that ordains the quarters, Âkâs’a, Heaven and
Earth, etc., in their proper spheres and divisions. This Sun is the Âtmâ
of Svarga and Mok<u>s</u>a, hell and other lower regions, of the Devas,
men, birds, reptiles, trees and all other living beings; and He is the
Presiding Deity of their sight. O Nârada! Its width is Pañchâs’a<u>t</u>
Ko<u>t</u>i Yoyanas and its height or depth is twenty-five Ko<u>t</u>i
Yoyanas. If as the two halves of a gram are of the same size, so the
Earth and Heaven are of equal size. The space enclosed between them is
called Antarîk<u>s</u>a; the Sun God, the foremost of the planets, being
situated in the middle, gives light and illumines and heats the three
Lokas. He goes by the path of Uttarâya<u>n</u>a and therefore His motion
becomes slow (His motion becomes Mandagati). The Sun then getting up
higher prolongs the day time. Similarly when the Sun follows the path of
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âyana, He gets S’îghra-gati and not going up so
high, shortens the day time. Again when He comes at the Equator, He
maintains an even position and the day and night become equal. When the
Sun is in the signs Aries (Me<u>s</u>a) and Libra (Tulâ), then the day
and night become equal. When the Sun traverses the five signs Taurus,
Gemini, etc., the day becomes longer and when the Sun traverses the five
signs Scorpio and others, the day becomes shorter and the night becomes
longer.

 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the

 

<span id="page_773">p. 773</span>

 

description of the Lokâloka space in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](bk08ch15.md)
