[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch08)  [Next](bk08ch10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IX**

** **

**On the narration of the division of the continents**

 

<span id="page_758">p. 758</span>

 

1-2. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- In Harivar<u>s</u>a, the Bhagavân Hari is
shining splendid as a Yogi in the form of Narasimha. The Mahâ Bhâgavat
(most devoted) Prahlâda, who knows the attributes of God worships and
chants hymns with his whole hearted devotion, seeing that beautiful
form, gladdening to all the people.

 

<span id="page_759">p. 759</span>

 

3-11. Prahlâda spoke :-- I bow down to Thee, the Bhagavân
Nrisi<u>n</u>gha Deva. Thou art the Light of all Lights. Thy big teeth
are like thunderbolts. Let Thee manifest in Thy most terrible form. Let
Thee destroy the desires of the people to do Karma and let Thou devour
the great Ignorance (Ajñâna) the Moha (delusion) of the people. Thou art
the receptacle of the Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gu<u>n</u>as. Let myself be
always free from any fear by Thy Grace. “Om Khraum!” Let this whole
world rest completely in peace and happiness. Let the cheats quit their
guiles and be pure and simple. Let all the people quit completely their
animosities towards each other and think of their welfare. Let all the
people be free from making injuries to others and be peaceful; and let
them have their control over their passions. Let our mind be completely
free from desires and rest entirely and devotedly to Thy lotus-feet. Let
us not be attached to sons, wives, wealth, house or to any other worldly
objects. If there be any attachment, let it be to the objects dear to
the Bhagavân. He who barely sustains his body and soul and controls
himself completely, success is very near to him; not so to the persons
that are attached to the senses. The dirt of the mind, that is not
washed away by bathing in the Ganges or by taking recourse to the
Tîrthas, etc., is removed by the company of the devotees to the God and
by their influence, hearing, thinking, and meditating on the attributes
of the Bhagavân. So who is there that does not serve the Bhagavân! He
who has got Niskâma Bhakti (devotion without regard to any fruits
thereof) to the Bhagavân, to him come always the Devatâ, Dharma and
Jñâna and other higher qualities. But he who indulges in various mental
phantasms, without any Bhakti to the Bhagavân, he follows the worldly
happiness that is certainly to be hated and never he gets Vairâgyan and
other higher qualities. As water is life to the fish, so the Bhagavân
Hari is the self of all embodied beings and so He is to be specially
prayed for. So if a high-souled person be attached to household
happiness, without thinking of God, then his greatness dwindles into a
trifling insignificance like the ordinary pleasures of man and woman
when they are full of youth. So leave, at once, the home that is the
source of Birth and Death and leave Tri<u>sn</u>â (thirst, desire),
clinging to life, low-spiritedness, name, and fame, egoism, shame, fear,
poverty and loss of one's honour and worship the Lotus-Feet of the
Bhagavân Nrisi<u>n</u>gha Deva and be entirely fearless. Thus Prahlâda,
the Lord of the Daityas, daily worships devotedly the Bhagavân
Nrisi<u>n</u>gha, resplendent in his lotus heart, the death blow, the
lion to all the elephant sins. In the Ketumâla Var<u>s</u>a, the
Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a is reigning in the form of the Kâma Deva, the
God of Love. The people there always worship Him. The daughter of Ocean,
the Indirâ Devî, who confers honour and glory to the Mahatmas,

 

<span id="page_760">p. 760</span>

 

is the presiding Deity of the Var<u>s</u>a. She always worships the Kama
Deva with the following verses :--

 

12-18. The Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî spoke :-- “Om, Hrâm, Hrîm, Hrûm, Om namo
Bhagavate Hri<u>s</u>ike<u>s</u>âya! Thou art the Bhagavân of the nature
of Om. Thou are the Director, the Lord of the senses: Thy Âtman is the
Highest and the Receptacle of all the good things. All the Karma
V<u>r</u>ittis, all the Jñâna V<u>r</u>ittis, and effort and resolution
and other faculties of the mind, act in their respective channels by Thy
looking and by their being constantly practised in Thee. And the
elements over which they get their masteries are subservient to Thy
Laws. The mind and the other eleven Indriyas, and touch, taste and other
five senses are but Thy parts. All the rites and ceremonies observed in
the Vedas are found in Thee. Thou art the infinite store of all the
foodings of the Jîvas. From Thee flows the Paramânanda, the Highest
Bliss. Thou art All, Thou art the Substance, Purity incarnate; Thou art
the Energy, the Strength manifest in all. Thou art the Finish of all the
happiness and Thou art the Only One Substance, that can be desired by
the people. So obeisance to Thee! This Thy Lordship is not dependent on
any other body. The women that know Thee, the Lord of all and worship
other bodies for their husbands, those husbands can never save them,
their lives, their wealth, progeny or other dear things as those are
controlled by Kâla (Time) and Karma. So they cannot be termed husbands
at all; Thou art the Real Husband; and no other. For Thou art naturally
fearless and Thou protectest in every way the persons that become
afraid. Thou art the Lord of all wealth; so no other is superior to
Thee. How can then, they be independent whose happiness depends on
others! The lady that desires to worship Thy lotus feet only and becomes
subservient to no others, she attains all the desires. Again the lady
who, desiring other desires than to get Thee, does not worship Thy
lotus-feet, Thou fulfillest the desires of her too. But, O Bhagavân!
When the period of enjoyment of these things ceases and when the objects
of these enjoyments are destroyed, then she repents much due to the loss
of those things. Brahmâ, Mahâdeva, the Suras and the Asuras practise
hard Tapasyâs to get me, impelled by their desires to attain the objects
of sense enjoyments; but he only really gets me who worships and takes
refuge of Thy lotus feet only, for my heart is entirely attached to
Thee. So, O Achyuta! Kindly shew Thy Grace and put, on my head, Thy
lotus palm, praised by the universal people that Thou placest on Thy
Bhaktas. O Bhagavân! That Thou takest me in Thy Bosom is a sign of Thy
Grace. No one can fathom the deeds of Thee, the Only Controller of all.
Thus the Prajâpati and the Lords of that Var<u>s</u>a, worship the
Bhagavân,

 

<span id="page_761">p. 761</span>

 

the Friend of all, with a view to attain their respective desires and
Siddhis. In Ramyak Var<u>s</u>a, the Matsya form of the Bhagavân is set
up and consecrated. The Suras and the Asuras worship Him. The highly
intelligent Manu always chant hymns to that Excellent Form thus :--
“Obeisance to Him who is the Life of all, the Essence and Strength of
all, to that Great Fish Form, the Body Incarnate of Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a,
who is of the nature of Om and Bliss.”

 

19-23. Thou art the Lord of all the Lokapâlas and of the form of the
Vedas. Thou art within and without all this universe, moving and
non-moving; still all the beings are unable to see Thy form. As the
people bring under their control the wooden dolls, so Thou controllest
the universe by the rules and prohibitions under the names of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, etc. Thou art the God. The Lokapâlas, being overcome
by the fever of jealousy and pride, become quite unable, either
individually or collectively, to quit their jealousies and to protect
the tripeds, quadrupeds, reptiles and snakes; so Thou art the God. Thou
hadst upheld this earth along with me and with the medicinal plants and
creepers; and Thou shewedest the highest luminous light in the great
ocean, at the time of Pralaya, tossed with surging waves and didst roam
there. Thou art the Self of all the beings in the universe. So we bow
down to Thee. Thus the Manu, the best of the mortal beings, used to
praise the Bhagavân, who took His incarnation in the shape of the Fish,
the Remover of all doubts. Manu, the foremost of the Bhâgavatas (the
devotees) is reigning there in the service of the Fish Incarnation of
the Bhagavân, with intense meditation and expurging all sins and with
great devotion.

 

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of the
division of the continents in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](bk08ch10.md)
