[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch22)  [Next](bk08ch24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIII**

 

**On the description of the remaining hells**

 

<span id="page_790">p. 790</span>

 

1-31. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! When persons, impelled by
sinful motives, always speak false at the time of giving evidence or at
the time of taking or giving money, they, after their death, go to the
terrible hell, named Avîchi. There, from the summit of a mountain, one
hundred

 

<span id="page_791">p. 791</span>

 

Yojanas high they are dropped at once down below with their heads
inverted down. Here the solid ground looks like water and appears like
waves. Therefore it is called Avîchi, resembling like Avîchi waves. Here
if the sinner’s body be cut to small pieces, still he does not die;
rather he gets a new body when his body is all cut to pieces. O Son of
Brahmâ! When a man, be he a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, K<u>s</u>attriya, or a
Vais’ya, drinks the Soma (wine) or due to inadvertence drinks wine, he
is thrown into this hell. O Muni! The Yama’s servants make him drink the
molten iron. When a vile person being maddened by the pride of his
self-learning, birth, austerities or Vârna and Âs’rama, does not pay his
respect duly to his superiors, he is thrown into the K<u>s</u>ârakardama
hell with his head downwards. He suffers a tremendous pain there. When a
man or woman out of delusion, performs the human sacrifices (where men
are immolated as victims), he or she has to eat the human flesh here.
Those that killed before all sorts of beasts, come after their death
into this abode of Yama, all united and like butchers, cut each other’s
flesh by pickaxes, etc., and drink their blood and dance and sing
repeatedly. They do, in fact, what the terrible Râk<u>s</u>asas do. When
persons meet with the innocent persons, wishing to live in villages or
forests and raise their confidence by various such means and make them
attached and finally pierce them by pointed S’ûlas (trident) or pointed
swords and kill them as if they were ordinary play things, they are
taken after their death by the Yama dûtas and thrown into S’ûlâdi Naraka
(pierced by S’ûlas). They are pierced there by S’ûlas and become
overpowered by hunger and thirst. Herons and cranes, with their sharp
beaks hunt after them to and fro. Thus tormented, they remember all
their sins done in their previous lives. Those who follow stray paths
and trouble the other beings as the serpents do, they fall into the
Dandas’ûka hell. Here worms with five faces and seven faces come from
all sides and eat them as a fierce serpent devours a mouse. Those who
confine persons in dark holes, a dark room or a dark cave they are taken
by the Death servants with their arms uplifted and confined to similar
dark caves, filled with poison, fire and smoke. When a Brâhmi<u>n</u>
householder, seeing a guest coming to his house in a reasonable (proper)
time, casts a furious sinful glance at him as if to burn him, the
Death’s attendants, the herons with thunderbolt like beaks, the crows
and the Va<u>t</u>as and other birds and very fierce vultures all come
and forcibly take out the eyes of that person who committed the
aforesaid sins. When person elated with vanity of his riches become too
haughty and doubt over their Gurus and when their hearts and faces
wither withal away, as it were, with the thoughts of their income and
expenditure, and being always unhappy, hoard up money always like the
Brahmâ Pis’âchas, the

 

<span id="page_792">p. 792</span>

 

Death’s officers take them for these Karmas to Sûchimukha Narakas and
pierce all over his body with pins, as a tailor does with his cloth. O
Devar<u>s</u>i! True, sinful persons thus suffer hundred thousand hells.
All these are very painful and tormenting. Out of these the abovenamed
twenty hells give the greatest sufferings. O Devar<u>s</u>i! The sinners
suffer various pains in hells and virtuous persons go to the several
spheres where all sorts of happinesses and pleasures reign. O
Mahar<u>s</u>i! I have described to you many forms of practising one’s
Sva Dharma; yet know this verily that the worship of the Devî’s Gross
Form and of Her Virât Form is the Chief Dharma of all the persons. By
worshipping the Devî, the persons have not to go to the hells. In fact,
when the Devî Bhagavatî is worshipped, She Herself arranges for crossing
the person to the other shore of this ocean of transmigration of
existence.

 

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description
of the remaining hells in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](bk08ch24.md)
