[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch05)  [Next](bk08ch07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VI**

** **

**On the rivers and the mountains Sumeru and others**

 

<span id="page_752">p. 752</span>

 

1-32. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! This Aru<u>n</u>odâ river that
I mentioned to you rises from the Mandara mountain and flows by the east
of Ilâvar<u>s</u>a. The Pavana Deva (the God of wind) takes up the nice
smell from the bodies of the wives of the Yak<u>s</u>as and Gandharbas,
etc., and the attendants of the Devî Bhavânî and keeps the surroundings
of the earth there filled with nice smell for ten Yoyanas around. Again
the rose-apples with their nuts, of the size of an elephant, fall down
upon the earth from the high peaks of the mountain Mandara and break
into pieces; the sweet scented juices flow down as a river. This is
called the Jambû river and this flows by the south of Ilâvar<u>s</u>a.
The Devî Bhagavatî there is pleased with the Juice of that rose-apple
(Jambû) and is known by the name of Jambâdinî. The Devas, Nâgas, and
Ri<u>s</u>is all always worship with great devotion, the lotus-feet of
the merciful Devî, wishing the welfare of all the Jîvas. The mere
remembering of the name of the Devî destroys all the disease, and all
the sins of the sinner. Therefore the Devas always worship and chant the
names of the Devî, the Remover of all obstacles. She is installed on
both the banks of the Jambû river. If men recite Her names
Kokilâk<u>s</u>î, Karu<u>n</u>â, Kâmapûjîtâ, Ka<u>t</u>horavigrahâ,
Devapûjyâ, Dhanyâ, Gavastinî and worship, so they get their welfare both
in this world and in the next. With the juice of the Jambû fruit aided
by the combination of the wind and the rays of the Sun, is created the
gold. Out of this are made the ornaments for the wives of the Immortals
and the Vidyâdharas. This gold, created by the Daiva, is known by the
name of the Jâmbûnada gold. The love-stricken Devas make their crowns,
waist bands and armlets out of this gold for their sweet-hearts. There
is a big Kadamba tree on the mountain Supars'va; the five streams of
honey called Madhu Dhârâ get

 

<span id="page_753">p. 753</span>

 

out from its cavities and running by the west of Ilãvrita Var<u>s</u>a,
flow over the land. The Devas drink its waters; and their mouths become
filled with the sweet fragrance. The air carries this sweet fragrant
smell to a distance of even one hundred Yoyanas. The Dhâres'varî Mahâ
Devî dwells there, the Fulfiller of the desires of the Bhaktas, highly
energetic, of the nature of Kâla (the Time, the Destroyer), and having
large face (Mahânanâ), faces everywhere, worshipped by the Devas and is
the presiding Deity of the woods and forests all around. The Devî, the
Lady of the Devas, is to be worshipped by the names “Karâla Dehâ,”
“Kâlâmgî”, “Kâmako<u>t</u>ipravartinî”. The great Banyan tree named
S'atabala is situated on the top of the Kumud mountain. From its trunk
many big rivers take their origin. These rivers possess such influences
as to give to the holy persons there, the milk, curd, honey, clarified
butter, raw sugar, rice, clothing, ornaments, seats, and beddings, etc.,
whatever they desire. Therefore these rivers are called Kâmadugh. They
come gradually down the earth and flow by the north of Ilâvar<u>s</u>a.
The Bhagavatî Mînâk<u>s</u>i dwell there and is worshipped by the Suras
and the Asuras alike. That Deity clothed blue, of fearful countenance,
and ornamented with hairs of blue colour, always fulfil the desires of
the Devas dwelling in the Heavens. Those that worship Her, remember Her
or praise Her by the names Atimânyâ, Atipûjyâ, Mattamâta<u>n</u>ga
Gâminî, Madanonmâdinî, Mânapriyâ, Mânapriyatarâ, Mârabegadharâ,
Marapûjitâ, Mâramâdinî, Mayûravaras'obhâdhyâ, S'ikhivâhanagarbhabhû,
etc., are honoured by the Deity Mînalochanâ Ekângarûpi<u>n</u>î and the
Parames'vara and get all sorts of happiness. Those drink the clear
waters of these rivers become free from old age or decay, worry,
perspiration, bad smell, from any disease, or premature death. They do
not suffer anything from error, from cold, heat, or rains, or from any
paleness in their colour. They enjoy extreme happiness as long as they
live and no dangers come to them. O Child! Now hear the names of the
other twenty mountains that encircle the Golden Sumeru mountain at its
base, as if they were the filaments round the pericarp of a flower. The
first is Kura<u>n</u>ga; they come in order Kuraga, Kus'umbha,
Vikankata, Trikû<u>t</u>a, S'is'ira, Patanga, Ruchaka, Ni<u>s</u>adha,
S'itîvâsa, Kapila, S'amkha, Vaidûrya, Chârudhi, Hamsa, Ri<u>s</u>abha,
Naga, Kâlanjara and lastly Nârada. The central one is the twentieth.

 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the rivers and the
mountains Sumeru and others in the Mahâpura<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](bk08ch07.md)
