[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch06)  [Next](bk08ch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On the** **Ganges** **and the Var<u>s</u>as**

 

<span id="page_754">p. 754</span>

 

1-37. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Ja<u>t</u>hara and Devakûta are the two
mountains situated on the east of Sumeru; their dimensions towards the
north are eighteen thousand Yoyanas wide and two thousand Yoyanas high.
On the west of Meru, are situated the two famous lofty mountains
Pavamâna and Pâriyâtra; their length and height are well known. On the
south of Meru are situated the two lofty mountains Kailâsa and Karavira.
On the north, again, of the Sumeru mountain, are situated the mountains
S'ri<u>n</u>gagiri and Makaragiri. Thus the golden Sumeru mountain,
shines like the Sun, surrounded by these eight mountains. In the centre
of the Sumeru, there is a Divine city built of the Creator Brahmâ, ten
thousand Yoyanas in dimensions. The learned sages that know everything
from the highest to the lowest, describe that as square in dimensions
and all made of gold. On the top of the Sumeru, are situated the  world
known eight golden cities, subservient to the Brahmapurî, for the eight
Lokapâlas. The Lords of the four directions, east, west, north and south
and of the four corners, north-east, north-west, south-west, south-east,
occupy these. The dimensions of each of these eight cities are two
thousand Yoyanas and a half. In fact, there are nine cities there
including the Brahmapurî. Now hear the names of these nine cities in due
order. The First is Manovatî, the second is Amarâvatî, the third is
Tejovatî, next come in order Samyamanî, Kri<u>sn</u>ânganâ,
S'raddhâvatî, Gandhavatî, and Mahodayâ, the ninth is Yas'ovatî. The
Lords of the Purîs are Brahmâ, Indra, Fire and the other Dikpâlas in due
order. When Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân assumed the Tri Vikrama Form in His
Dwarf Incarnation and went at the sacrifice, to get back the Kingdom of
the Heavens from the demon Vali, there was created one hole or cavity
over this Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a Ka<u>t</u>âha (skull) by the nails of the
toes of that foot that went up towards his left; and through that
cavity, the famous river Bhagavatî Gangâ flowed on the top of those
heavenly Kingdoms, the clear waters of which are ever ready to destroy
the sins of the whole people. For this reason, She is known in the three
Lokas as the Vi<u>sn</u>upadî manifested. This took place long long ago,
many thousand Yugas ago, a period difficult to determine. The Ganges
fell first on the top of the Indra's Heavens, near the place called
Vi<u>sn</u>udhâma, known in the three worlds. Here the pure-souled
Dhruva, the son of Uttânapâda, observed within his heart the lotus-feet

 

<span id="page_755">p. 755</span>

 

of Srî Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhagavân and exists still there taking refuge on
that immoveable position. There the high-souled Seven Ri<u>s</u>is,
knowing the highest purifying influence of the Ganges, circumambulate
the river, wishing for the welfare of all the Lokas. This is the great
place where one gets success, and final liberation, the success-giving
place of the ascetics and where the Munis with clots of hairs on their
heads daily take their dip in the Ganges with the greatest pleasure and
admiration. The Ganges flows thence from the Dhruva Man<u>d</u>ala, the
abode of Vi<u>sn</u>u, in Ko<u>t</u>is and Ko<u>t</u>is of Divine
Channels, interspersed with many Vimânas or carriages, deluges the
Chan<u>d</u>ra Ma<u>nd</u>ala (the Moon Sphere), comes gradually to the
Brahmâ Loka. Here She is divided into the four channels, Sîtâ,
Alakanandâ, Bhadrâ, and Chaturbhadrâ and irrigating many countries,
mountains, and forests ultimately falls in the oceans. The Sîtâ, the
famous Dhârâ, purifying all, while falling down from the Brahmâloka,
passes round the mountains that form as it were the filaments of the
flower-like Sumeru mountain, and falls on the top of the Gandhamâdana
range. Thence She, worshipped by the Devas, irrigates the
Bhadras'vavar<u>s</u>a and falls eastward into the salt ocean. The
second Dhârâ (stream), named Chak<u>s</u>u, getting out of the Malyavân
range, gradually gains strength and assumes great force and flows by
Ketumâlavar<u>s</u>a to the western ocean. The third Dhârâ (stream), the
very pure Alakananda, getting out of the Brahmâ Loka, passes through the
Girikûta mountain and other forests, falls to Hemakûta; next She flows
through the Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a and meets with the southern ocean. No
words can describe the glory and the purifying effect of this river;
suffice it to say that those who march out to bathe in this river get at
each of their steps, the fruits of doing the great sacrifices, Râjasûya
and As'vamedha, etc. The fourth Dhârâ of the Trailokyapavanî Ganga Devi,
named Bhadrâ, falling from the mountain S'ri<u>n</u>gavân, become swift
and capacious, flows by the Northern Kuru country and satisfying the
people there flows down into the ocean. Many other rivers, getting out
from the mountains, Meru, Mandara and others, flow through the various
Var<u>s</u>as or continents, but of all the Var<u>s</u>as, continents,
this Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a is called the Karma K<u>s</u>ettra (or the
field of actions). The other eight Var<u>s</u>as, though on earth, give
the pleasures of the Heavens. The reason for this is that when the
period of the persons’ enjoyments in the Heavens cease, they come and
take their birth in the one or other of these eight Var<u>s</u>as. The
people here live for ten thousand years; their body is hard like
thunderbolt and all are endowed with powers of Ayuta elephants. No one
is satisfied with a little of the pleasures of sexes; so all men live
happily with their wives, etc. It is not that the males alone are so
happy; the females also are

 

<span id="page_756">p. 756</span>

 

full of youth throughout their lives and become pregnant, when they are
less than one year old. In short, the inhabitants of the Var<u>s</u>as
enjoy for ever as the persons of Tretâ Yuga do.

 

Hear ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eighth Book on the story of the
Ganges and the continents in Srî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ Purânam,
of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk08ch08)
