[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch12)  [Next](bk08ch14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIII**

 

**On the description of the remaining Dvîpas**

 

<span id="page_769">p. 769</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- Thou, the Knower of everything! Describe about the
remaining Dvîpas, knowing which we will be highly delighted.

 

2-36. Nârâya<u>n</u>a spoke thus :-- The very vast Ghrita Sâgara (the
ocean of clarified butter) is encircling the Kus’a Dvîpa. Next to it is
the Krau<u>n</u>cha Dvîpa. It is twice as large as Kus’a. The
K<u>s</u>îra Sâgara (the ocean of milk) is surrounding this Dvîpa. The
Krau<u>n</u>cha mountain is standing here. The name of this Dvîpa is
derived from this mountain. In days gone by, the highly intelligent
Kârtikeya burst this mountain by his own prowess. This Dvîpa is washed
by the K<u>s</u>îra Sâgara; and Varu<u>n</u>a is its Regent. The son of
Priyavrata, Ghritapri<u>st</u>ha, respected by all and whose prosperity
knows no end, is the Lord of this Dvîpa. He divided this Dvîpa into the
seven parts and distributed them to his sons and named the Var<u>s</u>as
after the names of his sons. He made his sons the rulers of those places
and he himself took the refuge of the Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a The names
of the seven Var<u>s</u>as are respectively :-- Âma, Madhuruha,
Meghapri<u>st</u>ha, Sudhâmaka, Bhrâji<u>st</u>ha, Lohitâr<u>n</u>a, and
Vanaspati. O Nârada! The seven mountains and the rivers there are very
celebrated throughout the worlds. The names of the mountains are :--
S’ûkla, Vardhamâna, Bhojana, Upavarha<u>n</u>a, Nanda, Nandana, and
Sarvatobhadra. The names of the rivers are :-- Abhayâ, Amritaughâ,
Âryakâ, Tîrthavatî, Vrittirûpavatî, S’uklâ, and Pavitravatikâ. The
inhabitants there drink

 

<span id="page_770">p. 770</span>

 

the highly pure water of these rivers. The people there are divided into
four colours Puru<u>s</u>a, Ri<u>s</u>abha, Dravi<u>n</u>a, and Vedaka
and they worship the Bhagavân Varu<u>n</u>a, of the form of water. Then
they become very discriminative, and, with great devotion, and holding
full within their folded palms the water, repeat the following mantra
:-- “O Water! Thou art the essence Vîrya of the Person Bhagavâna and
Thou sanctifiest the Bhûrloka, Bhuvarloka, and Svarloka. Thou destroyest
the sins of all. We all are touching it; purify our bodies.” After
finishing their mantrams, they sing various hymns to Varu<u>n</u>a. Next
to the K<u>s</u>iroda Sâgara, is the S’aka Dvîpa, thirty two lakh
yoyanas wide, surrounded by the Dadhi Sâgara (the ocean of curds), of
similar dimensions. Here the most excellent tree named the S’aka tree
exists. O Nârada! The Dvîpa is named so after the tree. Medhâtithi, the
son of Priyavrata is the Lord of this Dvîpa. He divided this land into
the seven Var<u>s</u>as and distributed each to his seven sons
respectively; and ultimately he took refuge to the path of Yoga. The
names of the seven Var<u>s</u>as are Purojava, Manojava, Pavamânaka,
Dhûmrânîka, Chitrarepha, Bahurûpa, and Vis’vadhrik. In these
Var<u>s</u>as there are seven mountains, one in each Var<u>s</u>a, as
forming their boundaries; and there are seven rivers also. The names of
the mountains are :-- Îs’ana, Ûrus’ri<u>n</u>ga, Valabhadra, S’ata
Kes’ara, Sahasra-srotaka, Devapâla, and Mahâsana; the names of the
rivers are :-- Anaghâ, Âyurdâ, Ubhayaspri<u>st</u>i, Aparâjitâ,
Pañchapadî, and Sahasras’ruti and Nijadhriti. These seven rivers are all
very big and resplendent with lustre. The people are divided into four
classes :-- Var<u>s</u>as, Satyavrata, Kratuvrata, Dânavrata, and
A<u>n</u>uvrata. They all take the Prâ<u>n</u>ayâma exercise and thereby
bring the Râjas, and Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a under their subjection and they
worship Hari, of the nature of Prâ<u>n</u>a Vayu, Higher than the
Highest. Their mantra is this :-- “He has entered into all the living
beings and nourishes them by the Prâ<u>n</u>a and other faculties; He is
the Internal Ruler of all and the Supreme Controller; this Universe is
under His control; let Him protect and nourish us.” O Nârada! Next to
this Dadhi Sâgara is Pu<u>s</u>kara Dvîpa; it is twice as large as S’âka
Dvîpa. It is surrounded by the Dudha Sâgar (the ocean of milk) all twice
as large. The leaves of Pu<u>s</u>kara tree that shines in the
Pu<u>s</u>kara Dvîpa, are fiery like golden flames; they are as clean
and pure. Crores and crores of leaves, golden in colour ornament this
Tree. Vâsudeva, the Guru of all the Lokas, has created this
Pu<u>s</u>kara Dvîpa as the seat of Parame<u>st</u>hî Brahmâ, possessed
of six extraordinary powers, for the purpose of creation. There is one
mountain in this Dvîpa; it is divided into two parts, named Arvâchîna
and Parâchîna. These form the boundaries of the two Var<u>s</u>as. The

 

<span id="page_771">p. 771</span>

 

mountain is one Ayuta Yoyana high and one Ayuta Yoyana wide. There are
four cities on the four sides. Indra and the three other Lokapâlas are
the lords of these cities. The Sun God comes out from their top and
circumambulating Meru, goes there again. The whole year is his Chakram,
circle of circuit; His path is Uttrâya<u>n</u>am and
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âya<u>n</u>am. Vîtihotra, the son of Priyavrata is
the lord of this island. He distributed the two Var<u>s</u>as amongst
his two sons, Rama<u>n</u>a and Dhâtakî. They rule over the two
Var<u>s</u>as named also after them. Like the inhabitants of the above
Var<u>s</u>as, the people also get powers of themselves and worship
devotedly the God seated on the lotus and follow such path of the Yoga
as leads them to the Brahmâ Sâlokyâ, etc. The mantra runs thus :-- “We
bow down to that One God, without a Second, of the nature of Peace, Who
is the Fruit of all the Karmas, Who is the seat of illumination of
Brahmâ, Who is established in Unity, and Who is worshipped by all the
Lokas.”

 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description
of the remaining Dvîpas in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](bk08ch14)
