[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch07)  [Next](bk08ch09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On the description of Ilâvrita**

 

<span id="page_756">p. 756</span>

 

1-11. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- In those Var<u>s</u>as, Vi<u>sn</u>u and
the other Devas used to worship always the Great Devî with Japam and
meditation and to chant hymns to Her. The forests there are ornamented
with all sorts of fruits, flowers and leaves, in all the seasons. In
those excellent forests, and on the mountains, in those Var<u>s</u>as
and on the clear waters interspersed with full blewn lotuses and
S'ârasas (cranes) and in those countries where varieties of mountain
trees are standing and where varieties of birds frequent and echo all
around, the people play in waters and engage themselves with a great
many pleasant occupations; and the beautiful women, as well, roam there
with the knitting of their eyebrows. The people there enjoy as they
like, surrounded by young women; Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Âdipuru<u>s</u>a
Bhagavân Himself, worships the Devî there, to shew his extreme grace to
all the inhabitants of the Navavar<u>s</u>a. The people also worship the
Deity. By worshipping the Devî only, the Bhagavân remains there in
Samâdhi, surrounded with Aniruddha and his other Vyûhachatu<u>st</u>aya
(the four forms). But in Ilâvrita Var<u>s</u>a, the Bhagavân Rudra,
originated from the eye-brows of Brahmâ, resides only with women. No
other person can enter there; for the Bhâvanî, the S'akti of Rudra has
cursed that any male entering there would be transformed into a female.
The Lord of Bhavanî, surrounded by innumerable women, remains here
engaged in the worship of the unmanifested unborn Bhagavân
Samkar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a. For the good of humanity, with intense
meditation, He worships His Own Turîya Form of the nature of Tamas, thus
:--

 

12-19. S'rî Bhagavâna said :-- “Obeisance to Thee! the Bhagavân, the
Great Puru<u>s</u>a, endowed with all the qualities (the principal six
Ais'varyas or prosperities), the Ananta (the Infinite) and to the
Unmanifested! We worship Thee, Whose lotus feet are the refuge of all.
Thou art the great storehouse of all the superhuman powers and the
divine

 

<span id="page_757">p. 757</span>

 

faculties of omnipotence, etc. Thou art always present to the Bhaktas.
Thou art creating all these beings. Thou givest Mok<u>s</u>a to the
Bhaktas and destroyest their attachment to the world and Thou bindest
Thy non-devotees in bondage to this world. Thou art the Lord. We worship
Thee. We are entirely under the control of the passions, anger, etc.,
and our minds are always attached to the senses; but though Thou art
always looking at this world for its creation, etc., Thy mind is not a
bit attached to it. So who will not turn to Thee, desirous to conquer
his self. Thou art appearing by Thy Mâyâ as one whose sight is ignorant;
Thou lookest dreadful with Thy eyes reddened with the drink of Madhu
(wine). By the touch of Thy feet, the mental faculties are very much
enchanted; hence the women folk of the Nâgas cannot in any way worship
Thee, out of bashfulness. The Ri<u>s</u>is say that though Thou art the
Only One to create, preserve and destroy, yet Thou art quite unconcerned
with them. Thou art Infinite and Thou hast innumerable heads. This vast
universe is like the mustard seed resting somewhere on one of these
heads, which Thou canst not feel even. The Mahat Tattva is Thy body
manifested first. It is built of Sattva, Raja and Tamo Gu<u>n</u>as.
Brahmâ has come out of this and I again have sprung from this Brahmâ and
am nurtured by the Sattva and the other Gu<u>n</u>as and with the help
of the Teja, created these elements and the senses. These Mahat Tattvas
and we all are controlled by Thy Extraordinary Form. Thou hast kept us
in our respective places by Thy Kriyâ S'akti as birds are kept duly by
the strings through them. Mahat Tattva, Ahamkâra, and the Devas,
elements and the senses, before mentioned all united create this
Universe by Thy Grace. Thy creation is very big and grand; for this
reason the gross thinkers, deluded by Thy power, never understand it.
This Mâyâ is the only means to get the Samsâra Nivritti, Mok<u>s</u>a,
the real Goal of man: and this Mâyâ, again involves them in the Karma
entanglements, very hard to get through. Coming in and going out, both
of these are Thy forms; so we bow down to Thee.

 

20-23. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Thus the Bhagavân Rudra, with His Own
persons in Ilâvrita Var<u>s</u>a used to worship the Devî and the
Sankar<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a, the Controller of all the Lokas. The son of
Dharma, well known by the name of Bhadras'rava and all the persons born
of his family and his attendants, worship thus the Devî. This form is
well known to all by the name of Hayagrîva and worshipped thus. All the
persons there worship Him with the intense meditation and Samâdhi and
realise Him thoroughly. Then they praise Him, according to due customs
and get the thorough Siddhis (success in getting extraordinary powers).

 

<span id="page_758">p. 758</span>

 

24-29. The Bhadras'ravâs said :-- Obeisance to Thee, the Bhagavân, the
Incarnate of Virtue, and to Him who destroys completely the desires,
attachments, etc., to worldly objects! Ho! How wonderful are the feats
of the Bhagavân! Death always destroys all, but people, seeing this,
seem not to see this. Seeing that the son meets with death, the father
desires to live long not for a virtuous purpose but for sense
enjoyments, what is called Vikarma. Those who are skilled in Jñâna and
Vijñâna say that this Universe that is seen is very transient. Moreover
those Pundits who are endowed with much Jñâna, see vividly the
transitoriness of this Universe. Still, O Unborn One! When practically
they come to deal with this, they all become overpowered with the
influence of Mâyâ. So Thy Pastime (Lîla) is wonderfully variegated.
(Instead of spending our time uselessly in discussing on S'âstras) we
bow down to Thee, and Thee alone. Thou art the Self-manifest Chaitanya.
Thou are not the object to be covered by Mâyâ. Thou dost not do anything
in the sort of creation, etc. Thou remainest simply as the Witness
thereof. Sill the Vedas declare that Thou createst, preservest and
destroyest the Universe. It is quite reasonable and nothing to be
wondered at. Thou art the Âtman of all. When the Pralaya (the time of
great dissolution) comes, the Vedas were stolen by the Daityas and taken
to the nether regions, the Rasâtala. Thou, in the form of Hayagrîva
(Horse-faced), rescued the Vedas and gave them to the Grandsire Brahmâ
who was very eager to get them back and understand their meanings. Thou
art the true Sankalap (resolve); we bow down to Thee. Thus the
Bhadras'ravâs praise the Haiyagrîva form of Hari and sing the glorious
deeds of Him. He who reads these narratives of the Mahâ Puru<u>s</u>a
(the high-souled personage) or he who makes others hear these things,
both of them, quitting their sinful bodies, go to the Devî Loka.

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the description of
Ilâvrîta in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, of 18,000
verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk08ch09.md)
