[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch18)  [Next](bk08ch20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIX**

 

**On the narrative of the Atala, etc.**

 

<span id="page_781">p. 781</span>

 

1-32. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Vipra! In the first beautiful region
Atala, the exceedingly haughty son of the Dânava Mâyâ, named Bala, is 
living. He has created the ninety-six Mâyâs. All the requisites of the
inhabitants are obtained by them. The other Mâyâvis know one or

 

<span id="page_782">p. 782</span>

 

two of these. None of them are capable to know all, as they are
exceedingly difficult to be carried out. When this powerful Bala yawned,
the three classes of women were produced, fascinating to all the Lokas.
They were named Pums’chalî (or unchaste woman) Svairi<u>n</u>î, (an
adultress) and Kâminî (a lovely women). When any man, beautiful and
lovely to them, enters into their Atala region, they, with the help of
the Hâ<u>t</u>aka sentiment (of love), generate in him, while in
solitude, the power to enjoy (copulate) and with their sweet smiles and
amorous lovely looks and with great caution embrace him thoroughly and
begin to converse with him and with amorous gestures and postures, and
thus please him well. When the people enjoy this Hâ<u>t</u>akarasa, they
think often and often, that they themselves have become gods, they have
become Siddhas and powerful like Ayuta elephants; being blind with
vanity and finding them endowed with powers and prosperity, they think
themselves so repeatedly and constantly. O Nârada! Thus the position in
Atala has been described. Now hear, the description of the second region
Vitala. Vitala is situated below the earth. There the Bhagavân Bhava,
worshipped by all the Devas, has assumed the name of Hâ<u>t</u>akes’vara
and is staying there coupled with Bhavânî, surrounded by His attendants
specially for the increase of the creation of Brahmâ. The river
Hâ<u>t</u>aki flows there and has Her origin from the essences (Semen
virile) of them both. Fire, augmented by the help of the wind, begins to
drink it. When the Fire leaves that, making a Phutkâra noise (i.e.,
blowing out air through the mouth), the gold, named Hâ<u>t</u>aka, is
created. This gold is very much liked by the Daityas. The Daitya women
use this gold always for their ornaments. Below Vitala is Sutala. It is
reckoned as of some special importance. O Muni! The highly meritorious
Bali, the son of Virochana lives here. The Bhagavân Vâsudeva, brought
down this Bali into Sutala, for the welfare of Indra. He assumed the
body of Trivikrama and gave to Bali all the wealth of the three Lokas,
all the Lak<u>s</u>mî went to him and installed him in the position of
the Lord of the Daityas. What more can be said than this, that what
prosperity, wealth and riches that Indra could not obtain, that S’rî
Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî Herself has followed Bali. Bali, as the Lord of
Sutala, has become entirely fearless, remains here upto this day and is
worshipping Vâsudeva. O Nârada! It is said by the high-minded persons
that when Vâsudeva Himself, the Controller of all, appeared as a beggar,
Bali gave him land, and, therefore, on account of making gift to a good
person, he acquired so much prosperity. But this cannot be reasonable.
For, it is not at all reasonable to cast the effects of making this gift
on Nârâya<u>n</u>a, O Nârada! Who is Self-manifest by His own
Extraordinary

 

<span id="page_783">p. 783</span>

 

Glory and Who is Himself filled with all Ais’varya (prosperity) and Who
can bestow the Highest Goal of life and other requirements of men. This
Nârâya<u>n</u>a is the Deva of the Devas; if anybody takes His name,
when in the greatest distress, he gets himself immediately freed from
the Gu<u>n</u>as, the cause of bondage due to his Karma. All persons
perform many Yogas and follow the paths advised by the Sâmkhya method,
with their minds directed to the All-Controller Bhagavân, to abandon all
sorts of troubles and miseries. O Nârada! Know that the Bhagavân does
not shew us His Favour when he gives us greatest wealth and prosperity.
For the wealth and riches are the offspring of Mâyâ and the source of
all worries, miseries and mental troubles; and one is liable to forget
the Bhagavân when one gets such a wealth. The Bhagavân is pervading all
this universe and is full of wisdom; and He is seeing always all the
ways and means; He took away, in the way of begging, rather cheated all
that Bali had, leaving only his body; and at last, finding no other
means, fastened him by the Varu<u>n</u>a Pâs’a (noose), threw him in the
middle of the mountain cleft (cave) and then has stationed Himself at
his door as a Door-keeper. Once, out of his extreme devotion, Bali did
not care at all for his difficulties, troubles, or miseries. Rather he
gave out that Indra, whose minister is Brihaspati had acted very
foolishly. For when the Bhagavân becomes very graciously pleased, he
wanted from Him ordinary wealth. But what will the wealth of the
Trilokas avail? It is a quite insignificant thing. Surely, He is an
illiterate and stupid brute who, for mere wealth, leaves the Bhagavân,
Who is the Fountain of all Good Wishes to the Humanity. My grandfather
Prahlâda, who was highly fortunate, who was devoted to the God and who
was always ready to do good to others, he did not ask for any other
thing than the servantship of God (the Dâsya Bhâva). When his powerful
father died, the Bhagavân wanted to give him unbounded wealth; but the
Bhâgavata (devoted) Prahlâda did not want that. None of us, who are
marked with so many deficiencies can know the nature of the Bhagavân
Vâsudeva, Whose omnipotence cannot be compared and all these manifested
worlds are but His Upâdhis (adjuncts, limitations). O Devar<u>s</u>i!
Thus Bali, the Lord of Daityas, the highly respected and renowned in all
the Lokas, is reigning in Sutala. Hari Himself is his Door-keeper. Once
the King Râva<u>n</u>a, the source of torment to all the people, went
out to conquer the whole world; and when he entered Sutala, that Hari,
ever ready to show Grace to His devoted, threw him at a distance of one
Ayuta Yoyanas by the toe of His foot. Thus by the grace of the Devadeva
Vâsudeva, Bali is reigning in Sutala, and enjoying all sorts of
pleasures, without any equal anywhere.

 

<span id="page_784">p. 784</span>

 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narrative of
the Atala, etc., the Pâtâlas in S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am, of 18,000 verses, by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](bk08ch20)
