[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch03)  [Next](bk08ch05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE EIGHTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

** **

**On the narration of the family of Priyavrata**

 

<span id="page_748">p. 748</span>

 

1-28. The Ri<u>s</u>i Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- The eldest son of
Svâyambhuva, Priyavrata served always his father and was very truthful.
He married the daughter of the Prajâpati Vis'va Karmâ, the exceedingly
lovely and beautiful Barhi<u>s</u>matî, resembling like him, adorned
with modesty, good nature and various other qualifications. He begat ten
sons, very spiritual and well qualified and one daughter named
Ûrja<u>s</u>vatî. This daughter was the youngest of all. The names of
the ten sons are respec-

 

<span id="page_749">p. 749</span>

 

tively :-- (1) Âgnîdhra, (2) Idhmajibha, (3) Jajñabâhu, (4) Mahâvîra,
(5) Rukmas'ukra (Hira<u>n</u>yaretâ), (6) Ghritapri<u>st</u>ha, (7)
Savana, (8) Medhâtithi, (9) Vîtihotra and (10) Kavi. The name “Agni” was
attached to each of the above names. Out of these ten, the three sons
named Kavi, Savana, and Mahâvîra were indifferent and dispassionate to
the world. In due time, these became extremely free from all desires and
they were proficient in Âtmavidyâ (Self-Knowledge). They were all
Ûrdharetâ (of perpetual chastity; who has subdued all their passions)
and took gladly to the Paramahamsa Dharma. Priyavrata had by his other
wife three sons, named Uttama, Tâmasa, and Raivata. These were all
widely known; each of them in due time became endowed with great prowess
and splendour and became the Lord of one Manvatara. Priyavrata, the son
of Svâyambhuva, the King-Emperor enjoyed with his sons and relations,
this earth for eleven Arvuda years; the wonder was this, that he lived
so long and there was seen no decay in his strength as regards his body
or his senses. Once on an occasion, the King observed that when the sun
appeared on the horizon and got up, one part of the earth was illumined
and the remaining part was enveloped in darkness. Seeing this
discrepancy, he thought over for a long time and exclaimed, “What! Will
the Darkness be seen in my kingdom, while I am reigning? This can never
be. I will stop this by my Yogic powers.” Thus thinking, the King
Priyavrata mounted on a luminous chariot, as big as the Sun, to illumine
the whole world and circumambulated round the earth seven times.
Whatever portion of the earth was trodden by the wheel on each occasion,
became an ocean. Thus the seven oceans had their origins. And the
portion of the earth, that was included within the ruts, became the
seven islands (Dvîpas). 0 Child! Now hear about the seven Dvîpas and the
seven Oceans :-- The first is the Jambu Dvîpa; the second is
Plak<u>s</u>a, the third is S'almalî; the fourth is the Kus'a Dvîpa; the
fifth is Krauncha; the sixth is the S'aka Dvîpa; and the seventh is the
Pu<u>s</u>kara Dvîpa. The second Dvîpa Plak<u>s</u>a is twice the first
Jambu Dvîpa and so on; each succeeding Dvîpa is twice as large as its
previous one. Now hear the names of the oceans. The first ocean is named
Ksâroda (the salt water ocean); the second is Ik<u>s</u>urasa (the
sugarcane ocean); the third is Surâ (the wine ocean), the fourth is
Ghritoda (the clarified butter ocean) the fifth is K<u>s</u>îroda (the
ocean of milk); the sixth is Dadhi Ma<u>nd</u>a (the ocean of curds);
and the seventh is that of the ordinary water. The Jambu Dvîpa is
surrounded by K<u>s</u>îra Samudra. The King Priyavrata made his son
Âgnîdhra, the lord of this Dvîpa. He gave to his Idhmajibha, the
Plak<u>s</u>a Dvîpa surrounded by Ik<u>s</u>u Sâgara; so he gave to
Jajñabâhu the S'âlmalî Dvîpa surrounded by Surâ Sâgara and he

 

<span id="page_750">p. 750</span>

 

gave the lordship of Kus'a Dvîpa to Hira<u>n</u>yaretâ. Then he gave to
his powerful son Ghritapri<u>st</u>ha the Krauncha Dvîpa surrounded by
K<u>s</u>îra Samudra and to his son Medhâtithi the S'âka Dvîpa
surrounded by Dadhima<u>nd</u>a Sâgara. Finally he gave to his
Vîtihotra, the Pu<u>s</u>kara Dvîpa surrounded by the ordinary water.
Thus distributing duly amongst his sons, the separate divisions of the
earth, he married his daughter, the youngest Ûrjasvatî to the Bhagavân
Us'anâ. In the womb of Ûrjasvatî the Bhagavân S'ukrâchârya had his
famous daughter Devayânî. O Child! Thus giving the charge of each Dvîpa
to each of his sons and marrying his daughters to the worthy hands, he
took to Viveka (discrimination) and adopted the path of Yoga.

 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Eighth Book on the narration of the
family of Priyavrata in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am, S'rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk08ch05.md)
