[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch29)  [Next](bk09ch31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXX**

 

**On the conversation between Sâvitrî and Yama and on the fruition of
Karmas**

 

<span id="page_918">p. 918</span>

 

1\. Sâvitrî said :-- “O Dharmarâjan! Kindly tell me in detail about
those works that lead the meritorious persons to the Heavens and various
other spheres.”

 

2-20. Dharmarâj said :-- O Child! He who gives rice and food to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as in India, goes to the S’ivaloka where he dwells with
great respect for years equivalent to the measure of that food. This
“Anna-dâna” (the giving of boiled rice and other eatables) is a great
dân (charity) and this can be done not only to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as but
to the other castes also, where similar results also follow. There is,
or will be, no other charity superior to this charity of anna (rice,
boiled it may be and other eatables). For here no distinction is made as
to what caste will get it or not, nor the discrimination of time, when
to give such a charity. O Child! Seats (Âsanas) given to the Devas and
the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, carry the donor to the Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka, where he
dwells for Ayuta years with great respect and love. Giving excellent
cows yielding milk to Brâhma<u>n</u>as take the donor to
Vi<u>sn</u>uloka, where he is glorified and remains for years equivalent
to the number of pores in that cow or those cows. And if cows be given
on a meritorious day, four times the merits accrue, and if given in a
sacred place of pilgrimage, hundred times the result occurs; and if
given in a tîrath, where Nârâya<u>n</u>a is worshipped, ko<u>t</u>i
times the results accrue. He who gives with devotion, cows to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as in Bhârata, remains in the Chandraloka for one Ayuta
years and is glorified. He who gives a two-mouthed cow to a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a, goes to Vi<u>sn</u>uloka and remains there for as many
years as there exist the numbers of hairs on the body of that cow and is
glorified. A gift of a beautiful white umbrella to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a
makes one go to Varu<u>n</u>aloka for Ayuta years where he remains with
great pleasure. Giving garments to the diseased Brâhma<u>n</u>as makes
one fit to remain with glory in Vayuloka for one ayuta years. Giving to
a Brâhma<u>n</u>a the S’âlagrâma with garments makes one remain with
glory in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha as long as there exist the Sun and Moon.
Giving a beautiful bedding to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a, glorifies a man in the
Chandraloka as long as there exist the Sun and Moon. To give lights to
the Devas and Brâhma<u>n</u>a glorifies a man in Ag<u>n</u>iloka (the
region of Fire) for one Manvantara. To give elephants to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as in Bhârata, makes one sit in the same throne with Indra
for his life period.

 

<span id="page_919">p. 919</span>

 

Giving horses to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as makes one remain in
Varu<u>n</u>aloka for fourteen Indra’s life periods. Giving a good
palanquin to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a makes one remain in the Varu<u>n</u>aloka
for fourteen Indra’s life-periods. Giving a good site or a good orchard
to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a leads one to the Vayuloka where he remains with
glory for one Manvantara. Giving a white châmara and fan to a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a, leads the donor to the Vayuloka where he remains for
one ayuta years. Giving grains and jewels make one long-lived and both
the donors and receivers go certainly to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha.

 

21-40. He who always recites the name of S’rî Hari, lives for ever and
Death goes far far away from him. The intelligent man that celebrates
the Swinging Festival (Dol Jâtrâ) in the last quarter of the Full Moon
night in this land of Bhârata, becomes liberated while living, enjoying
pleasures in this world, goes in the end to Vi<u>sn</u>uloka, where he
remains for one hundred Manvantaras; there is no doubt in this. If the
Swinging Festival be performed under the influence of the asterism
Uttara Phâlgunî then the fruits become doubled; this is the saying of
Brahmâ  Himself. The performer lives to the end of a Kalpa. To give til
(Sesamum) to a Brâhma<u>n</u>, leads one to S’iva Loka, where one enjoys
for a number of years equal to the number of til. Then one is born in a
good yoni and becomes longlived and happy. To give a copper plate yields
double the effect. To give in India a chaste wife with garments and
ornaments to a Brâhma<u>n</u> (and then to purchase her with an
equivalent in gold) leads one to Chandra Loka where one remains for
fourteen Indra’s life periods and enjoys day and night the celestial
Apsarâs. Thence the donor goes to the Gandharba Loka for one ayuta years
and day and night enjoys Urvas’î. Then he gets for thousand births
chaste, fortunate, wealthy, gentle and sweet-speaking, beautiful wives.
He who gives nice and delicious fruits to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, remains
with glory in the Indra Loka for a number of years equivalent to the
fruits. He gets again a good Yoni (birth) and gets excellent sons. To
give thousand trees while there are fruits on them, or nice fruits only
to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, makes one enjoy the Heavens for a long, long
time and he then comes back to Bhârata. To give various things and good
edifices with grains, etc., to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as leads one to the
regions of the Devas where he remains for one hundred Manvantaras. Then
he gets a very good birth and becomes the master of abundant wealth. He
who gives with devotion to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as lands certainly goes for
one hundred Manvantaras and remains there in glory for one hundred
Manvantras; and, coming again to be born in good wombs, they become
Kings. The earth does not leave him for hundred births. He becomes
prosperous, wealthy and possesses many sons and

 

<span id="page_920">p. 920</span>

 

becomes the lord of his subjects. He who gives a good village with
pasture land and cows, dwells with glory in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha for one
lakh manvantaras. Then he gets a good birth (becomes born in a high
caste family) and obtains a lakh villages. The earth quits him not even
if he be born a lakh times. (This is very bad then, to one who does not
like to be born again).

 

41-60. He who gives a village inhabited by good and obedient subjects
with ripe excellent grains, various tanks, trees and adorned with fruits
and leaves dwells in Kailâ<u>s</u>a with great glory for ten lakh
Indra’s life periods. Getting again born in a high family, he becomes
Râja Dhirâja in Bhârata and obtains Niyuta towns. There is no doubt in
this. The earth quits him not, even if he be born ayuta times. Really he
gets the highest prosperity in this earth. He who gives to a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a one hundred towns and countries, inhabited by good or
mediocre subjects, with wells, tanks, and various trees, remains with
glory in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha for one ko<u>t</u>i manvantaras. Then he
becomes born in this earth in a high caste family, becomes the Lord of
Jambudvîpa and attains in this earth great prosperity like Indra. The
earth quits him not even if he comes here Ko<u>t</u>i times; in reality
he is a Mahâtmâ (a great soul man), Râjrâjes’vara (the Lord of Kings)
and lives upto the end of a Kalpa. He who gives his whole property to a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, gets in the end four times that; there is no doubt in
this. He who gives Jambu Dvîpa to an ascetic Brâhma<u>n</u>a, gets
undoubtedly in the end one hundred times the fruit. If you give away
Jambu Dvîpa, the whole earth; if you travel all the Tîrthas, if you
perform all sorts of asceticisms, if you give shelter to all, if you
make gifts of all sorts, know that you will have to come again to be
reborn in this earth; but if you become a devotee of Mûla Prakriti, then
be sure that you won’t have to come here and be reborn. The devotees of
Mûla Prakriti go to Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa, the highest place of S’rî
Bhuvanes’arî Devî and remain there and they see the fall of innumerable
Brahmâs. The worshippers of the Devî Mantra when they quit their mortal
coils, assume divine appearances endowed with Bibhûtis (manifestations
of powers) and free from birth, death and old age, assume the Sârûpya
(the same form) of the Devî and remain in Her Service. They reside in
Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa and see the part Pralayas. The Devas die, the Siddhas
die, the whole universe vanishes; but the Devî Bhaktas never die and
they remain free form birth, death, and old age. He who offers Tulasî
leaf to Bhagavân Hari in the month of Kârtik resides for three yugas in
the temple of Hari. Getting again a good birth, he acquires the devotion
to S’rî Hari and becomes the Foremost of those who restrain their
senses. He who bathes in the Ganges early before the rising of the Sun
remains in enjoyment in the temple of Hari for sixty thousand yugas.
Getting again a good birth, he gets

 

<span id="page_921">p. 921</span>

 

the Vi<u>sn</u>u Mantra, and, quitting his mortal coil, becomes united
with the Feet of S’rî Hari.

 

61-77. He has not to come back from Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha to this earth. He
remains in Hari’s Service and gets the same form of Hari. He who bathes
daily in the Ganges, becomes purified like the Sun and gets the result
of performing the Horse-sacrifice at every step. The earth becomes
purified by the dust of his feet and he enjoys in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha as
long as the Sun and Moon exist. Then again he becomes born in a good and
beautiful womb, and is liberated by acquiring the devotion to Hari. He
becomes very energetic and the foremost of the ascetics, pure,
religious, learned, and self-restrained. When the Sun comes midway
between Pisces and Cancer and heats intensely the earth, the man who in
Bhârata gives cool water to drink to the people, resides in happiness in
Kailâs’a for fourteen Indra’s life periods. Getting again a good birth
here, he becomes beautiful, happy, devoted to S’iva, energetic and
expert in the Vedas, and the Vedangas. He who gives to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a
the S’aktu (sattu). in the month of Vais’âkhe enjoys in the S’iva temple
for as many years as there are number of particles in that quantity of
sattu (powders in parched oat). He who performs the Kri<u>sn</u>a
Janmâ<u>st</u>amî vow in this Bhârata, is freed from the sins incurred
in his hundred births; there is no doubt in this. The observer of the
vow remains in great enjoyment in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha for fourteen Indra’s
life periods, gets again a good birth here and acquires Hari Bhakti. He
who performs the S’ivarâtri vow in this Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a, resides
with great joy in S’iva Loka for seven manvantaras. He who offers the
Bel leaves to S’iva in S’ivarâtri time, resides with great joy in
S’iva’s Abode for as many yugas as there are number of leaves. Getting
again a good birth here, he acquires the devotion to S’iva and becomes
learned, prosperous and possesses sons, subjects and lands. He who
performs vow and worships S’ankara in the month of Chaitra or Mâgha and
who, with a branch of a tree in hand, dances day and night for one
month, or half a month, for ten days or for seven days, dwells in S’iva
Loka for as many yugas as the number of days he dances. He who performs
the vow of S’rî Râma Navamî, lives in the abode of Vi<u>sn</u>u for
seven Manvantaras in great joy. Getting again a good birth, he becomes
devoted to S’rî Râma, the foremost of those who have self restraint and
he becomes very wealthy.

 

78-87. He who performs the Sâradîyâ Pûjâ (the great Durgâ Pûjâ in the
month of autumn) of the Mûla Prakriti with incense, lights, offerings of
food, and animal sacrifices of buffaloes, goats, sheep, rhinoceros,
frogs or other animals, together with dancing, music, and various other
aus-

 

<span id="page_922">p. 922</span>

 

picious things, resides in the S’iva Loka for seven Manvantaras. Getting
an excellent birth, and a pure understanding, he gets unbounded
prosperity, sons and, no doubt, grandsons and he becomes a very powerful
sovereign possessing many horses and elephants. There is no doubt in
this. Again he who worships daily with devotion for a fortnight
beginning from the eighth day of the bright fortnight the Mahâ Devî
Lak<u>s</u>mî, remains in the region of Goloka for fourteen Indra’s life
periods. Then, obtaining an excellent birth, he becomes a sovereign. He
who in the full moon night in the month of Kârtik prepares a Râsa
ma<u>nd</u>al with one hundred Gopas and Gopis and worships S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a and Râdhâ in S’âlagrâma or in images with sixteen
varieties of offerings remains in Goloka for Brahmâ’s life-time and
coming again to Bhârata acquires an unflinching devotion to S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a.

 

88-99. And when this Bhakti becomes greatly intensified, ho gets
initiated into S’rî Hari mantra and after quitting his mortal coil, he
goes to the Goloka. Then he gets the Sârûpya (the same form) of
Kri<u>sn</u>a and becomes the chief Pâri<u>s</u>ad (attendant of
Kri<u>sn</u>a) and, becoming free from old age, he has no fear, to fall
again down to this earth. He who observes the Ekâdas’î day, remains
fasting and performing penances in the bright or dark eleventh day,
remains in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha in great enjoyment and comfort. Then, again
coming into this Bhârata he becomes a devotee of Hari. And when that
Bhakti is intensified he becomes solely devoted to Hari and quitting his
mortal coil, goes again to the Goloka and gets the Sârûpya of
Kri<u>sn</u>a and becomes His Pâri<u>s</u>ada (attendant). Then, freed
of old age and death, he does not fall. He who worships Indra in the
month of Bhâdra in the twelfth day of the white fortnight is worshipped
in the regions of Indra for sixty thousand years. He who performs in
Bhârata the worship of the Sun on Sunday Sankrânti (when the Sun goes
from one sign to another) and the bright seventh Tithi, according to due
rules and ceremonies and eats the food called Havi<u>s</u>yânna (rice
boiled in ghee), dwells in the Sûryaloka for fourteen Indra’s life
periods. Then coming to Bhârata, he becomes free from all diseases and
becomes prosperous. He who worships Sâvitrî on the fourteenth day of the
black fortnight dwells in the region of Brahmâ for seven Manvantaras
with great eclât and glory. Coming again to Bhârata he enjoys beauty,
unequalled valour, long life, knowledge and prosperity. He who worships
on the fifth day of the bright fortnight in the month of Mâgha, with his
senses controlled and full of devotion, the Devî Sarasvatî with sixteen
articles of food, resides in Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa for one day and one night
of Brahmâ.

 

100-140. On getting re-birth, he becomes a poet and a learned man. He
who daily gives with devotion for his whole life, cow and gold to a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a dwells in Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka for twice as many years as
there are

 

<span id="page_923">p. 923</span>

 

the numbers of hairs on the bodies of these cows and plays and jests
with Vi<u>sn</u>u and doing auspicious things he finds pleasure. In the
end he comes again to this Bhârata and becomes the King of Kings. He
becomes fortunate, prosperous, possesses many sons, becomes learned,
full of knowledge and happy in every way. He who feeds a Brâhma<u>n</u>a
here with sweetmeats goes to Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka and enjoys there for as
many years as there are hairs on the body of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>. In the
end he comes again to Bhârata and becomes happy, wealthy, learned, long
lived, fortunate and very powerful. He who utters the name of Hari or
gives the name (i.e., the mantra) of Hari to others, is worshipped in
Vi<u>sn</u>u loka for as many yugas as the number of times, the name or
mantra was uttered. Coming again to Bhârata, he becomes happy and
wealthy. And if such things be done in Nârâya<u>n</u>a K<u>s</u>ettra,
ko<u>t</u>i times the above results ensue. He who repeats the name of
Hari ko<u>t</u>i times in Nârâya<u>n</u>a K<u>s</u>ettra, becomes, no
doubt, freed of all sins and liberated while living and he will not get
rebirth. He lives always in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. He gets the Sâlokya (the
same region of Vi<u>sn</u>u), is not liable to fall, becomes a Bhakta of
Vi<u>sn</u>u. He who daily worships the earthen phallic symbol (after
making it daily) for his whole life, goes to the S’iva Loka and dwells
there, for as many years as there are the number of particles of earth.
Getting rebirth he becomes the King of Kings. He who worships daily the
S’âlagrâma stone and eats the water (after bathing it) is glorified in
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha for one hundred Brahmâ’s lives and becomes born again.
When he acquires the rare Hari Bhakti and quiting his mortal coil goes
to Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka, whence he is not to return. He who performs all
the Tapasyâs (asceticims) and observes all the vratas (vows), dwells in
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha for fourteen Indra’s life peroids. Getting rebirth in
Bhârata he becomes the King of Kings and then he becomes liberated. He
is not to return any more. He who bathes in all the Tîrthas and makes a
journey round the whole world, gets Nirvâ<u>n</u>a. He is not reborn. He
who performs the Horse-Sacrifice in this holy land Bhârata enjoys half
the Indraship for as many years as there are hairs on the body of the
horse. He who performs a Râjasûya Sacrifice, gets four times the above
result. Of all the sacrifices, the Devî Yajñâ, or the Sacrifice before
the Devî is the Best. O Fair One! Of old, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Brahmâ, Indra
and when Tripurâsura was killed, Mahâ Deva did such a sacrifice. O
Beautiful One! This sacrifice before the S’akti is the highest and best
of all the sacrifices. There is nothing like this in the three worlds.
This Great Sacrifice was done of yore by Dak<u>s</u>a when he collected
abundant sacrificial materials of all sorts. And a quarrel ensued on
this account between Dak<u>s</u>a and S’ankara. The Brâhmi<u>n</u>s

 

<span id="page_924">p. 924</span>

 

conducting the sacrifice cursed the Nandî and others. And Nandî cursed
the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Mahâdeva, therefore, disallowed the going on of
sacrifice and brought it to a dead stop. Of yore the Prajâpati
Dak<u>s</u>a did this Devî Yajñâ; it was done also by Dharma, Kas’yapa;
Ananta, Kardama, Svâyambhuva Manu, his son Priyavrata, S’iva, Sanat
Kumâra, Kapila and Dhruva. The performance of this sacrifice brings
fruits equal to performing thousands and thousands of Râjasûya
sacrifices. Therefore there is no other sacrifice greater than this Devî
Yajñâ. One becomes surely endowed with a long life of one hundred years
and is liberated while living. He becomes equal to Vi<u>sn</u>u in
knowledge, energy, strength, and asceticism. This is as true as
anything. O Child! This Devî Yajñâ is the best and highest of all the
sacrifices as Vi<u>sn</u>u is the highest amongst the Devas; Nârada,
amongst the Vai<u>sn</u>avas; the Vedas, amongst all the S’âstras; the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as amongst all the castes; the Ganges amongst the sacred
places of pilgrimages, S’iva amongst the Holy of Holies, the Ekâdas’î
vow amongst all the Vratas; Tulasî, amongst all the flowers; the Moon,
amongst the asterisms; Garu<u>d</u>a, amongst the birds; Prakriti,
Râdhâ, Sarasvatî and Earth amongst the females; the mind, amongst the
quick-going and restless senses; Brahmâ, amongst the Prajâpatis; Brahmâ,
amongst all the subjects; Vrindrâban, amongst all the forests; Bharat
Var<u>s</u>a, amongst all the Var<u>s</u>as; Lak<u>s</u>mî, amongst the
prosperous; Sarasvatî, amongst the learned; Durgâ, amongst the chaste;
Radhikâ, amongst the fortunate. If one hundred horse sacrifices are
performed, Indrahood is sure to be obtained. It is by the influence of
bathing in all the Tîrthas, performing all the sacrifices, observing all
the Vratas, practising all the austerities, studying all the Vedas and
circumambulating the whole earth, that this Highest S’akti’s service is
obtained and this service of S’akti is the direct cause of Mukti
(liberation). To worship the lotus-feet of the Devî is the best and
highest, is stated in all the Purâ<u>n</u>as, in all the Vedas, and in
all the Itihâsas. To sing the glories of Mûla Prakriti, to meditate on
Her, to chant Her Name and attributes, to remember Her stotras, bow down
before Her, to repeat Her Name, and to drink daily Her Pâdodoka (water
after washing Her feet) and the offerings already offered to Her, these
are approved of by all; and everyone desires this. So worship, worship
this Mûla Prakriti, Who is of the nature of Brahmâ, and, lo! Who is
again endowed with Mâyâ. O Child! Take your husband and live happily
with him in your home. O Child! Thus I have described to you the
fruition of the Karmas. This is auspicious to every human being, desired
by all and approved of by all. The Real Knowledge springs from this.
There is no doubt in this.

 

<span id="page_925">p. 925</span>

 

Here ends the Thirtieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the conversation
between Sâvitrî and Yama and on the fruition of Karmas in the Great
Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](bk09ch31)
