[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch04)  [Next](bk09ch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On Sarasvatî stotra by Yâjñavalkya**

 

<span id="page_824">p. 824</span>

 

1-5 Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I now describe the Stotra (hymn)
of Sarasvatî Devî, yielding, all desires that Yâjñavalkya, the best of
the Ri<u>s</u>is recited in days of yore to Her. The Muni Yajñavalkya
forgot all the Vedas out of the curse of Guru and with a very sad heart
went to the Sun, the great merit-giving place. There he practised
austerities for a time when the Lolâkhya Sun became visible to him,
when, being overpowered by great sorrow, he began to cry repeatedly; and
then he sang hymns to him. Then Bhagavân Sûrya Deva became pleased and
taught him all the Vedas with their Amgas (limbs) and said :-- “O Child!
Now sing hymns to Sarasvatî Devî that you get back your memory.” Thus
saying, the Sun disappeared. The Muni Yâjñavalkya finished his bath and
with his heart full of devotion began to sing hymns to the Vâg Devî, the
Goddess of Speech.

 

6-32. Yâjñavalkya said :-- “Mother! Have mercy on me. By Guru's curse,
my memory is lost; I am now void of learning and have become powerless;
my sorrow knows no bounds. Give me knowledge, learning, memory, power to
impart knowledge to disciples, power to compose books, and also good
disciples endowed with genius and Pratibhâ (ready wit). So that in the
council of good and learned men my intelligence and power of argument
and judgment be fully known. Whatever I lost by my bad luck, let all
that come back to my heart and be renewed as if the sprouts come again
out of the heaps of ashes. O Mother! Thou art of the nature of Brahmâ,
superior to all; Thou art of the nature of Light, Eternal; Thou art the
presiding Deity of all the branches of learning. So I bow down again and
again to Thee. O Mother! The letters Anusvâra, Vi<u>s</u>arga and
Chandravindu that are affixed, Thou art those letters. So obeisance to
Thee! O Mother! Thou art the exposition (Vyâkhyâ) of the S'âstras; Thou
art the

 

<span id="page_825">p. 825</span>

 

presiding Deity of all the expositions and annotations. Without Thee no
mathematician can count anything. So Thou art the numbers to count time;
Thou art the S'akti by which Siddhântas (definite conclusions) are
arrived at; Thus Thou dost remove the errors of men. So again and again
obeisance to Thee. O Mother! Thou art the S'akti, memory, knowledge,
intelligence, Pratibhâ, and imagination (Kalpanâ). So I bow down again
and again to Thee. Sanatkumâra fell into error and asked Brahmâ for
solution. He became unable to solve the difficulties and remained
speechless like a dumb person. Then S'rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Highest Self
arriving there, said :-- O Prajâpati! Better praise and sing hymns to
the Goddess of speech; then your desires will be fulfilled. Then the
four-faced Brahmâ advised by the Lord, praised the Devî Sarasvatî; and,
by Her grace, arrived at a very nice Siddhânta (conclusion). One day the
goddess Earth questioned one doubt of Her to Ananta Deva, when He being
unable to answer, remained silent like a dumb person. At last He became
afraid; and advised by Kas'yapa, praised Thee when He resolved the doubt
and came to a definite conclusion. Veda Vyâsa once went to Vâlmîki and
asked him about some Sûtras of the Purâ<u>n</u>as when the Muni Vâlmîki
got confounded and remembered Thee, the Mother of the world. When by Thy
Grace, the Light flashed within him and his error vanished. Thereby he
became able to solve the question. Then Vyâsadeva, born of the parts of
S'rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, heard about the Purâ<u>n</u>a Sûtras from Vâlmîki's
mouth and came to know about Thy glory. He then went to Pu<u>s</u>kara
Tîrtha and became engaged in worshipping Thee, the Giver of Peace, for
one hundred years. Then Thou didst become pleased and grant him the boon
when he ascended to the rank of the Kavîndra (Indra amongst the poets).
He then made the classification of the Vedas and composed the eighteen
Purâ<u>n</u>as. When Sadâ S'iva was questioned on some spiritual
knowledge by Mahendra, He thought of Thee for a moment and then
answered. Once Indra asked Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, about
S'abda S'âstra (Scriptures on sound). He became unable to give any
answer. So he went to Pu<u>s</u>kara Tîrtha and worshipped Thee for a
thousand years according to the Deva Measure and he became afterwards
able to give instructions on S'abda S'âstra for one thousand divine
years to Mahendra. O Sures'varî! Those Munis that give education to
their disciples or those that commence their own studies remember Thee
before they commence their works respectively. The Munîndras, Manus,
men, Dai<u>t</u>yendras, and Immortals, Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a
all worship Thee and Sing hymns to Thee. Vi<u>sn</u>u ultimately becomes
inert when He goes on praising Thee by His thousand mouths. So Mahâ Deva
becomes when

 

<span id="page_826">p. 826</span>

 

he praises by His five mouths; and so Brahmâ by His four mouths. When
great personages so desist, then what to speak of me, who is an ordinary
mortal having one mouth only!” Thus saying, the Mahar<u>s</u>i
Yâjñavalkya, who had observed fasting, bowed down to the Devî Sarasvatî
with great devotion and began to cry frequently. Then the Mahâmâyâ
Sarasvatî, of the nature of Light could not hide Herself away. She
became visible to him and said “O Child! You be good Kavîndra (Indra of
the poets).” Granting him this boon, She went to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. He
becomes a good poet, eloquent, and intelligent like Brihaspati who reads
this stotra of Sarasvatî by Yâjñavalkya. Even if a great illiterate
reads this Sarasvatî stotra for one year, he becomes easily a good
Pundit, intelligent, and a good poet.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on Sarasvatî stotra by
Yâjñavalkya in S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk09ch06)
