[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch25)  [Next](bk09ch27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXVI**

 

**On the narration of Sâvitrî**

 

<span id="page_905">p. 905</span>

 

1-2. Nârada said :-- I have heard the anecdote of Tulasî. Now describe
in detail the history of Sâvitrî. Sâvitrî is considered as the Mother of
the Vedas. Why was She born, in days gone by? By whom was She first
worshipped and subsequently also?

 

<span id="page_906">p. 906</span>

 

3-4. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Muni! She was first worshipped by
Brahmâ. Next the Vedas worshipped her. Subsequently the learned men
worshipped her. Next the King As’vapati worshipped Her in India. Next
the four Var<u>n</u>as (castes) worshipped Her.

 

5\. Nârada said :-- O Brâhma<u>n</u>! Who is that As’vapati? What for
did he worship? When the Devî Sâvitrî became adorable by all, by which
persons was She first worshipped and by which persons subsequently?

 

6-14. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Muni! The King As’vapati reigned in
Bhadrades’a, rendering his enemies powerless and making his friends
painless. He had a queen very religious; her name was Mâlatî; She was
like a second Lak<u>s</u>mî. She was barren; and desirous of an issue,
She under the instruction of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha, duly worshipped Sâvitrî
with devotion. But She did not receive any vision nor any command;
therefore She returned home with a grievous heart. Seeing her sorry, the
king consoled her with good words and himself accompanied her to
Pu<u>s</u>kara with a view to perform Tapas to Sâvitrî with devotion
and, being self-controlled, practised tapasyâ for one hundred years.
Still he could not see Sâvitrî, but voice came to him. An incorporeal,
celestial voice reached his ears :-- “Perform Japam (repeat) ten lakhs
of Gâyatrî Mantram.” At this moment Parâsara came up there. The king
bowed down to him. The Muni said :-- O King! One japa of Gâyatrî,
destroys the days sins. Ten Japams of Gâyatrî destroy day and night’s
sins.

 

15-40. One hundred Gâyatrî Japams destroy one month’s sins. One thousand
Japams destroy one year’s sins. One lakh Gâyatrî Japams destroy the sins
of the present birth and ten lakh Gâyatrî Japams destroy the sins of
other births. One hundred lakhs of Japams destroy the sins of all the
births. If ten times that (i.e., 1,000 lakhs) be done, then liberation
is obtained. (Now the method, how to make Japam). Make the palm of the
(right) hand like a snake’s hood; see that the fingers are all close, no
holes are seen; and make the ends of the fingers bend downwards; then
being calm and quiet and with one’s face eastward, practise Japam. Then
count from the middle of the ring (name-less) finger and go on counting
right-handed (with the hands of the watch) till you come to the bottom
of the index finger. This is the rule of counting by the hand. O King!
The rosary is to be of the seed of white lotus or of the crystals; it
should be consecrated and purified. Japam is to be done then in a sacred
Tîrtha or in a temple. Becoming self-controlled one should place the
rosary on a banyan leaf or on a lotus leaf and smear it with cowdung;
wash it, uttering Gâyatrî Mantra and over it perform one hundred times
Gâyatrî Japam intently in accordance with

 

<span id="page_907">p. 907</span>

 

the rules. Or wash it with Pañchagavya, milk, curds, clarified butter,
cow urine and cowdung, and then consecrate it well. Then wash it with
the Ganges water and perform best the consecrations. O Râjar<u>s</u>i!
Then perform ten lakhs of Japam in due order. Thus the sins of your
three births will be destroyed and then you will see the Devî Sâvitrî. O
King! Do this Japam, being pure, everyday in the morning, mid-day, and
in the evening. If one be impure and devoid of Sandhyâ, one has no right
to do any action; and even if one performs an action, one does not get
any fruit thereby. He who does not do the morning Sandhyâ and the
evening Sandhyâ, is driven away from all the Brâhmi<u>n</u>ic Karmas and
he becomes like S’ûdras. He who does Sandhyâ three times throughout his
life, becomes like the Sun by his lustre and brilliance of tapas. What
more than this, the earth is always purified by the dust of his feet.
The Dvîja who does his Sandhyâ Bandanam and remains pure, becomes
energetic and liberated while living. By his contact all the Tîrthas
become purified. All sins vanish away from him as snakes fly away at the
sight of Garu<u>d</u>a. The Dvîja who becomes void of Sandhyâ three
times a day, the Devas do not accept his worship nor the Pitris accept
his Pi<u>nd</u>as. He who has no Bhakti towards the Mûla Prakriti, who
does not worship the specific seed Mantra of Mâyâ and who does not hold
festivities in honour of Mûla Prakriti, know him verily to be an Ajagara
snake without poison. Devoid of the Vi<u>sn</u>u mantra, devoid of the
three Sandhyâs and devoid of the fasting on the Ekâdas’i Tithi (the
eleventh clay of the fortnight), the Brâhmi<u>n</u> becomes a snake
devoid of poison. The vile Brâhmi<u>n</u> who does not like to take the
offerings dedicated to Hari and who does the washerman’s work and eats
the food of S’ûdra and drives the buffaloes, becomes a snake devoid of
poison. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> who burns the dead bodies of the S’ûdras,
becomes like the man who is the husband of an unmarried girl. The
Brâhmi<u>n</u> also who becomes a cook of a S’ûdra, becomes a snake void
of poison. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> who accepts the gifts of a S’ûdra, who
performs the sacrifice of a S’ûdra, who lives as clerks and warriors
becomes like a snake void of poison. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> who sells his
daughter, who sells the name of Hari or eats the food of a woman who is
without husband and son, as well as of one who has just bathed after her
menstruation period, becomes like a serpent void of poison. The
Brâhmi<u>n</u> who takes the profession of pimps and pampers and lives
on the interest, is also like a serpent void of poison. The
Brâhmi<u>n</u> who sleeps even when the Sun has risen, eats fish, and
does not worship the Devî is also like a poisonless serpent. Thus
stating all the rules of worship in order, the best of the Munis told
him the Dhyânam, etc., of the Devî

 

<span id="page_908">p. 908</span>

 

Sâvitrî, what he wanted. Then he informed the King of all the mantras
and went to his own Âs’rama. The king, then worshipped accordingly and
saw the Devî Sâvitrî and got boons.

 

41-43. Nârada said :-- What is the Sâvitrî’s Dhyân, what are the modes
of her worship, what is stotra, mantra, that Parâs’ara gave to the King
before he went away? And how did the King worship and what boon did he
get? This great mystery, grand and well renowned in the S’rutis, about
Sâvitrî, I am desirous to hear in brief on all the points.

 

44-78. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- On the thirteenth day (the trayodas’i
tithi) of the black fortnight in the month Jyaistha or on any other holy
period, the fourteenth day (the chaturdas’i tithi) this vow is to be
observed with great care and devotion. Fourteen fruits and fourteen
plates with offerings of food on them, flowers and incense are to be
offered and this vow is to be observed for fourteen years consecutively.
Garments, holy threads and other articles are also offered and after the
Vrata is over, the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s are to be fed. The lucky pot (mangal
gha<u>t</u>) is to be located duly according to the rules of worship
with branches and fruits. Ga<u>n</u>es’a, Ag<u>n</u>i, Vi<u>sn</u>u,
S’iva and S’ivâ are to be worshipped duly.

 

In that gha<u>t</u> Sâvitrî is to be next invoked and worshipped. Now
hear the Dhyânam of Sâvitrî, as stated in the Mâdhyan Dina Sakhâ, as
well the stotra, the modes of worship, and the Mantra, the giver of all
desires. I meditate and adore that Sâvitrî, the Mother of the Vedas, of
the nature of Pra<u>n</u>ava (Om), whose colour is like the burnished
gold, who is burning with Brahmâ teja (the fire of Brahmâ), effulgent
with thousands and thousands of rays of the midday summer Sun, who is of
a smiling countenance adorned with jewels and ornaments, wearing
celestial garment (purified and uninflammable by fire), and ready to
grant blessings to Her Bhaktas; who is the bestower of happiness and
liberation, who is peaceful and the consort of the Creator of the world,
who is all wealth and the giver of all riches and prosperity, who is the
Presiding Deity of the Vedas and who is the Vedas incarnate, I meditate
on Thee. Thus reciting the Dhyânam, mantra and meditating on Her, one is
to offer Naivedyas (offerings of food) to Her and then place one’s
fingers on one’s head; one is to meditate again, and then invoke the
Devî within the pot. One should next present fourteen things, uttering
proper mantras according to the Vedas. Then one must perform special
pûjâ and chant hymns to the Devî and worship Her. The fourteen articles
of worship are as under :--

 

<span id="page_909">p. 909</span>

 

 (1) Seat (Âsan); (2) water for washing feet (Pâdya), (3) offering of
rice and Durba grass (Arghya), (4) water for bath (Snânîya), (6)
anointment with sandalpaste and other scents (Anulepana), (7) incense
(Dhûpa), (8) Lights (Dipa), (9) offerings of food (Naivedya), (10)
Betels (Tambûl), (11) Cool water, (12) garments, (13) ornaments, (14)
garlands, scents, offering of water to sip, and beautiful bedding. While
offering these articles, one is to utter the mantras, this beautiful
wooden or golden seat, giving spiritual merits is being offered by me to
Thee. This water from the Tîrthas, this holy water for washing Thy feet,
pleasant, highly meritorious, pure, and as an embodiment of Pûjâ is
being offered by me to Thee. This holy Arghya with Durba grass and
flowers and the pure water in the conch-shell is being offered by me to
Thee (as a work of initial worship). This sweet scented oil and water
being offered by me to Thee with devotion for Thy bathing purposes.
Kindly accept these. O Mother! This sweet-scented water Divine-like,
highly pure and prepared of Kunkuma and other scented things I offer to
Thee. O Parames’varî! This all-auspicious, all good and highly
meritorious, this beautiful Dhûpa, kindly take, O World Mother! This is
very pleasant and sweet scented; therefore I offer this to Thee. O
Mother! This light, manifesting all this Universe and the seed, as it
were, to destroy the Darkness is being offered by me to Thee. O Devî!
Kindly accept this delicious offering of food, highly meritorious,
appeasing hunger, pleasant, nourishing end pleasure giving. This betel
is scented with camphor, etc., nice, nourishing, and pleasure-giving;
this is being offered by me to Thee. This water is nice and cool,
appeasing the thirst and the Life of the World. So kindly accept this. O
Devî! Kindly accept this silken garment as well as the garment made of
Kârpâsa Cotton, beautifying the body and enhancing the beauty. Kindly
accept these golden ornaments decked with jewels, highly meritorious,
joyous, beauteous and prosperous. Kindly accept these fruits yielding
fruits of desires, obtained from various trees and of various kinds.
Please have this garland, all auspicious and all good, made of various
flowers, beauteous and generating happiness. O Devî! Kindly accept this
sweet scent, highly pleasing and meritorious. Please take this Sindûra,
the best of the ornaments, beautifying the forehead, highly excellent
and beautiful. Kindly accept this holy and meritorious threads an
purefied by the Vedic mantrams and made of highly holy threads and
knitted with highly pure knots. Uttering thus, offer the above articles
that are to be offered to the Devî, every time the specific seed mantra
being uttered. Then the intelligent devotee should recite the stotras
and subsequently of the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs (presents) with devotion
to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. The Radical or the Specific Seed Mantra mantra
is the eight lettered mantra Srîm Hrîm Klîm Svâitrai Svâhâ; So the sages
know. The Stotra, as stated in the Mâdhyandîna

 

<span id="page_910">p. 910</span>

 

S'âkhâ, gives fruits of all desires. I am now speaking to you of that
mantra, the Life of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Listen attentively. O Nârada!
Sâvitrî was given to Brahmâ, in the ancient times of old in the region
of Goloka by Kri<u>sn</u>a; but Sâvitrî did not come to Brahmâ loka with
Brahmâ. Then by the command of Kri<u>sn</u>a, Brahmâ praised the mother
of the Vedas. And when She got pleased, She accepted Brahmâ as Her
husband.

 

79-87. Brahmâ said :-- Thou art the everlasting existence intelligence
and bliss; Thou art Mûlaprakriti; thou art Hira<u>n</u>ya Garbha; Thou
didst get pleased, O Fair one! Thou art of the nature of fire and
Energy; Thou art the Highest; Thou art the Highest Bliss, and the caste
of the twice-born. Dost thou get appeased, O Fair One! Thou art eternal,
dear to the Eternal; thou art of the nature of the Everlasting Bliss. O
Devî, O Thou, the all auspicious One! O Fair One! Beest thou satisfied.
Thou art the form of all (omnipresent)! Thou art the essence of all
mantras of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, higher than the highest! Thou art the
bestower of happiness and the liberator O Devî, O Fair One! Beest thou
appeased. Thou art like the burning flame to the fuel of sins of the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as! O Thou, the Bestower of Brahmâ teja (the light of
Brahmâ) O Devî! O Fair One! Beest appeased. By Thy mere remembrance, all
the sins to me by body, mind and speech are burnt to ashes. Thus saying,
the Creator of the world reached the assembly there. Then Sâvitrî came
to the Brahmaloka with Brahmâ. The King As’vapati chanted this stotra to
Sâvitrî and saw Her and got from Her the desired boons. Whosoever
recites this highly sacred king of Stotras after Sandhyâ Bandanam,
quickly acquires the fruits of studying the Vedas.

 

Here ends the Twenty Sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the narration of
Sâvitrî in S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27](bk09ch27.md)
