[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch12)  [Next](bk09ch14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XIII**

** **

**On the anecdote of Gangâ**

 

<span id="page_855">p. 855</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- O Lord of the Devas! Kindly say in what Loka did
Gangâ go after 5000 (five thousand) years of the Kali Yuga?

 

2-4. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- The Bhâgîrathî Gangâ came down to Bhârata
under the curse of Bhâratî; and when the term expired, She went back, by
the Will of God, to the region of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. Also at the end of
the period of their curses, Bhâratî and, Lak<u>s</u>mî, too, left
Bhârata and repaired to Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Gangâ, Lak<u>s</u>mî, and
Sarasvatî, these three and Tulasî all these four are so very dear to
S’rî Hari.

 

5-6. Nârada said :-- How did Gangâ appear from the lotus feet of
Vi<u>sn</u>u? Why did Brahmâ put Her in His Kama<u>nd</u>alu? I have
heard that Gangâ is the wife of S’iva; how then, came She to be the wife
of Nârâya<u>n</u>a? Kindly describe all these in detail to me.

 

7-8. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Muni! In ancient times, in the region of
Goloka, Gangâ assumed the liquid appearance. She was born of the bodies
of Râdhâ and Kri<u>sn</u>a. So She is of the nature of both of them and
their parts. Gangâ is the presiding deity of water. She is unequalled in
Her beauty in this world. She is full of youth and adorned with all
ornaments.

 

9-43. Her face was like the autumnal mid-day lotus and sweet smile was
always reigning on Her lips; Her form was very beautiful; Her colour was
as bright as melted gold and She looked brilliant like the Autumnal
Moon. Eyes and mind get cool and become pleasant at Her beauty and
radiance; She was of purely Suddha Sattva; Her loins were bulky and hard
and She was covered with excellent clothings all over Her body. Her
breasts were plump and prominent; they were raised, hard, and nicely
round. Her eyes very fascinating, always casting sidelong glances. Her
braids of hair situated a little oblique and the garland of Mâlatî
flowers over it made Her look extremely handsome. The saudalpaste dot
and the vermillion dot were seen on Her forehead. On Her cheeks the
leaves of musk were drawn and Her lips were red like Bandhûka flowers
and they looked enchanting. Her rows of teeth looked like rows of ripe
pomegranates; the ends of Her cloth not inflammable by fire, worn in
front in a knot round the waist. She sat by the side of Kri<u>sn</u>a,
full of amorous desires, and abashed. She covered Her face with the end
of Her cloth and was seeing, with a steadfast gaze the face of the Lord
and She was drinking the nectar

 

<span id="page_856">p. 856</span>

 

of His face with great gladness. Her lotus face bloomed and became
gladdened at the expectation of a first amorous embrace. She fainted on
seeing the Form of Her Lord and a thrill of joy passed all over Her
body. In the meanwhile Râdhikâ came up there. Râdhâ was attended by
thirty ko<u>t</u>is of Gopîs. She looked brilliant like tens of millions
of Moons. Seeing Gangâ by the side of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Her face and
eyes became reddened with anger like a red lotus. Her colour was yellow
like champaka and Her gait was like a maddened elephant. She was adorned
with various invaluable ornaments made of jewels. Her pair of clothings
were tied round Her waist. They were decked with invaluable jewels and
not inflammable by fire (fire-proof). The Arghya offered by S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a was on Her lotus-feet of the colour of a flowering shrub,
Hibiscus mutabilis, and She was going slowly step by step. The
Ri<u>s</u>is began to fan Her with white Châmaras no sooner She,
descending from the excellent aeroplane decked with jewels, began to
walk. Below the point where the parting of the hairs on the head is
done, there was the dot of Sindura on Her forehead. It looked brilliant
like a bright lamp flame. On both sides of this Sindurabindu, the dot of
musk and the dot of Sandal-paste were seen. When She began to quiver
with anger, Her braid, with Pârijâta garland round it began to tremble
also. Her lips adorned with beautiful colours, began to quiver also. She
took Her seat angrily on a jewel throne by the side of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a. Her attendants took their seats in their allotted
positions. Seeing Râdhâ, S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a got up at once from His seat
with reverence and addressed Her, smiling and began to converse with Her
in sweet words. The Gopîs, very much afraid and with their heads bent
low, began to chant hymns to Her with devotion. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a also
began to praise Her with stotras. At this moment Gangâ Devî got up and
praised Her with various hymns and asked Her welfare with fear and with
humble words. Out of fear, Her throat, lips and palate were parched up.
She took refuge humbly at S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a's feet. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a
then, took Gangâ Devî on His breast when She became calm and quiet. At
this interval Sures'varî Gangâ looked at Râdhâ, seated on a throne,
lovely and sweet, as if She was burning with Brahmâ Fire. Since the
beginning of creation, She is the Sole Lady of innumerable Brahmâs and
She is Eternal. At the first sight, She looked young as if of twelve
years old. Nowhere in any Universe can be seen a lady so beautiful and
so qualified. She was peaceful, calm and quiet, lovely, infinite and
having no beginning nor end. She was auspicious, well endowed with all
auspicious signs, prosperous, and having the good fortune of having a
best

 

<span id="page_857">p. 857</span>

 

husband. She was the foremost jewel amongst the ladies and appeared as
if all the beauties were concentrated in Her. Râdhâ is the (left) half
of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a's body; whether in age or in strength or in beauty
she was in every way perfectly equal to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a.
Lak<u>s</u>mî and the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî both worship Râdhâ. The
excellent brilliance of Srî Kri<u>sn</u>a was overpowered by the beauty
of Râdhâ. Taking Her seat on the throne She began to chew betels offered
by Her attendants (Sakhîs). She is the Mother of all the worlds; but no
one is Her mother. She is fortunate, respected and proud. She is the
Ruling Lady of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a's Life and Soul and ever dearer to Him
than His Prâ<u>n</u>a (vital breath). O Devar<u>s</u>i! Gangâ, the
Governess of the Devas, looked at Her over and over again with a
steadfast gaze; but Her eyes and mind were not at all satiated. At this
moment, Râdhâ addressed smilingly to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Lord of the
world, humbly and in sweet words. O My Lord! Who is that Lady sitting by
Thy side, looking askance, eager and with a smiling countenance. She is
enchanted with Thy beauteous form and fainting away. Her whole body is
excited with rapturous joy. Hiding Her face with cloth She is frequently
looking at Thee. Thou also dost look on Her smilingly and with desires.
What are all these? Even during My presence in this Goloka, all these
bad practices are being rampant.

 

44-51. It is Thou that art doing all these bad things often and often!
We are female sex; what shall we do? We are naturally, of a very
pleasing temper, simple. I bore and forgave all these out of our love. O
Licentious One! Take Thy Beloved and go away quickly from this Goloka.
Otherwise these things will not bid fair to Thee. Firstly, one day I saw
Thee, united with Virajâ Gopî, in Chandana (Sandal wood) forest. What to
do? At the request of the S'akhîs, I did forgive Thee. Then, hearing My
footsteps Thou didst fly away. Virajâ, out of shame, quitted Her body
and assumed the form of a river. That is million Yojanas wide an four
times as long. Even to this day that Virajâ is existing, testifying to
Thy Glory (near Puri, Jagannâtha)! When I went back to My home Thou
didst go to Virajâ again and cried aloud “O Viraje! O Viraje!” Hearing
Your cry, Virajâ, the Siddha Yoginî arose from the waters, out of Her
Yogic power, and when She showed Thee Her divine appearance decked with
ornaments, Thou didst draw Her to Thy side and cast Thy seed in Her. It
is owing to the casting of that seed in the womb of Virajâ that the
seven oceans have come into existence!

 

52-107. Secondly, one day I saw Thee in actual intercourse with the Gopî
named S'obhâ! Hearing My footsteps, Thou fled'st away that day also.

 

<span id="page_858">p. 858</span>

 

Out of shame S'obhâ quitted Her body and departed to the sphere of Moon
(Chandra Man<u>d</u>al). The cooling effect of the Moon is due to this
S'obhâ. When S’obhâ was thus distressed, Thou didst divide Her and put
some parts to gems and jewels, part to gold, partly to excellent pearls
and gems, partly on the face of women, partly to the bodies of Kings,
partly to the leaves of trees, partly to flowers, partly to ripe fruits,
partly to corns, partly to palaces and temples, partly to purified
materials, partly to young and tender shoots and foliage, and partly to
milk. Thirdly, I saw Thee united with Prabhâ Gopî in Brindâban. Thou
fled'st away, hearing My footsteps. Out of shame, Prabhâ quitted Her
body and departed to the Solar atmosphere. This Prabhâ (lustre) is
fierce luminosity of the Solar atmosphere. Out of the pangs of
separation Thou criedest and didst divide Prabhâ and didst put some
parts in Fire, partly amidst the Yak<u>s</u>as, partly into lions, among
men, partly amongst the Devas, partly in Vai<u>sn</u>avas, partly in
serpents, partly in Brâhma<u>n</u>as, partly in Munis, partly in
ascetics, and partly in fortunate and prosperous ladies. Thou hadst to
weep then after Thou hadst thus divided Prabhâ, for Her separation and
and fourthly I saw Thee in love union with the Gopî S'ânti in Râsa
Man<u>d</u>alam. On the coming of the spring season, one day Thou with
garlands of flowers on Thy neck and with Thy body besmeared with sandal
paste and decked with ornaments, wast sleeping on a bed of flowers with
S’ânti Gopî, decked with gems, in a temple made of gems and pearls and
illumined by a lamp of jewels and Thou wast chewing the betel, given by
Thy beloved. Hearing My sound Thou fled'st away. S’ânti Gopî, too, out
of fear and shame quitted Her body and disappeared in Thee. Therefore
S’ânti is reckoned as one of the noblest qualities. Out of the pain of
separation, Thou didst divide the body of S’ânti and distributed partly
to forests, partly to Brahmâ, partly to Me, partly to S'uddha Sattvâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî, partly to Thy Mantra worshippers, partly to My Mantra
worshippers, partly to the ascetics, partly to Dharma, and partly to the
religious persons. Fifthly, dost Thou remember that one day anointing
all over Thy body fully with the sandal paste and good scent and with
garlands on Thy neck, well dressed, decked with jewels, Thou wast
sleeping with K<u>s</u>amâ (forgiveness) Gopî in ease and happiness, on
a nice bedding interspersed with flowers and well scented. Thou wert so
much over-powered by sleep after fresh intercourse that when I went and
disturbed, then Thou two didst get up from the sweet sleep. I took away
Thy yellow robes, the beautiful Muralî (flute), garlands made of forest
flowers, Kaustubha gems, and invaluable earrings of pearls and gems. I
gave it back to Thee at the earnest request of the S'akhîs. Thy body
turned black with sin and dire shame, K<u>s</u>amâ then quitted Her body
out of shame and went down to the

 

<span id="page_859">p. 859</span>

 

earth. Therefore K<u>s</u>amâ turned out to be the repository of best
qualities. Out of affection to Her, Thou didst divide Her body and
distributed them partly to Vi<u>sn</u>u, partly to the Vai<u>sn</u>avas,
partly to Dharma, partly to the religious persons, partly to weak
persons, partly to ascetics, partly to the Devas, and partly to the
Pundits (literary persons). O Lord! Thus I have described Thy qualities
as far as I know. What more dost thou want to hear? Thou hast many more
qualities! But I am not aware of them. Having thus spoken, the red-lotus
eyed Râdhâ began to rebuke Gangâ sitting by the side of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a with Her head bent low out of shame. At this time Gangâ,
who was a Siddha Yoginî came to know all the mysteries, and instantly
disappeared from the assembly in Her own water form.

 

The Siddha Yoginî Râdhâ came to know also, by Her Yogic power, the
secrets of Gangâ and became ready to drink the whole water in one sip.
Gangâ, knowing this intention of Râdhâ, by Her Yogic power, took refuge
of Kri<u>sn</u>a and entered into His feet. Then Râdhâ began to look out
for Gangâ everywhere :-- First She searched in Goloka, then
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, then Brahmâ-loka; then She searched all the Lokas one
by one but no where did She find Gangâ. All the places in Goloka became
void of of water; all turned out dried mud and all the aquatic animals
died and fell to the ground. And Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’iva, Ananta,
Dharma, Indra, Moon, Sun, Manus, Munis, Siddhas, ascetics all became
very thirsty and their throats became parched. They then went to Goloka,
and bowed down with devotion to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Who was the Lord of
all, beyond Prakriti, the Supreme, worthy to be worshipped, the Bestower
of boons, the Best, and the Cause of boons; Who is the Lord of Gopas and
Gopîs; Who is formless, without any desire, unattached, without refuge,
attributeless, without any enthusiasm, changeless, and unstained; Who is
All Will and who assumes forms to show favour to His devotees; Who is
Sattva, the Lord of truth, the Witness and eternal Puru<u>s</u>a and Who
is the Highest, the Supreme Lord, the Best and Excellent, the Highest
Self and the Supreme God. They began to hymn Him. All were filled with
intense feelings with devotion; tears of love were flowing from their
eyes and the bodies of all were filled with ecstasy, the hairs standing
in ends. He was Para Brahmâ; His Substance was made of Transcendental
Light, Who is the Cause of all Causes, who was seated in a wonderful
throne, built of invaluable gems and jewels, who was being fanned by the
Gopas with white chowries, who was seeing and hearing with great
delight, and smiling countenance, the dancing and singing of the Gopîs,
who was chewing the scented betel offered by Râdhâ and who

 

<span id="page_860">p. 860</span>

 

was residing in. the heart of His dearest S’rî Râdhâ, who was the
Perfect, all pervading, and the Lord of the Râsa Circle. The Manus,
Munis, and the ascetics all bowed down to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, no sooner
they beheld Him. Joy and wonder at once caught hold of their hearts.
They then looked at one another and gave over to Brahmâ the task of
communicating their feelings. The four faced Brahmâ, with Vi<u>sn</u>u
on His right and Vâma Deva on His left, gradually came in front of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a. Wherever He cast His glance in the Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>alam,
He saw S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, full of the Highest Bliss, of the nature of
the Highest Bliss, sitting. All have turned out Kri<u>sn</u>as; their
seats were all uniform; all were two armed and with flutes in their
hands; on every one's neck is the forest garland; peacock's tail was on
the top of everyone's crest and Kaustubha jewels were on all their
breasts. The Forms of all of them were very beautiful; very lovely and
very peaceful. No difference at all between them whether in form, or in
qualities, or in ornaments, or in radiance, in age, in lustre, in no
respect no one was inferior to another. No one was imperfect; no one was
deficient in lordliness. It was indeed very difficult to make out who
was the master and who was the servant. Sometimes He is seen in His Teja
form as the Great Light, and there is nothing else; sometimes there is
that Clear Divine Form; sometimes He comes Formless; sometimes with
form; and again sometimes both with and without form. Sometimes there is
no Râdhâ; there is only Kri<u>sn</u>a; And sometimes again in every seat
there is the Yugal Murti Râdhâ and Kri<u>sn</u>a combined. Sometimes
Râdhâ assumes the form of Kri<u>sn</u>a. So the Creator Brahmâ could not
make out whether S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a was a female or a male. At last He
meditated on S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a in his heart-lotus and began to chant
hymns to Him with devotion and prayed for forgiveness for his misdoings.
When S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a got pleased, the Creator, opening His eyes, saw
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a on the breast of S’rî Râdhâ. There were His
attendants on all the sides and the Gopîs all around. Seeing this,
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes'vara bowed down to Him and sang His
praises.

 

108-113. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî, the 
Omnipresent, Cause of all, the Lord of all, and the Internal Ruler of
all, knew their intentions and, addressing them, separately said :-- “O
Brahmân! Is it all well with you? O Lord of Kamalâ! Come here. O
Mahâdeva! Come here; let all be well to you. You all have come to me for
Gangâ. Gangâ has taken refuge under My feet out of fear for Râdhâ.
Seeing Gangâ by My side, Râdhâ wanted to drink Her up, However I

 

<span id="page_861">p. 861</span>

 

will give over Gangâ to the hands of you all; but you will have to pray
to Râdhâ, so that Gangâ becomes fearless of Her.” The lotus born Brahmâ
smiled at S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a's words and began to sing hymns to Râdhâ,
Who is fit to be worshipped by all. The Creator Brahmâ, the Compiler of
the Four Vedas, the Four-faced One praised Râdhâ with His Four heads,
bent low and addressed Her thus :--

 

114-125. Brahmâ said :-- “O Râdhe! Gangâ, appeared from Thee and the
Lord S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. Both of you were transformed before into the
liquid forms in the Râ<u>s</u>â Ma<u>nd</u>alam, on hearing the music of
S'ankara. And That Lquid Form is Gangâ. So She is born of Thee and S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a. Hence She is like Thy daughter and to be loved as such.
She will be initiated in Thy Mantra and She will worship Thee. The four
armed Lord of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha will be Her husband. And when She will
appear in parts on earth, the Salt Ocean will be Her husband. O Mother!
The Gangâ that dwells in Goloka, is dwelling everywhere. O Governess of
the Devas! Thou art Her mother; and She is always Thy Self born
daughter.” Hearing thus, the words of Brahmâ, Râdhâ gave Her assent
towards the protection of Gangâ. And then Gangâ appeared from the
toe-tip of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. The liquid Gangâ, then, assumed Her own
form and, getting up from water, was received with great honour by the
Devas. Bhagavân Brahmâ took a little of that Ganges water in His
Kama<u>nd</u>alu and Bhagavân Mahâdeva kept some of it in His own head.

 

The lotus born Brahmâ, then, initiated Gangâ into the Râdhâ Mantra and
gave Her instructions, Râdhâ Stotra (hymn of Râdhâ) according to the
Sâma Veda, Râdhâ Kavacha (protection mantras), Râdhâ Dhyân (meditation
on Râdhâ), method of worship of Râdhâ, and Râdhâ's
pura<u>s</u>chara<u>n</u>a. Gangâ worshipped Râdhâ according to those
instructions and went to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. O Muni! Lak<u>s</u>mî,
Sarasvatî, Gangâ, and the world purifying Tulasî, these four became the
wives of Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Kri<u>sn</u>a, then, smiled and explained to
Brahmâ the history of Time, hardly to be comprehended by others. He then
spoke :-- “O Brahmâ! O Vi<u>sn</u>u! O Mahes'vara! Now you better take
Gangâ and I will now tell you what a change has been effected by this
time. Hear.

 

126-136. You, the three Devas, the other Devas, Munis, Manus, Siddhas,
and other Mahâtmâs that are present here, are living now. For this
region of Goloka is not affected by Kâla (Time). Now the Kalpa is going
to expire. So in the other regions than Goloka and Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, the
Brahmâs, etc., that were existing in all other Universes, have all now
dissolved in My Body. O Lotus-born! Save Goloka and Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha,
all are now under water, the pre-state of earth. Better go and create
your own

 

<span id="page_862">p. 862</span>

 

Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as and Gangâ will go to that newly created
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a. I will also create other worlds and the Brahmâs
thereof. Now you all better go with the Devas and do your own works
respectively. You have waited here for a long interval. As many Brahmâs
that have fallen all appear again.” Thus saying S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the
Lord of Râdhâ went to His Inner Chamber. The Devas also instantly
retired from that spot and engaged themselves earnestly in the creation
work. Gangâ remained as before till then in the region of Goloka,
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, S’ivaloka, Brahmâ-loka, and in other places, by the
command of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. She is named Vi<u>sn</u>upadî, because
She appeared from the feet of Vi<u>sn</u>u. Thus I have described to you
this pleasant, essential story of Gangâ, leading to liberation. What
more do you now want to hear? Say.

 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter on the anecdote of Gangâ in the Ninth
Book in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses
by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](bk09ch14.md)
