[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch43)  [Next](bk09ch45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLIV**

 

**On the story of Svadhâ Devî in the discourse between Nârada and
Nârâya<u>n</u>a**

 

<span id="page_976">p. 976</span>

 

1-18. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said said :-- O Nârada! I will tell you now the
excellent anecdote of Svadhâ, pleasing to the Pitris and enhancing the
fruits of the S’râdh ceremony when foods are offered to the Pitris.
Listen. Before the creation, the Creator created seven Pitris. Four out
of them are with forms and the other three are of the nature of Teja
(light).

 

Note :-- Kavyavâhoanalah Somo Yamaschaivâryamâ tathâ, Agni<u>s</u>vâttâh
Barhi<u>s</u>adah Somapâ Pitri Devatâh. These seven Pitris are according
to the other Purâ<u>n</u>as. Seeing the beautiful and lovely forms of
the Pitris, He made arrangements for their food in the form of S’râddhas
and

 

<span id="page_977">p. 977</span>

 

Tarpa<u>n</u>as, etc. (funeral ceremony and peace-offerings), etc.
(S’râdh, solemn obsequies performed in honour of the manes of deceased
ancestors.)

 

Taking bath, performing S’râdh ceremony upto Tarpa<u>n</u>am
(peace-offerings), worshipping the Devas and doing Sandhyâ thrice a day;
these are the daily duties of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. If any
Brâhma<u>n</u>a does not perform daily the Trisandhyâs, S’râddha,
Tarpa<u>n</u>am, worship and the reciting of the Vedas, he becomes
devoid of fire like a snake without any poison. He who does not perform
the devotional service of the Devî, who eats food not offered to S’rî
Hari, who remains impure till death, is not entitled to do any karma
whatsoever. Thus, introducing the S’râddhas, etc., for the Pitris,
Brahmâ went to His own abode. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as went on doing the
S’râddhas for the Pitris, but the Pitris could not enjoy them and so
they remained without food and were not satisfied. They all, being
hungry and sad, went to the Council of Brahmâ and informed Him
everything from beginning to end. Brahmâ then created out of His mind
one daughter very beautiful, full of youth and having a face lovely, as
if equal to one hundred moons. That woman was best in all respects
whether in form, beauty, qualities or in learning. Her colour was white
like the white Champaka flower and her body was adorned all over with
jewel ornaments. This form was very pure, ready to grant boons,
auspicious and the part of Prakriti. Her face was beaming with smiles;
her teeth were very beautiful and her body showed signs of Lak<u>s</u>mî
(i.e., of wealth and prosperity). Her name was Svadhâ. Her lotus-feet
were situated on one hundred lotuses. She was the wife of the Pitris.
Her face resembled that of a lotus and Her eyes looked like water
lilies. She was born of the lotus born Brahmâ. The Grand-father Brahmâ
made over that daughter of the nature of Tu<u>st</u>i (Contentment) to
the hands of the Pitris and they were satisfied. Brahmâ advised the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as privately that whenever they would offer anything to
the Pitris, they should offer duly with the mantra Svadhâ pronounced at
the end. Since then the Brâhma<u>n</u>as are offering everything to the
Pitris, with the Mantra Svadhâ uttered in the end. Svâhâ is laudable,
when offerings are presented to the Gods and Svadhâ is commendable when
offerings are made to the Pitris. But in both the cases,
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â is essential. Without Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â
(sacrificial fee), all sacrifices are useless and worthless. The Pitris,
Devatâs, Brâhma<u>n</u>as, the Munis, the Manus worshipped the peaceful
Svadhâ and chanted hymns to Her with great love. The Devas, Pitris,
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, all were pleased and felt their ends achieved when
they got the boon from Svadhâ Devî. Thus I have told you everything
about Svadhâ. It is pleasing to all. What more do you want to hear? Say.
I will answer all your questions.

 

<span id="page_978">p. 978</span>

 

19\. Nârada said :-- “O Thou, the Best of the knowers of the Vedas! O
Muni Sattama! I want now to hear the method of worship, the meditation
and the hymns of Svadhâ Devî. Kindly tell me all about this.”

 

20-27. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- You know everything about the
all-auspicious Dhyân, Stotra, as stated in the Vedas; then why do you
ask me again? However I will speak out this for the enhancement of
knowledge. On the thirteenth day of the Dark Fortnight in autumn when
the Maghâ asterism is with the Moon and on the S’râddha day. One should
worship with care Svadhâ Devî; then one should perform S’râddha. If, out
of vanity, a Brâhmi<u>n</u> performs S’râdh without first worshipping
Svadhâ Devî then he will never get the fruits of Tarpa<u>n</u>am or
S’râdh. “O Devî Svadhe! Thou art the mind-born daughter of Brahmâ,
always young and worshipped by the Pitris. Thou bestowest the fruits of
S’râddh. So I meditate on Thee.” Thus meditating, the Brâhmi<u>n</u> is
to pronounce the motto (mûla mantra) and offer the Pâdyam, etc., on the
S’âlagrâma stone or on the auspicious earthen jar. This is the ruling of
the Vedas. The motto is “Om Hrîm, S’rîm, Klîm, Svadhâ Devyai Svâhâ.” She
should be worshipped with this Mantra. After reciting hymns to the Devî,
one is to bow down to the Svadhâ Devî. O Son of Brahmâ! O Best of Munis!
O Skilled in hearing! I now describe the stotra which Brahmâ composed at
the beginning for the bestowal of the desired fruits to mankind. Listen.

 

Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- The instant the Mantra Svadhâ is pronounced,
men get at once the fruits of bathing in the holy places of pilgrimages.
No trace of sin exists in him at that time; rather the religious merits
of performing the Vâjapeya sacrifice accrue to him.

 

28-36. “Svadhâ,” “Svadhâ,” “Svadhâ,” thrice this word if one calls to
mind, one gets the fruits of S’râdh, Tarpa<u>n</u>am, and Bali (offering
sacrifices). So much so, if one hears with devotion during the S’râdh
time the recitation of the hymn to Svadhâ, one gets, no doubt, the fruit
of S’râdh. If one recites the Svadhâ mantra thrice every time in the
morning, midday and evening, every day, one gets an obedient, chaste
wife begetting sons. The following is the hymn (Stotra) to Svadhâ :-- “O
Devî Svadhe! Thou art dear to the Pitris as their vital breaths and thou
art the lives of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. Thou art the Presiding Deity of
the S’râdh ceremonies and bestowest the fruits thereof. O Thou of good
vows! Thou art eternal, true, and of the nature of religious merits.
Thou appearest in creation and disappearest in dissolution. And this
appearing and disappearing go on forever. Thou art Om, thou art Svasti,
Thou art Namas Kâra (salutation); Thou art Svadhâ, Thou art
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, Thou art the various works as designated in the
Vedas. These the Lord of the world has

 

<span id="page_979">p. 979</span>

 

created for the success of actions.” No sooner Brahmâ, seated in His
assembly in the Brahmâ Loka, reciting this stotra remained silent, than
Svadhâ Devî appeared there all at once. When Brahmâ handed over the
lotus-faced Svadhâ Devî over to the hands of the Pitris, and they gladly
took Her to their own abodes. He who hears with devotion and attention
this stotra of Svadhâ, gets all sorts of rich fruits that are desired
and the fruits of bathing in all the Tîrthas.

 

Here ends the Forty-fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of
Svadhâ Devî in the discourse between Nârada and Nârâya<u>n</u>a in the
Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 45](bk09ch45)
