[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch17)  [Next](bk09ch19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVIII**

 

**On the union of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a with Tulasî**

 

<span id="page_873">p. 873</span>

 

1-26. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Thus highly pleased, Tulasî went to sleep
with a gladdened-heart. She, the daughter of Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja, was
then in her blooming youth and while asleep, the Cupid, the God of five
arrows, shot at her five arrows (by which one gets enchanted and
swooned). Though the Devî was smeared with sandal paste and She slept on
a bed strewn with flowers, her body was felt as if being burnt. Out of
joy, the hairs stood on their ends all over her body; her eyes were
reddened and her body began to quiver. Sometimes She felt uneasiness,
sometimes dryness; sometimes She got faint; sometimes drowsiness and
sometimes again pleasantness; sometimes she became conscious, sometimes
sorrowful. Sometimes she got up from her bed; sometimes she sat; and
sometimes she fell again to sleep. The flower-bed, strewn with
sandal-paste, appeared to her full of thorns; nice delicious fruits and
cold water appeared to her like poison. Her house appeared to her like a
hole in a ground and her fine garments seemed to her like fire. The mark
of Sindûra on her forehead appeared, as it were, a boil, a sore. She
began to see in her dreams that one beautiful, well clothed, humorous,
young man with smile in his lips, appeared to her. His body was
besmeared with sandal-paste and decked with excellent jewels; garlands
of forest flowers were suspending from his neck. Coming there, he was
drinking the honey of her lotus face. He was speaking on love themes and
on various other sweet topics. As if he was embracing amorously and
enjoying the pleasures of intercourse. After the intercourse he was
going away; again he was coming near.

 

<span id="page_874">p. 874</span>

 

The lady was addressing him, “O Darling! O Lord of my heart! Where do
you go. Come close.” Again when she became conscious, she began to
lament bitterly. Thus on entering in her youth, the Devî Tulasî began to
live in the hermitage of Badari (Plum fruit, it may signify womb. Those
who visit Badari are not to enter again in any womb). On the other hand
the great Yogi S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a obtained the Kri<u>sn</u>a Mantra
from Mahar<u>s</u>i Jaigî<u>s</u>avya and got siddhi (success) in
Pu<u>s</u>kara Tîrtha (sacred place of pilgrimage where one crosses the
world). Holding on his neck the Kavacha named Sarvamangalamaya and
obtaining the boon from Brahmâ as he desired, he arrived at Badari, by
Brahmâ’s command. The signs of the blooming youth had just begun to be
visible in the body of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a as if the God of Love
incarnated in his body; his colour resembled that of white Champakas and
all his body was decked with jewelled ornaments. His face resembled the
autumnal full moon; his eyes were extended like the lotus leaves. The
beautiful form was seen to sit in an excellent aerial car, made of
pearls and jewels. Two jewel earrings, nice and elegant, suspended upto
his cheek; his neck was adorned with Pârijâta flower garlands; and his
body was smeared with Kumkum and scented sandal-paste. O Nârada! Seeing
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a coming near to her, Tulasî covered her face by her
clothing and she, with a smiling countenance, cast repeatedly sidelong
glances at him and bent her head low abashed in the expectation of a
fresh intercourse. How beautiful was that clear face of her! It put down
the autumnal moon in the background. The invaluable jewelled ornament
were on her toes. Her braid of hair was surrounded by sweet scented
Mâlatî garlands. The invaluable jewelled wonderful earrings like the
shape of a shark were hanging up to her cheek. Extraordinarily beautiful
necklaces were seen being suspended to the middle of her breasts and
added to the beauty thereof; on her arms and hand were jewelled bangles
and conch ornaments; jewelled armlets and on fingers; excellent jewelled
rings were seen. O Muni! Seeing that lovely beautiful chaste woman of
good nature, S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a came to her and taking his seat
addressed her as follows :--

 

27\. “O Proud One! O Auspicious One! Who are you? Whose daughter are
you? You look fortunate and blessed among women. I am your silent slave.
Talk with me.”

 

28-30. That beautiful eyed Tulasî, full of love, replied to
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a with smiling countenance and face bent low :--  “I
am the daughter of the great king Vri<u>s</u>adhvaja. I have come to
this forest for tapasyâ and am engaged in this. Who are you? What
business have you to talk with me? You can go away wherever you like. I
have heard

 

<span id="page_875">p. 875</span>

 

in the S’âstras that persons born of a noble family never speak with
ladies of a respectable family in privacy.

 

31-71. Only those that are lewd, void of any knowledge in the Dharma
S’âstras, void of the Vedic knowledge and who are not Kulînas, like to
speak with women in privacy. And those woman, too, that look externally
beautiful but very passionate and the Death of males, who are sweet
tongued but filled with venom in their hearts, those who are sweet
externally but like a sword internally, those that are always bent in
achieving their own selfish ends and those that become obedient to their
husbands for their own selfish ends otherwise behaving as they like,
those that are filled inside with dirty things and outside looking
pleasant in their faces and eyes, whose characters are pronounced as
defiled, what intelligent, learned and noble-minded man can trust them?
Those women do not discriminate who are their friends or who are their
enemies; they want always new persons. Whenever they see a man well
dressed, they want to satisfy their own passions. And they pretend with
great care that they are very chaste. They are the vessels of passion;
they always attract the minds of others and they are very enthusiastic
in satisfying their own lust. They verbally shew that they want other
men to go away but at hearts, feelings for intercourse remain
preponderant; whenever they see their paramours in private, they laugh
and become very glad but externally their shame, knows no bounds. When
they do not have their intercourses with their paramours, they become
self-conceited; their bodies burn with anger and they begin to quarrel.
When their passions are satisfied fully, they become glad and when there
is a deficiency in that, they become sorrowful. For the sake of good and
sweet food and cold drinks, they want beautiful young persons, qualified
and humorous. They consider witty young persons clever in holding
intercourses, more dearly than their sons. And if that beloved one
becomes incapable or aged, then he is considered as an enemy. Quarrels
and anger then ensue. They devour these men as serpents eat rats. They
are boldness personified and they are the source of all evils and vices.
Even Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a remain deluded before them. They
cannot find out any clue of their minds. They are the greatest obstacle
in the path of tapasyâ and the closed doors for liberation. Devotion to
Hari cannot reach those women. They are the repositories of Mâyâ and
they hold men fast by iron chains in this word. They are like magicians
and false like dreams. They enchant others by external beauty; their
lower parts are very ugly and filled with excrements, faeces, of foul
scent and very unholy and smeared with blood. The Creator Bhagavân has
created them as such, the Mâyâ to

 

<span id="page_876">p. 876</span>

 

the Mâyâvis and the venom to those who want liberation, and as invisible
to those that want to have them.” Thus saying Tulasî stopped. O Nârada!
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, then smilingly addressed her as follows :-- “O
Devî! What you have spoken is not wholly false; partly it is true and
partly it is false. Now hear. The Creator has created this
all-enchanting female form into two parts. One is praiseworthy and the
other is not. He has created Lak<u>s</u>mî, Sarasvatî, Durgâ, Sâvitrî
and Râdhâ and others as the primary causes of creation; so there are the
prime creations: Those women that are born of their parts, are
auspicious, glorious and much praiseworthy. S’atarûpâ, Devahûtî, Svadhâ,
Svâhâ, Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â Chhâyâvatî, Rohi<u>n</u>î, Varunânî,
S’achî, the wife of Kuvera, Diti, Aditi, Lopâmudrâ, Anasûyâ,
Kau<u>t</u>abhî (Ko<u>t</u>arî), Tulasî, Ahalyâ, Arundhatî, Menâ, Tarâ,
Mandodarî, Damayantî, Vedavatî, Gangâ, Manasâ, Pu<u>st</u>i,
Tu<u>st</u>i, Smriti, Medhâ, Kâlikâ, Vasundharâ, Sa<u>st</u>hî,
Mangalacha<u>n</u>dî, Mûrti, wife of Dharma. Svasti, S’raddhâ; S’ânti,
Kânti, K<u>s</u>ânti, Nidrâ, Tandrâ, K<u>s</u>udhâ, Pipâsâ, Sandhyâ,
Râtri, Divâ, Sampatti, Dhriti, Kîrtî, Krîyâ, S’obhâ, Prabhâ, S’ivâ, and
other women born of the Prime Prakritis, all are excellent in every
Yuga. The prostitutes of the heavens are also born of the above women in
their parts and parts of parts. They are not praiseworthy in the
universe; they are all regarded as unchaste women. Those women that are
of Sâttva Gu<u>n</u>as are all excellent and endowed with influence. In
the universe they are good, chaste and praiseworthy. This is not false.
The Pandits declare them excellent. Those that are of Râjo Gu<u>n</u>as,
and Tâmo Gu<u>n</u>as are not so praiseworthy. Those women that are of
Râjo Gu<u>n</u>as are known as middling. They are always fond of
enjoyments, yield to them, and always ready to achieve their own ends.
These women are generally insincere, delusive, and outside the pale of
religious duties. Therefore they are generally unchaste. The Pandits
consider them as middling. Those women that are of Tâmo Gu<u>n</u>as are
considered as worst. Those born of noble families, can never speak with
other wives in a private place or when they are alone. By Brahmâ’s
command I have come to you. O Fair One! I will marry you now according
to the Gandharba method. My name is S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a. The Devas fly
away from me out of terror. Before I was the intimate S’akhâ (friend) of
S’rî Hari, by the name of Sudâmâ. Now, by Râdhikâ’s curse I am born in
the family of the Dânavas. I was a Pâri<u>s</u>ad (attendant) of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a and the chief of the eight Gopas. Now, by Râdhikâ’s curse
I am born as S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, the Indra of the Dânavas. By S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a’s grace and by His mantra, I am Jâtismarâ (know of my past
births). You, too, are Jâtismarâ Tulasî. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a enjoyed you
before. By

 

<span id="page_877">p. 877</span>

 

Râdhikâ’s anger, you are now born in Bhârata. I was very eager to enjoy
you then; out of Râdhikâ’s fear I could not.”

 

72-87. Thus saying, S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a stopped. Then Tulasî gladly and
smilingly replied :-- “Such persons (like you) are famous in this world;
good women desire such husbands. Really, I am now defeated by you in
argument. The man who is conquered by woman is very impure and blamed by
the community. The Pitri Lokas, the Deva Lokas, and the Gandharba Loka,
too, look upon men, overpowered by women, as mean, despicable. Even
father, mother, brother, etc., hate them mentally. It is said in the
Vedas that the impurities during birth and death are expiated by a ten
days observances for the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, by twelve days observances
for the K<u>s</u>attriyas, by fifteen days observances for the Vais’yas
and by one month’s observances for the S’ûdras and other low castes. But
the impurity of the man who is conquered by women cannot be expiated by
any other means except (his dead body) being burned in the funeral pyre.
The Pitris never accept willingly the pi<u>nd</u>as and offerings of
water (Tarpa<u>n</u>as) offered by the women-conquered men. So much so
that the Devas even hesitate to accept flowers, water, etc., offered by
them on their names. Those whose hearts are entirely subdued by men, do
not acquire any fruits from their knowledge, Tapasyâ, Japam, fire
sacrifices, worship, learning and fame. I tested you to ascertain your
strength in learning. It is highly advisable to choose one’s husband by
examining his merits and defects. Sin equivalent to the murder of a
Brâhmi<u>n</u> is committed if one gives in marriage one’s daughter to
one void of all qualifications, to an old man, to one who is ignorant,
to a poor, illiterate, diseased, ugly, very angry, very harsh, lame,
devoid of limbs, deaf, dumb, inanimate like, and who is impotent. If one
gives in marriage a daughter to a young man of good character, learned,
well qualified and of a peaceful temper, one acquires the fruits of
performing ten horse sacrifices. If one nourishes a daughter and sells
her out of greed for money, one falls to the Kumbhîpâka hell. That
sinner drinks the urine and eats the excrements of that daughter,
remaining in that hell. For a period equal to the fourteen Indra’s
life-periods they are bitten by worms and crows. At the expiry of this
period, they will have to be born in this world of men as diseased
persons. In their human births they will have to earn their livelihood
by selling flesh and carrying flesh.”

 

88-100. Thus saying, when Tulasî stopped, Brahmâ appeared on the scene
and addressed S’ankachûda :-- O S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a! Why are you
spending uselessly your time in vain talks with Tulasî? Marry her soon
by the Gandharba method. As you are a gem amongst

 

<span id="page_878">p. 878</span>

 

males, so She is a gem amongst females. It is a very happy union between
a humorous lover and a humorous beloved. O King! Who despises the great
happiness when it is at one’s hand! He who forsakes the pleasure is
worse than a beast in this world. O Tulasî! And what for are you testing
the nobly qualified person who is the tormentor of the Devas, Asuras and
Dânavas. O Child! As Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî is of Nârâya<u>n</u>a, as
Râdhikâ is of Kri<u>sn</u>a; as is My Sâvîtrî, as Bhava’s is Bhavânî, as
Boar's is Earth, as Yajña’s is Dak<u>s</u>î<u>n</u>â, Atri’s Anasûyâ,
Gautama’s Ahalyâ, Moon’s Rohi<u>n</u>î, Brihaspati’s Târâ, Manu’s
S’atarûpâ, Kandarpa’s Rati, Kas’yapa’s Aditi, Vas’i<u>st</u>ha’s
Arundhatî, Karddama’s Devahûti, Fire’s Svâhâ, Indra’s S’achî,
Ga<u>n</u>es’a’s Pu<u>st</u>i, Skanda’s Devasenâ, and Dharma’s Mûrti, so
let you be the dear wife of S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a. Let you remain with
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a, beautiful as he is, for a long time, and enjoy with
him in various places as you like. When S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a will quit
his mortal frame, you would go to Goloka and enjoy easily with the
two-armed S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, and in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha with the
four-armed Kri<u>sn</u>a and with great gladness.

 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the union of
S’ankhachû<u>d</u>a with Tulasî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](bk09ch19)
