[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch09)  [Next](bk09ch11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On the offences caused to the Earth and punishments thereof**

 

<span id="page_844">p. 844</span>

 

1-3. Nârada said :-- I am now desirous to hear about the merits acquired
by making gifts of land, the demerits in stealing away lands, digging
wells in other's wells, in digging earth on the day of Ambuvâchî, in
casting semen on earth, and in placing lamps and lights on the surface
of the earth as well the sins when one acts wrongly in various other
ways on the surface of the earth and the remedies thereof.

 

4-30. S’rî Nârâyana said :-- If one makes a gift of land in this Bhârata
of the measure of a Vitasti (a long span measured by the extended thumb
and little finger) to a Brâhma<u>n</u>a who performs Sandhyâ three times
a day and is thus purified, one goes and remains in S’iva Loka (the
abode of S’iva). If one gives away in charity a land full of corn to a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, the giver goes and lives in Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka in the end
for a period measured by the number of dust particles in the land. If
one presents a village, a plot of land, or grains to a Brâhmi<u>n</u>,
both the giver and the receiver, become freed of their sins and go to
the Devî Loka (the abode of the Devî). Even if one be present when a
proposal for a gift of land is being made and says “This act is good,”
one goes to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha with one's friends and relatives. He
remains in the Kâlasutra hell as long as the Sun and Moon exist, who
takes back or steals away the gift to a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, offered by
himself or by any other body. Even his sons, grandsons, etc., become
destitute of lands, prosperity, sons, and wealth and remain in a
dreadful hell named Raurava. If one cultivates the grazing land for the
cows and reaps therefrom a harvest of grains, one remains for one
hundred divine years in the Kumbhîpâka hell. If one cultivates any
enclosure for cows or tanks and grows grains on them, one remains in the
Asipatra hell for a period equivalent to fourteen Indra's falls. One who
bathes in another's tank without taking off five handfuls of earth from
it, goes to hell and one's bath is quite ineffectual. If anybody, out of
his amorous passion casts his semen privately on the suface of the
ground, he will have to suffer the torments of hell for as many years as
are the numbers of dust particles on that area. If anyone digs ground on
the day of Ambuvâchî, one remains in hell for four Yugas. If, without
the permission of the owner of a well or tank, a stupid man clears the
old well or tank and digs

 

<span id="page_845">p. 845</span>

 

the slushy earth from the bottom, his labour goes in vain. The merit
goes to the real owner. And the man who laboured so much goes to Tapta
Ku<u>nd</u>a Naraka for fourteen Indra's life-periods. If any one takes
out five handfuls of earth from another's tank, when he goes to bathe in
it, he dwells in Brahmâ Loka for a period of years amounting to the
number of particles in those handfuls of earth. During one's father's or
grandfather's S'râdha ceremony, if one offers pi<u>nd</u>a without
offering any food (pi<u>nd</u>a) to the owner of the soil, the S'râdha
performer goes certainly to hell. If one places a light (Pradîpa)
directly on the earth without any holding piece at the bottom, one
becomes blind for seven births; and so if one places a conch-shell on
the ground (S'ankha), one becomes attacked with leprosy in one's next
birth. If any body places pearls, gems, diamonds, gold and jewels, the
five precious things on the ground he becomes blind, if one places the
phallic emblem of S’iva, the image of S'ivâni, the S'âlagrâma stone on
the ground, he remains for one hundred Manvantaras to be eaten by worms.
Conchshells, Yantras (diagrams for S'akti worshippers), the water after
washing S'ilas (stones) i. e., Chara<u>n</u>âmrita, flowers, Tulasî
leaves, if placed on the ground, lead him who places these, verily to
hells. The beads, garlands of flowers, Gorochana (a bright yellow
pigment prepared from the urine or bile of a cow), and camphor, when
placed on the ground, lead him who places so to suffer the torments of
hell. The sandal wood, Rudrâk<u>s</u>a mâlâ, and the roots of Kus'a
grass also, if placed on the ground, lead the doer to stay for one
manvantara in the hell. Books, the sacred Upanayana threads, when placed
on the ground make the doers unfit for Brâhmi<u>n</u> birth; rather he
is involved in a sin equivalent to the murder of a Brâhmi<u>n</u>. The
sacred Upanayana thread when knotted and rendered fit for holding, is
worth being worshipped by all the castes. One ought to sprinkle the
earth with curd, milk, etc., after one has completed one's sacrifices.
If one fails to do this, one will have to remain for seven births in a
hot ground with great torment. If one digs the earth when there is an
earth quake or when there is an eclipse, that sinner becomes also devoid
of some of his limbs in his next birth. O Muni! This earth is named
Bhûmi since She is the abode of all; she is named Kâs'yapî since she is
the daughter of Kas'yapa; is named Vis'vambharâ, since she supports the
Universe; She is named Ananta, since she is endlessly wide; and She is
named Prithivî since she is the daughter of the King Prithu, or she is
extensively wide.

 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the offences caused
towards the surface of the earth and punishments thereof

 

<span id="page_846">p. 846</span>

 

in hells - in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk09ch11.md)
