[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch38)  [Next](bk09ch40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXIX**

 

**On the story of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî**

 

<span id="page_957">p. 957</span>

 

1-3 Nârada said :-- “O Lord! I have heard in the discourse on Sâvitrî
and Yama about the Formless Devî Mûla Prakriti and the glories of
Sâvitrî, all true and leading to the endless good. Now I want to hear
the story of the Devî Lak<u>s</u>mî. O Thou, the Chief of the knowers of
the Vedas! What is the nature of Lak<u>s</u>mî? By whom was She first
worshipped? and by what Mantra? Kindly describe Her glories to me.”

 

4-33. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Of old, in the beginning of the Prâkritik
Creation, from the left side of Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Supreme Spirit,
appeared in the Râsama<u>nd</u>alam (the Figure Dance) a Devî. She
looked exceedingly handsome, of a dark blue colour, of spacious hips, of
thin waist, and

 

<span id="page_958">p. 958</span>

 

with high breast, looking twelve years old, of steady youth, of a colour
of white Champaka flower and very lovely. The beauty of Her face throws
under shade millions and millions of autumnal full moons. Before Her
wide expanded eyes, the midday lotus of the autumnal season becomes
highly ashamed. By the Will of God, this Devî suddenly divided Herself
into two parts. The two looked equal in every respect; whether in
beauty, qualities, age, loveliness, colour, body, spirit, dress,
ornaments, smile, glance, love, or humanity, they were perfectly equal.

 

Now she who appeared from the right side is named Râdhâ and she who came
from the left side is named Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî. Râdhâ wanted first the
two armed S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Who was Higher than the highest; then Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî wanted Him. Râdhâ came out of the right side and wanted
first Kri<u>sn</u>a; so Kri<u>sn</u>a, too, divided himself at once into
two parts. From His right side came out the two-armed and from his left
side came out the four-armed. The two-armed person first made over to
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî the four armed One; then the two armed Person Himself
took Râdhâ. Lak<u>s</u>mî looks on the whole universe with a cooling
eye; hence She is named Lak<u>s</u>mî and as She is great, She is called
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî. And for that reason the Lord of Râdhâ is two-armed
and the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî is four-armed. Râdhâ is pure Aprâ kritic
S’uddha Sattva (of the nature of pure Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a, the
illuminating attribute) and surrounded by the Gopas and Gopîs. The
four-armed Puru<u>s</u>a, on the other hand, took Lak<u>s</u>mî (Padmâ)
to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. The two-armed person is Kri<u>sn</u>a; and the
four-armed is Nârâya<u>n</u>a. They are equal in all respects. Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî became many by Her Yogic powers (i.e., She remained in
full in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha and assumed many forms in parts). Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha is full, of pure Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a,
and endowed with all sorts of wealth and prosperity. She is the crest of
woman-kind as far as loving one’s husbands is concerned. She is the
Svarga Lak<u>s</u>mî in the Heavens; the Nâga Lak<u>s</u>mî of the
serpents, the Nâgas, in the nether regions; the Râja Lak<u>s</u>mî of
the kings and the Household Lak<u>s</u>mî of the householders. She
resides in the houses of house-holders as prosperity and the most
auspicious of all good things. She is the progenetrix, She is the
Surabhi of cows and She is the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â (the sacrificial
fee) in sacrifices. She is the daughter of the milk ocean and she is
Padminî, the beauty of the spheres of the Moon and the Sun. She is the
lustre and beauty of the ornaments, gems, fruits, water, kings, queens,
heavenly women, of all the houses, grains, clothings, cleansed places,
images, auspicious jars, pearls, jewels, crest of jewels, garlands,
diamonds, milk, sandal, beautiful twigs, fresh rain cloud, or of all
other colours. She was first worhipped in Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha by
Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Next She was worshipped by Brahmâ and then

 

<span id="page_959">p. 959</span>

 

by S’ankara with devotion. She was worshipped by Vi<u>sn</u>u in the
K<u>s</u>hirode Samudra. Then she was worshipped by Svâyambhuva Manu,
then by Indras amongst men, then by Munis, Ri<u>s</u>is, good
householders, by the Gandharbas, in the Gandharbaloka; by the Nâgas in
the Nâgaloka. She was worshipped with devotion by Brahmâ for one
fortnight commencing from the bright eighth day in the month of Bhâdra
and ending on the eighth day of the dark fortnight in the three-worlds.
She was worshipped by Vi<u>sn</u>u, with devotion in the three worlds on
the meritorious Tuesday in the months of Pau<u>s</u>a, Chaitra, and
Bhâdra. Manu, also, worshipped Her on the Pau<u>s</u>a Sankrânti (the
last day of the month of Pau<u>s</u>a when the Sun enters another sign)
and on the auspicious Tuesday in the month of Mâgha. Thus the worship of
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî is made prevalent in the three worlds. She was
worshipped by Indra, the Lord of the Devas and by Mangala (Mars) on
Tuesday. She was then worshipped by Kedâra, Nîla, Subala, Dhruva,
Uttânapada, S’akra, Bali, Kas’yapa, Dak<u>s</u>a, Kardama, Sûrya,
Priyavrata, Chandra, Vâyu, Kuvera, Varu<u>n</u>a, Yama, Hutâsana and
others. Thus Her worship extended by and by to all the places. She is
the Presiding Deity of all wealth; so She is the wealth of all.

 

Here ends the Thirty-ninth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the story of
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam
of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 40](bk09ch40)
