[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch31)  [Next](bk09ch33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXII**

 

**On the enumeration of various hells for sinners**

 

<span id="page_926">p. 926</span>

 

1-28. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Then, initiating her with the Great Seed,
the Âdi Radical Mantra of the Mahâ S’akti, S’rî Bhuvanes’varî in
accordance with due rules, the son of Sûrya began to recite the various
effects of various Karmas, auspicious and inauspicious. Never do the
persons go to hell when they perform good Karmas; it is only the bad
works that lead men to hells. The different Purâ<u>n</u>as narrate
various heavens. The Jîvas go to those places as the effects of their
various good Karmas. The good Karmas do not lead men to hells; but the
bad Karmas do lead them veritably to various hideous hells. In different
S’âstras, different hell-pits are ascertained. Different works lead men
to different hells. O Child! Those hell-pits are very wide, deep,
painful and tormenting, very horrible and ugly. Of these, eighty six
pits or Ku<u>nd</u>as are prominent. Many other Ku<u>nd</u>as exist. Now
listen to the names of the Ku<u>nd</u>as mentioned in the Vedas. Their
names are :-- Vah<u>n</u>i Ku<u>nd</u>a, Tapta Ku<u>nd</u>a,
K<u>s</u>âra Ku<u>nd</u>a, Bhayânaka Ku<u>nd</u>a, Vi<u>t</u>
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Mûtra Ku<u>nd</u>a, S’le<u>s</u>ma Ku<u>nd</u>a, Gara
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Dû<u>s</u>ikâ Ku<u>nd</u>a, Vasâ Ku<u>nd</u>a, S’ukra
Ku<u>nd</u>a, S’o<u>n</u>ita Ku<u>nd</u>a, As’rû Ku<u>nd</u>a, Gâtramala
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Kar<u>n</u>amala Ku<u>nd</u>a, Majjâ Ku<u>nd</u>a, Mâmsa
Ku<u>nd</u>a, impassable Nakra Ku<u>nd</u>a, Loma Ku<u>nd</u>a, Kes’a
Ku<u>nd</u>a, impassable Asthi Ku<u>nd</u>a, Tâmra Ku<u>nd</u>a, the
exceedingly hot and painful Lauha Ku<u>nd</u>a (the pit of molten iron),
Charma Ku<u>nd</u>a, the hot Surâ Ku<u>nd</u>a, sharp Thorny
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Vi<u>s</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a, the hot Taila Ku<u>nd</u>a, very
heavy Astra Ku<u>nd</u>a, Krimi Ku<u>nd</u>a, Pûya Ku<u>nd</u>a,
terrible Sarpa

 

<span id="page_927">p. 927</span>

 

Ku<u>nd</u>a, Mas’aka Ku<u>nd</u>a, Dams’a Ku<u>nd</u>a, dreadful Garala
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Vajra Dam<u>st</u>ra Vris’chika Ku<u>nd</u>a, S’ara
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Sûla Ku<u>nd</u>a, awful Kha<u>d</u>ga Ku<u>nd</u>a, Gola
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Nakra Ku<u>nd</u>a, sorrowful Kâka Ku<u>nd</u>a, Manthâna
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Vîja Ku<u>nd</u>a, painful Vajra Ku<u>nd</u>a, hot
Pâts’â<u>n</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a, sharp Pâs’â<u>n</u>a Ku<u>nd</u>a, Lâlâ
Ku<u>nd</u>a, Masî Ku<u>nd</u>a, Chakra Ku<u>nd</u>a, Vakra
Ku<u>nd</u>a, very terrible Kurma Ku<u>nd</u>a, Jvâlâ Ku<u>nd</u>a,
Bhasma Ku<u>nd</u>a, Dagdha Ku<u>nd</u>a, and others. Besides these,
there are the Taptasûchî, Asipatra, K<u>s</u>uradhâra, Sûchîmukha,
Gokhâmûkha, Kûmbhîpâka, Kâlasûtra, Matsyoda, Krimi, Kantuka,
Pâms’ubhojya, Pâs’ave<u>st</u>a, Sûlaprota, Prakampana, Ulkâmakha,
Andhakûpa, Vedhana, Tâ<u>d</u>ana, Jâlarandhra, Dehachûrna, Dalana,
S’o<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a, Ka<u>s</u>a, S’ûrpa, Jvâlâmûkha, Dhûmândha,
Nâgave<u>st</u>ana and various others. O Savitri! The Ku<u>nd</u>as give
much pain and torment greatly the sinners; they are under the constant
watch of innumerable servants. They hold rods in their hands; some of
them have nooses; others hold clubs, S’aktis, awful scimitars; they are
fierce fanatics, maddened with vanity. All are filled with
Tamogu<u>n</u>as, merciless, irresistible, energetic, fearless and
tawny-eyed (like copper). Some of them are Yogis; some are Siddhas, they
assume various forms. When the sinners are about to die, they see these
servants of Yama. But those who do their own duties, who are S’âktas,
Sauras, or Gâ<u>n</u>apatyas or those who are virtuous Siddha Yogis,
they never see the servants of Yama. Those who are engaged in their own
Dharmas, who are possessed of wisdom, who are endowed with knowledge,
who are mentally strong, who are untouched by fear, who are endowed with
the feelings of the Devas, and those who are real Vai<u>sn</u>avas, they
never see these servants of Yama. O Chaste One! Thus I have enumerated
to you the Ku<u>nd</u>as. Now hear who live in the Ku<u>nd</u>as.

 

Here ends the Thirty-second Chapter of the Ninth Book on the enumeration
of various hells for sinners in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33](bk09ch33)
