[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch15)  [Next](bk09ch17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVI**

 

**On the incarnation of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî in the house of Kus’adhvaja**

 

<span id="page_866">p. 866</span>

 

1-30. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Muni! Dharmadhvaja and Kus’adhvaja
practised severe tapasyâs and worshipped Lak<u>s</u>mî. They then got
separately their desired boons. By the boon of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, they

 

<span id="page_867">p. 867</span>

 

became again the rulers of the earth. They acquired great religious
merits and they also had their children. The wife of Kus’adhvaja was
named Mâlâvatî. After a long time, the chaste wife delivered one
daughter, born of the parts of Kamalâ. The daughter, on being born,
became full of wisdom. On being born, the baby began to sing clearly the
Vedic mantrams from the lying-in-chamber. Therefore She was named
Vedavatî by the Pundits. She bathed after her birth and became ready to
go to the forest to practise severe tapas. Everyone then, tried
earnestly to dissuade her, devoted to Nârâya<u>n</u>a, from the
enterprise. But she did not listen to anybody. She went to
Pu<u>s</u>kara and practised hard tapasyâ for one Manvantara. Yet her
body did not get lean a bit; rather she grew more plumpy and fatter. By
degrees her youth began to show signs in her body; one day she heard an
incorporeal voice from the air above, “O Fair One! In your next birth
S’rî Hari, adored by Brahmâ and other gods, will be your husband.”
Hearing this, her joy knew no bounds. She went to the solitary caves in
the Gandhamâdan mountain to practise tapas again. When a long time
passed away in this tapasyâ, one day the irresistible Râvana came there
as guest. No sooner Vedavatî saw the guest, then she gave him, out of
devotion to the guest, water to wash feet, delicious fruits, and cool
water for his drink. The villain accept the hospitality and sitting
there, began to ask :-- “O Auspicious One! Who are you?” Seeing the fair
smiling lady, with beautiful teeth, her face blooming like the autumnal
lotus, of heavy loins, and of full breast, that villain became
passionate. He lost entirely all consciousness and became ready to make
violence on Her. Seeing this, the chaste Vedavatî, became angry and out
of her tapas influence, astounded him and made him insensible to move.
He remained motionless like an inanimate body. He could not move his
hands nor feet nor could he speak. That wicked fellow then mentally
recited praises to her. And the praise of the Higher S’akti can never go
futile. She became pleased and granted him religious merits in the next
world. But she also pronounced this curse :-- “That when you have touch
my body out of passion, then you will be ruined with your whole family
for my sake. Now see my power.” O Nârada! Thus saying to Râvana,
Vedavatî left her body by her yogic power. Then Râvana took her body and
delivered it to the Ganges and he then returned to his own home. But
Râvana thought over the matter repeatedly and exclaimed, “What wonder
have I seen! Oh! What a miracle this lady has wrought!” Râvana thus
lamented. This Vedavatî, of pure character, took her birth afterwards as
Sîtâ, the daughter of

 

<span id="page_868">p. 868</span>

 

Janaka. For the sake of this Sîtâ, Râvana was ruined with his whole
family. By the religious merits of her previous birth, the ascetic lady
got Bhagavân Hari S’rî Râma Chandra, the Fullest of the Full, for her
husband and remained for a long time in great enjoyment with the Lord of
the world; a thing very difficult to be attained! Though she was a
Jâtismarâ (one who knows all about her past lives), she did not feel any
pain due to her practising severe austerities in her previous birth; for
when the pains end in success, the pains are not then felt at all. Sîtâ,
in Her fresh youth enjoyed various pleasures in the company of her
husband, handsome, peaceful, humorous and witty, the chief of the Devas,
loved by the female sex, well-qualified, and just what she desired. But
the all-powerful Time is irresistible; the truthful Râmachandra, the
scion of the Raghu’s family, had to keep up the promise made by his
father and so he had to go to the forest, ordained by Time. He remained
with Sîtâ and Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a near the sea. Once the God Fire
appeared to Him in the form of a Brâhma<u>n</u>a. Fire, in a
Brâhmin-form, saw Râma Chandra morose and became himself mortified. Then
the Truthful Fire addressed the truthful Râmachandra :-- “O Bhagavân
Râmachandra! I now speak to you how time is now coming to you. Now has
come the time when your Sîtâ will be stolen.

 

31-48. The course of Destiny is irresistible; none else is more powerful
than Time, Fate. So give over your Sîtâ, the World Mother to me and keep
with you this Chhâyâ Sîtâ (the shadow Sîtâ; the false Sîtâ). When the
time of Sîtâ’s ordeal by fire will take place I will give Her back to
you. The Devas united have sent me to you. I am not really a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>; but I am Ag<u>n</u>i Deva (eater of oblations).”
Râmachandra heard Fire and gave his assent. But his heart shattered. He
did not speak of this to Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a. By the yogic power
Ag<u>n</u>i (Fire) created a Mâyâ Sîtâ. This Mâyâ Sîtâ, O Nârada, was
perfectly equal to the real Sîtâ. Fire, then, handed this Mâyâ Sîtâ to
the hands of Râmachandra. Hûtâsana (fire) took the real Sîtâ and said,
“Never divulge this to any other body” and went away. What to speak of
divulging the secret to any other body, Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a even
could not know it. By this time Râma saw one deer, made of all gold. To
bring that deer carefully to her, Sîtâ sent Râmachandra with great
eagerness. Putting Sîtâ under Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a’s care, in that
forest, Râma went himself immediately and pierced the deer by one arrow.
That Mâyâ mrîga (the deer created by magic powers) on being pierced,
cried out “Ha Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a!” and seeing Hari before him and
remembering the name of Hari, quitted

 

<span id="page_869">p. 869</span>

 

his life. The deer body then vanished; and a divine body made its
appearance in its stead. This new body mounting on an aerial car made of
jewels, ascended to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. That Mâyik (magic) deer was in its
previous birth, a servant, of the two gate-keepers of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha;
but, for the sake of some emergency, he had to take up this
Râkh<u>s</u>asa birth. He again became the servant of two door-keepers
of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. On the other hand Sîtâ Devî, hearing the cry “Ha
Laksmana!” became very distressed and sent Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a in
search of Râma. No sooner did Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a get out of the
hermitage, the irresistible Râva<u>n</u>a took away Sîtâ gladly to the
city of Lanka (Ceylon). Now Râmachandra, seeing Lak<u>s</u>ma<u>n</u>a
on the way in the forest, became merged in the ocean of sorrows and
without losing any time came hurriedly to the hermitage where he could
not find Sîtâ. Instantly he fell unconscious, on the ground; and, after
a long time, when he regained his consciousness, he lamented and
wandered here and there in search of Her. After some days on the banks
of the river Godâvarî, getting the information of Sîtâ, he built a
bridge across the ocean with the help of His monkey armies. Then he
entered with his army into Lanka and slew Râva<u>n</u>a with arrows with
all his friends. When Sîtâ’s ordeal by fire came, Ag<u>n</u>i (Fire)
handed over the real Sîtâ to Râmachandra. The Shadow Sîtâ then humbly
addressed Ag<u>n</u>i and Râma Chandra, “O Lord! What am I to do now?
Settle my case.”

 

49-53. Ag<u>n</u>i and Râmachandra both of them then said to Chhâyâ Sîtâ
:-- “O Devî! Go to Pu<u>s</u>kara and practise tapasyâ there; that place
is the giver of religious merits and then you will be the Svarga
Lak<u>s</u>mî (Lak<u>s</u>mî of Heaven).” Hearing this, the Chhâyâ Sîtâ
went and practised tapasyâ for the three divine lakh years and became
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî. This Svarga Lak<u>s</u>mî appeared at one time from
the sacrificial Ku<u>nd</u>a (pit). She was known as the daughter of
Drupada and became the wife of the five Pâ<u>nd</u>avas. She was Veda
Vatî, the daughter of Kus’adhvaja in the Satya Yuga; Sîtâ, the wife of
Râma and the daughter of Janaka in Tretâ Yuga; and Draupadî, the
daughter of Drupada, in the Dvâpara Yuga. As she existed in the Satya,
Tretâ, and Dvâpara Yugas, the Three Yugas, hence She is Trihâyanî.

 

54\. Nârada said :-- “O Chief of Munis! O Remover of doubts! Why had
Draupadî five husbands? A great doubt has arisen in my mind on this
point. Remove my doubt.”

 

55-63. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Devar<u>s</u>i! When, in the city of
Lanka, the real Sîtâ came before Râma, then Chhâyâ Sîtâ, full of youth
and beauty, became very anxious. Ag<u>n</u>i Deva and Râmachandra both
told

 

<span id="page_870">p. 870</span>

 

Her to go to Pu<u>s</u>kara and worship S’amkara. While this Chhâyâ Sîtâ
was practising austerities in Pu<u>s</u>kara, She became very anxious to
get a good husband and asked from MahâDeva the boon “Grant me a husband”
and repeated it five times. S’iva, the chief among the humorous, witty
persons, hearing this, said, “O Dear! You will get five husbands” and
thus granted her the boon. Therefore She became the dearest wife of the
five Pâ<u>nd</u>avas. Now hear other facts. When the war at Lanka was
over, S’rî Râmachandra got his own dear wife Sîtâ, and installing
Vibhîsana on the throne of Lanka, returned to Ayodhyâ. He ruled for
eleven thousand years in Bhârata and finally went to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha
with his all his subjects. Vedavatî, the incarnation in part of
Lak<u>s</u>mî dissolved in the body of Kamalâ. Thus I have described to
you the pure anecdote of Vedavatî. Hearing this destroys sins and
increases virtue. The four Vedas reigned incarnate, in their true forms,
on the lips of Vedavatî; hence She was named Vedavatî. Thus I have told
you the anecdote of the daughter of Kus’adhvaja. Now hear the story of
Tulasî, the daughter of Dharmadhvaja.

 

Here ends the Sixteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the incarnation of
Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî in the house of Kus’adhvaja in S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](bk09ch17)
