[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch44)  [Next](bk09ch46) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLV**

 

**On the anecdote of Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â**

 

<span id="page_979">p. 979</span>

 

1-63. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- The excellent, most sweet stories of
Svâhâ and Svadhâ are told; now I will tell you the story of
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â; hear attentively. In early days, in the region of
Goloka, there was a good-natured Gopî named Sus’îlâ, beautiful, Râdhâ’s
companion and very dear to S’rî Hari. She was fortunate, respected,
beautiful, lovely, prosperous, with good teeth, learned, well qualified
and of exquisitely handsome form. Her whole body was tender and lovely
like Kalâvatî (one versed in 64 arts; moon). She was beautiful and her
eyes were like water lilies. Her hips were good and spacious; Her
breasts were full; she was Shyâmâ (a kind of women having colour like
melted gold; body being hot in cold and cool in summer; of youthful
beauty); as well She was of the Nyagrodha class of women (an excellent
woman. Stanau Suka<u>t</u>hinau Yasyâ Nitambe cha Vis’âlatâ. Madhye
Ksî<u>n</u>â bhavedyâ Sânyagrodha parima<u>nd</u>alâ). Always a smile
sweetened Her face; and that looked always gracious. Her whole body was
covered with jewel ornaments. Her colour was white like the white
champakas. Her lips were red like the Bimba fruits; Her eyes were like
those of a deer.

 

Sus’îlâ was very clever in amorous sciences. Her gait was like a swan.
She was specially versed in what is called Prema Bhakti (love towards
God). So She was the dearest lady of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. And She was of
intense emotional feelings. She knows all the sentiments of love; she
was witty, humorous, and ardent for the love of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the
Lord of the Râsa circle. She sat by the left side of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a
in the presence of Râdhâ. S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, then cast His glance on
Râdhâ, the Chief of the Gopîs and hung down His head through fear.
Râdhâ’s face turned red; the two eyes looked like red lilies; all Her
bodies began to quiver out of anger and Her lips began to shake. Seeing
that state of Râdhâ, Bhagavân S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a disappeared, fearing
that a quarrel might ensue. Sus’îlâ and other Gopîs seeing that the
peaceful Kri<u>sn</u>a of Sattvâ Gu<u>n</u>a and of lovely form had
disappeared, began to tremble with fear. Then one lakh Ko<u>t</u>i

 

<span id="page_980">p. 980</span>

 

Gopîs seeing Kri<u>sn</u>a absent and Râdhâ angry, became very much
afraid and bowing their heads down with devotion and with folded palms
began to say frequently, “Râdhe! Protect us, protect us,” and they took
shelter at Her feet. O Nârada! Three lakh Gopas also including Sudâmâ
and others took shelter at the lotus feet of S’rî Râdhâ out of fear.
Seeing, then, Kri<u>sn</u>a absent and Her companion Sus’îlâ running
away, Râdhâ cursed her thus :-- “If Sus’îlâ comes again to this Goloka,
she will be reduced to ashes.” Thus cursing Her companion Sus’îlâ out of
anger, Râdhâ, the Darling of the Deva of the Devas, and the Lady of the
Râsa circle went to the Râsa circle and called on Kri<u>sn</u>a, the
Lord of the same. Not being able to find out S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, a
minute appeared a yuga to Her and she began to say :-- “O Lord of
Prâ<u>n</u>as! O Dearer than My life! O Presiding Deity of my life! O
Kri<u>sn</u>a! My life seems to depart from Thy absence! Come quickly
and show Thyself to me. O Lord! It is through the favour of one’s
husband that the pride of women gets increased day by day. Women’s
safeguards of happiness are their husbands. Therefore women, who are
helpless creatures, ought always to serve their husbands according to
Dharma. The husband is the wife’s friend, presiding deity and the sole
refuge and the chief wealth. It is through husbands that women derive
their pleasures, enjoyments, Dharma, happiness, peace and contentment.
If husbands are respected, wives are respected and if husbands are
dishonoured, women are dishonoured too. The husband is the highest thing
to a woman. He is the highest friend. There is no better friend than
him. The husband is called Bhartâ because he supports his wife; he is
called Pati, because he preserves her; he is called S’vâmî, because he
is the master of her body; he is called Kântâ because he bestows the
desired things to her; he is called Bandhu, because he increases her
happiness; he is called Priya, because he gives pleasure to her; he is
called Is’a, because he bestows prosperity on her; he is called
Prâ<u>n</u>es’vara, because he is the lord of her Prâ<u>n</u>a; and he
is called Rama<u>n</u>a, because he gives enjoyment to her. There is no
other thing dearer than husband. The son is born of the husband; hence
the son is so dear. The husband is dearer to a family woman than one
hundred sons. Those who are born in impure families, cannot know what
substance a husband is made up of. Taking Baths in all the Tîrthas,
giving Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs in all the Yajñas (sacrifice),
circumambulating round the whole earth, performing all austerities,
observing all vows, making all great gifts, holy fastings, all that are
dictated in the S’âstras, serving the Guru, the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and the
Devas all cannot compare to even one sixteenth part with serving
faithfully the feet of the husband. The husband is the highest; higher
than the Spiritual Teacher (Guru),

 

<span id="page_981">p. 981</span>

 

higher than the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, higher than all the Devas. As to man,
the Spiritual Teacher who imparts the Spiritual Knowledge is the Best
and Supreme, so to the women their husbands are the best of all. Oh! I
am not able to realise the glory of my Dearest, by Whose favour I am the
Sole Ruler of one lakh Ko<u>t</u>i Gopîs, one lakh Ko<u>t</u>i Gopas,
innumerable Brâhma<u>nd</u>as, and all the things thereof, and all the
lokas (regions) from Bhu (earth) to Goloka. Oh! The womanly nature is
insurmountable.” Thus saying, Râdhikâ began to meditate with devotion on
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. Tears began to flow incessantly from Her eyes. She
exclaimed, “O Lord! O Lord! O Rama<u>n</u>a! Shew Thyself to me. I am
very much weak and distressed from Thy bereavement.” Now the
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â Devî, driven out from Goloka; practised Tapasyâ
for a long time when She entered into the body of Kamalâ. The Devas, on
the other hand, performed a very difficult Yajña; but they could not
derive any fruit therefrom. So they went to Brahmâ, becoming very sad.
Hearing them, Brahmâ meditated on Vi<u>sn</u>u for a long time with
devotion. At last Vi<u>sn</u>u gave Him a reply. Vi<u>sn</u>u got out of
the body of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî a Martya Lak<u>s</u>mî (Lak<u>s</u>mî of
the earth) and gave Her Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â to Brahmâ.Then with a view
to yield to the Devas the as a fruits of their Karmas, Brahmâ made over
to the Yajña Deva (the Deva presiding the sacrifice) the Devî
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, offered by Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Yajña Deva, then,
worshipped Her duly and recited hymns to Her with great joy. Her colour
was like melted gold; her lustre equalled ko<u>t</u>i Moons; very
lovely, beautiful, fascinating; face resembling water lilies, of a
gentle body; with eyes like Padmâ Palâsa, born of the body of
Lak<u>s</u>mî, worshipped by Brahmâ, wearing celestial silken garments,
her lips resembling like Bimba fruits, chaste, handsome; her braid of
hair surrounded by Mâlatî garlands; with a sweet smiling face,
ornamented with jewel ornaments, well dressed, bathed, enchanting the
minds of the Munis, below the hair of her forehead the dot of musk and
Sindûra scented with sandalpaste, of spacious hips, with full breasts,
smitten by the arrows of Kâma Deva (the God of Love). Such was the
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â Devî. Seeing Her, the Yajña Deva fainted. At last
he married her according to due rites and ceremonies. Taking her to a
solitary place, he enjoyed her for full divine one hundred years with
great joy like Lak<u>s</u>mî Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Gradually then
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â became pregnant. She remained so for twelve divine
years. Then she duly delivered a nice son as the fruit of Karma. When
any Karma becomes complete, this son delivers the fruits of that Karma.
Yajña Deva with His wife Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â and the above named
Karmaphala, the bestower of the fruits of actions, gives the desired
fruits to

 

<span id="page_982">p. 982</span>

 

all their sacrificial acts and Karmas. So the Pundits, the knowers of
the Vedas, say. Really he, henceforth, began to give fruits to all the
persons of their acts, with his wife Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â and son, the
bestower of the fruits of the actions. The Devas were all satisfied at
this and went away respectively to their own abodes. Therefore, the man
who performs Karmas, generally known as Karma Kartas, should pay the
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â (the Sacrificial fee) and so he completes at once
his actions. It is stated in the Vedas, that no sooner the Karma Karta
pays the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, than he obtains the fruits of his Karmas
at once. In case the Karma Karta, after he has completed his acts, does
not pay either through bad luck or through ignorance, any
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, its amount is doubled if
a Muhûrta passes away and if one night elapses, its amount is increased,
to one hundred times. If three nights pass away, and the Daksi<u>n</u>â
not paid, the amount last brought forward, is increased again to hundred
times; if a week passes, the last amount is doubled, and if one month
passes away, the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â is multiplied to one lakh times.
If one year passes away, that is increased to ten millions of times and
the Karma, also, bears no fruit. Such a Karma Karta is known as taking
away unfairly a Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s property and is regarded as impure. He
has no right to any further actions. For that sin, he becomes a pauper
and diseased. Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî goes away from his house, leaves him,
cursing him severely. So much so that the Pitris do not accept the
S’râdh, Tarpa<u>n</u>am offered by that wretched fellow. So the Devas do
not accept his worship, nor the Fire accepts the oblations poured by
him. If the person that performs sacrifices does not pay the sacrificial
fee that he resolves to pay and he who accepts the offer does not demand
the sum, both of them go to hell. But if the performer of the sacrifices
does not pay when the priests demand the fee, then the Yajamâna (the
performer of the sacrifices) only falls down to hell as the jar, severed
from the rope, falls down. The Yajamâna (pupil) is denominated as a
Brahmâsvapahârî (one who robs a Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s property); he goes
ultimately to the Kumbhîpâka hell. There he remains for one lakh years
punished and threatened by Yama’s messengers. He is then reborn as a
Châ<u>nd</u>âla, poor and diseased. So much so that his seven
generations above and his seven

generations below go to hell.

 

64-65. O Nârada! Thus I have narrated to you the story of
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â. What more do you want to hear? Say. Nârada said
:-- “O Best of Munis! Who bears the fruits of that Karma where no
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â is paid. Describe the method of worship that was
offered to Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â by Yajña Deva.” Nârâya<u>n</u>a said
:-- Where do you find the fruit of any sacrifice without
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â? (i.e., nowhere.) That Karma only gets

 

<span id="page_983">p. 983</span>

 

fruits where Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âs are paid. And the fruits of the acts
void of any Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, Bali who lives in the Pâtâla only
enjoys; and no one else.

 

66-71. For, in olden times, it was ordained by Vâmana Deva that those
fruits would go to the king Vali. All those that pertain to S’râdh not
sanctioned by the Vedas, the charities made without any regard or faith,
the worship offered by a Brâhmi<u>n</u> who is the husband of a
Vri<u>s</u>ala (an unmarried girl twelve years in whom menstruation has
commenced), the fruits of sacrifices done by an impure Brâhma<u>n</u>a
(a Brâhma<u>n</u>a who fails in his duties), the worship offered by
impure persons, and the acts of a man devoid of any devotion to his
Guru, all these are reserved for the king Bali. He enjoys the fruits of
all these. O Child! I am now telling you the Dhyân Stotra, and the
method of worship as per Ka<u>n</u>va S’âkhâ of Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â
Devî. Hear. When Yajña Deva, in ancient times got Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â,
skillful in action, he was very much fascinated by her appearance and
being love-stricken, began to praise her :-- “O Beautiful One! You were
before the chief of the Gopîs in Goloka. You were like Râdhâ; you were
Her companion; and you were loved by Srî Râdhâ, the beloved of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a.

 

72-97. In the Râsa circle, on the Full Moon night in the month of
Kârtik, in the great festival of Râdhâ, you appeared from the right
shoulder of Lak<u>s</u>mî; hence you were named Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â. O
Beautiful One! You were of good nature before; hence your name was
Sus’îlâ. Next you turned due to Râdhâ's curse, into
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â. It is to my great good luck that you were
dislodged from Goloka and have come here. O highly fortunate One! Now
have mercy on me and accept me as your husband. O Devî! You give to all
the doers of actions, the fruits of their works. Without you, their
Karmas bear no fruit. So much so, if you be not present in their action
the works never shine forth in brilliant glory. Without Thee, neither
Brahmâ, nor Vi<u>sn</u>u nor Mahes’a nor the Regents of the quarters,
the ten Dikpâlas, can award the fruits of actions. Brahmâ is the
incarnate of Karma. Mahes’vara is the incarnate of the fruits of Karmas;
and I Vi<u>sn</u>u myself is the incarnate of Yajñas. But Thou art the
Essence of all. Thou art the Parâ Prakriti, without any attributes, the
Parâ Brahmâ incarnate, the bestower of the fruits of action. Bhagavân
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a cannot award the fruits of actions without Thee. O
Beloved! In every birth let Thou be my S’akti. O Thou with excellent
face! Without Thee, I am unable to finish well any Karma.” O Nârada!
Thus praising Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â Devî, Yajña Deva stood before Her.
She, born from the shoulder of Lak<u>s</u>mî, became pleased with His
Stotra and accepted Him for Her bridegroom. If anybody recites this
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â stotra during sacrifice, he gets all the results
thereof.

 

<span id="page_984">p. 984</span>

 

If anybody recites this stotra in the Râjasûya sacrifice, Vâjapaya,
Gomedha (cow sacrifice) Naramedha (man sacrifice), As’vamedha (horse
sacrifice), Lângala Sacrifice, Vi<u>sn</u>u Yajña tending to increase
one’s fame, in the act of giving over wealth or pieces of lands, digging
tanks or wells, or giving fruits, in Gaja medha (elephant sacrifice), in
Loha Yajña (iron sacrifice), Svarna Yajña (gold sacrifice), Ratna Yajña
(making over jewels in sacrifices), Tâmra Yajña (copper), S’iva Yajña,
Rudra Yajña, S’akra Yajña, Bandhuka Yajña, Varu<u>n</u>a Yajña (for
rains), Ka<u>nd</u>aka Yajña, for crushing the enemies, S’uchi Yajña,
Dharma Yajña, Pâpa mochana Yajña, Brahmâ<u>n</u>î Karma Yajña, the
auspicious Prakriti Yâga, sacrifices, his work is achieved then without
any hitch or obstacle. There is no doubt in this. The stotra, thus, is
mentioned now; hear about the Dhyânam and the method of worship. First
of all, one should worship in the S’âlagrâma stone, or in an earthen jar
(Gha<u>t</u>a) Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â Devî. The Dhyânam runs thus :-- “O
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â! Thou art sprung from the right shoulder of
Lak<u>s</u>mî; Thou art a part of Kamalâ; Thou art clever (Dak<u>s</u>a)
in all the actions and Thou bestowest the fruits of all the actions.
Thou art the S’akti of Vi<u>sn</u>u, Thou art revered, worshipped. Thou
bestowest all that is auspicious; Thou art purity; Thou bestowest
purity, Thou art good natured. So I meditate on Thee.” Thus meditating,
the intelligent one should worship Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â with the
principal mantra. Then with the Vedic Mantras, pâdyas, etc. (offerings
of various sorts) are to be offered. Now the mantra as stated in the
Vedas, runs thus :-- “Om S’rîm Klîm Hrîm Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âyai
Svâhâ.” With this mantra, all the offerings, such as pâdyas, arghyas,
etc., are to be given, and one should worship, as per rules,
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â Devî with devotion. O Nârada! Thus I have stated
to you the anecdote of Daksinâ. Happiness, pleasure, and the fruits of
all karmas are obtained by this. Being engaged in sacrificial acts, in
this Bhâratavar<u>s</u>a, if one hears attentively this Dhyânam of
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, his sacrifice becomes defectless. So much so that
the man who has got no sons gets undoubtedly good and qualified sons; if
he has no wife, he gets a best wife, good natured, beautiful, of slender
waist, capable to give many sons, sweet speaking, humble, chaste, pure,
and Kulîna; if he be void of learning, he gets learning; if he be poor
he gets wealth; if he be without any land, he gets land and if he has no
attendants, he gets attendants. If a man hears for one month this stotra
of Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â Devî, he gets over all difficulties and
dangers, bereavements from friends, troubles, inprisonments, and all
other calamities.

 

 

Here ends the Forty-fifth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the anecdote of
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 46](bk09ch46)
