[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch40)  [Next](bk09ch42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLI**

 

**On the churning of the ocean and on the appearing of Lak<u>s</u>mî**

 

<span id="page_965">p. 965</span>

 

1-2. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Twice-born! Indra then remembered Hari
and took Brihaspati, the Guru of the Devas, to the assembly of Brahmâ,
accompanied by the other Devas. They soon reached the region of Brahmâ
and no sooner they saw Him, than Indra and the other Devas and Bihaspati
all bowed down to Him.

 

3-25. Brihaspati, the Âchârya of the Devas, then communicated all to
Brahmâ. Hearing this, He smiled and spoke, addressing Indra :-- O Indra!
You have been born in My race; nay, you are My grandson; the Ârya
Brihaspati is your Guru; you yourself are the ruler of the Devas and you
are very wise and sagacious; the mother of your father is the powerful
Dak<u>s</u>a, a great Vi<u>sn</u>u Bhakta. How is it, then that when the
three sides of the family are pure, one would turn out so haughty and
arrogant! Whose mother is so much devoted to her husband, whose father,
mother’s father and mother’s brother are self-controlled and of pure
Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a, he is not expected to be so very haughty! Every man
may be guilty to Hari for the three faults :-- For some fault due to
that of his father, or of his mother’s father, or of Guru, the Spiritual
Teacher. Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a, resides in this great holy temple of
our this physical body controlling the hearts of all. At whatever
moment, S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a quits this temple-body, at that moment this
body becomes dead. I myself am the mind; S’ankara is the Knowledge,
Vi<u>sn</u>u is the vital

 

<span id="page_966">p. 966</span>

 

breaths, Bhagavatî Durgâ is the intelligence (Buddhi), sleep, etc., the
powers of Prakriti; when these are being reflected on by the Âtman, Jîva
is formed with a body for enjoyment called Bhoga S’arîrabhrit. When a
king departs, his attendants also follow him; so when this Âtman departs
from this temple of body, his attendants mind, buddhi, etc., instantly
depart from this body and follow the Âtman. O Indra! We all, are verily,
the parts of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. I myself, S’iva, Ananta Deva,
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Dharma, Mahâ Virât, you all are His parts and entirely
devoted to Him. And you have shown contempt for His flower. Bhagavân
S’ankara, the Lord of the Bhûtas, worshipped the lotus-feet of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a with that flower. The Ri<u>s</u>i Durvâsâ gave you that
flower. But you showed disrespect to it. The flower, Pârijâta, after
being offered at the lotus-feet of Kri<u>sn</u>a, should be placed on
the head of an Immortal; His worship is to be done first; and it is the
foremost amongst the Devas. So you are now being afflicted by the
inevitable course of Fate; Fate is the most powerful of all. Who can
save that unlucky man against whom Fate has turned? Seeing that you have
rejected the flower offered to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, S’rî Lak<u>s</u>mî
Devî has left you out of anger. Now come with Me and with your family
priest Brihaspati to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha and worship the Lord of
Lak<u>s</u>mî; then by His grace you may get back your Heavens. Thus
saying, Brahmâ with Indra and all the other Devas, went to the Eternal
Puru<u>s</u>a, Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a and saw that He was full of Fire
and Energy like one hundred ko<u>t</u>i summer midday Suns, yet
perfectly cool and calm. He has no beginning, and no end, nor any
middle. He is Infinite. The four-armed Pâri<u>s</u>adas, Sarasvatî, the
four Vedas, and the Ganges, all were surrounding Him. Seeing Him, Brahmâ
and the other Devas bowed down with devotion and began to chant hymns to
Him with tears in their eyes. Brahmâ, then, informed Him of everything
when all the Devas, dispossessed of their places, began to weep before
Him. Nârâya<u>n</u>a saw that the Devas were very afraid and much
distressed. They had no jewel ornaments as before, no vehicles
(Vâhanas), nor the Daivic splendour as before, not that brillance;
always fearful. Then Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the Destroyer of fear, seeing the
Devas in that state, addressed Brahmâ and the other Devas :-- O
Brâhma<u>n</u>! O Devas! Discard all fears. What fear can overcome you?
I am here. I will give you again the immoveable prosperous Râjya
Lak<u>s</u>mî (the Laksmî of the kings).

 

26-47. But for the present, I give you some advice proper for this
moment. Listen. There are endless universes where exist innumerable
persons. All of them are under Me. So know verily, that

 

<span id="page_967">p. 967</span>

 

I am under them also. My devotees regard Me as the Highest. They know no
other than Me; they are fearless; so I do not remain in that house where
My devotees are dissatisfied. I instantly quit that house with
Lak<u>s</u>mî. Durvâsâ Ri<u>s</u>i is born in part of S’ankara. He is
highly devoted to Me. He is a pakkâ Vai<u>sn</u>ava. He cursed you and,
as a matter of fact, I and Lak<u>s</u>mî instantly left your house.

Lak<u>s</u>mî does not reside in that house where conch shells are not
blown, where there are no Tulasî trees, where there is no worship of
S’iva and S’ivâ, where the Brâhma<u>n</u>as are not fed. O
Brâhma<u>n</u>! O Devas! Where I and My Bhaktas are blamed, Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî becomes greatly displeased. She instantly goes away out of
that house. Lak<u>s</u>mî does not stay even for a moment in that house
where the stupid person, without any devotion for me, takes his food on
the Harivâsara Ekâdas’î day (the eleventh day of the moon’s wane or
increase) or on My anniversary birthday. If anybody sells My name or his
own daughter, where the guests are not served, Lak<u>s</u>mî quits that
house instantly and goes away.

 

(Note :-- That Guru is the Real Guru, who, being capable, imparts the
name of God to worthy persons without taking any fee at all.)

 

If the son of an unchaste woman be a Brâhma<u>n</u>a, he and the husband
of an unchaste woman are great sinners. If anybody goes to such a
person’s house or eats the food of a S’ûdra during a Srâddha ceremony,
Lak<u>s</u>mî becomes very angry and vacates that house. Being a
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, if one burns a S’ûdra’s corpse, one becomes very
wretched and the vilest of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. Lak<u>s</u>mî never
stays for a moment more in that house. Being a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, if he be
a S’ûdra’s cook and drives oxen, Lak<u>s</u>mî fears to drink water
there and quits his house. Being a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, if his heart be
unholy, if he be cruel, envies others and blames persons, if he
officiates as a priest for the S’ûdra, Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî never stays in
his house. The World-Mother never stays even for a moment in his house
who eats at the house of one who marries an unmarried girl twelve years
old in whom menstruation has commenced. He who cuts grass by his nails,
or writes on the ground with his nails, or from whose house a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a guest goes back disappointed, Lak<u>s</u>mî never stays
in his house. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a eats food at the early sunrise,
sleeps during the day or engages in a sexual intercourse during the day,
Lak<u>s</u>mî never stays in his house. Lak<u>s</u>mî slips away from
that Brâhma<u>n</u>a who is devoid of Âchâra (rules of conduct), who
accepts gifts from S’ûdras, from him who remains uninitiated in his
Mantram. The ignorant man who sleeps naked and with his feet wet, who
laughs always, and always

 

<span id="page_968">p. 968</span>

 

talks at random on disconnected subjects like a mad man, is forsaken at
once by Lak<u>s</u>mî. Lak<u>s</u>mî becomes angry and goes away from
the house of that man who applies oil all over his body first and then
touches the bodies of others and always makes some sounding noise on
several parts of his body. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a forsakes observing
vows, fastings, the Sandhyâ ceremony, purity and devotion to
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Kamalâ (Lak<u>s</u>mî) does not remain in his house any
longer. If anybody blames always the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and shews his
hatred always towards the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, if he does injury to the
animals, and if he does not indulge in his heart anything of pity,
kindness, Lak<u>s</u>mî, the Mother of the Worlds, quits him. O
Lotus-born! But where Hari is worshipped and Hari’s Name is chanted,
Lak<u>s</u>mî, the Mother of all auspiciousness, remains there.
Lak<u>s</u>mî remains where the glories of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a and His
Bhaktas are sung.

 

48-59. Lak<u>s</u>mî always remains there with the greatest gladness
where conch-shells are blown, where there are conchsells, the S’âlagrâma
stone, the Tulasî leaves and the service and meditation of Lak<u>s</u>mî
are daily done.

 

Where the phallic emblem of S’iva is worshipped, and His glories sung,
where S’rî Durgâ is worshipped and Her glories are sung, Lak<u>s</u>mî,
the Dweller in the Lotus, remains there. Where the Brâhma<u>n</u>as are
honoured and they are gladly feasted, where all the Devas are worshiped;
the chaste Lak<u>s</u>mî, the Lotus-faced, remains there. Thus saying to
the Devas, the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî said :-- O Devî! Go without any any
delay to the K<u>s</u>iroda Ocean and incarnate there in part. He then
addressed Brahmâ and said :-- “O Lotus-born! You also better go there
and churn the K<u>s</u>iroda Ocean; when Lak<u>s</u>mî will arise, give
her to the Devas.” O Devar<u>s</u>i! Thus saying, the Lord Kamalâ went
to His inner compartment. On the other hand the Devas, after a long
time, reached the shores of the K<u>s</u>iroda Ocean. The Devas and the
Daityas then made the Golden Mountain (the Sumeru) the churning rod, the
Deva Kurma (the tortoise), the churning pot and Ananta Deva (the
thousand headed serpent) the churning cord and began to churn the ocean.
While churning was going on, by and by arose Dhanvantarî, Amrita (the
nectar), the horse Uchchaihs’ravâ, various other invaluable jewels that
were desired, the elephant Airâvata and the beautiful eyed
Lak<u>s</u>mî. Vi<u>sn</u>upriyâ, S’rî Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî, no sooner She
got up from the ocean, she, the chaste woman, presented on the neck of
Nârâya<u>n</u>a, of beautiful appearance, the Lord of all, Who slept on
the K<u>s</u>iroda ocean the garland (indicative of accepting Him for
her bridegroom). Then Brahmâ and Mahes’vara and the other Devas gladly
worshipped Her and chanted hymns. At this time Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî being
pleased, cast a favourable glance towards the homes of the Devas,

 

<span id="page_969">p. 969</span>

 

in order to free them from their curse. Then, by the grace of Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî and by the granting of the boon by Brahmâ, the Devas got
back their own possessions from the hands of the Daityas. O Nârada! Thus
I have described to you the story of Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî, the Essence of
all Essences, and very pleasant to hear. Now what more do you want to
hear? Say.

 

Here ends the Forty-first Chapter of the Ninth Book on the churning of
the ocean and on the appearing of Lak<u>s</u>mî in the Mahâ
Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 42](bk09ch42.md)
