[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch41)  [Next](bk09ch43.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLII**

 

**On the Dhyânam and Stotra of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî**

 

<span id="page_969">p. 969</span>

 

1-50. Nârada said :-- O Bhagavân! I have heard about the glories of
Hari, about the Tattvajñânam (the True Knowledge) and the story of
Lak<u>s</u>mî. Now tell me Her Dhyânam (meditation) and Stotram
(recitation of hymns) of Her. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Indra
then, bathed first in the Tîrath (holy place) and, wearing a cleansed
cloth, installed, first of all, an earthen jar (gha<u>t</u>a) on the
beach of the K<u>s</u>iroda Ocean. Then he worshipped with devotion
Ganes’a, Sûrya, Fire, Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’iva, and S’ivâ, the six deities
with scents and flowers. Next Indra invoked Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, of the
nature of the highest powers and greatest prosperity, and began to
worship Her as Brahmâ, who was acting as an officiating priest in the
presence of the Munis, Brâhma<u>n</u>as, Brihaspati, Hari and the other
Devas, had dictated him. He first smeared one Pârijâta flower with
sandal paste and reciting the meditation mantra of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî
offered it to Her feet. The meditation mantra that was recited by
Devendra, was what Bhagavân Hari first gave to Brahmâ. I am now telling
you that. Listen.

 

“O Mother! Thou residest on the thousand-petalled lotus. The beauty of
Thy face excels the beauty of ko<u>t</u>i autumnal Full Moons. Thou art
shining with Thy own splendour. Thou art very beautiful and lovely; Thy
colour is like the burnished gold; Thou art with form, chaste,
ornamented all over with jewel ornaments; Thou art wearing the yellow
cloth and look! What beauty is coming out of it! Always a sweet smile
reigns on Thy lips. Thy beauty is constant; Thou art the bestower of
prosperity to all. O Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî! I meditate on Thee.” Thus
meditating on Her endowed with various attributes with this mantra,
Indra worshipped devotedly with sixteen upachâras (articles offered).
Every upachâra (article) was offered with the repetition of mantra. All
the things were very excellent, right and commendable. “O Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî!

 

<span id="page_970">p. 970</span>

 

Vis’vakarmâ has made this invaluable Âsan (a carpet seat) wonderfully
decked with jewels; I am offering this Âsan to Thee. Accept. O Thou
residing in the Lotus! This holy Ganges water is considered with great
regard and desired by all. This is like the fire to burn the fuel in the
shape of the sins of the sinners. O Thou! The Dweller in the Lotus! This
Dûrbha grass, flowers, this Arghya (offering) of the Ganges water
perfumed with sandalpaste, I am offering to Thee. Accept. O Beloved of
Hari! This sweet scented flower oil and this sweet scented Âmalaki fruit
lead to the beauty of the body; therefore I present this to Thee.
Accept. O Devî! I am presenting this cloth made of silk to Thee; Accept.
O Devî! This excellent ornament made of gold and jewels, which increases
the beauty, I am presenting to Thee. Accept. O Beloved of Kri<u>sn</u>a!
I am presenting this sweet scented holy Dhûpa prepared from various
herbs and plants, exquisitely nice and the root of all beauty, to Thee.
Accept. This sweet scented pleasant sandalpaste I offer to Thee, O Devî!
Accept. O Ruler of the Devas! I present this pleasing holy Dîpa (lights)
which is the eye of this world and by which all the darkness is
vanished; accept. O Devî! I present to Thee these very delicious
offerings of fruits, etc., very juicy and of various kinds. Accept. O
Deves'î! This Anna (food) is Brahmâ and the chief means to preserve the
life of living beings. By this the nourishment of the body and the
mental satisfaction are effected. Therefore I am presenting this food to
Thee. Accept. O Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî! I am presenting this most delicious
Paramânna, which is prepared out of rice, milk and sugar, to Thee.
Accept. O Devî! I am presenting this most delicious and pleasant
svastika prepared of sugar and clarified butter to Thee; accept. O
Beloved of Achyuta! I am presenting to Thee various beautiful Pakkânnas,
ripe delicious fruits and clarified butter out of cow’s milk; accept. O
Devî! The sugarcane juice, when heated, yields a syrup which again
heated yields very delicious and nice thing called Gur. I am presenting
this Gur to Thee; accept. O Devî! I am presenting to Thee the sweetmeats
prepared out of the flour of Yava and and wheat and Gur and clarified
butter; accept. I am presenting with devotion the offering made of
Svastika and the flour of other grains; accept. O Kamale! I am
presenting to Thee this fan and white châmara, which blows cool air and
is very pleasant when this body gets hot; accept. O Devî! I am
presenting this betel scented with camphor by which the inertness of the
tongue is removed; accept. O Devî! I am presenting this scented cool
water, which will allay the thirst and which is known as the life of
this world; accept. O Devî! I am presenting this cloth made of cotton
and silk that increases the beauty and splendour of the body. Accept. O
Devî! I am presenting to Thee, the ornaments made of gold and jewels
which are the source of beauty and loveliness. Ac-

 

<span id="page_971">p. 971</span>

 

cept. O Devî! I am presenting to Thee these pure garlands of flowers
which blossom in different seasons, which look very beautiful and which
give satisfaction to the Devas and to the kings. Accept. O Devî! I am
presenting to Thee this nice scent, this very holy thing to Thee by
which both the body and mind become pure, which is most auspicious and
which is prepared of many fragrant herbs and plants; accept. O Beloved
of the God Kri<u>sn</u>a! I am presenting this Âchamanîya water to Thee
for rinsing the mouth, pure and holy, and brought from holy places of
pilgrimages; accept. O Devî! I am presenting to Thee, this bed made of
excellent gems and jewels and flowers, sandalpaste, clothings and
ornaments; accept. O Devî! I am presenting to Thee all those things that
are extraordinary, very rare in this earth and fit to be enjoyed by the
Devas and worthy of their ornaments; accept.” O Devar<u>s</u>i! Uttering
those mantras, the Devendra offered those articles, with intense
devotion according to the rules. He, then, made Japam of the Mûla Mantra
(the Radical Seed Mantra) ten lakhs of times. Thus his Mantra revealed
the Deity thereof and thus came to a successful issue. The lotus born
Brahmâ gave this Mantra “S’rîm Hrîm Klîm Aim Kamalâvâsinyai Svâhâ” to
the Devendra. This is like a Kalpavrik<u>s</u>a (the tree in Indra’s
garden yielding whatever may be desired). This Vaidik mantra is the
chief of the mantras. The word “Svâhâ” is at the end of the mantra. By
virtue of this Mantra, Kuvera got his highest prosperity. By the power
of this Mantra, the King-Emperor Dak<u>s</u>a Sâvar<u>n</u>i Manu and
Mangala became the lords of the earth with seven islands. Priyavrata,
Uttânapâda, and Kedârarâja all these became Siddhas (were fructified
with success) and became King-Emperors. O Nârada! When Indra attained
success in this Mantra, there appeared before him Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî,
seated in the celestial car, decked with excellent gems and jewels. The
Great Halo, coming out of Her body made manifest the earth with seven
islands. Her colour was white like the white champaka flower and Her
whole body was decked with ornaments. Her face was always gracious and
cheerful with sweet smiles. She was ever ready to shew Her kindness to
the Bhaktas. On Her neck there was a garland of jewels and gems, bright
as ten million Moons. O Devar<u>s</u>i! No sooner did Indra see that
World Mother Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, of a peaceful appearance, than his body
was filled with joy and the hairs of the body stood on ends. His eyes
were filled with tears; and, with folded palms, he began to recite
stotras to Her, the Vaidik stotras, yielding all desires, that was
communicated to him by Brahmâ.

 

51-75. Indra said :-- “O Thou, the Dweller in the lotus! O
Nârâya<u>n</u>î! O Dear to Kri<u>sn</u>a! O Padmâsane! O Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî!

 

<span id="page_972">p. 972</span>

 

Obeisance to Thee! O Padmadalek<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>e! O Padmanibhânane! O
Padmâsane! O Padme! O Vai<u>sn</u>avî! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the
wealth of all; Thou art worshipped by all; Thou bestowest to all the
bliss and devotion to S’rî Hari. I bow down to Thee. O Devî! Thou always
dwellest on the breast of Kri<u>sn</u>a and exercisest Thy powers over
Him. Thou art the beauty of the Moon; Thou takest Thy seat on the
beautiful Jewel Lotus. Obeisance to Thee! O Devî! Thou art the Presiding
Deity of the riches; Thou art the Great Devî; Thou increasest always Thy
gifts and Thou art the bestower of increments. So I bow down to Thee. O
Devî! Thou art the Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî of Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, the
Lak<u>s</u>mî of the K<u>s</u>iroda Ocean; Thou art Indra’s Heavenly
Lak<u>s</u>mî; Thou art the Râja Lak<u>s</u>mî of the Kings; Thou art
the Griha Lak<u>s</u>mî of the householders; Thou art the household
Deity of them; Thou art the Surabhî, born of the Ocean; Thou art the
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â, the wife of the Sacrifices; Thou art Aditi, the
Mother of the Devas; Thou art the Kamalâ, always dwelling in the Lotus;
Thou art the Svâhâ, in the offerings with clarified butter in the
sacrificial ceremonies; Thou art the Svadhâ Mantra in the Kâvyas (an
offering of food to deceased ancestors). So obeisance to Thee! O Mother
Thou art of the nature of Vi<u>sn</u>u; Thou art the Earth that supports
all; Thou art of pure S’uddha Sattva and Thou art devoted to
Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Thou art void of anger, jealousy. Rather Thou grantest
boons to all. Thou art the auspicious Sâradâ; Thou grantest the Highest
Reality and the devotional service to Hari. Without Thee all the worlds
are quite stale, to no purpose like ashes, always dead while existing.
Thou art the Chief Mother, the Chief Friend of all; Thou art the source
of Dharma, Artha, Kâma and Mok<u>s</u>a! As a mother nourishes her
infants with the milk of her breasts, so Thou nourishest all as their
mother! A child that sucks the milk might be saved by the Daiva (Fate),
when deprived of its mother; but men can never be saved, if they be
bereft of Thee! O Mother! Thou art always gracious. Please be gracious
unto me. O Eternal One! My possessions are now in the hands of the
enemies. Be kind enough to restore my kingdoms to me from my enemies’
hands. O Beloved of Hari! Since Thou hast forsaken me, I am wandering
abroad, friendless, like a beggar, deprived of all prosperities. O Devî!
Give me Jñânam, Dharma, my desired fortune, power, influence and my
possessions.” O Nârada! Indra and all the other Devas bowed down
frequently to Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî with their eyes filled with tears.
Brahmâ, S’ankara, Ananta Deva, Dharma and Kes’ava all asked pardon again
and again from Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî. Lak<u>s</u>mî then granted boons to
the Devas and before

 

<span id="page_973">p. 973</span>

 

the assembly gladly gave the garland of flowers on the neck of Ke’sava.
The Devas, satisfied, went back to their own places. The Devî,
Lak<u>s</u>mî, too, becoming very glad went to S’rî Hari sleeping in the
K<u>s</u>iroda Ocean. Brahmâ and Mahes’vara, both became very glad and,
blessing the Devas, went respectively to their own abodes. Whoever
recites this holy Stotra three times a day, becomes the King Emperor and
gets prosperity and wealth like the God Kuvera. Siddhi (success) comes
to him who recites this stotra five lakhs of times. If anybody reads
regularly and always this Siddha Stotra for one month, he becomes very
happy and he turns out a Râjarâjendra.

 

Here ends the Forty-second Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Dhyânam and
Stotra of Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 43](bk09ch43.md)
