[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch46)  [Next](bk09ch48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XLVII**

 

**On Manasâ’s story**

 

<span id="page_989">p. 989</span>

 

1-25 Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I have now narrated the anecdote
of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî as stated in the Vedas. Now hear the anecdote of
Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>î, approved of by the Vedas and respected by the
literary persons. The Cha<u>nd</u>î, that is very skilled in all
auspicious works and who is the most auspicious of all good things, is
Mangal Cha<u>nd</u>îkâ. Or the Cha<u>nd</u>î who is an object of worship
of Mangala (Mars), the son of earth and the bestower of desires is
Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>îkâ. Or the Cha<u>nd</u>î who is an object of
worship of Mangala of the family of Manu who was the ruler of the whole
world composed of seven islands and the bestower of all desires is
Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>î. Or it may be that the Mûla Prakriti, the
Governess, the Ever Gracious Durgâ assumed the form of Mangala
Cha<u>nd</u>î and has become the I<u>st</u>a Devatâ of women. When there
was the fight with Tripurâsura, this Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>î, higher than
the highest was first worshipped by Mahâdeva, stimulated by
Vi<u>sn</u>u, on a critical moment. O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! While the fighting
was going on, a Daitya threw out of anger one car on Mahâdeva and as
that car was about to fall on Him, Brahmâ and Vi<u>sn</u>u gave a good
advice when Mahâdeva began to praise Durgâ Devî at once. Durgâ Devî that
time assuming the form of Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>î appeared and said “no
fear no fear” Bhagavân Vi<u>sn</u>u will be Thy Carrier buffalo. I will
be also Thy S’akti in the action and Hari, full of Mâyâ, will also help
Thee. Thou better slayest the enemy that dispossessed the Devas. O
Child! Thus saying, the Devî Mangala

 

<span id="page_990">p. 990</span>

 

Chandî disappeared and She became the S’akti of Mahâ Deva. Then with the
help of the weapon given by Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of Umâ killed the
Asura. When the Daitya fell, the Devas and Ri<u>s</u>is began to chant
hymns to Mahâdeva with devotion and with their heads bent low. From the
sky, a shower of flowers fell instantaneously on Mahâ Deva’s head.
Brahmâ and Vi<u>sn</u>u became glad and gave their best wishes to Him.
Then ordered by Brahmâ and Vi<u>sn</u>u, S’ankara bathed joyously. Then
He began to worship with devotion the Devî Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>î with
pâdya, Arghya, Âchamanîya and various clothings. Flowers, sandal paste,
various goats, sheep, buffaloes, bisons, birds, garments, ornaments,
garlands, Pâyasa (a preparation of rice, ghee, milk and sugar),
Pi<u>st</u>aka, honey, wine, and various fruits were offered in the
worship. Dancing, music, with instruments and the chanting of Her name
and other festivals commenced. Reciting the Dhyân as in Mâdhyandina,
Mahâdeva offered everything, pronouncing the principal Radical Mantra,
“Om Hrîm S’rîm Klîm Sarvapujye Devî Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>îke Hum
Pha<u>t</u> Svâhâ” is the twenty-one lettered Mantra of Mangala
Cha<u>nd</u>î. During worship, the Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a, the tree
yielding all desires, must be worshipped. O Nârada! By repeating the
Mantra ten lakhs of times, the Mantra Siddhi (success in realising the
Deity inherent in the Mantra) comes. Now I am saying about the Dhyânam
of Mangal Cha<u>nd</u>î as stated in the Vedas and as approved by all.
Listen. “O Devî Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>îke! Thou art sixteen years old;
Thou art ever youthful; Thy lips are like Bimba fruits, Thou art of good
teeth and pure. Thy face looks like autumnal lotus; Thy colour is like
white champakas; Thy eyes resemble blue lilies; Thou art the Preserver
of the world and thou bestowest all sorts of prosperity. Thou art the
Light in this dark ocean of the world. So I meditate on Thee.” This is
the Dhyânam. Now hear the stotra, which Mahâdeva recited before Her.

 

26-37. Mahâdeva said :-- Protect me, Protect me, O Mother! O Devî Mangal
Cha<u>nd</u>îke! Thou, the Destroyer of difficulties! Thou givest joy
and good. Thou art clever in giving delight and fortune. Thou the
bestower of all bliss and prosperity! Thou, the auspicious, Thou art
Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>îkâ. Thou art Mangalâ, worthy of all good, Thou art
the auspicious of all auspicious; Thou bestowest good to the good
persons. Thou art worthy to be worshipped on Tuesday (the Mangala day);
Thou art the Deity, desired by all. The King Mangala, born of Manu
family always worships Thee. Thou, the presiding Devî of Mangala; Thou
art the repository of all the good that are in this world. Thou, the
Bestower of the auspicious Mok<u>s</u>a. Thou, the best of all; Thou,
the respository of all good; Thou makest one cross all the Karmas; the
people worship Thee on every Tuesday; Thou bestowest abundance of Bliss
to all. Thus praising Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>îkâ with this stotra, and
worshipping on every

 

<span id="page_991">p. 991</span>

 

Tuesday, S’ambhu departed. The Devî Sarva Mangalâ was first worshipped
by Mahâdeva. Next she was worsh ipped by the planet Mars; then by the
King Mangala; then on every Tuesday by the ladies of every household.
Fifthly she was worshipped by all men, desirous of their welfare. So in
every universe Mangal Cha<u>nd</u>îkâ, first worshipped by Mahâdeva,
came to be worshipped by all. Next she came to be worshipped everywhere,
by the Devas, Munis, Mânavas, Manus. O Muni! He who hears with undivided
attention this stotra of the Devî Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>îkâ, finds no
evils anywhere. Rather all good comes to him. Day after day he gets sons
and grandsons and so his prosperity gets increased, yea, verily
increased!

 

38-58. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Thus I narrated to you the
stories of <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî and Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>îkâ, according
to the Vedas. Now hear the story of Manasâ that I heard from the mouth
of Dharama Deva.

 

Manasâ is the mind-born daughter of Mahar<u>s</u>i Kas’yapa; hence she
is named Manasâ; or it may be She who plays with the mind is Manasâ. Or
it may be She who meditates on God with her mind and gets rapture in Her
meditation of God is named Manasâ. She finds pleasure in Her Own Self,
the great devotee of Vi<u>sn</u>u, a Siddha Yoginî. For three Yugas She
worshipped S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a and then She became a Siddha Yoginî. S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Lord of the Gopîs, seeing the body of Manasâ lean and
thin due to austerities, or seeing her worn out like the Muni Jarat Kâru
called her by the name of Jarat Kâru. Hence Her name has come also to be
Jarat Kâru. Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Ocean of Mercy, gave her out of kindness,
Her desired boon; She worshipped Him and S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a also
worshipped Her. Devî Manasâ is known in the Heavens, in the abode of the
Nâgas (serpents), in earth, in Brahmâloka, in all the worlds as of very
fair colour, beautiful and charming. She is named Jagad Gaurî as she is
of a very fair colour in the world. Her other name is S’aivî and she is
the disciple of S’iva. She is named Vai<u>sn</u>avî as she is greatly
devoted to Vi<u>sn</u>u. She saved the Nâgas in the Snake Sacrifice
performed by Pariksit, she is named Nages’varî and Nâga Bhaginî and She
is capable to destroy the effects of poison. She is called
Vi<u>s</u>ahari. She got the Siddha yoga from Mahâdeva; hence She is
named Siddha Yoginî; She got from Him the great knowledge, so she is
called Mahâ Jñanayutâ, and as she got Mritasamjîvanî (making alive the
dead) she is known by the name of Mritasanjîvanî. As the great ascetic
is the mother of the great Muni Âstîk, she is known in the world as
Âstîka mâtâ. As She is the dear wife of the great high-souled Yogi Muni
Jarat Kâru, worshipped by all, she is called as Jarat

Kârupriya, Jaratkâru, Jagadgaurî, Manasâ, Siddha Yoginî,
Vai<u>sn</u>avî,

 

<span id="page_992">p. 992</span>

 

Nâga Bhaginî, S'aivi, Nages’varî, Jaratkârupriyâ, Âstikamâtâ,
Vi<u>s</u>ahari, and Mahâ Jñanayutâ; these are the twelve names of
Manasâ, worshipped everywhere in the Universe. He who recites these
twelve names while worshipping Manasâ Devî, he or any of his family has
no fear of snakes. If there be any fear of snakes in one’s bed, if the
house be infested with snakes or if one goes to a place difficult for
fear of snakes or if one’s body be encircled with snakes, all the fears
are dispelled, if one reads this stotra of Manasâ. There is no doubt in
this. The snakes run away out of fear from the sight of him who daily
recites the Manasâ stotra. Ten lakhs of times repeating the Manasâ
mantra give one man success in the stotra. He can easily drink poison
who attains success in this stotra. The snakes become his ornaments;
they carry him even on their backs. He who is a great Siddha can sit on
a seat of snakes and can sleep on a bed of snakes. In the end he sports
day and night with Vi<u>sn</u>u.

 

Here ends the Forty-seventh Chapter of the Ninth Book on Manasâ’s story
in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 48](bk09ch48)
