[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch33)  [Next](bk09ch35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXIV**

 

**On the description of the various hells**

 

<span id="page_934">p. 934</span>

 

1-28. Dharma Râja Yama said :-- O Fair One! If, in this Bhârata, any
murderer, merciless and fierce, kills any man, out of greed for money,
he goes and miserably dwells in the Asipattra hell for fourteen Indra’s
life periods. And if that murderer kills a Brâhma<u>n</u>a, he lives in
that hell for one hundred manvantaras. While in hell, his body becomes
fiercely cut and wounded by the swords. There My messengers chastise him
and beat him and he cries aloud and passes his time without any food.
Then he becomes born for one hundred years as a Manthâna insect, for
hundred births as a boar, for seven births as a cock; for seven births
as a fox, for seven births as a tiger; for three births, as a wolf; for
seven births, as a frog; then as a buffalo when he becomes freed of his
sins of murders. If anybody sets fire to a city or a village, he will
have to live in K<u>s</u>uradhâra Ku<u>nd</u>a for three yugas with his
body severed. Then he becomes a Preta (disembodied spirit) and travels
over the whole earth, being burnt up with fire. For seven births he eats
unclean and unholy food and spends his time as a pigeon. Then for seven
births he becomes diseased with a severe colic pain, for seven births as
a leper; when ultimately he gets a pure human body. If anybody whispers
in one’s ear another’s calumny and thus glorifies himself and abuses and
vilifies the Devas and Brâhma<u>n</u>as, he goes and remains in Sûchî
Ku<u>nd</u>a for three Yugas, and he is pierced there by needles. Then
he becomes a scorpion for seven births, a serpent for seven births, and
an insect (Bha<u>s</u>ma Kî<u>t</u>a) for seven births; then he gets a
diseased human body when, at last, he becomes purified. If anybody
breaks into another’s house and steals away all the household articles,
cows, goats or buffaloes, he goes to Gokâ Mukha Ku<u>nd</u>a where
faeces are

 

<span id="page_935">p. 935</span>

 

like cow’s hoofs, there, beaten by My servants, for three Yugas. (Gokâ
is Gok<u>s</u>ura, hoof of a cow). Then, for seven births, he becomes a
diseased cow; for three births, a sheep; for three births, a goat; and
finally he becomes a man. But in this man-birth he is born first as
diseased, poor, deprived of wife and friends, and a repenting person;
when ultimately he is freed of his sin. If anybody steals any ordinary
thing, he goes to Nakra Mukha Ku<u>nd</u>a and lives there for three
years, greatly tormented by My messengers. Next for seven births, he
becomes a diseased ox. Then he attains a very diseased man-birth, and
ultimately he is freed of his sins. Such are the horrible results. If
anybody kills a cow, elephant, horse, or cuts a tree, he goes to Gaja
Dams’a Ku<u>nd</u>a for three yugas. There he is punished by My
messengers freely by the teeth of elephants. Then he attains three
elephants’ births, three horse-births; then he becomes born as a cow and
ultimately he is born a Mlechcha when he becomes pure. If anybody
obstructs any thirsty cow from drinking water, he goes to Krimi
Ku<u>nd</u>a and Gomukha Ku<u>nd</u>a filled with hot water and lives
there for one manvantara. Next when he attains a human birth he owns not
any cattle nor any wealth; rather he is born as a man, very much
diseased, in low castes, for seven births when he becomes freed. If
anybody, being born in Bhârata, kills cows, Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, women,
beggars, causes abortions or goes to those not fit to be gone into, he
lives in the Kumbhîpâka hell for fourteen Indra’s life periods. There be
is pulverised always by My messengers. He is made to fall sometimes in
fire, sometimes over thorns, sometimes in hot oil, sometimes in hot
water, sometimes in molten iron or copper. That great sinner gets
thousand vulture births, hundred boar births, seven crow births and
seven serpent births. He then becomes worms of faeces for sixty thousand
years. Thus travelling frequently in ox births he at last becomes born
as a very poor leper.

 

29-31. Sâvitrî said :-- “O Bhagavân! What is, according to the S’âstras,
Brahmahattyâ (murdering a Brâhmin) and Gohatyâ (killing a cow)? Who are
called Agamyâs (women unfit to be approached)? Who are designated as
void of Sandhyâ (daily worship of the twice born castes)? Who can be
called uninitiated? Who are said to take Pratigrahas (gifts) in a
Tîrath? What are the characteristics of a real Grâmayâjî (village
priests), Devala, (Brâhma<u>n</u>a of an inferior order who subsists
upon the offerings made to the images which he attends), the cook of a
S’ûdra, of one who is infatuated (Pramatta) and the Vri<u>s</u>alîpati
(one who has married an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom
menstruation has commenced; a barren woman). Kindly describe all these
to me.”

 

<span id="page_936">p. 936</span>

 

32-91. Dharmarâjan said :-- O Fair Sâvitrî! If anybody makes a
distinction between Kri<u>sn</u>a and His Image or between any Deva and
his image, between S’iva and His phallic emblem, between the Sun and the
stone Sûrya Kânta (a precious stone of a bright and glittering colour)
between Ganes’a and Durgâ, he is said to be guilty of the sin
Brahmahattyâ. If anybody makes any difference (superiority or
inferiority) between his own I<u>s</u>ta Deva (his Deity), his Spiritual
Teacher, his natural father, and mother, is certainly involved in the
sin of Brahmahattyâ. He who shews any difference (superiority or
inferiority) between the devotees of Vi<u>sn</u>u and those of other
Devas, is said to commit Brahmahattyâ. He who makes any difference in
matters of respect between the waters of the feet of any Brâhma<u>n</u>a
and those of S’âlagrâma stone, is said to commit Brahmahattyâ. The
difference between the offerings to Hari and Hara leads to Brahmahattyâ.
He who shews any difference between Kri<u>sn</u>a, Who is verily the God
of gods, the Cause of all causes, the Origin of all, Who is worshipped
by all the Devas, Who is the Self of all, Who is attributeless and
without a second yet Who by His Magic powers assumes many forms and who
is Is’âna, is said to commit, indeed, the Brahmahattyâ. If any
Vai<u>sn</u>ava (a devotee of Vi<u>sn</u>u) abuses and envies a S’akta
(a devotee of S’akti), he commits Brahmahattyâ. He who does not worship,
according to the Vedas, the Pitris and the Devas or prohibits others in
doing so, commits Brahmahattyâ. He who abuses Hri<u>s</u>ikes’a, Who is
the Highest of the Holy things, Who is Knowledge and Bliss and Who is
Eternal, Who is the only God to be served by the Devas and
Vai<u>sn</u>avas, and those Who are worshippers of His Mantra, and those
who do not worship themselves are said to commit Brahmahattyâ. He who
abuses and vilifies Mûlaprakriti Mahâ Devî, Who is of the nature of
Causal Brahmâ (Kâra<u>n</u>a Brahmâ), Who is All Power and the Mother of
all, Who is worshipped by all and who is of the nature of all the Devas
and the Cause of all Causes, Who is Âdyâ S’akti Bhagavatî, is said to
commit Brahmahattyâ. He who does not observe the Holy S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a
Janmâ<u>st</u>ami, S’rî Râma Navamî, S’ivarâtri, the Ekâdas’î happening
on Sunday, and five other holy Pârva<u>n</u>as (festivals), commits
Brahmahattyâ; is considered more sinful than a Châ<u>nd</u>âla. He who
in this land of Bhârata, digs earth on the day of Ambuvâchî or makes
water, etc., in the waters of the tanks, is involved in the sin of
Brahmahattyâ. He who does not support his spiritual teacher, mother,
father, chaste wife, son and daughter, though they are faultless,
commits Brahmahattyâ. He whose marriage does not take place during his
whole life-time, who does not see the face of his son, who does not
cherish devotion to Hari, who eats things unoffered to S’rî Hari, who
never worshipped throughout his life Vi<u>sn</u>u or an earthen symbol
of S’iva, verily commits Brahmahattyâ. O Fair One! Now I will

 

<span id="page_937">p. 937</span>

 

recite the characteristics, according to the S’âstras, of Gohattyâ
(killing a cow). Listen. If anybody does not prohibit one, seeing one to
beat a cow, or if he goes between a cow and a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, he is
involved in the sin of Gohattyâ. If any illiterate Brâhma<u>n</u>,
carrying an ox, daily beats with a stick, the cows, certainly he commits
the Gohattyâ. If anybody gives the remains of another’s meal to a cow to
eat, or feeds a Brâhmi<u>n</u> who carries, rather moves or drives, cows
and oxen; or eats himself the food of such a Brâhmi<u>n</u> driver, he
commits Gohattyâ. Those who do sacrifices of the husband of a barren
woman (Vri<u>s</u>alî) or eat his food, commit sin equal to one hundred
Gohattyâs; there is no doubt in this. Those who touch fire with their
feet, beat the cows or enter the temple bathing but not washing their
feet, commit Gohattyâ. Those who eat without washing their feet or those
who sleep with their feet wetted with water and those who eat just after
the Sun has risen, commit Gohattyâ. Those who eat the food of women
without husbands or sons or the food of pimps and pampers or those who
do not perform their Sandhyâs thrice, commit Gohattyâ. If any woman
makes any difference between her husband and the Devatâ, or chastises
and uses harsh words to her husband, she commits Gohattyâ. If anybody
destroys cow’s pasture land, tanks, or land for forts and cultivates
there grains, he commits Gohattyâ. He who does not do Prâyas’chitta
(expiation, atonement) for the expiation of the sin of Gohattyâ done by
his son (for fear of his son’s life), commits the sin himself. If any
trouble arises in the state or from the Devas, and if any master does
not protect then his own cows, rather torments them, he is said to
commit Gohattyâ. If any Jîva oversteps the image of a Deva, fire, water,
offerings to a god, flowers, or food, he commits the great sin
Brahmahattyâ. When a guest comes, if the master of the house always
says, “there is nothing, nothing with me; no, no,” and if he be a liar,
cheat and an abuser of the Devas, he commits the above sin. O fair One!
Whoever seeing his spiritual teacher, and a Brâhma<u>n</u>, does not bow
down and make respectful obeisance to them, commits Gohattyâ. If any
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, out of sheer anger, does not utter blessings to a man
who bows down or does not impart knowledge to a student, he commits
Gohattyâ. O Fair One! Thus I have described to you the characteristics,
approved by S’âstras, of cow-killing (Gohattyâ) and murdering a
Brâhmi<u>n</u> (Brahmahattyâ). Now hear which women are (Agamyâs) not
fit to be approached and those which are fit to be approached (Gamyâs).
One’s own wife is fit to be approached (Gamyâ) and all other women are
Agamyâs, so the Pundits, versed in the Vedas, declare. This is a general
remark; now hear everything in particular. O Chaste One! The
Brâhmi<u>n</u> wives of S’ûdras or the S’ûdra wives of Brâhma<u>n</u>as
are Atyâgamyâs (very

 

<span id="page_938">p. 938</span>

 

unfit to be approached) and blameable both in the Vedas and in the
society. A S’ûdra going to a Brâhma<u>n</u>î woman commits one hundred
Brahmahattyâs; so a Brâhma<u>n</u>a woman going to a S’ûdra goes to the
Kumbhîpâka hell. As a S’ûdra should avoid a Brahmâ<u>n</u>i, so a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a should avoid a S’ûdra woman. A Brâhma<u>n</u>a going to
a S’ûdra woman is recognised a Bri<u>s</u>alipati (one who has married
an unmarried girl twelve years old in whom menstruation has commenced).
So much so that that Brâhma<u>n</u>a is considered an outcast and the
vilest of the Châ<u>nd</u>âlas. The offerings of Pi<u>nd</u>as by him
are considered as faeces and water offered by him is considered as
urine. Nowhere whether in the Devaloka or in the   Pitriloka, his
offered Pi<u>nd</u>as and water are accepted. Whatever religious merits
he has acquired by worshipping the Devas, and practising austerities for
Ko<u>t</u>i births, he loses all at once by the greed of enjoying the
S’ûdra woman. There is no doubt in this. A Brâhmi<u>n</u>, if he drinks
wine, is considered as the husband of a Vri<u>s</u>alî, eating faeces.
And if he be a Vai<u>sn</u>ava, a devotee of Vi<u>sn</u>u, his body must
be branded with the marks of a Taptamudrâ (hot seal); and if he be a
S’aiva, his body is to be branded with the Tapta S’ûla (hot trident).
The wife of a spiritual teacher, the wife of a king, step-mother,
daughter, son’s wife, mother-in-law, sister of the same father and
mother, the wife of one’s brother (of the same father and mother), the
wife of a maternal uncle, the father’s mother, mother’s mother, the
mother’s sister, sisters, the brother’s daughter, the female disciple,
the disciple’s wife, the wife of the sister’s son, the wife of the
brother’s son, these all are mentioned by Brahmâ as Atyâgamyâs (very
unfit to be approached). The people are hereby warned. If anybody,
overpowered by passion, goes to these Atyâgamyâ women, he becomes the
vilest of men. The Vedas consider him as if going to his mother and he
commits one hundred Brahmahattyâ sins. These have no right to do any
actions. They are not to be touched by any. They are blamed in the
Vedas, in the society everywhere. Ultimately they go to the dreadful
Kumbhîpâka hells. O Fair One! He who performs Sandhyâs wrongly or reads
it wrongly or does not perform at all the three Sandhyâs daily, is
called as void of Sandhyâ. He is said to remain uninitiated who does
not, out of sheer vanity, receive any Mantra, whether he be a
Vai<u>sn</u>avite, S’aivite, or a Sun worshipper or the Ganes’a
worshipper. Where there is the running stream of the Ganges, lands on
either side, four hands in width, are said to be the womb of the Ganges
(Gangâ Garbha) Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a incessantly dwells there. This
is called the Nârâya<u>n</u>a (K<u>s</u>etra). One goes to
Vi<u>sn</u>upada who dies in such a place. Vârâ<u>n</u>asî (Benares),
Vadarî, the Confluence of the Ganges with the ocean (Ganga-Sâgara),
Pu<u>s</u>kara, Hari Hara K<u>s</u>ettra (in Behar near Châprâ),
Prabhâsa,

 

<span id="page_939">p. 939</span>

 

Kâmarûpa, Hardwar, Kedâra, Mâtripura, the banks of the river Sarasvatî,
the holy land Bindrâban, Godâvarî, Kaus’ikî, Trive<u>n</u>î (Allahabad),
and the Himâlayâs are all famous places of pilgrimages. Those who
willingly accept gifts in these sacred places are said to be
Tîrthapratigrâhîs (the acceptors of the gifts in the Tîrtha). These
Tîrthaprathigrâhîs go in the end to Kumbhîpâka hell. The Brâhma<u>n</u>a
who acts as priest to the S’ûdras is called S’ûdrayâjî; the village
priests are called Grâmayâjîs. Those who subsist on the offerings made
to the gods are called Devalas. The cooks of the S’ûdras are called
Sûpakâras. Those who are void of Sandhyâ Bandanams are called Pramattas
(mad). O Bhadre! These are the marks of the Vri<u>s</u>alîpatis that I
have (now) enumerated. These are the Great Sinners (Mahâ Pâtakas). They
go ultimately to the Kumbhîpâka hell. O Fair One! I now state by and by
the other Ku<u>nd</u>as (hells) when other people go. Listen.

 

Here ends the Thirty fourth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the description
of the various hells in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam
of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 35](bk09ch35.md)
