[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch35)  [Next](bk09ch37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXXVI**

 

**On the destruction of the fear of the Yama of those who are the
worshippers of the Five Devatâs**

 

<span id="page_942">p. 942</span>

 

1-7. Sâvitrî said :-- “O Dharmarâjan! O Highly Fortunate One! O Thou!
Expert in the Vedas and the Amgas thereof! Now kindly describe that
which is the essence of the various Purâ<u>n</u>as and Itihâsas, which
is the quintessence, which is dear to all, approved of by all, which is
the seed by which the Karmic ties are cut asunder, which is high, noble
and happy is this life. Kindly describe the above by which man can
acquire all his desires, and what is the only source of all the good and
auspicious things. All by knowing which man has

 

<span id="page_943">p. 943</span>

 

not to face any dangers or troubles, nor has he to go to the dreadful
hells that thou hast severally just now described and that by which men
can be freed of those various wombs. Kindly now describe all these. O
Bhagavan! What is the size of the several ku<u>nd</u>as or hells that
Thou hast just now enumerated? How do the sinners dwell there? When a
man departs, his body is reduced to ashes. Then of what sort is that
other body by which the sinners enjoy the effects of their Karmas and
why do not those bodies get destroyed when they suffer so much pains for
so long a time? What sort of body is that? Kindly describe all these to
me.”

 

8-33. Nârâya<u>n</u>a spoke :-- Hearing the questions put forward by
Sâvitrî, Dharmarâja remembered S’rî Hari and began to speak on subject
that sever the bonds of Karma :-- O Child! O One of good vows! In the
four Vedas, in all the books on Dharma, (Smritis) in all the Samhitâs,
all the Itihâsas, all the Purâ<u>n</u>as, in the Nârada Pañcharâtram, in
the other Dharma S’âstras and in the Vedângas, it is definitely stated
that the worship of the Pañcha Devatâs (the five Devatâs) S’iva, S’akti
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Ganes’a, and Sûrya is the best, the highest, the destroyer
of the old age, disease, death, evils and sorrows, the most auspicious
and leading to the highest bliss. In fact, the worship of these Pañcha
Devatâs is the source of acquiring all the Siddhis (the success) and
saves one from going to the hells. From their worship springs the
Bhaktic Tree and then and then only the Root of the Tree of all Karmic
bonds is severed for ever and ever. This is the step to Mukti (final
liberation) and is the indestructible state. By this one can get
Sâlokya, Sâr<u>st</u>i, Sârûpya, and Sâmîpya, the different state of
beatitudes in which the soul (1) resides in the same world with the
Deity, (2) possesses the same station, condition, or rank, or equality
with the Supreme Being in power and all the Divine attributes (the last
of the four grades of Mukti), (3) possesses the sameness of form or gets
assimilated to the Deity or (4) gets intimately united, identified or
absorbed into the Deity. O Auspicious One! The worshipper of these five
Devatâs has never to see any of the hells, watched by My messengers.
Those who are devoid of the devotion to the Devî see My abode; but those
who go to the Tîrthas of Hari, who hold Harivâsaras (festivities on the
days of Hari) who bow down at the feet of Hari and worship Hari, never
come to My abode named Samyamana. Those Brâhma<u>n</u>as that are
purified by their performing the three Sandhyâs and by the following the
pure Âchâras (customs and observances), those that find no pleasure
until they worship the Devî, those that are attached to their own
Dharmas and their own Âchâras, never come to My abode.

 

<span id="page_944">p. 944</span>

 

My terrible messengers, seeing the devotees of S’iva, run away out of
terror as snakes run away terrified by Garu<u>d</u>a. I also order My
messengers with nooses in their hands never to go to them. My messengers
go mostly to other persons than the servants of Hari. No sooner do My
Messengers see the worshippers of the Kri<u>sn</u>a Mantra, than they
run away as snakes get terrified at the sight of Garu<u>d</u>a.
Chitragupta, too, one of the beings in Yama’s world, recording the vices
and virtues of mankind, strike off the names of the Devî worshippers,
out of fear and prepare Madhuparka, etc., for them (a mixture of honey;
respectful offering made to a guest or to the bridegroom on his arrival
at the door of the father of the bride). They rise higher than the
Brahmâ Lokas and go to the Devî’s abode, i.e., to Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa.
Those that are the worshippers of the S’akti Mantra and are highly
fortunate, whose contact removes the sins of others, they deliver the
thousand generations (from the downward course). As bundles and bundles
of dry grasses become burnt to ashes, no sooner they are thrown into
fire, so the delusion at once becomes itself deluded at the sight of the
forms of those devotees. At their sight, lust, anger, greed, disease,
sorrow, old age, death, fear, Kâla (time that takes away the life of
persons), the good and bad karmas, pleasures and enjoyments drop off to
a great distance. O Fair One! Now I have described to you the states of
those persons that are not under the control of Kâla, good and bad
karmas, pleasures and enjoyments, etc., and those that do not suffer
those pains. Now I am speaking of this visible body. Listen. Earth,
water, fire, air, and ether are the five Mahâ Bhûtas (the great
elements); these are the seeds of this visible body of the person and
are the chief factors in the work of creation. The body that is made up
of earth and other elements is transient and artificial, i.e., that body
becomes burnt to ashes. Within this visible body, bound, is there a
Puru<u>s</u>a of the size of a thumb; that is called the Jîva
Puru<u>s</u>a; the subtle Jîva assumes those subtle bodies for enjoying
the effects of karmas. In My world, that subtle body is not burnt by the
burning fire. If that subtle body be immersed in water, if that be
beaten incessantly or if it be struck by a weapon or pierced by a sharp
thorn, that body is not destroyed. That body is not burnt nor broken by
the burning hot and molten material, by the red hot iron, by hot stones
by embracing a hot image or by falling into a burning cauldron. That
body has to suffer incessant pains. O Fair One! Thus I have dwelt on the
subject of the several bodies and the causes thereof according to the
S’âstras. Now I will describe to you the characters of all the other
Ku<u>nd</u>as. Listen.

 

<span id="page_945">p. 945</span>

 

Here ends the Thirty-sixth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the destruction
of the fear of the Yama of those who are the worshippers of the Five
Devatâs, in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](bk09ch37.md)
