[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch49)  [Next](bk10ch01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter L**

 

**On the Glory of S’akti**

 

<span id="page_1002">p. 1002</span>

 

1-4. Nârada said :-- “O Bhagavân! I have heard all the anecdotes of
Prakriti, as according to the S’âstras, that lead to the freedom from
birth and death in this world. Now I want to hear the very secret
history of S’rî Râdhâ and Durgâ as described in the Vedas. Though you
have told me about their glories, yet I am not satisfied. Verily, where
is he whose heart does not melt away on hearing the glories of both of
them! This world is originated from their parts and is being controlled
by them. The devotion towards them frees one easily from the bonds of
Samsâra (rounds of birth and death). O Muni! Kindly describe now about
them.”

 

5-44. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I am now describing the
characters of Râdhâ and Durgâ, as described in the Vedas; listen. I did
not describe to anybody this Secret which is the Essence of all essences
and Higher than the highest. This is to be kept very secret. Hearing
this, one ought not to divulge it to any other body. Râdhâ presides over
the Prâ<u>n</u>a and Durgâ presides over the Buddhi. From these two, the
Mûlaprakriti has originated this world. These two S’aktis guide the
whole world. From the Mahâvirât to the small insect, all, moving or
non-moving, are under the Mûlaprakriti. One must satisfy them. Unless
these two be satisfied, Mukti cannot be obtained.

 

Therefore one ought to serve Mûla Prakriti for Her satisfaction. Now of
the two in Mûla Prakriti, I will describe fully the Râdhâ Mantra.
Listen. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and others always worship this mantra. The
principal mantra is “S’rî Râdhâyai Svâhâ.” By this six lettered mantra
Dharma and other fruits all are obtained with ease. If to this six
lettered Mûla mantra Hrîm be added, it yields gems and jewels as
desired. So much so, if thousand ko<u>t</u>i mouths and one hundred
ko<u>t</u>i tongues are obtained, the glory of this mantra cannot be
described. When the incorporeal voice of Mûla Prakriti was heard in the
Heavens, this mantra was obtained, first by Kri<u>sn</u>a in the Râsa
Ma<u>nd</u>alam in the region of Goloka where all love sentiments are
played. (The Vedas declare him as Raso vai Sah). From Kri<u>sn</u>a,
Vi<u>sn</u>u got the Mantra; from Vi<u>sn</u>u, Brahmâ got; from Brahmâ

 

<span id="page_1003">p. 1003</span>

 

Virât got, from Virât, Dharma, and from Dharma I have got this Mantra.
Repeating that Mantra, I am known by the name of Ri<u>s</u>i. Brahmâ and
the other Devas meditate always on the Mûla Prakriti with greatest joy
and ecstasy. Without the worship of Râdhâ, never can the worship of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a be done. So men, devoted to Vi<u>sn</u>u, should first of
all worship Râdhâ by all means. Râdhâ is the Presiding Deity of the
Prâ<u>n</u>a of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. Hence S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a is so much
subject to Râdhâ. The Lady of the Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>alam remains always
close to Him. Without Her S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a could not live even for a
moment. The name Râdhâ is derived from “Râdhnoti” or fulfills all
desires. Hence Mûla Prakriti is termed Râdhâ. I am the Ri<u>s</u>i of
all the mantras but the Durgâ Mantra mentioned in this Ninth Skandha.
Gâyatrî is the chhanda (mantra) of those mantras and Râdhikâ is the
Devatâ of them. Really, Nârâya<u>n</u>a is the Ri<u>s</u>i of all the
mantras; Gâyatrî is the chhanda; Prâ<u>n</u>ava (om) is the Vîja (seed)
and Bhuvanes’varî (the Directrix of the world) is the S’akti. First of
all the principal mantra is to be repeated six times; then meditation of
the great Devî Râdhikâ, the S’akti of the Ri<u>s</u>is is to be done, as
mentioned in the Sâma Veda. The meditation of Râdhâ is as follows :-- O
Devî Radhike! Thy colour is like white Champaka flower; Thy face is like
the autumnal Full Moon; Thy body shines with the splendour of ten
million moons, Thy eyes look beautiful like autumnal lotus; Thy lips are
red like Bimba fruits, Thy loins are very heavy and decked with the
girdle (Kânchî) ornament; Thy face is always gracious with sweet smiles;
Thy breasts defy the frontal globe of an elephant. Thou art ever
youthful as if twelve years old; Thy body is adorned all over with
ornaments! Thou art the waves of the ocean of S’ringâra (love
sentiments.) Thou art ever ready to show Thy grace to the devotees; on
Thy braid of hair garlands of Mallikâ and Mâlatî are shining; Thy body
is like a creeping plant, very gentle and tender; Thou art seated in the
middle of Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>alam as the Chief Directrix; Thy one hand is
ready to grant boons and another hand expresses “Have no fear.” Thou art
of a peaceful appearance; Thou art ever youthful; Thou art seated on a
jewel throne; Thou art the foremost guide of the Gopîkâs; Thou art
dearer to Kri<u>sn</u>a than even His life; O Parame’svarî! The Vedas
reveal Thy nature. Meditating thus, one is to bathe the Devî on a
S’âlagrâma stone, jar, yantra or the eight petalled lotus and then
worship Her duly. First the Devî is to be invoked; then Pâdya and Âsana,
etc., are to be offered, the principal Mantra being pronounced at every
time an offering

 

<span id="page_1004">p. 1004</span>

 

is given. After giving water for washing both the feet, Arghya is to be
placed on the head and Âchamanîyam water to be offered three times on
the face. Madhuparka (an oblation of honey, milk etc.) and a cow giving
a good quantity of milk are next to be offered. Then the yantra is to be
thought of as the bathing place where the Devî is to be bathed. Then Her
body is to be wiped and a fresh cloth given for putting on. Sandalpaste
and various other ornaments are next to be given. Various garlands of
flowers with Tulasî Manjari (flower stalks) Pârijâta flower and
Satapatra etc., then, are to be offered. Then within the eight petals,
the family members of the Devî are to be thought of; worship is next to
be offered in the right hand direction (with the hands of the watch).
First of all, Mâlâvatî on the petal in front of (on the east) the Devî,
then Mâdhavî on the southeast corner, then Ratnamâlâ on the south,
Sus’îlâ on the south-west, Sas’ikalâ on the west, Pârijâta on the
north-west, Parâvatî on the north and the benefactious Sundarî on the
north-east corner are to be worshipped in order. Outside this, Brâhmî
and the other Mâtrikâs are to be worshipped and on the Bhûpûras (the
entrances of the yantra,) the Regents of the quarters, the Dikpâlas and
the weapons of the Devî, thunderbolt, etc., are to be worshipped . Then
all the attendant Deities of the Devî are to be worshipped with scents
and various other articles. Thus finishing the worship, one should chant
the <u>S</u>totra (hymns) named Sahasra-nâma (thousand names)
<u>S</u>totra with care and devotion. O Nârada! The intelligent man who
worships thus the Râses’varî Devî Râdhâ, becomes like Vi<u>sn</u>u and
goes to the Goloka.

 

He who performs the birthday anniversary of S’rî Râdhâ on the Full-Moon
day of the month of Kârtik, gets the blessings of S’rî Râdhâ who remains
near to him. For some reason Râdhâ, the dweller in Goloka was born in
Brindâban as the daughter of Vri<u>s</u>avânu. However, according to the
number of letters of the mantras that are mentioned in this chapter,
Pura<u>s</u>chara<u>n</u>a is to be made and Homa, one-tenth of
Pura<u>s</u>chara<u>n</u>a, is to be then performed. The Homa is to be
done with ghee, honey, and milk; the three sweet things mixed with Til
and with devotion.

 

45\. Nârada said :-- “O Bhagavân; Now describe the <u>S</u>totra (hymn)
Mantra by which the Devî is pleased.”

 

46-100. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Now I am saying the Râdhâ
<u>S</u>totra. Listen. O Thou, the Highest Deity, the Dweller in Râsa
Ma<u>nd</u>alam! I bow down to Thee; O Thou, the Chief Directrix of the
Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>alam; O Thou dearer to Kri<u>sn</u>a than His life even,
I bow down to Thee. O Thou, the Mother of the three Lokas! O Thou the
Ocean of

 

<span id="page_1005">p. 1005</span>

 

mercy! Be pleased. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and the other Devas bow down
before Thy lotus feet. Thou art Sarasvatî; Thou art Savitrî; Thou art
S’ankarî; I bow down to Thee; Thou art Gangâ; Thou art Padmâvatî; Thou
art <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî; Thou art Mangalâ Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ; Thou art
Manasâ; Thou art Tulasî; Thou art Durgâ; Thou art Bhagavatî; Thou art
Lak<u>s</u>mî; Thou art all, I bow down to Thee. Thou art the Mûla
Prakriti; Thou art the Ocean of mercy. Obeisance to Thee! Be merciful to
us and save us from this ocean of Samsâra (round of birth and death). O
Nârada! Anybody who remembers Râdhâ and reads this <u>S</u>totra three
times a day does not feel the want of anything in this world. He will
ultimately go to Goloka and remain in the Râsa Ma<u>nd</u>alam. O Child
This great secret ought never to be given out to any. Now I am telling
you the method of worship of the Durgâ Devî. Hear. When any one
remembers Durgâ in this world, all his difficulties and troubles are
removed. It is not seen that anybody does not remember Durgâ. She is the
object of worship of all. She is the Mother of all and the Wonderful
S’akti of Mahâdeva. She is the Presiding Deity of the intellect (Buddhi)
of all and She controls the hearts of all and She removes the great
difficulties and dangers of all. Therefore She is named Durgâ in the
world. She is worshipped by all, whether a S’aiva or a Vai<u>sn</u>ava.
She is the Mûla Prakriti and from Her the creation, preservation and
destruction of the universe proceed. O Nârada! Now I am saying the
principal nine lettered Durgâ Mantra, the best of all the Mantras. “Aim
Hrîm Klîm Châmu<u>nd</u>âyai Vichche” is the nine lettered Vîja mantra
of S’rî Durgâ; it is like a Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a yielding all desires.
One should worship this mantra by all means. Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and
Mahes’a are the Ri<u>s</u>is of this mantra; Gâyatrî, U<u>sn</u>ik and
Anu<u>st</u>hubha are the chhandas; Mahâkâlî, Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî and
Sarasvatî are the Devatâs; Rakta Dantikâ, Durgâ, and Bhrâmarî are the
Vîjas. Nandâ, Sâkambharî, and Bhîmâ are the S’aktis and Dharma (Virtue),
Artha (wealth) and Kâma (desires), are the places of application
(Viniyoga). Assign the head to the Ri<u>s</u>i of the mantra (Nyâsa);
assign the chhandas to the mouth and assign the Devatâ to the heart.
Then assign the S’akti to the right breast for the success and assign
the Vîja to the left breast.

 

Then perform the <u>S</u>a<u>d</u>amga Nyâsa as follows :-- Aim
Hridayâya namah, Hrîm S’irase Svâhâ, Klîm S’ikhâyâm Va<u>s</u>a<u>t</u>,
Châmu<u>nd</u>âyai Kavachâya Hum, Vichche Netrâbhyâm
Vau<u>s</u>a<u>t</u>, “Aim Hrîm Klîm Châmu<u>nd</u>âyai Vichche”
Karatalapri<u>s</u>ihâbhyâm Pha<u>t</u>. Next say touching the
corresponding parts of the body :-- “Aim namah S’ikhâyâm, Hrîm Namah” on
the right eye; “Klîm Namah” on the left eye, “Châm Namah” on

 

<span id="page_1006">p. 1006</span>

 

the right ear, “Mum namah” on the left ear, <u>nd</u>am Namah” on the
nostrils; “Vim Namah” on the face; “Chchem Namah” on the anus and
finally “Aim Hrîm Klîm Châmu<u>nd</u>âyai Vichche” on the whole body.
Then do the meditation (dhyân) thus :-- “O Châmu<u>nd</u>e! Thou art
holding in Thy ten hands ten weapons, viz., Kha<u>d</u>ga (axe), Chakra
(disc), Gadâ (club), Vâ<u>n</u>a (arrows), Châpa (bow), Parigha, Sûla
(spear), Bhûs’u<u>nd</u>î Kapâla, and Kha<u>d</u>ga. Thou art Mahâ Kâlî;
Thou art three-eyed; Thou art decked with various ornaments. Thou
shinest like Lilânjan (a kind of black pigment). Thou hast ten faces and
ten feet. The Lotus born Brahmâ chanted hymns to Thee for the
destruction of Madhu Kaitabha; I bow down to Thee.” Thus one should
meditate on Mahâ Kâlî, of the nature of Kâmavîja (the source whence will
comes). Then the Dhyânam of Mahâ Laksmî runs as follows :-- O Mahâ
Lak<u>s</u>mî, the destroyer of Mahi<u>s</u>âsura! Thou holdest the
garland of Ak<u>s</u>a (a kind of seed), Paras’u (a kind of axe), Gadâ
(club), I<u>s</u>u (arrows), Kulis’a (the thunderbolt) Padmâ (Lotus),
Dhanu (bow), Ku<u>n</u>dikâ (a student’s waterpot), Kama<u>n</u>dalu,
Da<u>nd</u>a (rod for punishment), S’akti (a kind of weapon), Asi
(sword), Charma (shield) Padmâ (a kind of waterlily), Gha<u>nt</u>â
(bell,) S’urâpâtra (a pot to hold liquor), S’ûla (pickaxe), Pâs’a
(noose) and Sudar<u>s</u>ana (a kind of weapon). Thy colour is of the
Rising Sun. Thou art seated on the red Lotus. Thou art of the nature
Mâyâvîja (the source whence female energy comes). So Obeisance to Thee!
(The Vîja and the Devî are one and identical). Next comes the Dhyânam of
Mahâ Sarasvatî as follows :-- O Mahâ Sarasvatî! Thou holdest bell,
pickaxe, plough (Hala), Conch shell, Mu<u>s</u>ala (a kind of club),
Sudars’ana, bow and arrows. Thy colour is like Ku<u>nd</u>a flower; Thou
art the destroyer of S’umbha and the other Daityas; Thou art of the
nature of Vâ<u>n</u>îvîja (the source whence knowledge, speech comes).
Thy body is filled with everlasting existence, intelligence and bliss.
Obeisance to Thee! O Nârada! Now I am going to say on the Yantra of Mahâ
Sarasvatî. Listen. First draw a triangle. Draw inside the triangle eight
petalled lotus having twenty-four leaves. Within this draw the house.
Then on the Yantra thus drawn, or in the S’âlagrâma stone, or in the
jar, or in image, or in the Vâ<u>n</u>ali<u>n</u>gam, or on the Sun, one
should worship the Devî with oneness of heart. Then worship the
Pî<u>t</u>ha, the deities seated also on the dais, i.e., Jayâ, Vîjayâ,
Ajitâ, Aghorâ, Mangalâ and other Pî<u>t</u>ha S’aktis. Then worship the
attendant deities called Âvara<u>n</u>a Pûjâ :-- Brahmâ with Sarasvatî
on the east, Nârâya<u>n</u>a with Lak<u>s</u>mî on the Nairirit corner,
S’ankara with Pârvatî on the Vâyu corner, the Lion on the north of the
Devî, and Mahâsura on the left side of the Devî; finally worship
Mahi<u>s</u>a (buffalo). Next worship

 

<span id="page_1007">p. 1007</span>

 

Nandajâ, Raktadantâ, S’akambharî, S’ivâ, Durgâ, Bhîmâ, and Bhrâmarî.
Then on the eight petals worship Brahmâ, Mahes’varî, Kaumârî,
Vai<u>sn</u>avî, Vârâhî, Nâra Simhî, Aindrî, and Châmu<u>nd</u>â. Next
commencing from the leaf in front of the Devî, worship on the twenty
four leaves Vi<u>sn</u>u Mâyâ, Chetanâ, Buddhi, Nidrâ (sleep), hunger,
shadow, S’akti, thirst, peace, species (Jâti), modesty, faith, fame,
Lak<u>s</u>mî (wealth), fortitude, Vriti, S’ruti, memory, mercy,
Tu<u>st</u>i, Pu<u>st</u>i (nourishment), Bhrânti (error) and other
Mâtrikâs. Next on the corners of the Bhûpura (gates of the Yantra),
Ganes’a K<u>s</u>ettrapâlas, Va<u>t</u>uka and Yoginîs are to be
worshipped. Then on the outside of that Indra and the other Devas
furnished with weapons are to be worshipped as per the aforesaid rules.
For the satisfaction of the World-Mother various nice offerings and
articles like those given by the royal personages are to be presented to
the Mother; then the mantra is to be repeated, understanding its
exoteric and esoteric meanings. Then Saptas’ati stitra (Cha<u>nd</u>î
pâ<u>t</u>ha) is to be repeated before the Devî. There is no other
stotra like this in the three worlds. Thus Durgâ, the Deity of the
Devas, is to be appeased every day. He who does this gets within his
easy reach Dharma, Artha, Kâma, and Mok<u>s</u>a, the four main objects
of human pursuits (virtue, wealth, enjoyment and final beatitude). O
Nârada! Thus I have described to you the method of worship of the Devî
Durgâ. People get by this what they want. Hari, Brahmâ, and all the
Devas, Manus, Munis, the Yogîs full of knowledge, the Âs’ramîs, and
Lak<u>s</u>mî and the other Devas all meditate on S’ivânî. One’s birth
is attained with success at the remembrance of Durgâ. The fourteen Manus
have got their Manuship and the Devas their own rights by meditating on
the lotus feet of Durgâ. O Nârada! Thus I have described to you the very
hidden histories of the Five Prakritis and their parts. Then, verily,
the four objects of human pursuits Dharma, Artha, Kâma and Mok<u>s</u>a
are obtained by hearing this. He who has no sons gets sons, who has no
learning gets learning and whoever wants anything gets that if he hears
this. The Devî Jagaddhâtrî becomes certainly pleased with him who reads
with his mind concentrated on this for nine nights before the Devî. The
Devî becomes obedient to him who daily reads one chapter of this Ninth
Skandha and the reader also does what is acceptable to the Devî. To
ascertain before-hand what effects, merits or demerits, would accrue
from reading this Bhâgavata, it is necessary by examining through the
hands of a virgin girl or a Brâhmi<u>n</u> child, the auspicious or
inauspicious signs. First make a Sankalpa (resolve) and worship the
book. Then bow down again and again to the Devî Durgâ. Then bring there
a virgin girl, bathed well and worship her duly and have a golden pencil
fixed duly in her

 

<span id="page_1008">p. 1008</span>

 

hand and placed in the middle on the body. Then calculate the auspicious
or inauspicious effects, as the case may be, from the curves made by
that pencil. So the effects of reading this Bhâgavata would be. If the
virgin girl be indifferent in fixing the pencil within the area drawn,
know the result of reading the Bhâgavata would be similar. There is no
doubt in this.

 

Here ends the Fiftieth Chapter of the Ninth Book on the Glory of S’akti
in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

Here ends the Ninth Book.

 

The Ninth Book Completed.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk10ch01)
