[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk09ch13)  [Next](bk09ch15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XIV**

** **

**On the story of Gangâ becoming the wife of Nârâya<u>n</u>a**

 

<span id="page_862">p. 862</span>

 

1-2. Nârada said :-- O Lord! Gangâ, Lak<u>s</u>mî, Sarasvatî, and the
world purifying Tulasî, these four, are dearest to Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Out
of these, Gangâ went from the region of Goloka to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. So I
have heard. But how did She come to be the wife of Nârâya<u>n</u>a. I
have not heard. Kindly describe this.

 

3\. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Brahmâ came from Goloka to the region of
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha accompanied by Gangâ.

 

4-23. Brahmâ said to Nârâya<u>n</u>a :-- O Lord! Gangâ, born of the
bodies of Râdhâ and Kri<u>sn</u>a, full of youth, modest,
extraordinarily beautiful, of pure Suddha Sattva, and void of anger and
egoism, does not like to marry anyone save Thee as She is born of Thee.
But Râdhâ is of a very proud nature and very wrathful. She was even
ready to drink up Gangâ. But Gangâ at once and intelligently took refuge
into the feet of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. So the whole Goloka became void of
water. Seeing this, I have come here to know in particular the whole
history of the case. Then S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Knower and the Ruler
of the hearts of all, came to know my heart and instantly caused Gangâ
to issue from His toe and handed Her over to me. I bowed down to S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a and now I have come with Gangâ to Thee. Now Thou dost
marry the Sures'varî Gangâ according to the Gândharva rule of marriage.
As Thou art a Deva of taste and humorous in the assembly of the Devas,
so Gangâ is. As Thou art a gem amongst the males, so She is the gem
amongst the females. And the union of a humorous man with a humorous
woman is exceedingly pleasant. Now marry this Lady who has come of Her
own

 

<span id="page_863">p. 863</span>

 

accord to Thee. S’rî Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî becomes annoyed with one who
does not marry a woman who has come spontaneously. There is no doubt in
this. The wise men do never insult the Prak<u>r</u>iti. All the
Puru<u>s</u>as (males) are born of Prak<u>r</u>iti and all the females
are parts of Prak<u>r</u>iti. So Prak<u>r</u>iti and Puru<u>s</u>a are
both inseparable and verily one and the same. So these two should never
insult each other. (If Thou sayest that Gangâ is attached to
Kri<u>sn</u>a; how canst Thou marry Her. The reply is) As S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a is beyond the attributes and beyond Prak<u>r</u>iti, so
Thou art also above Prak<u>r</u>iti. The one-half of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a
is two-armed; the other half of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a is four-armed. Râdhâ
has appeared from the left side of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. He Himself is the
right half and Padmâ is His left-half. As there is no difference between
Râdhâ and Kamalâ so there is no difference between S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a
and Thee. Therefore as Gangâ is born of Thy body, she wants to marry
Thee. As Prak<u>r</u>iti and Puru<u>s</u>a are really one and the same
without any difference, so the males and females are one. Thus speaking
to Nârâya<u>n</u>a, Brahmâ handed Gangâ over to Nârâya<u>n</u>a and went
away. Nârâya<u>n</u>a, then, married Gangâ smeared with sandal paste and
flowers, according to the rules of the Gandarbha marriage. The Lord of
Lak<u>s</u>mî then spent his time happily in enjoyment with Gangâ. Gangâ
had to go to the earth (under the Bhârati's curse) and afterwards
returned to Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha. As Gangâ appeared from the feet of
Vi<u>sn</u>u, She is denominated Vis<u>nu</u>padî. Gangâ Devî was very
much overpowered with enjoyment in Her first intercourse with
Nârâya<u>n</u>a; so much so that She remained motionless. Thus Gangâ
spent the days happily with Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Sarasvatî’s jealousy
towards Gangâ did not disappear, though She was advised by Lak<u>s</u>mî
Devî not to do so. Sarasvatî cherished incessantly the feeling of
jealousy towards Gangâ. But Gangâ had not the least feeling of jealousy
towards Sarasvatî.

 

At last, one day, when vexed too much, Gangâ became angry and cursed
Sarasvatî to take Her birth in Bhârata. So Lak<u>s</u>mî, Sarasvatî and
Gangâ were the wives of Nârâya<u>n</u>a. Lastly Tulasî became the wife
of Nârâya<u>n</u>a. So the number of wives of Nârâya<u>n</u>a amounted
to four.

 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter in the Ninth Book on the story of Gangâ
becoming the wife of Nârâya<u>n</u>a in the Mahâpura<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](bk09ch15.md)
