[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk08ch24)  [Next](bk09ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE NINTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

 

**On the description of Prak<u>r</u>iti**

<span id="page_797">p. 797</span>

 

1\. S’ri Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- This (Highest) Prak<u>r</u>iti is
recognised as five-fold. When She is engaged in the work of Creation,
She appears as :-- (1) Durgâ, the Mother of Ga<u>n</u>es’a,  (2) Râdhâ,
(3) Laksmî, (4) Sarasvatî and (5) Sâvitrî.

 

2-3. Nârada replied :-- O Thou, the best of Jñânins! Who is this
Prak<u>r</u>iti? (Whether She is of the nature of Intelligence or of
matter?) Why did She manifest Herself and then again why did She reveal
Herself in these five forms? And what are Her characteristics? Now Thou
oughtest to describe the lives of all, the different modes of their
worship, and the fruits that are accrued thereby. Please also inform me
which Forms of them manifested themselves in which different places.
Dost Thou please narrate to me all these.

 

4-18. Nârâyana said :-- “O Child! Who is there in this world that can
describe fully the characteristics of Prak<u>r</u>iti! However I will
describe to you that much which I heard from my own father, Dharma.
Hear. The prefix “Pra” in the word Prak<u>r</u>iti means exalted,
superior, excellent; and the affix “K<u>r</u>iti” denotes creation. So
the Goddess, the Devî Who is the most excellent in the work of creation
is known as the Devî Prak<u>r</u>iti. To come closer :-- “Pra” signifies
the Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a, the most exalted quality, “K<u>r</u>i” denotes
the Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a and “Ti” denotes the Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a. (The Sattva
Gu<u>n</u>a is considered as the Highest as it is perfectly clear and
free from any impurities whatsoever; the Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a is considered
intermediate as it has this defect :-- that it spreads a veil over the
reality of things, so as not to allow men to understand the True
Reality, while the Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a is considered worst as it completely
hides the Real Knowledge).

 

So when this Intelligence of the nature of Brahmâ, beyond the three
attributes, gets tinged with the above three Gu<u>n</u>as and becomes
omnipotent, then She is superior (Pradhânâ) in the work of creation.
Hence She is styled as Prak<u>r</u>iti.

 

<span id="page_798">p. 798</span>

 

O Child Nârada! The state just preceding that of creation is denoted by
“Pra”; and “K<u>r</u>i” signifies creation. So the Great Devî that
exists before creation is called Prak<u>r</u>iti after creation. The
Paramâtmâ by His Yoga (i.e., Mâyâ S’akti, the Holy Ghost) divided
Himself into two parts; the right side of which was male and the left
side was the female Prak<u>r</u>iti.

(Note :-- The Holy Ghost is the principle of Conception and Emanation,
Creation). So the Prak<u>r</u>iti is of the nature of Brahmâ. She is
eternal. As the fire and its burning power are not different, so there
is no separate distinction between Âtman and His S’akti, between
Puru<u>s</u>a and Prak<u>r</u>iti. Therefore those that are foremost and
the highest of the Yogis do not recognise any difference between a male
and a female. All is Brâhman. He is everywhere as male and female
forever. There is nothing in this world that can exist for a moment even
without this Brâhman consisting of male and female. (i.e. they are
Brâhman with Mâyâ manifested). Out of the Will of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, to
create the world Whose Will is all in all, came out at once the Mûlâ
Prak<u>r</u>iti, the Great Devî Îs’varî, (the Lady Controller of the
Universe) Brahmâ with Mâyâ in a state of equilibrium). By Her command
came out five Forms of Her, either for the purpose of creation or for
bestowing Favour and Grace to the Bhaktas (devotees). Durgâ the Mother
of Ga<u>n</u>es’a, comes, as the first, the most auspicious, loved by
S’iva. She is Nârâya<u>n</u>î, Vi<u>sn</u>u Mâyâ, and of the nature of
Pûr<u>n</u>a Brahmâ (the Supreme Brahmâ). This eternal, all auspicious
Devî is the Presiding Deity of all the Devas and is, therefore,
worshipped and praised by Brahmâ and the other Devas, Munis, and Manus.
This Bhagavatî Durgâ Devî, (when She gets pleased) destroys all the
sorrows, pains and troubles of the Bhaktas that have taken Her refuge,
and gives them Dharma, everlasting name and fame, all auspicious things
and bliss and all the happiness, nay, the Final Liberation! She is the
Greatest Refugeof these Bhaktas that come to Her wholly for protection
and are in great distress, whom She saves from all their dangers and
calamities. In fact, know this Durgâ Devî as, verily, the Presiding
Deity of the heart of Kri<u>sn</u>a and as His Highest S’akti, of the
nature of the Holy Fire and the Holy Light. She is Omnipotent and
resides always with Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Great God. She is worshipped by
all the Siddha Puru<u>s</u>as (those that have attained success); the
(eighteen) Siddhis all go to Her and when pleased She gives whatever
Siddhis (success) that Her Bhaktas want.

 

19-40. This Great Devî is the intelligence, sleep, hunger, thirst,
shadow, drowsiness, fatigue, kindness, memory, caste, forbearance,
errors, peace, beauty, and consciousness, contentment, nourishment,
prosperity, and fortitude. She is sung in the Vedas and in other
S’âstras

 

<span id="page_799">p. 799</span>

 

as the Mahâ Mâyâ, of the nature of the Universe. In reality, She is the
All-S’akti of the Universe and She is the S’akti of Kri<u>sn</u>a. All
these qualities are also mentioned in the Vedas. What is mentioned here
is a tithe merely, in comparison to that of the Vedas. She has infinite
qualities. Now hear of other S’aktis. The second S’akti of the
Paramâtman is named Padmâ (Lak<u>s</u>mî). She is of the nature of
S’uddha Sattva (Higher than Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a) and is Kri<u>sn</u>a’s
Presiding Deity of all wealth and prosperity. This very beautiful
Lak<u>s</u>mi Devî is the complete master of the senses; She is of a
very peaceful temper, of good mood and all-auspicious. She is free from
greed, delusion, lust, anger, vanity and egoism. She is devoted to Her
husband and to Her Bhaktas; Her words are very sweet and She is very
dear to Her husband, indeed, the Life and Soul of Him. This Devî is
residing in all the grains and vegetables and so She is the Source of
Life of all the beings. She is residing in Vaikun<u>t</u>ha as Mahâ
Laksmî, chaste and always in the service of Her husband. She is the
Heavenly Lak<u>s</u>mî, residing in the Heavens and the royal
Lak<u>s</u>mî in palaces and the Griha Lak<u>s</u>mî in the several
families of several householders. O Nârada! All the lovely beauty that
you see in all the living beings and all the things, it is She; She is
the glory and fame of those that have done good and pious works and it
is She that is the prowess of the powerful kings. She is the trade of
merchants, the mercy of the saints, engaged in doing good to others and
the seed of dissensions in those sinful and vicious persons as approved
of in the Vedas. She is worshipped by all, reverenced by all. Now I will
describe to you about the third S’akti of the Great God who is the
Presiding Deity of knowledge, speech, intelligence, and learning. This
third S’akti is named Sarasvatî. She is all the learning of this endless
Universe and She resides as medhâ (intelligence) in the hearts of all
the human beings; She is the power in composing poetry; She is the
memory and She is the great wit, light, splendour and inventive genius.
She gives the power to understand the real meaning of the various
difficult Siddhânta works; She explains and makes us understand the
difficult passages and She is the remover of all doubts and
difficulties. She acts when we write books, when we argue and judge,
when we sing songs of music; She is the time or measure in music; She
holds balance and union in vocal and instrumental music. She is the
Goddess of speech; She is the Presiding Deity in the knowledge of
various subjects; in argumentations and disputations. In fact all the
beings earn their livelihood by taking recourse to Her. She is peaceful
and holds in Her hands Vî<u>n</u>â (lute) and books. Her nature is
purely Sâttvic (S’uddha Sattva), modest and very loving to S’rî Hari.
Her colour is white like ice-clad mountains, like that of the white
sandal, like that of the Kunda flower, like that of the Moon, or white
lotus. She always repeats

 

<span id="page_800">p. 800</span>

 

the name of Paramâtmâ S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a while She turns Her bead
composed of jewels. Her nature is ascetic; She is the bestower of the
fruits of the ascetism of the ascetics; She is the Siddhi and Vidyâ of
all; She grants always success to all. Were She not here, the whole host
of Brâhmi<u>n</u>s would always remain speechless like the dead cluster
of persons. What is recited in the Vedas as the Third Devî is the Holy
Word, The Third S’akti, Sarasvatî. Thus I have described Her. Now hear
the glories of the other Devî in accordance with the Vedas. She is the
mother of the four colours (castes), the origin of the (six) Vedâmgas
(the limbs of the Vedas and all the Chhandas, the Seed of all the
mantrams of Sandhyâ vandanam and the Root, the Seed of the Tantras; She
Herself is versed in all the subjects. Herself an ascetic, She is the
Tapas of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s; She is the Tejas (Fire) and the caste of
the Brâhmi<u>n</u> caste and embodies in Herself all sorts of Samskâras
(tendencies; inclinations); She is the Japam. Pure, known by the names
of Sâvitrî and Gâyatrî, She resides always in the Brahmâ Loka (the
Sphere of Brahmâ) and is such as all the sacred places of pilgrimages
want Her touch for their purification.

 

41-47. Her colour is perfectly white like the pure crystal. She is
purely S’uddha Sattva, of the nature of the Highest Bliss; She is
eternal and superior to all. She is of the nature of Para Brahmâ and is
the bestower of Mok<u>s</u>a. She is the Fiery S’akti and the Presiding
Deity of the Brahmâ Teja (the fiery spirit of Brahmâ, and the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as). The whole world is purified by the touch of Whose
Feet, this Sâvitrî Devî is the Fourth S’akti. O Child Nârada! Now I will
describe to you about the Fifth S’akti, the Devî Râdhikâ. Hear. She is
the Presiding Deity of the five Prâ<u>n</u>as; She Herself is the Life
of all; dearer than life even to S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a; and She is highly
more beautiful and superior to all the other Prak<u>r</u>iti Devîs. She
dwells in everything; She is very proud of Her good fortune
(Saubhâgyam); Her glory is infinite; and She is the wife, the left body,
as it were, of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a and She is not in any way inferior to
Him, either in quality or in the Tejas (Fiery Spirit) or in any other
thing. She is higher than the Highest; the Essence of all, infinitely
superior, the First of all, Eternal, of the nature of the Highest Bliss,
fortunate, highly respected, and worshipped by all. She is, the
Presiding Devî of the Râsa Lîlâ of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a. From Her has
sprung the Râsa ma<u>nd</u>alam and She is the Grace and the Ornament of
the Râsa ma<u>nd</u>alam (the dance in a circle in Râsa).

 

\[Note :-- Extracts from a paper on Creation as explained by Hon’ble
Justice Sir G. Woodroffe.

The lecturer commenced by pointing out that an examination of any
doctrine of creation reveals two fundamental concepts: Those of Being

 

<span id="page_801">p. 801</span>

 

(Ku<u>t</u>astha) and Becoming (Bhava); Changelessness and Change; the
one and Many. The Brahmân or Spirit in its own nature (Svarupa) is and
never becomes. It is the evolutes derived from the Principle of Becoming
(Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti) which constitute what is called Nature. The
latter principle is essentially Movement. The world is displayed by
consciousness (chit) in association with Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti in cosmic
vibration (spandana). Recent Western hypotheses have made scientific
“matter” into Mâyâ in the sense that it is but the varied appearances
produced in our mind by vibration of and in the single substance ether.
The doctrine of vibration (Spandana) is however in India an ancient
inheritance. The whole world is born from the varied forms of the
initial movement in Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti. The problem is how does such
multiplicity exist without derogation to the essential unit of its
efficient cause, the spirit? The lecturer then made a rapid survey of
the Sânkhya philosophy on this point which assumes two real and
independent principles of Being and Becoming which it calls
Puru<u>s</u>a and Prak<u>r</u>iti and passed from this the easiest
dualistic answer to the pure monism of S’ankara which asserted that
there was but one Principle of Being, the Sadvastu and Mâyâ, whether
considered as a S’akti of Îs’vara or as the product of such S’akti was
Avastu or nothing. He then pointed out that the Tântrik doctrine with
which he dealt occupied a middle position between those two points of
view. S’iva in the Kulârnava Tantra says “Some desire Monism”
(Advaitavâda), others Dualism (Dvaitavâda). Such, however, know not My
Truth which is neither Monism nor Dualism (Dvaitâdvaitâ Vivarjita).
Tantra is not Dvaitavâda for it does not recognise Prak<u>r</u>iti as an
independent unconscious principle (Achit). It differs from S’ankara’s
Advaitavâda in holding that Prak<u>r</u>iti as a conscious principle of
Becoming, that is as S’akti, is not Avastu, though its displayed
picture, the world is Mâyâ. It effects a synthesis of the S’ânkhya
dualism by the conversion of the twin principles of Puru<u>s</u>a and
Prak<u>r</u>iti into the unity which is the Ardhanârîs’vara S’iva
S’akti.

 

As regards other matters it adopts the notions of the Sânkhya such as
the concepts of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti with the three Gu<u>n</u>as,
vibration (spandana), evolution (Parinâma) of the Vikritis and the order
of emanation of the Tattvas. S’akti which effects this exists and is
Herself never unconscious (Achit) though It has the power to make the
Jîva think It is such. If this were understood one would not hear such
nonsense as that the S’âktas (whose religion is one of the oldest in the
world) worship material force or gross matter (Ja<u>d</u>a).

 

<span id="page_802">p. 802</span>

 

The lecturer then shortly explained the nature of S’akti (S’akti
Tattva), a term which derived from the root “S’ak” meant the Divine
Power whereby the world was created, manifested and destroyed. In Tantra
the power and the Lord who wields it (S’aktimân) are one and the same,
S’iva and S’akti are one and the same, S’iva is Brahmân, S’akti is
Brahmân. The first is the transcendent, the second the immanent aspect
of the one Brahmân, Who is both S’iva and S’akti. The Mother creates
(Kârya-Vibhâvinî). The Father wills what She does (Kârya-Vibhâvaka).
From their union creation comes. S’akti is not like the diminutive
female figure which is seen on the lap of some Indian images, to which
is assigned the subordinate position which some persons consider a Hindu
wife should occupy. She is not a handmaid of the Lord but the Lord
Himself in Her aspect as Mother of the worlds. This S’akti is both
Nirgu<u>n</u>a and Sagu<u>n</u>a that is Chit S’akti and Mâyâ S’akti.

 

After this defining the nature of S’akti by which the world was created,
the lecturer commenced an account of its manifestation as the universe,
following in the main the S’âradâ Tilaka written in the eleventh century
by Laksmanâchârya, the guru of the celebrated Kashmiran Tântrik,
Abhinava Gupta. The following is a very abbreviated summary of this, the
main portion of the paper. The lecturer first referred to the
Aghanâvasthâ state which was that Ni<u>s</u>kala S’iva and touching upon
the question why S’iva became Sakala (associated with Kalâ) and creative
explained the term Kalâ and the theory of Adri<u>st</u>asri<u>st</u>i
taught by the Tantra as by other S’astras. The former is according to
Sânkhya, Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti; according to Vedânta, Avidyâ and
according to the S’iva Tantra, S’akti. The latter is the doctrine that
the impulse to creation is proximately caused by the Karma of the Jîvas.
It is the seed of Karma which contains the germ of cosmic will to life.
When Karma becomes ripe, there arises the state called
Îk<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a and other names indicative of creative desire and
will. There then takes place a development which is peculiar to the
Tantra called Sadris’a Pari<u>n</u>âma, which is a kind of Vivartta. The
development is only apparent for there is no real change in the
Ânandamaya Ko<u>s</u>a. S’akti which exists in Sakala S’iva in a purely
potential state is said to issue from Him. This is the first kinetic
aspect of S’akti in which Sattagu<u>n</u>a is displayed. This is the
Paramâkâ<u>s</u>âvasthâ. Nâda (sound, word) then appears. S’akti becomes
further kinetic through the enlivening of the Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a. This is
the Aksarâvasthâ. Then under the influence of Tamas, Î<u>s</u>vara
becomes Ghanibhûta and what is called the Parâvindu. This is the
Avyaktâvasthâ. Thus the Supreme Vindu men call by different names, Mahâ
Vi<u>sn</u>u, Brahmâ Purû<u>s</u>a, or Devî. It is compared to a grain
of gram which under its sheath contains two seeds in undivided

 

<span id="page_803">p. 803</span>

 

union. These are S’iva S’akti and their encircling sheath is Mâyâ. This
Vindu unfolds and displays itself, in the threefold aspect of Vindu,
Vîja, Nâda; or S’iva, S’akti, and S’iva S’akti; the three S’aktis of
will, knowledge and action. This is the mysterious Kâma Kalâ which is
the root of all Mantras. These seven :-- Sakala, S’iva, S’akti, Nâda,
Parâvindu, Vindu, Vîja, Nâda are all aspects of S’akti which are the
seven divisions of the Mantra Om and constitute what is called the
creation of Parâ sound in the Îs’vara creation.

 

The lecturer having explained the nature of these S’aktis which formed
part of the sound (S’abda), Sadri<u>s</u>a Parinâma, referred to the
form or meaning (Artha) creation in the same development by the
appearance of the six S’ivas from S’ambu to Brahmâ which were aggregate
(Sama<u>st</u>i) sound powers. It was he said, on the differentiation of
the Parâvindu that there existed the completed causal S’abda which is
the Hidden Word. The causal body or Parâ S’abda and Artha being
complete, there then appeared the displayed word or S’abdârtha. This is
a composite like the Greek Logos. The S’abda Brahmân or Brahmân as cause
of S’abda is the Chaitanya in all beings. The S’abdârtha in the Vedantin
Nâmarûpa or world of name and form of this S’abdârtha the subtle and
gross bodies are constituted, the S’aktis of which are the
Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha sound, called Madhyamâ and the Virâ<u>t</u> sound
Vaikhârî. By S’abda is not meant merely physical sound which as a
quality of atomic ether is evolved from Tâmasik Ahamkâra.

 

The lecturer then pointed out that there had been Adri<u>st</u>a
Sri<u>st</u>i up to the appearance of S’akti and Vivartta development up
to the completion of the “word” or causal sound. Then there takes place
real evolution (Pari<u>n</u>âma) in which the Tattvas (or elements
discovered as a result of psychological analysis of our worldly
experience) are said to emanate according to the Sânkhya and not the
Vedantic scheme, though there were some peculiarities in the Tantrik
exposition which the lecturer noted. Finally Yogika Sri<u>st</u>i was
accepted in so far as it was the elements which in varied combinations
made up the gross world.

 

In conclusion the lecturer pointed out that Indian S’âstra was a
mutually connected whole. Such peculiarities as existed in any
particular S’âstra were due to a variety of standpoints or purpose in
view. The main point in this connection to be remembered was that the
Tantra was practical S’âdhanâ S’âstra. Whilst S’ankara dealt with the
subject from the standpoint of Jñânakân<u>d</u>a, the Tantra treated it
from the point of view of worship (Upâsanâkân<u>d</u>a) the Tantrik
doctrine is compounded of various elements some of which it shared with
other S’âstras, some of which are its own, the whole being set forth
according to a method and terminology which is peculiar to itself.\]

 

<span id="page_804">p. 804</span>

 

48-70. She is the Lady of the Râsa Lîlâ, the Foremost of the Jovial,
humourous (witty) persons and dwells always in Râsa. Her abode is in
Goloka and from Her have come out all the Gopîkâs. Râsa – the circular
dance of Kri<u>sn</u>a and the cow-herdesses of Vrindâvana. Her nature
is the Highest Bliss, the Highest Contentment, and Excessive Joy; She
transcends the three Sattva, Rajo and Tamo Gu<u>n</u>as and is Nirâkâra
(without any particular form); but She dwells everywhere but unconnected
with any. She is the soul of all. She is without any effort to do
anything and void of Ahamkâra. She assumes forms only to show Her favour
to Her Bhaktas. The intelligent learned men (Pundits) read Her Mahimâ
(glories) in meditating on Her according to the Vedas. The chief of the
Devas and the Munis could never see Her; Her clothings are fire-proof
and She is decorated with many ornaments all over Her body. Her body
looks as if the crores of moons have risen all at once; She is the Giver
of Bhakti (devotion) towards Kri<u>sn</u>a, services towards
Kri<u>sn</u>a; and She bestows all wealth and prosperity. In Varâha
Kalpa, i.e., when the Varâha incarnation took place, She incarnated
Herself as the daughter of one Gopa (cow-herd), named Vrisabhânu. And
Earth was blessed by the touch of Her feet. She is such as Brahmâ and
the other Devas could never perceive Her by any of their senses, yet
everyone at Vrindâvan saw Her very easily. She is the Gem amongst women.
And when She is seen on the breast of Kri<u>sn</u>a, it seems that
lightnings flash in the blue mass of clouds in the sky. In days gone by,
Brahmâ practised several austerities for sixty thousand years to purify
Himself by seeing the nails of Her toe; but far from seeing that, He
could not have that even in his dreams. At last He succeeded in seeing
Her at Vrindâvana and became blessed. O Child Nârada! This is the fifth
Prak<u>r</u>iti and She is denominated as Râdhâ. Every female in every
Universe is sprung from a part of S’rî Râdhâ or part of a part. O
Nârada! Thus I have described to you the five Highest Prakritis, Durgâ
and others. Now I am going to describe those that are parts of these
Prak<u>r</u>itis. Hear. The Ganges, Gangâ has sprung from the lotus feet
of Vi<u>sn</u>u; Her form is fluid-like; She is eternal. And She is the
veritable burning fire to burn away the sins of the sinners. She is
sweet to touch in taking baths and in drinking; She gives final
liberation to the Jîvas, and leads easily to the Goloka abode. She is
the holiest amongst the places of pilgrimage and is the first of the
running rivers. She is the rows of pearls in the clotted hairs of
Mahâdeva’s head and She is the Tapasyâ (asceticism) incarnate of the
Tapasvîs (ascetics) of the Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a. This Ganges purifies
the three worlds and is the part of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti; She shines
like the Full Moon, is white like white lotus and like milk; She is pure
S’uddha Sattva, clear, free from any Ahamkâra, chaste and

 

<span id="page_805">p. 805</span>

 

beloved of Nârâyana. The Tulasî Devî is the consort of Vi<u>sn</u>u. She
is the ornament of Nârâya<u>n</u>a, and dwells always at the lotus feet
of Nârâyana. By Her are performed all the acts of worship, all
austerities, and all Sankalpas (resolves). She is the chief of all the
flowers, holy and able to give merits (Pu<u>n</u>yam) to others. At Her
sight and touch, Nirvâ<u>n</u>a can be obtained; and, were it not for
Her, there could be no other fire in this Kali Yuga to burn the sins.
She Herself is of the nature of Fire and at the touch of Whose
lotus-feet, the earth is purified; all the Tîrthas desire to have Her
sight and touch for purification and without Her all acts in this world
become fruitless. She bestows Mok<u>s</u>a (liberation) to those who
want final liberation, grants all sorts of desires to several people,
Who Herself is like a Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a, Who is the Presiding Deity of
all the trees in Bhârata and Who has come here to grant satisfaction to
the ladies of Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a and She is considered very superior
throughout all parts of India. This Tulasî Devî is the chief factor of
Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti.

 

71-95. Then comes the Manasâ Devî, the daughter of Kas’yapa. She is the
dear disciple of S’ankara and is therefore very learned in matters of
S’âstras. She is the daughter of Ananta Deva, the Lord of Snakes and is
very much respected by all the Nâgas. She Herself is very beautiful, the
Lady of the Nâgas, the mother of the Nâgas and is carried by them. She
is decorated with ornaments of the Snakes; She is respected by the
Nâgendras and She sleeps on the bed of Snakes. She is Siddha Yoginî, the
devotee of Vi<u>sn</u>u and always ready in the worship of Vi<u>sn</u>u;
She is the Tapas and the bestower of the fruits of Tapas. Herself an
ascetic, She spent three lakh years (according to the Deva measure) and
has become the foremost of the ascetics in Bhâratva<u>r</u>sa. She is
the Presiding Deity of all the mantras; Her whole body shines with
Brahmâteja (the Holy Fire of Brahmâ). Herself of the nature of Brahmâ,
She again meditates on Brahmân. She is sprung from a part of S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a and the chaste wife of Jarat Kâru Muni, the mother of
Âstika, the great Muni; She is the part of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti. O Child
Nârada! Now comes the S’a<u>st</u>hî Devî, the Mother of Devasenâ. She
is the most superior amongst the Gaurî and the sixteen Mâtrikâs. This
chaste woman is the giver of sons and grandsons in the three worlds and
the nurse, the foster mother of all. She is the sixth part of Mûlâ
Prak<u>r</u>iti and is hence known by the name of S’a<u>st</u>hî. She
lives near to every child as an aged Yoginî. Her worship is everywhere
prevalent in the twelve months Vais’âkha, etc. When the child gets born,
on the sixth day of Her worship is done in the lying-in-chamber and
again on the 21<sup>st</sup> day (after twenty days have passed away)
the most auspicious worshipful ceremony of Her is performed. The Munis
bow down to Her with reverence and want to visit Her daily.

 

<span id="page_806">p. 806</span>

 

She protects all children always with a mother’s affectionate heart.
This S’a<u>st</u>hî Devî is again the part of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti. Then
appears the Devî Mangala Cha<u>nd</u>ikâ. She goes from one house to
another, on land or through water or in air, doing great good to them;
She has come out of the face of the Prak<u>r</u>iti Devî and is doing
always all sorts of good to this world. Her name is Mangala
Cha<u>nd</u>î because She is all auspicious at the time of creation and
assumes very furious angry appearance at the time of destruction. So the
Pundits say. On every Tuesday in all the worlds Her worship is done; and
She, when pleased, gives to women sons, grandsons, wealth, prosperity,
fame and good of all sorts and grants all desires. This Mangala
Cha<u>nd</u>i is again the part of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti. Now comes the
lotus-eyed Mâhes’varî Kâlî who when angry can destroy all this universe
in a moment, who sprang from the forehead of the Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti,
Dûrgâ to slay the two demons S’umbha and Nis’umbha. She is the
half-portion of Dûrgâ and qualified like Her, fiery and energetic. The
beauty and splendour of whose body make one think as if the millions of
suns have arisen simultaneously. Who is the foremost of all the S’aktis
and is more powerful than any of them, Who grants success to all the
persons, Who is superior to all and is of Yogic nature, Who is
exceedingly devoted to Kri<u>sn</u>a and like Him fiery, well-qualified,
and valorous, Whose body has become black by the constant meditation of
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Who can destroy in one breath this whole
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a, Who was engaged in fighting with the Daityas simply
for sport and instruction to the people and Who, when pleased in worship
can grant the four fruits Dharma, Artha, Kâma and Mok<u>s</u>a. This
Kâlî is also the part of Prak<u>r</u>iti. The Devî Basundharâ (Earth) is
again the part of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti. Brahmâ and the other Devas, all
the Muni ma<u>nd</u>alams (the spheres of Munis), fourteen Manus and all
men sing hymns to Her. She is the support of all and filled with all
sorts of grains. She is the source of all gems and jewels, She bears in
Her womb all the precious metals. All sorts of best things issue from
Her. She is the Refuge of all. The subjects and kings worship Her always
and chant hymns to Her. All the Jîvas live through Her and She bestows
all sorts of wealth and prosperity. Without Her, all this, moving or
non-moving, become void of any substratum. Where to rest on!

 

96-143. O Child Nârada! Now hear about them who are issued again from
the parts of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti as well as the names of their wives. I
will now narrate duly. The Devî “Svâhâ” is the wife of Agni (Fire), and
the whole Universe worships Her. Without her, the Devî can never take
any oblations. Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â and Diksâ are both the wives of
Yajña (Sacrifice). They are honoured everywhere. So much so that without
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â (the fees given at the end of the Sacrifice) no
sacrificial ceremonies

 

<span id="page_807">p. 807</span>

 

can be complete and fructifying. The Devî “Svadhâ” is the wife of the
Pitris. All worship this Devî “Svadhâ” whether they are Munis, Manus, or
men. If this mantra “Svadhâ” be not uttered while making an offering to
the Pitris, all turn out useless. The Devî “Svasti” is the wife of the
Vâyu Deva; She is honoured everywhere in the Universe. Without this
“Svasti” Devî, no giving nor taking nor any action can be fructifying
and useful. “Pu<u>st</u>î”  (nourishment) is the wife of
Ga<u>n</u>apatî. All in this world worship this Pu<u>st</u>î Devî.
Without this “Pu<u>st</u>i”, women or men alike all become weaker and
weaker. Tu<u>st</u>î (satisfaction, contentment) is the wife of Ananta
Deva. She is praised and worshipped everywhere in this world. Without
Her no one anywhere in the world can be happy. “Sampattî” is the wife of
Îsâna Deva. The Suras, the men all alike worship Her. Were it not for
Her, all in this world would be oppressed with dire poverty. The Devî
“Dhritî” is the wife of Kapila Deva. She is honoured equally in all
places. Were it not for Her, all the people in this world would have
become impatient. The “Satî” Devî is the wife of Satya Deva (Truth). She
is endearing to the whole world. The liberated ones worship Her always.
Were it not for the truth loving Satî, the whole world would have lost
the treasure in friendship. “Dayâ” (Mercy) endearing to the whole world
is the chaste wife of “Mohâ Deva”. She is liked by all. Were it not for
Her, all the world would have become hopeless. The Devî
“Prati<u>st</u>hâ” (fame, celebrity) is the wife of Pu<u>n</u>ya Deva
(merit).She gives merits to persons according as they worship Her. Were
it not for Her, all the persons would remain dead while living. The Devî
“Kîrti” (fame) is the wife of Sukarma (good works). Herself a Siddha
(one who has acquired the result of one’s success), all the blessed
people honour Her with great reverence. Were it not for Her, all the
persons in this world would have been dead, devoid of any fame. Kriyâ
(work-efforts, action, doing) is the wife of “Udyoga” (enthusiasm). All
honour Her greatly. O Muni Nârâda! Were it not for Her, the whole people
would be void of any rules and regulations. Falsehood is the wife of
Adharma (unrighteousness). She is honoured greatly by all the cheats
that are extant in this world. Were she not liked by them, then all the
cheats would become extinct. She did not fall in the sight of anybody in
the Satya Yuga. Her subtle form became visible in the Tretâ Yuga. When
the Dvâpara Yuga came, She became half developed. And at last when the
Kali Yuga has come, She is fully developed and there is no second to Her
whether in bold confidence and shamelessness or in talking much and
pervading everywhere. With her brother Deceitfulness, She roams from one
house to another. Peace and modesty and shame are both the wives of good
behaviour. Were they not existent, all in this

 

<span id="page_808">p. 808</span>

 

world would have turned out deluded and mad. Intelligence, genius and
fortitude, these three are the wives of Jñâna (knowledge). Had they not
lived, every one would become stupid and insane. Mûrti is the wife of
Dharma Devî. She is of the nature of Beauty to all and very charming.
Were it not for Her, Paramâtmân would not get any resting place; and the
whole universe would have become Nirâlamba (without anything to rest).
This chaste Mûrti Devî is of the nature of splendour, loveliness and
Lak<u>s</u>mî. She is everywhere respected, worshipped and reverenced.
“Sleep”, the Siddha Yoginî, is the wife of Rudra Deva, who is of the
nature of Kâlâgni (the universal conflagration at the break-up of the
world). All the Jîvas spend their nights with Her. The twilights, night
and day are the wives of Kâla (Time). If they were not, the Creator even
would not be able to reckon time. Hunger and thirst are the wives of
Lobha (covetousness). They are thanked, respected and worshipped by the
whole world. Had they not lived, the whole world would have merged ever
in an ocean of anxieties. Splendour and burning capacity are the wives
of Tejas (fire). Without these, the Lord of the world could never have
created and established order in this universe. Death and old age are
the daughters of the Kâla, and the dear wives of Jvarâ (the disease).
Without these, all the creation would come to an end. The Tandrâ
(drowsiness, lassitude) and Prîti (satisfaction) are the daughters of
Nidrâ (sleep). And they are the dear wives of Sukha (pleasure). They are
present everywhere in this world. O Best of Munis! S’raddhâ (faith) and
Bhakti (devotion) are the wives of Vairâgyam (dispassion). For then all
the persons can become liberated while living (Jîvanmuktas). Besides
these there is Aditi, the Mother of the Gods, Surabhi, mother of cows;
Diti, the mother of the Daityas; Kadru, the mother of the Nâgas
(serpents); Vinatâ, the mother of Ga<u>r</u>u<u>d</u>a, the prince of
birds; and Danu, the mother of the Dânavas. All are very useful for the
purpose of creation. But these all are parts of Mûlâ Prak<u>r</u>iti.
Now I will mention some of the other parts of Prak<u>r</u>iti. Hear.
Rohi<u>n</u>î, the wife of the Moon, Sanjñâ, the wife of the Sun;
S’atarûpâ, the wife of Manu; S’achî, the wife of Indra; Târâ, the wife
of Brihaspati; Arundhatî, the wife of Vas’i<u>st</u>ha; Anasûyâ, the
wife of Atri; Devahûtî, the wife of Kardama; Prasûti, the wife of
Dak<u>s</u>a; Menakâ, the mind born daughter of the Pitris and the
mother of Ambikâ, Lopâmudrâ, Kuntî, the wife of Kuvera, the wife of
Varu<u>n</u>a, Bindhyâvalî, the wife of the King Bali; Damayantî,
Yas’odâ, Devakî, Gândhârî, Draupadî, S’aivyâ, Satyavatî, the chaste and
noble wife of Bri<u>s</u>abhânu and the mother of Râdhâ; Mandidarî;
Kaus’alyâ, Kauravî,; Subhadrâ; Revatî, Satyabhâmâ, Kâlindî, Laksmanâ;
Jâmbavatî; Nâgnajiti, Mitrabindâ,

 

<span id="page_809">p. 809</span>

 

Lak<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>â, Rukmi<u>n</u>î, Sîtâ, the Laksmî incarnate; Kâlî,
Yojana Gandhâ, the chaste mother of Vyâsa, Û<u>s</u>â, the daughter of
Vâ<u>n</u>a, her companion Chitralekhâ; Prabhâvati, Bhânumatî, the Satî
Mâyâvatî, Re<u>n</u>ukâ, the mother of Paras’urâma; Rohi<u>n</u>î, the
mother of Balarâma, Ekanandâ and the sister of S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, Satî
Durgâ and many other ladies are the parts of Prak<u>r</u>iti and all the
female sex, everywhere in the Universe are all come from the parts of
Prak<u>r</u>iti. So to insult any woman is to insult the
Prak<u>r</u>iti. If one worships a chaste Brahmi<u>n</u> woman, who has
her husband and son living, with clothings, ornaments, and sandal paste,
etc., one worships, as it were, Prak<u>r</u>iti. If any Vipra worships a
virgin girl, eight years old, with clothings, ornaments and sandal
paste, know that he has worshipped the Prak<u>r</u>iti Devî. The best,
middling, and worst are all sprung from Prak<u>r</u>iti. Those women
that are sprung from Sattva Gu<u>n</u>a are all very good natured and
chaste; those that are sprung from Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a are middling and
very much attached to worldly enjoyments and do their selfish ends and
those that are sprung from Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a are recognised as worst and
belonging to the unknown families. They are very scurrilous, cheats,
ruining their families, fond of their own free ways, quarrelsome and no
seconds are found equal to them. Such women become prostitutes in this
world and Apsarâs in the Heavens. The Hermaphrodites are parts of
Prak<u>r</u>iti but they are of the nature of Tamo Gu<u>n</u>as.

 

144-159. Thus I have described to you the nature of Prak<u>r</u>iti. So
in this Punyabhûmi Bhârata Var<u>s</u>a, to worship the Devî is by all
means desirable. In days past by, the King Suratha worshipped the Mûlâ
Prak<u>r</u>iti Durgâ, the Destructrix of all evils. Then again S’rî
Râma Chandra worshipped Her when he wanted to kill Râva<u>n</u>a. Since
then Her worship is extant in the three worlds. She was first born as
the honourable daughter of Dak<u>s</u>a. She destroyed the whole hosts
of Daityas and Dânavas. It was She who, hearing the abusive words
uttered against Her husband at the Yajña by Dak<u>s</u>a, Her father,
gave up Her body and took up again Her birth. She took Her birth in the
womb of Menakâ and got again Pas’upati as Her husband. And of the two
sons, Kârtika and Ga<u>n</u>es’a, born to Her, Kârtika was the
A<u>n</u>sa (part) of Nârâyana and Ga<u>n</u>apati was S’rî
Kri<u>sn</u>a Himself, the Lord of Râdhâ. O Devar<u>s</u>i! After the
two sons, Laksmî Devî came out of Durgâ. Mangala Râja, the King Mars
first worshipped Her. Since then, all in the three worlds began to
worship Her, whether they are Devas or men. The King As’vapati first
worshipped Sâvitrî Devî; and since then the Devas, Munis, all began to
worship Her. When the Devî Saravastî was born, the Bhagavân Brahmâ first
worshipped Her; next the greatest Munis, Devas all began

 

<span id="page_810">p. 810</span>

 

to worship Her. On the full moon night of the month of Kârtik, it was
Bhagavân S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, The Highest Spirit, that worshipped, first
of all, the Devî Râdhâ within the Râsa Mandalam, the enclosure, within
which the Râsa Lîlâ was performed (the circular dance) in the region
Goloka. Then under the command of S’rî Krisna, all the Gopas
(cow-herds), Gopîs, all the boys, girls, Surabhî, the queen of the race
of the cows, and the other cows worshipped Her. So since Her worship by
the inhabitants of Goloka, by Brahmâ and the other Devas and the Munis,
all began to worship ever S’rî Râdhâ with devotion and incense, light
and various other offerings. On earth She was first worshipped by
Suyajña, in the sacred field of Bhâratvar<u>s</u>a, under the direction
of Bhagavân Mahâdeva. Subsequently, under the command of the Bhagavân
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a, the Highest Spirit, the inhabitants of the three
worlds began to worship Her. The Munis with great devotion, with
incense, flowers and various other offerings worship always the Devî
Râdhâ. O Child Nârada! Besides these, all the other Devîs that have
issued from Prak<u>r</u>iti Devî are all worshipped. So much so that in
the villages, the village Deities, in the forests, the forest Deities
and in the cities, the city Deities are worshipped. Thus I have
described to you all according to the S’âstras the glorious lives of the
Devî Prak<u>r</u>iti and Her parts. What more do you want to hear?

 

Here ends the First Chapter on the Description of Prakriti in the Ninth
Book of the S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i
Veda Vyâsa.

 

    

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk09ch02)
