[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch10)  [Next](bk10ch12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XI**

** **

**On the killing of Madhu Kai<u>t</u>abha**

 

<span id="page_1038">p. 1038</span>

 

1-2. The king Suratha spoke :-- “O Best of the twice born! Who is that
Devî that you spoke just now? Why the Devî deludes all these beings?
What for does She do so? Whence is the Devî born? What is Her Form? and
what are Her qualities? O Brâhmi<u>n</u>! Kindly describe all these to
me.”

 

3-9. The Muni spoke :-- O King! I will now describe the nature of the
Devî Bhagavatî and why does She take Her Form in due time. Listen. In
ancient days, when Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a, the king of the Yogis, was
lying in deep sleep on the ocean on the bed of Ananta, after He had
destroyed the Universe, there came out of the wax of his ear the two
Dânavas, Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>abha, of monstrous appearances. They
wanted to kill Brahmâ, who was lying on the lotus coming out of the
navel of Bhagavân. Seeing the two Daityas Madhu and Kai<u>t</u>abha and
seeing also Hari asleep the Lotus-born Brahmâ became very anxious and
thought :-- Now Bhagavân is asleep; and these two indomitable Daityas
are ready

 

<span id="page_1039">p. 1039</span>

 

to kill me. Now what am I to do? Where to go? How shall I get ease? O
Child! Thus thinking, the high souled Lotus born suddenly came to a
practical conclusion. He said :-- “Let me now take refuge to the Goddess
Sleep, Nidrâ, the Mother of all and under Whose power Bhagavân Hari is
now asleep.”

 

10-24. Brahmâ then began to praise Her thus :-- “O Devî of the Devas! O
Upholdress of the world! Thou grantest desires of Thy devotees. O Thou
auspicious! Thou art Para Brahmâ! By Thy Command all are doing
respectively their works in their proper spheres! Thou art the Night of
Destruction (Kâla Râtri); Thou art the Great Night (Mahâ Râtri). Thou
art the greatly terrible Night of Delusion (Moha Râtri); Thou art
omnipresent; omniscient; of the nature of the Supreme Bliss. Thou art
regarded as the Great. Thou art highly worshipped; Thou art alone in
this world as highly intoxicated; Thou art submissive to Bhakti only;
Thou art the Best of all the things; Thou art sung as the Highest; Thou
art modesty; Thou art Pu<u>st</u>i (nourishment); Thou art forgiveness
(K<u>s</u>amâ); Thou art Beauty (Kânti); Thou art the embodiment of
mercy; Thou art liked by all; Thou art adorned by the whole world; Thou
art of the nature of wakefulness, dream and deep sleep; Thou art the
Highest; Thou art alone Highest Deity; Thou art highly attached to the
Supreme Bliss. There is no other thing than Thee. There is One only and
that is Thee. Hence Thou art denominated as One; Thou becomest again the
two by contact with Thy Mâyâ. Thou art the refuge of Dharma, Artha and
Kâma; hence Thou Thou art Three; Thou art the Turîya (the fourth state
of consciousness) hence Thou art Four. Thou art the God of the five
elements; hence Thou art Panchamî (five); Thou presidest over the six
passions Kâma, anger, etc.; hence Thou art <u>S</u>a<u>st</u>hî; Thou
presidest over the seven days of the week and Thou grantest boons seven
by seven; hence Thou art Seven. Thou art the God of the eight Vasus;
hence Thou art A<u>st</u>amî; Thou art full of the nine Râgas and nine
parts and Thou art the Goddess of nine planets; hence Thou art Navamî.
Thou pervadest the ten quarters and Thou art worshipped by the ten
quarters; hence Thou art named Das'amî (the tenth day of the fortnight);
Thou art served by the Eleven Rudras, the Goddesses of eleven
Ga<u>n</u>as and Thou art fond of Ekâdas'î Tithi; hence Thou art
denominated Ekâdas'î; Thou art twelve armed and the Mother of the twelve
Âdityas; hence Thou art Dvâdas'î; Thou art dear to the thirteen
Ga<u>n</u>as; Thou art the presiding Deity of Visve Devas and Thou art
the thirteen months including the Malas Mâsa (dirty month), hence Thou
art Trayodas'î. Thou didst

 

<span id="page_1040">p. 1040</span>

 

grant boons to the fourteen Indras and Thou gavest birth to the fourteen
Manus; hence Thou art Chaturdas'î. Thou art knowable by the Pañchadas'î.
Thou art sixteen armed and on Thy forehead the sixteen digits of the
Moon are always shining; Thou art the sixteenth digit (ray) of the Moon
named Amâ; hence Thou art <u>S</u>o<u>d</u>as'î. O Deves'î! Thou, though
attributeless and formless, appearest in these forms and attributes.
Thou hast now enveloped in Moha and Darkness the Lord of Ramâ, the
Bhagavân, the Deva of the Devas. These Daityas, Madhu and
Kai<u>t</u>abha are indomitable and very powerful. So to kill them, Thou
better dost awake the Lord of the Devas.”

 

25-34. The Muni said :-- Thus praised by the Lotus-born, the Tâmasi
Bhagavatî (the Goddess of sleep and ignorance), the Beloved of Bhagavân,
left Vi<u>sn</u>u and enchanted the two Daityas.

 

On being awakened, the Supreme Spirit Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Lord of the
world, the Bhagavân, the Deva of the Devas, saw the two Daityas. Those
two monstrous Dânavas, beholding Madhu Sûdana, came up before Him, ready
to fight. The hand-to-hand fight lasted amongst them for five thousand
years. Then the two Dânavas, maddened by their great strength, were
enchanted by the Mâyâ of Bhagavatî and told the Supreme Deity, “Ask boon
from us.” Hearing this, the Bhagavân Âdi Puru<u>s</u>a, (the Prime Man)
asked the boon that both of them would be killed that day by Him. Those
two very powerful Dânavas spoke to Hari again, “Very well. Kill us on
that part of the earth which is not under water.” O King! Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Holder of the conch and club, spoke :-- “All right.
Indeed! Let that be so.”

 

Saying this He placed their heads on His thigh and severed them with His
disc (chakra). O King! Thus Mahâ Kâlî, the Queen of all the Yogas arose
on this occasion when the praise was offered Her by Brahmâ. O King! Now
I will describe another account how this Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî appeared on
another occasion. Listen.

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the killing of Madhu
Kai<u>t</u>abha in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk10ch12.md)
