[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch08)  [Next](bk10ch10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IX**

** **

**On the narrative of Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a Manu**

 

<span id="page_1035">p. 1035</span>

 

1-7. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I will now narrate the supreme
glories of the Devî and the anecdote how Manu, the son of Anga, obtained
excellent kingdom by worshipping the Devî Bhagavatî. The son of the king
Anga, named Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a became the Sixth Manu. One day he
went to the Brahmâr<u>s</u>i Pulaha Ri<u>s</u>i and taking his refuge
said :-- O Brahmâr<u>s</u>i! Thou removest all the sorrows and
afflictions of those that come under Thy refuge; I now take Thy refuge.
Kindly advise Thy servant how he may become the Lord of an endless
amount of wealth. O Muni! What can I do so that I may get the sole
undisputed sway over the world? How my arms can wield the weapons and
manipulate them so that they may not be baffled? How my race and line be
constant and my youth remain ever the same, undecayed? And how can I, in
the end, attain Mukti? O Muni! Kindly dost Thou give instructions to me
on these points and oblige. Hearing thus, the Muni wanted him to worship
the Devî and said :-- “O King! Listen attentively to what I say you
today. Worship today the all auspicious S'akti; by Her grace, all your
desires will be fulfilled.”

 

8\. Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a said :-- “O Muni! What is that very holy
worship of S’rî Bhagavatî? How to do it? Kindly describe all these in
detail.”

 

9-20. The Muni said :-- O King! I will now disclose all about the
excellent Pûja of the Devî Bhagavatî. Hear. You recite (mentally) always
the seed mantra of Vâkbhava (Speech) (The Deity being Mahâ Sarasvatî).
If any one makes japam (recites slowly) of the Vâkbhava Vîja thrice a
day, one gets both the highest enjoyment here and, in the end, release
(Mukti). O Son of a K<u>s</u>attriya! There is no other Vîja Mantra
(word) better than this of Vâk (the Word). Through the Japam of this
Vîja Mantra comes the increase of strength and prowess and all
successes. By the Japam of this, Brahmâ is so powerful and has become
the Creator; Vi<u>sn</u>u preserves the Universe and Mahes'vara has
become the Destroyer of the Universe. The other Dikpâlas (the Regents of
the quarters) and the other Siddhas have become very powerful by the
power of this Mantra, and are capable of favouring or disfavouring
others. So, O King! You, too, worship the Devî of the Devas, the World
Mother and ere long you will become the Lord of unbounded wealth. There
is no doubt in

 

<span id="page_1036">p. 1036</span>

 

this. O Nârada! Thus advised by Pulaha Ri<u>s</u>i, the son of the King
Anga went to the banks of the Virajâ river to practise austerities.
There the king Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a remained absorbed in making Japam
of the Vâkbhava Vîja Mantra and took for his food the leaves of the
trees that dropped on the ground and thus practised severe austerities.

 

The first year he ate leaves; the second year he drank water and in the
third year he sustained his life by breathing air simply and thus
remained steady like a pillar. Thus he remained without food for twelve
years. He went on making Japam of the Vâkbhava Mantra and his heart and
mind became purified. While he was sitting alone, absorbed in the
meditation of the Devî Mantra, there appeared before him suddenly the
Parames'varî, the World Mother, the Incarnate of Lak<u>s</u>mî. The
Highest Deity, full of dauntless fire and the Embodiment of all the
Devas, spoke graciously in sweet words to Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a, the
son of Anga.

 

21-29. O Regent of the earth! I am pleased with your Tapasyâ. Now ask
any boon that you want. I will give that to you. Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a
said :-- “O Thou, worshipped by the Devas! O Sovereign of the Deva of
the Devas! Thou art the Controller Inside; Thou art the Controller
Outside. Thou knowest everything what I desire in my mind. Still, O
Devî! When I am so fortunate as to see Thee, I say Thou grantest me the
kingdom for the Manvantara period.” The Devî said :-- “O Best of the
K<u>s</u>attriyas! I grant unto you the kingdom of the whole world for
one manvantara. You will have many sons, very powerful, indeed, and well
qualified. Your kingdom will be free from any danger till at last you
will certainly get Mukti.” Thus granting the excellent boon to Manu, She
disappeared then and there, after being praised by Manu, with deep
devotion. The Sixth Manu, then favoured by the Devî, enjoyed the
sovereignty of the earth and other pleasures and became the best of the
Manus. His sons became the devotees of the Devî, very powerful and
expert and became respected by all and enjoyed the pleasures of the
kingdom. Thus getting the supremacy by the worship of the Devî, the
Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a Manu became merged in the end in the Holy Feet of
the Devî.

 

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the narrative of
Châk<u>s</u>u<u>s</u>a Manu in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rîmad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](bk10ch10)
