[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch04)  [Next](bk10ch06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On the Devas going to Vi<u>sn</u>u**

 

<span id="page_1028">p. 1028</span>

 

1-5. Sûta said :-- Then the Devas, on arriving at Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, saw
the Lord of Lak<u>s</u>mî, the Deva of the Devas, the World-Teacher,
with his eyes beautiful like Padmâ Palâsa (lotus-leaves), shining with
brilliance and began to praise Him in a voice choked with intense
feelings of devotion, thus :-- “Victory to Vi<u>sn</u>u! O Lord of Ramâ!
Thou art prior to the Virâ<u>t</u> Puru<u>s</u>a. O Enemy of the
Daityas! O Thou, the Generator of desires in all and the Bestower of the
fruits of those desires to all! O Gobinda! Thou art the Great Boar and
Thou art of the nature of Great Sacrifices! O Mahâ Vi<u>sn</u>u! O Lord
of Dharma! Thou art the Cause of the origin of this world! Thou didst
support the earth in Thy Fish Incarnation for the deliverance of the
Vedas! O Thou Satyavrata of the form of a Fish! We bow down to Thee. O
Thou! The Enemy of the Daityas! The Ocean of mercy! Thou dost do the
actions of the Devas out of mercy. O Thou! the Tortoise Incarnation!
That grantest Mukti to others! Obeisance to Thee!

 

6-18. O Thou! That didst assume the form of a Boar for the destruction
of the Daityas Jaya and others and for raising the earth from the
waters! Obeisance to Thee! Thou didst assume that form - Half man and
half Lion of the Nrisimha Mûrti and tore asunder

 

<span id="page_1029">p. 1029</span>

 

Hira<u>n</u>ya Kas'ipu, proud of his boons, by Thy nails. We bow down to
Thee! Obeisance to Thee! That in Thy Dwarf Incarnation, didst deceive
Bali, whose head got crazed by the acquisition of the kingdom over the
three Lokas. We bow down to Thee, that in Thy Paras'u Râma Incarnation,
didst slay Kârta Vîryâryuna, the thousand handed, and the other wicked
K<u>s</u>attriyas! Obeisance to Thee! That wert born of the womb of
Re<u>n</u>ukâ as the son of Jamadagni. Obeisance to Thee, of great
prowess and valour, that in Thy Râma Incarnation as the son of
Das'aratha, didst cut off the heads of the wicked Râk<u>s</u>asa, the
son of Pulastya! We bow down again and again to Thee, the Great Lord,
that in Thy Kri<u>sn</u>a incarnation, didst deliver this earth from the
clutches of the wicked King Duryodhana, Kam<u>s</u>a and others and
didst establish the religion by removing the then prevailing vicious
ideas and doctrines. We bow down to Thy Buddha Incarnation, that Great
Deva who didst come down here to put a stop to the slaughtering of the
innocent animals and to the performance of the wicked sacrificial
ceremonies! Obeisance to the Deva! When almost all the persons in this
world will turn out in future as Mlechchas and when the wicked Kings
will oppress them, right and left, Thou wilt then incarnate Thyself
again as Kalki and redress all the grievances! We bow down to Thy Kalki
Form! O Deva! These are Thy Ten Incarnations, for the preservation of
Thy devotees, for the killing of the wicked Daityas. Therefore Thou art
called as the Great Reliever of all our troubles. O Thou! Victory to
Thee! The Deva Who assumest the forms of women and water for destroying
the ailings of the devotees! Who else can be so kind! O Thou, the Ocean
of mercy!” O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus praising the yellow robed Vi<u>sn</u>u,
the Lord of all the Devas, the whole host of the Devas bowed down to Him
and made Shâs<u>t</u>âmgas. Then Vi<u>sn</u>u Gadâdhara, hearing their
hymns, gladdened them and spoke :--

 

19-27. S’rî Bhagavâna said :-- “O Devas! I am pleased with your stotra.
You need not be sorrowful. I will remove all your troubles that have
become unbearable to you. O Devas! I am very glad to hear the praises
that you have offered on Me. Better ask boons from Me. I will grant them
though very rare even and obtained with difficulty. Any person who rises
early in the morning and recites with devotion this stotra sung by you,
will never experience any sorrow. O Devas! No poverty, no bad symptoms,
no Vetâlas nor planets nor Brahmâ Râk<u>s</u>asas nor any misfortunes
will overtake him. No disease, due to Vâta (windy temperament), Pitta
(bile) and Kapha (phlegm) nor untimely death will visit him. His family
will not

 

<span id="page_1030">p. 1030</span>

 

be extinct and happiness will always reign there. O Devas! This stotra
can give everything. Both the enjoyment and freedom will come within
anyone's easy access. There is no doubt in this. Nov what is your
difficulty? Give out. I will remove it at once. There is not a bit of
doubt in this.” Hearing these words of S’rî Bhagavân, the Devas became
glad and spoke to Vi<u>sn</u>u.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the Devas' going to
Vi<u>sn</u>u, in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk10ch06.md)
