[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch03)  [Next](bk10ch05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter IV**

** **

**On the Devas going to Mahâ Deva**

 

<span id="page_1027">p. 1027</span>

 

1-2. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! Then Indra and all the other Devas
taking Brahmâ along with them and placing Him at the front, went to
Mahâdeva and took His refuge. They bowed down to Him and chanted sweet
and great hymns to Him, Who holds Moon on His forehead, Deva of the
Devas, thus :--

 

3-5. O Thou, the Leader of the host of Gods! Victory to Thee! O Thou,
Whose lotus feet are served by Umâ, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Giver
of the eight Siddhis and Vibhûtis (extraordinary powers) to Thy
devotees, Victory to Thee! O Thou, the Background of this Great
Theatrical Dance of this Insurmountable Mâyâ! Thou art the Supreme
Spirit in Thy True Nature! Thou ridest on Thy vehicle, the Bull, and
residest in Kâilâs'a; yet Thou art the Lord of all the Devas. O Thou,
Whose ornament is snakes, Who art the Honoured and the Giver of honours
to persons! O Thou! the Unborn, yet comprising all forms, O Thou
S'ambhu! That findest pleasure in this Thy Own Self! Victory toThee!

 

6-9. O Thou, the Lord of Thy attendants! O Thou, Giris'a! The Giver of
the great powers, praised by Mahâ Vi<u>sn</u>u! O Thou, That livest in
the heart lotus of Vi<u>sn</u>u, and deeply absorbed in Mahâ Yoga!
Obeisance to Thee! O Thou that can'st be known through Yoga, and nothing
but the Yoga itself; Thou, the Lord of the Yoga! We bow down to Thee.
Thou awardest the fruits of yoga to the Yogins. O Thou, the Lord of the
helpless! The Incarnate of the ocean of mercy! The Relief of the
diseased and the most powerful! O Thou, whose forms are the three
gu<u>n</u>as, Sattva, Rajo, Tamas! O Thou! Whose Emblem (carrier) is the
Bull (Dharma); Thou art verily the Great Kâla; yet Thou art the Lord of
Kâla! Obeisance to Thee! (The Bull represents the Dharma or Speech).

 

10\. Thus praised by the Devas, who take the offerings in sacrifices the
Lord of the Devas, whose emblem is Bull, smilingly told the Devas in a
deep voice :--

 

11\. O Thou, the excellent Devas! The residents of the Heavens! I am
pleased with the praises that you have sung of Me. I will fulfil the
desires of you, all the Devas.

 

12-15. The Devas said :-- O Lord of all the Devas! O Giris'a! Thou whose
forehead is adorned with Moon! O Thou, the Doer of good to the
distressed. O Thou, the Powerful! Dost Thou do good to us. O Thou, the
Sinless One! The Bindhya Mountain has become jealous of the Sumeru
Mountain, and has risen very high up in the Heavens and he has
obstructed the Sun's course, thereby causing great troubles to all. O

 

<span id="page_1028">p. 1028</span>

 

Thou, the Doer of good to all! O Îs'âna! Dost Thou check the mountain's
abnormal rise. How can we fix time if the Sun's course be obstructed!
And when there is no knowledge, what is now the time, the sacrifices to
the Devas and the offerings to the Pitris are now almost dead and gone.
O Deva! Who will now protect us? We see Thee as the Destroyer of the
fear of us and of those who are terrified. O Deva! O Lord of Giris'â! Be
pleased with us.

 

16-18. S’rî Bhagavân said :-- O Devas! I have no power to curb the
Bindhya Mountain. Let us go to the Lord of Ramâ and pay our respects to
Him. He is our Lord, fit to be worshipped. He is Gobinda, Bhagavân
Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Cause of all causes. We will go to Him and tell Him
all our sorrows. He will remove them.

 

19\. Hearing thus the words of Girîs'a, Indra and the other Devas with
Brahmâ placed Mahâdeva at their front and went to the region of
Vaiku<u>nt</u>ha, trembling with fear.

 

Here ends the Fourth Chapter of the Tenth Book on the going of the Devas
to Mahâdeva in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rîmad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](bk10ch05)
