[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch06)  [Next](bk10ch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On the checking of the rise of the Bindhya Range**

 

<span id="page_1032">p. 1032</span>

 

1-21. Sûta said :-- Hearing the words of the Devas, Agastya, the Best of
the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s promised that he would carry out their works. O
Ri<u>s</u>is! All the Devas then became very glad when the Muni, born of
the water jar, promised thus. They then bade good-bye to him and went
back gladly to their own abodes. The Muni then spoke to his wife thus
:-- “O daughter of the King! The Bindhya Mountain has baffled the
progress of the Sun's course and has thus caused a great mischief. What
the Munis, the Seers of truths said before referring to Kâs’î, all are
now coming to my mind when I am thinking why this disturbance has
overtaken me. They said that various hindrances would come to him at
every step, who is a Sâdhu intending to settle at Kâs'î. Let him who
wants Mukti, never quit Kâs'î, the Avimukta place in any case. But, O
Dear! Today I have got one hindrance during my stay at Kâs'î.” Thus
talking with much regret on various subjects with his wife, the Muni
bathed in the Ma<u>n</u>ikar<u>n</u>ikâ ghât, saw the Lord Vis'ves'vara
worshipped Dan<u>d</u>apânî and went to the Kâla Bhairava. He said in
the following terms :-- “O Mighty armed Kâlabhairava! Thou destroyest
the fear of the Bhaktas; Thou art the God of this Kâs'î City. Then why
art Thou driving me away from this Kâs'îdhâm. O Lord! Thou removest all
the obstacles of the devotees and Thou preservest them. Then why, O
Destroyer of the sorrows of the Bhaktas! art Thou removing me from here?
Never I blamed others; nor did I practise any hypocrisy with any person
nor did I lie; then under what sin, Thou art driving me away from
Kâs'î.” O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus praying to Kâla Bhairava, the Muni Agastya,
born of water jar and the husband of Lopâmudrâ, went to Sâk<u>s</u>i
Ga<u>n</u>es'a, the Destroyer of all evils and seeing and worshipping
Him, went out of Kâs'î and proceeded to the south. The Muni, the ocean
of great fortune, left Kâs'î; but he became very much distressed to
leave it and he remembered it always. He began to march on with his
wife. As if riding on his car of asceticism he arrived at the Bindhya
mountain in the twinkling of an eye and saw that the Mountain had risen
very high and obstructed the passage of the Sun in the Heavens. The
Bindhya Mountain, seeing the Muni Agastya in front, began to tremble and
as if desirous to speak something to the earth in a whisper became low
and dwarfish and bowed down to the Muni and fell down with devotion in
sâ<u>st</u>ângas with devotion just like a stick dropped flat on the
ground before the Muni.

 

<span id="page_1033">p. 1033</span>

 

Seeing the Bindhya thus low, the Muni Agastya became pleased and spoke
with a gracious look :-- “O Child! Better remain in this state until I
come back. For, O Child! I am quite unable to ascend to your lofty
heights.” Thus saying, the Muni became eager to go to the south; and,
crossing the peaks of the Bindhya, alighted gradually again to the
plains. He went on further to the south and saw the S’rî S'aila Mountain
and at last went to the Malayâchala and there, building his Âs'rama
(hermitage), settled himself. O Saunaka! The Devî Bhagavatî, worshipped
by the Muni went to the Bindhya Mountain and settled there and became
known, in the three worlds, by the name of Bindhyavâsinî.

 

22-26. Sûta said :-- Anybody who hears this highly pure narrative of the
Muni Agastya and Bindhya, becomes freed of all his sins. All his enemies
are destroyed in no time. This hearing gives knowledge to the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, victory to the K<u>s</u>attriyas, wealth and corn to
the Vais'yas and happiness to the S’ûdras.

 

If anybody once hears this narrative, he gets Dharma if he want Dharma,
gets unbounded wealth if he wants wealth and gets all desires if he
wants his desires fulfilled. In ancient times Svâyambhuva Manu
worshipped this Devî with devotion and got his kingdom for his own
Manvantara period. O Saunaka! Thus I have described to you the holy
character of the Devî in this Manvantara. What more shall I say? Mention
please.

 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Book on the checking of the
rise of the Bindhya Range in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk10ch08)
