[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch12)  [Next](bk11ch01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XIII**

** **

**On the account of Bhrâmarî Devî**

 

<span id="page_1046">p. 1046</span>

 

1-21. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a spoke :-- O Child Nârada! Hear now the
wonderful anecdotes of the births of the remaining other Manus. The mere
remembrance of these birth anecdotes causes Bhakti to grow and well up
towards the Devî. Vaivasvata Manu had six sons :-- viz., Karu<u>s</u>a,
P<u>r</u>i<u>s</u>adhra, Nâbhâga, Di<u>st</u>a, Saryâti, and
Tris'a<u>n</u>ku. All of them were stout and strong. Once they all
united went to the excellent banks of the Jumnâ and began to practise
Prâ<u>n</u>âyama without taking any food and became engaged in
worshipping the Devî. Each of them built separately an earthen image of
the Devî and worshipped Her with devotion and with various offerings. In
the beginning, they took the dry leaves of the trees that dropped of
themselves for their food; then they drank water only, then breathed air
only; then the smoke from the fire of the Homa; then they depended on
the Solar Rays. Thus they practised tapasyâ with great difficulties. The
continual worship of the Devî with the greatest devotion made them
conscious of their clear intellect, destructive of all sorts of vanities
and delusions, and the Manu's sons thought only of the Hallowed Feet of
the Devî; their intellects were purified and they were greatly wondered
to see within their Self the whole Universe. Thus they practised their
Tapasyâ full twelve years when Bhagavatî, the Ruling Principle of this
Universe resplendent wiih the brilliance of the thousand Suns, appeared
before them. The princes with their intelligences thus purified saw Her,
bowed down and, with their lowly hearts, began to chant hymns to Her
with greatest devotion. “O Îs'ânî! O Merciful! Thou art the Devî
presiding over all. Thou art the Best. So Victory to Thee! Thou art
known by the Vâgbhava Mantra. Thou gettest pleased when the Vâgbhava
Mantra is repeated. O Devî! Thou art of the nature of Klîm Kâra (of the
form of Klîm). Thou gettest pleased with the repetition of Klîm Mantra.
O Thou, that gladdenest the Lord! Thou bestowest joy and pleasure in the
heart of the King of Kâma. O Mahâ Mâyâ! When Thou art pleased, Thou
givest that Unequalled Kingdom. O Thou that increasest the enjoyments!
Thou art Vi<u>sn</u>u, Sûrya, Hara, Indra and the other Devas.” When the
highsouled princes praised Her thus, Bhagavatî became pleased and spoke
to them the following sweet words :-- “O Highsouled Princes! You all
have worshipped Me and practised, indeed, very hard tapasyâs and thus
you have become sinless and your intellects and hearts have become
thoroughly purged and thus purified. Now ask boons that you

 

<span id="page_1047">p. 1047</span>

 

desire. I will grant them ere long to you.” The Princes said :-- “O
Devî! We want unrivalled Kingdoms, many sons of long longevity,
continual enjoyment of pleasures, fame, energy, freedom in all actions,
and as well the good and keen intelligence. These will be beneficial to
us.” The Devî said :-- Whatever you have desired, I grant them to you
all. Besides I give you another boon. Listen attentively. By My Grace
you all will be the Lords of the Manvantaras and acquire strength that
will experience no defeat, and you will get prosperity, fame, energy,
powers, and a continual line of descent and abundant full enjoyments.

 

22-32. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- After the World Mother Bhrâmarî Devî
granted them these boons, the princes chanted hymns to Her and then She
instantly vanished. The very energetic princes acquired in that birth
excellent kingdoms and abundance of wealth. They all had sons and thus
established their families, and became the Lords of Manvantara in their
next births. By the Grace of the Devî, the first of the princes
Karu<u>s</u>a became the Ninth Manu, the exceedingly powerful
Dak<u>s</u>a Sâvar<u>n</u>i; the second prince Pri<u>s</u>adhra became
the Tenth Manu, named Meru Sâvar<u>n</u>i; the third prince, the highly
enthusiastic Nâbhâga became the Eleventh Manu, named Sûrya
Sâvar<u>n</u>i; the fourth prince Di<u>st</u>a became the Twelfth Manu,
named Chandra Sâvar<u>n</u>i; the powerful fifth prince S'aryâti became
the Thirteenth Manu named Rudra Sâvar<u>n</u>i and the sixth prince
Tris'anku became the Fourteenth Manu named Vi<u>sn</u>u Sâvar<u>n</u>i
and became the celebrated Lord of the world.

 

33-41. Nârada questioned :-- “O Wise One! Who is that Bhrâmari Devî?
What is Her Nature? What for She takes birth? Kindly describe all this
beautiful and pain destroying anecdotes to me. I am not satiated with
the drinking of the nectar of the Glories of the Devî; my desire to hear
further more is as strong as ever. As the drink of the nectar takes away
death, so the drink of this anecdote of the Devî takes away the fear of
death.” Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I will now narrate the
wonderful glories of that unthinkable, unmanifested World Mother,
leading to Mukti. Hear, as a Mother behaves towards Her child kindly and
without any hypocrisy, so the World Mother in all Her lives manifests
Her merciful sincere dealings for the welfare of the humanity. In days
gone by, in the nether regions, in the city of the Daityas, there lived
a powerful Daitya named Aru<u>n</u>a. He was a furious Deva Hater and a
pâkkâ hyprocrite. With a view to conquer the Devas, he went to the banks
of the Ganges in the Himâlayâs, practised a very bard Tapasyâ, to
Brahmâ, taking Him to be the Protector of the Daityas. First influenced
by Tamo Gu<u>n</u>a, he withheld in his body the five Vâyus

 

<span id="page_1048">p. 1048</span>

 

and partook only the dry leaves and repeated, the Gâyatrî Mantra and
practised austerities. Thus he practised for full ten thousand years.
Then for another ten thousand years the Daitya lived drinking some drops
of water only; then for another ten thousand years he remained by
inhaling air only; and then for another ten thousand years he did not
take any thing and thus practised he his wonderful Tapasyâ.

 

42-49. Thus practising his Tapasyâ a sort of wonderful halo of light
emitted from his body and began to burn the whole world. This thing then
appeared a great wonder. All the Devas then exclaimed. “Oh! What is
this! Oh! What is this!” And they trembled. All were very much terrified
and took refuge of Brahmâ. Hearing all the news from the Devas, the
four-faced Bhagavân rode on His vehicle, the Swan, and with the Gâyatrî
went very gladly to where the Daitya was practising his austerities and
saw that the Daitya was immersed in meditation with his eyes closed; and
he looked, as it were, blazing with fire, as if a second Fire himself.
His belly had become dried up, body withered and the nerves of the
bodies, too, became almost visible; only the life breath was lingering
there. Brahmâ then spoke to him :-- “O Child! Auspices to you! Now ask
the boon that you desire.” Hearing these gladdening nectar-like words
from the mouth of Brahmâ, Aru<u>n</u>a, the chief of the Daityas opened
his eyes and saw Brahmâ in his front. Seeing Brahmâ before him with a
rosary of beads and Kâma<u>nd</u>alu in his hand and attended by Gâyatrî
and the four Vedas, muttering the name of the Eternal Brahmâ, the Daitya
rose up and bowed down to Him and sang to Him various Stotras.

 

50-59. Then the intelligent Daitya asked from Brahmâ the following boon
that “I shall not die. Grant this.” Brahmâ then gently explained to him
:-- “O Best of the Dânavas! See that Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, Mahes'vara
and others are not free from this limitation of death! What to speak
then for others! I cannot grant you a boon that is an impossibility. Ask
what is possible and just. The intelligent persons never show an
eagerness to an impossibility.” Hearing the above words of Brahmâ,
Aru<u>n</u>a again said with devotion :-- “O Deva! If Thou art unwilling
to grant me the above boon, then, O Lord! Grant me such a boon, as is
practicable, that my death shall not be caused by any war, nor by any
arms or weapons, nor by any man or any woman, by any biped or quadruped
or any combination of two and grant me such a boon, such a large army as
I can conquer the Devas.” Hearing the words of the Daitya, Brahmâ said
“Let that be so” and went back instantly to His own abode. Then, puffed
up with that boon, the Daitya Aru<u>n</u>a called on all the other
Daityas that lived in

 

<span id="page_1049">p. 1049</span>

 

the nether regions. The Daityas, that were under his shelter, came and
saluted him, as their king and, by his command, they sent messengers to
the Heavens to fight with the Devas. Hearing from the messenger that the
Daityas were willing to fight with the Devas, Indra trembled with fear
and went instantly with the Devas to the abode of Brahmâ. Taking Brahmâ,
too, along with them from there, they went to the Vi<u>sn</u>u Loka and
took Vi<u>sn</u>u with them and all went to the S’iva Loka.

 

60-70. There they all held a conference how to kill the Daitya, the
enemy of the Gods. While, on the other hand, Aru<u>n</u>a, the king of
the Daityas surrounded by his army, went ere long to the Heavens.

 

O Muni! The Daitya, then, through the power of his Tapas, assumed
various forms and seized the rights and possessions of the Moon, the
Sun, Yama, Agni and all the othars. All the Devas, then, dislodged from
their stations went to the region of Kailas'a and represented to
S’ankara about their own troubles and dangers respectively. Then, what
was to be done on this subject, on this, great discussions cropped up.
When Brahmâ said, that the death of the Daitya would not ensue from any
fight, with any arms or weapons, from any man or woman, biped, quadruped
or from any combination of the above two. Then the Devas became all
anxious and could not find out any solution at that instant, when the
Incorporeal Voice was clearly heard in the Heavens :-- Let you all
worship the Queen of the Universe. She will carry out your work to
success. If the king of the Daityas, always engaged in muttering the
Gâyatrî, forsakes the Gâyatrî any how, then his death will occur.
Hearing this gladdening Celestial Voice, the Devas held the council with
great caution. When it was settled what ought to be done, Indra asked
Brihaspati and said :-- “O Guru Deva! You would better go to the Daitya
for the carrying out of the Devas' ends and do so that he forsakes the
Devî Gâyatrî Parames’varî. We will all now go and meditate on Her. When
She will be pleased, She will help us.

 

71-77. Thus commanding Brihaspati and thinking that the beautiful
Protectress of Jâmbû Nada would protect them the Devas all started to
worship Her and, going there, began the Devî Yajña and with great
devotion muttered the Mâyâ Vîja and practised asceticism. On the other
hand, Brihaspati went ere long in the garb of a Muni to the Daitya
Aru<u>n</u>a. The king of the Daityas then asked him :-- “O Best of
Munis! Whence and why have you come here. Say, O Muni! Where have you
come? I am not one of your party. Rather I am your enemy.” Hearing the
above words, Brihaspati said :-- When you are worshipping incessantly
the Devî whom we too worship, then say how you are not a one on our
side! O Saint! The vicious Daitya, hearing the above words and deluded

 

<span id="page_1050">p. 1050</span>

 

by the Mâyâ of the Devas, forsook the Gâyatrî Mantra out of vanity and
therefore he became weak, bereft of the Holy Fire.

 

78-85. Then Brihaspati, having succeeded in his work there, went to the
Heavens and saw Indra and told him everything in detail. The Devas
became satisfied and worshipped the Highest Deity. O Muni! Thus, a long
interval passed, when one day the World Mother, the Auspicious Devî
appeared before them. She was resplendent with the brilliance of ten
million suns and looked beautiful like ten millions of Kandarpas (Gods
of love). Her body was anointed with variegated colours, etc.; She wore
a pair of clothings; a wonderful garland suspended from Her neck; Her
body was decked with various ornaments and in the fists of Her hands
there were wonderful rows of hornets ( large black bees). Her one hand
was ready to grant boons and Her other hand was ready to hold out “no
fear.” On the neck of  Bhagavatî, the Ocean of Mercy, and peaceful, were
seen the variegated garlands with large black bees all round. Those male
and female bees singing incessantly all round Her the Hrîmkâra Mantra
(the First Vibration of Force), kotis of black bees surrounded Her. The
All-auspicious Bhagavatî, praised by all the Vedas, Who is all in all,
composed of all, Who is all good, the Mother of all, Omniscient, the
Protectress of all, was adorned fully with dress.

 

86-96. Seeing suddenly the Devî, in their front Brahmâ and the other
Devas became surprised and by and by they got relieved and gladly began
to chant hymns of praise to Bhagavatî, Whose Glories have been written
in the Vedas.

 

The Devas said :-- “O Devî! Obeisance to Thee! Thou art the Highest
Knowledge and the Creatrix, Preservrix and the Destructrix of the
Universe. O Thou, the Lotus-eyed! Thou art the Refuge of all! So we bow
down to Thee. O Devî! Thou art collectively and individually Vis'va,
Taijasa, Prâjña, Virâ<u>t</u> and Sûtrâtmâ. O Bhagavatî. Thou art
differentiated and undifferentiated; Thou art the Kû<u>t</u>astha
Chaitanya (the Unmoveable, Unchangeable Consciousness). So we bow down
to Thee. O Durge! Thou art unconcerned with the creation, preservation
and destruction; yet Thou punishest the wicked and art easily available
by the sincere devotion of Thy Bhaktas. O Devî! Thou scorchest and
destroyest the ignorance and sin of the embodied souls. Hence Thou art
named Bhargâ. So we bow down to Thee. O Mother! Thou art Kâlikâ, Nîla
Sarasvatî, Ugra Târâ, Mahogrâ; Thou assumest many other forms. So we
always bow down to Thee. O Devî! Thou art Tripura Sundarî, Bhairabî,
Mâtangî, Dhûmâvatî, Chhi<u>nn</u>amastâ, S'âkambharî and Rakta Dantikâ.
Obeisance to Thee! O Bhagavatî! It is Thou that didst appear as
Lak<u>s</u>mî out of

 

<span id="page_1051">p. 1051</span>

 

the milk ocean (K<u>s</u>îra Samudra). Thou hadst destroyed Vritrâsura,
Cha<u>nd</u>a, Mu<u>nd</u>a, Dhûmralochana, Rakta Bîja, S’umbha,
Nis'umbha and the Exterminator of the Dânavas and thus, Thou didst do
great favours to the Devas. So, O Gracious Countenanced! Thou art Vîjayâ
and Gangâ; O Sârade! We bow down to Thee. O Devî! Thou art the earth,
fire, Prâ<u>n</u>a and other Vâyus and other substances. O Merciful!
Thou art of the form of this Universe; the Deva form, and the Moon, Sun
and other Luminous forms and of the Knowledge Form.

 

97-109. O Devî! Thou art Sâvitrî; Thou art Gâyatrî; Thou art Sarasvatî;
Thou art Svadhâ, Svâhâ, and Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â. So we bow down to
Thee. Thou art, in the Vedas, the Âgamas, “Not this, not this.” Thou art
what is left after the negation of all this. This all the Vedas declare
of Thy True Nature thus as the Absolute Consciousness in all. Thus Thou
art the Highest Deity. So we worship Thee. As Thou art surrounded by
large black bees, Thou art named Bhrâmarî. We always make obeisance to
Thee! Obeisance to Thee! Obeisance to Thy sides! Obeisance to Thy back!
Obeisance to Thy front! O Mother! Obeisance to Thy above! Obeisance to
Thy below! Obeisance to everywhere round of Thee! O Thou, the Dweller in
Ma<u>n</u>î Dvîpa! O Mahâ Devî! Thou art the Guide of the innumerable
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as! O World Mother! Let Thou be merciful to us. O Devî!
Thou art higher than the highest. O World Mother! Victory be to Thee!
All Hail! O Goddess of the universe! Thou art the Best in the whole
universe; Victory to Thee! O Lady of the world! Thou art the mine of all
the gems of qualities. O Parames'varî! O World Mother! Let Thou be
pleased unto us.” Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- Hearing those sweet, ready
and confident words of the Devas, the World Mother said in the sweet
tone of a Mad Cuckoo:-- “O Devas! As far as granting boons to others is
concerned, I am ever ready. I am always pleased with you. So, O Devas!
Say what you want.” Hearing the words of the Devî, the Devas began to
express the cause of their sorrows. They informed Her of the wicked
nature of the vicious Daitya, the neglect of the Devas, the
Brahmâ<u>n</u>as and the Vedas and the ruins thereof, and the
dispossession of the Devas of their abodes and the receiving by the
Daitya of the boon from Brahmâ; in fact, everything what they had to
say, duly and vigorously. Then the Bhagavatî Bhrâmarî Devî sent out all
sorts of black bees, hornets, etc., from Her sides, front and forepart.

 

<span id="page_1052">p. 1052</span>

 

110-120. Innumerable lines of black bees then were generated and they
joined themselves with those that got out of the Devî's hands and thus
they covered the whole earth. Thus countless bees began to emit from all
sides like locusts. The sky was overcast with the bees; and the earth
was covered with darkness. The sky, mountain peaks, trees, forests all
became filled with bees and the spectacle presented a grand dismal
sight. Then the black bees began to tear asunder the breasts of the
Daityas as the bees bite those who destroy their beehives. Thus the
Daityas could not use their weapons nor could they fight nor exchange
any words. Nothing they could do; they had no help but to die. The
Daityas remained in the same state where they were and in that state
they wondered and died. No one could talk with another. Thus the
principal Daityas died within an instant. Thus completing their
destruction, the bees came back to the Devî. All the people then spoke
to one another “Oh! What a wonder! Oh! What a wonder!” Or like this :--
“Whose Mâyâ is this! What a wonder that She will do like this!” Thus
Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'a became merged in the ocean of joy and
worshipped the Devî Bhagavatî with various offerings and shoutings of
chants “Victory to the Devî” and showered flowers all around. The Munis
began to recite the Vedas. The Gandharbas began to sing.

 

121-127. The various musical instruments, Mridangas, Murajas, the Indian
lutes, Dhakkâs, Damarus, S'ankhas, bells, etc., all sounded and the
three worlds were filled with their echoes. All with folded palms
chanted various hymns of praise to the Devî and said “O Mother! Îsânî!
Victory to Thee!” The Mahâ Devî became glad and gave to each separate
boons and when they asked “for unshakeable devotion to Thy lotus feet,”
She granted them that also and disappeared before them. Thus I have
described to you the glorious character of the Bhrâmârî Devî. If anybody
hears this very wonderful anecdote, he crosses at once this ocean of the
world. Along with the glories and greatness of the Devî, if one hears
the accounts of Manus, then all auspiciousness comes to him. He who
hears or recites daily this Greatness of the Devî, becomes freed from
all his sins and he gets himself absorbed in the thoughts of the Devî
(Sâjuya). Note :-- The Mantra is here not merely the Seed, the Spiritual
Password, but it connotes, besides the idea of the password, the Âdi
First vibration and it exhibits the First Spiritual Form, endowed with
the highest feelings of Faith, Wisdom, Bliss and Joy, displayed with the
grandest colours, startling thrills, rapt enchanting

 

<span id="page_1053">p. 1053</span>

 

signs, gestures, and postures, the shooting forth of all powers, the
sources of Siddhis, that cannot be ordinarily conceived in the worldly
concerns. Their faint echoes govern this mighty world. The Mantras are
seated in the six chakras or plexuses or the six Laya centres in the
spinal cord. Within these chakras, the transformations of the Tattvas
take place. Some vanish. Some appear and so on. Remark :-- In this
chapter we find clearly the mention of the several names of the ten
Das'a Mahâ Vidyâs.

 

Here ends the Thirteenth Chapter of the Tenth Book of the account of
Bhrâmarî Devî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa and here ends as well the
Tenth Book.

 

\[The Tenth Book completed.\]

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk11ch01)
