[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch02)  [Next](bk10ch04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter III**

** **

**On the obstruction of the Sun’s course by the Bindhya Mountain**

 

<span id="page_1025">p. 1025</span>

 

1-16. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! Thus advising, the Devar<u>s</u>i,
the great Jñanî and Muni going wherever he likes, went to the
Brahmaloka. After the Muni had gone, the Bindhya became immersed in
great anxiety and becoming always very sorrowful, could not get peace.
What shall I do now so as to overthrow Meru? Until I do that, I won't be
able to get the peace of my mind or my health. The highsouled persons
always praised me for my enthusiasm and energy. Fie to my energy,
honour, fame and family! Fie to my strength and heroism! O Ri<u>s</u>is!
With all these cogitations in his mind, Bindhya came finally to this
crooked conclusion :-- “Daily the Sun, stars and planets circumambulate
round the Sumeru; hence Sumeru is always so arrogant; now if I can
resist the Sun's course in the heavens by my peaks, He will not be able
to circumambulate round the Sumeru. If I can do this, certainly I will
be able to curb the Sumeru in his pride.” Thus coming to a conclusion,
Bindhya raised his arms that were the peaks high up to the heavens and
blocking the passage in the Heavens, remained so and passed that night
with great uneasiness and difficulty, thinking when the Sun would rise
and he would obstruct His passage. At last, when the morning broke out,
all the quarters were clear. The Sun, destroying the darkness, rose in
Udaya Giri. The sky looked clear with His rays; the lotus, seeing Him,
blew out with joy; while the excellent white water-lilies, at the
bereavement of the Moon, contracted their leaves and closed as if at the
separation of one's lover, gone to a distant place. The people began to
do their own works on the appearance of the day; the worship of the
gods, the offerings to the Gods,

 

<span id="page_1026">p. 1026</span>

 

the Homas and the offerings to the Pitris were set a going on (in the
morning, afternoon and evening respectively). The Sun marched on in His
course. He divided the day into three parts, morning, midday, and
afternoon. First of all he consoled the eastern quarter which seemed
like a woman suffering from the bereavement of her lover; then he
consoled the south eartern corner; then as He wanted to go quickly
towards the south, His horses could not go further. The charioteer
Aru<u>n</u>a, seeing this, informed the Sun what had happened.

 

17\. Aru<u>n</u>a spoke :-- “O Sun! The Bindhya has become very jealous
of the Sumeru as You circumambulate round the Sumeru Mountain daily. He
has risen very high and obstructed your course in the Heavens, hoping
that you would circumambulate round him. He is thus vying with the
Sumeru Mountain.”

 

18-26. Sûta said :-- O Ri<u>s</u>is! Hearing the words of Aru<u>n</u>a,
the charioteer, the Sun began to think thus :-- “Oh! The Bindhya is
going to obstruct My course! What can a great hero not do, when he is in
the wrong path? Oh! My horses' motions are stopped to-day! The fate is
the strongest of all (Because Bindhya is strong today by Daiva,
therefore he is doing this). Even when eclipsed by Râhu (the ascending
node) I do not stop for a moment even; and now obstructed in My passage,
I am waiting here for a long time. The Daiva is powerful; what can I
do?” The Sun's course having been thus obstructed, all from the Gods to
the lowest became helpless and could not make out what to do.
Chitragupta and others ascertain their time through the Sun's course;
and that Sun is now rendered motionless by the Bindhya mountain! What a
great adverse fate is this! When the Sun was thus obstructed by the
Bindhya out of his arrogance, the sacrifices to the Devas, the offerings
to the Pitris all were stopped; the world was going to rack and ruin.
The people that lived on the west and south had their nights prolonged
and they remained asleep. The people of the east and the north were
scorched by the strong rays of the Sun and some of them died; some of
them lost their health and so forth. The whole earth became devoid of
S'râddhas and worships and a cry of universal distress arose on all
sides. Indra and the other Devas became very anxious and began to think
what they should do at that moment.

 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Tenth Book on the obstruction of the
Sun's course by the Bindhya Mountain in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](bk10ch04)
