[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch05)  [Next](bk11ch07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VI**

** **

**On the greatness of Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams**

 

<span id="page_1069">p. 1069</span>

 

1-21. Îs'vara said :-- O Kârtikeya! Kus'agranthi, Jîvapattrî and other
rosaries cannot compare to one-sixteenth part of the Rudrâk<u>s</u>a
rosary. As Vi<u>sn</u>u is the best of all the Puru<u>s</u>as, the Gangâ
is the best of all the rivers, Kas'yapa, amongst the Munis,
Uchchai<u>h</u>sravâ amongst the horses, Mahâ Deva amongst the Devas,
Bhagavatî amongst the Devîs, so the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am rosary is the best
of all the rosaries. All the fruits that occur by reading the stotras
and holding all the Vratas, are obtained by wearing the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
bead. At the time of making the Ak<u>s</u>aya gift, the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
bead is capable of giving high merits. The merit that accrues by giving
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am to a peaceful devotee of S’iva, cannot be expressed in
words. If anybody gives food to a man holding the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
rosary, his twenty one generations are uplifted and he ultimately
becomes able to live in the Rudrâ Loka. He who does not apply ashes on
his forehead and who does not hold Rudrâk<u>s</u>am and is averse to the
worship of S’iva is inferior to a châ<u>nd</u>âla. If Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
be placed on the head then the flesh-eaters, drunkards, and the
associates with the vicious become freed of their sins. Whatever fruits
are obtained by performing various sacrifices, asceticism and the study
of the Vedas are easily attained by simply holding the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
rosary. Whatever merits are obtained by read-

 

<span id="page_1070">p. 1070</span>

 

ing the four Vedas and all the Purâ<u>n</u>as and bathing in all the
Tîrthas and the results that are obtained by immense practice in
learning all are obtained by wearing Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. If at the time of
death, one wears Rudrâk<u>s</u>am and dies, one attains Rudrahood. One
has not to take again one's birth. If anybody dies by holding
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on his neck or on his two arms, he uplifts his
twenty-one generations and lives in the Rudra Loka. Be he a
Brâhma<u>n</u> or a Châ<u>nd</u>âla, be he with qualities or without
qualities, if he applies ashes to his body and holds Rudrâk<u>s</u>am he
surely attains S’ivahood. Be he pure or impure; whether he eats
uneatables or be he a Mlechha or a Châ<u>nd</u>âla or a Great Sinner,
any body if he holds Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is surely equal to Rudra. There is
no doubt in this.

 

If any body holds Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on his head he gets Ko<u>t</u>i times
the fruit; on his ears, ten Ko<u>t</u>i times the fruit, on his neck,
one hundred Ko<u>t</u>i times the fruit; on his holy thread, ayuta times
the fruit; on his arm, one lâkh Ko<u>t</u>i times the fruit and if one
wears Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on one's wrist, one attains Mok<u>s</u>a.
Whatever acts, mentioned in the Vedas be performed with Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
on, the fruits obtained are unbounded. Even if a man be without any
Bhakti and if he wears on his neck the Rudrâk<u>s</u>a rosary though he
does always vicious acts, he becomes freed of the bondage of this world.
Even if a man does not hold Rudrâk<u>s</u>a but if he be always full of
devotion towards the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, he attains the fruit that is got
by wearing the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am and he attains the S’iva Loka and is
honoured like S’iva. As in the country of Kîkata, an ass which used to
carry Rudrâk<u>s</u>am seed got S’ivahood after his death, so any man,
whether he be a Jñani (wise) or Ajnâni (unwise), gets S’ivahood if he
holds Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. There is no doubt in this.

 

22-28. Skanda said :-- “O God! How is it that in the country of
Kîka<u>t</u>a (Bihar), an ass had to carry Rudrâk<u>s</u>a; who gave him
the Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams! And what for did he hold that?”

 

Bhagavân Îs'vara said :-- O Son! Now hear the history of the case. In
the Bindhya mountain one ass used to carry the load of Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
of a traveller. Once the ass felt tired and became unable to carry the
load and fell down on the road and died. After his death the ass came to
Me by My Grace, becoming Mahes'vara with trident in his hand and with
three eyes. O Kârtikeya! As many faces as there are in the
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, for so many thousand Yugas the holder resides with
honour in the S’iva Loka. One should declare the greatness of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am to one's own disciple; never to disclose its glories to
one who is not a disciple nor a devotee of Rudrâk<u>s</u>am nor to him
who is an illiterate brute. Be he a Bhakta or not a

 

<span id="page_1071">p. 1071</span>

 

Bhakta, be be low or very low, if he holds Rudrâk<u>s</u>am then he is
freed from all sins. No equal can be to the merit of him who holds the
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams.

 

29-39. The Munis, the Seers of truth, describe this holding on of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am as a very great vow. He who makes a vow to hold one
thousand Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams, becomes like Rudra; the Devas bow down
before him. If thousand Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams be not obtained, one should
hold at least sixteen Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams on each arm, one
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on the crown hair; on the two hands, twelve on each;
thirty-two on the neck; forty on the head; six on each ear and one
hundred and eight Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams on the breast; and then he becomes
entitled to worship like Rudra. If any body holds Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
together with pearls, Prabâla, crystal, silver, gold and gem (lapis
lazuli), he becomes a manifestation of S'iva. If a body, through
laziness even, holds Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, the sin cannot touch him as
darkness cannot come near light. If any body makes japam of a mantram
with a Rudrâk<u>s</u>a rosary, he gets unbounded results. Such a merit
giving Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, if one such Rudrâk<u>s</u>am be not found in
any one's body, his life becomes useless, like a man who is void of
Tripu<u>nd</u>rak (three curved horizontal marks made on the forehead by
the worshippers of S'iva). If any body simply washes his head all over
with Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on, he gets the fruit of bathing in the Ganges.
There is no doubt in this. One faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, the five faced,
eleven faced and fourteen faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams are highly meritorious
and entitled to worship by all. The Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is S'ankara made
manifest; so it is always worshipped with devotion. The greatness of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is such as it can make a king out of a poor man. On
this point, I will tell you an excellent Purânic anecdote.

 

40-49. There was a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, named Girinâtha in the country of
Kosala. He was proficient in the Vedas and Vedâmgas, religious and very
rich. He used to perform sacrifices. He had a beautiful son named
Gu<u>n</u>anidhi. The son gradually entered into his youth and looked
beautiful like Kandarpa, the God of Love. While he was studying at his
Guru Sudhi<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a's house, he, by his beauty and youth
captivated the mind of his Guru's wife named Muktâvalî. The Guru's wife
became so much enchanted by his extraordinary beauty that she, being
unable to control herself, mixed with him and for some time remained
with him in secret enjoyment. Then feeling inconveniences, due to the
fear of. his Guru, to enjoy her freely, used poison to the Guru, killed
him and then he began to live freely with her. Next when his father,
mother came to know about this, he put to death instantly his father and
mother, administering poison to them. He became

 

<span id="page_1072">p. 1072</span>

 

addicted to various pleasures and his wealth was exhausted gradually. He
began to steal in Brâhma<u>n</u>s' houses and became addicted very much
to drinking. His relatives outcasted him from the society for his bad
behaviour and banished him outside the town. He then went into a dense
forest with Muktâvalî; and he began to kill the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s for
their wealth. Thus a long time passed away; when at last he fell into
the jaws of death.

 

50-54. Then to take him to the region of Death, thousands of the Yama's
messengers came; at the same time the S’iva's messengers came from S’iva
Loka. O Kârtikeya! A quarrel then ensued between both the parties of
Yama and S’iva. The Yama's messengers then said :-- “O Servers of
S’ambhu! What are the merits of this man that you have come to take him?
First speak to us of his merits.” S’iva's messengers spoke :-- “Fifteen
feet below the ground where this man died, there exists the
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. O Yama's messengers! By the influence of that
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, all his sins are destroyed; and we have come to take
him to S’iva.” Then the Brâhmi<u>n</u> Gu<u>n</u>anidhi assumed a divine
form and, getting on an aerial car went with S'iva's messengers before
S'iva. O One of good vows! Thus I have described briefly to you the
greatness of Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. This is capable to remove all sorts of
sins and yield great merits.

 

Here ends the Sixth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S'rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](bk11ch07.md)
