[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch22)  [Next](bk11ch24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIII**

 

**On the Tapta Krichchhra vrata and others**

 

<span id="page_1127">p. 1127</span>

 

1-20. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- The best Sâdhaka, then uttering after his
meals, the mantra “Amritâpidhânamasi.” (O Water-nectar! Let Thou be the
covering to the food that I have taken), should make Âchaman (sip one
Ga<u>nd</u>u<u>s</u>a water) and distribute the remnant food (the
leavings) to those who take the leavings. “Let the servants and
maid-servants of our family that expect the leavings of food be
satisfied with what leavings I give to them.” “Let those inhabitants of
the Raurava hell or other unholy places who have remained there for a
Padma or Arbuda years and want to drink water, be satisfied with this
water that I offer to them and let this water bring unending happiness
to them.” Repeating the above two mantras let the house-holder
distribute the leavings of food to the servants and the water to those
who want water respectively. Then opening the knot of the Pavitra (a
ring of Kus’a grass worn on the fourth finger on certain religious
occasions), let him throw this on the square ma<u>nd</u>alam or the
ground. The Brâhma<u>n</u>a that throws this Kus’a grass on the vessel
(Pâtra) is said to defile the vow of Brâhma<u>n</u>as, taking their
food. The Brâhma<u>n</u>a that has not yet washed his face after taking
the food, or touching another such Brâhma<u>n</u>a or a dog, or a
S’ûdra, should fast one day and then drink Pañchagabya and thus purify
himself. And in case the Uchchi<u>st</u>a Brâhmi<u>n</u> (who has not
washed his mouth and hands after meals) be touched by another
Brâhmi<u>n</u>, who is not Uchchi<u>st</u>a, then simply bathing will
purify him. By offering this Ekâhuti (oblation once) according to rules
mentioned above, one obtains the fruit of performing ten million
sacrifices; and by offering this oblation five times one gets the

 

<span id="page_1128">p. 1128</span>

 

endless fruit, of performing fifty million sacrifices, and if one feeds
such a man who knows well how to do this Prânâgnihoma, then he as well
as he whom he feeds both derive full benefits and they ultimately go to
heaven. The Brâhma<u>n</u>a acquires while taking each of his mouthful
of food the fruit of eating Pañchagavya, who takes his food duly with
the holy Pavitra Kus’a grass tied on his finger. During the three times
of worship, the devotee is to do his daily Japam, Tarpa<u>n</u>am and
Homa and he should feed the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s. Thus the five limbed
Puras’chara<u>n</u>a is completely done. The religious man should sleep
on a low bedding (lie on the ground); he is to control his senses and
anger; he is to eat moderately, the things that are light, sweet and
good; he is to be humble, peaceful and calm. He is to bathe thrice daily
and not to hold any unholy conversation with any woman, a S’ûdra, one
who is fallen, without any initiation, and who is an atheist; as well he
should not speak in a language spoken by the châ<u>nd</u>âlas. One is to
bow down before him who is in the act of performing the Japam, Homa and
worship, etc; one is not to talk with him. Never by deed, mind or word,
on all occasions never speak about sexual intercourses; nor hold any
contact with such people. For the relinquishment of this subject is
called Brahmacharyam (continence) of the kings as well as of the
house-holders. But one should go to one’s legal wife during the night
time after her menstruation duly according to the rules of the S’âstras;
the Brahmacharyam is not thereby destroyed. Man cannot repay the
three-fold debts and he cannot aspire for mok<u>s</u>a without
procreating sons or without doing the duties of the house-holders, as
prescribed by the S’âstras. An attempt to do so becomes entirely
fruitless like the breast on the neck of a goat. Rather it drags one
downward. So the S’rutis say. So let yourself be free first from the
debts due to the Devas, the debts due to the Ri<u>s</u>is and the debts
due to the Pitris. Make sacrifices first and then be free from the
Devas’ debt. Hold Brahmacharyam and be free from the Ri<u>s</u>is’ debt.
Offer til and water; that is, do S’râddhas and tarpa<u>n</u>ams and be
free from the debt due to the Pitris. Then do readily practise your own
Varnas’rama Dharma.

 

21-33. One is to practise Krichchra chândrâ yana Vrata and to take for
his food, milk, fruits, roots and vegetables, Habi<u>s</u>yannam and
food obtained by begging so that one may become sinless. One is to make
japam for Puras’chara<u>n</u>am. One is to avoid salt, salty or alkaline
substances, acid, garlic, turnips, eating in Kâmsa vessels, chewing
betels, eating twice, putting on impure clothings, the intoxicating
things and the unsâstric nocturnal japam; also one is not to waste one’s
time over blaming and

 

<span id="page_1129">p. 1129</span>

 

trying to find faults with the relatives, playing at dice, or talking at
random with one’s wife (so that evil effects may arise). One is to spend
one’s time in worshipping the Devas, reciting the hymns of praise, and
studying the S’âstras. One is to sleep on the ground, practise
Brahmacharyam, and the vow of silence, bathe thrice, not practise
anything which befits the S’ûdras only. One is to worship everyday, make
charities duly and be always happy, recite stotras daily, do occasional
Deva worships, have faith in one’s Guru and Deva. These twelve rules are
to ensure success to the devotee who does Puras’chara<u>n</u>am. One is
to daily praise the Sun, with one’s face turned towards Him, do japam
before Him; or one is to worship one’s own Deity in front of fire or the
image of any god, and do japam simultaneously. The devotee who practises
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am is to bathe, worship, do japam, meditate, practise
Homa, Tarpa<u>n</u>am, is to have no desires and to surrender all fruits
to one’s own desired Deity, etc. These are necessarily to be observed by
him. Therefore while doing japam, Homa, etc., the devotee’s mind is to
remain always pleasant and satisfied. One should be ready to practise
tapasyâ, to see the S’âstras and be merciful to all the beings. As
asceticism leads one to to heaven and to the attainment of one’s
desires, therefore know this that all the powers come to an ascetic. An
ascetic can cause another’s death (mâran); he can injure others, cure
diseases and kill all. Whatever the several Ri<u>s</u>is wanted from the
Devî Gâyatrî and to that end made Puras’chara<u>n</u>am and worshipped
Her, they obtained from Her all those things. O Nârada! I will speak of
S’ânti Karmas etc., in a future chapter. Here I will speak of those
rules, etc., that are to be observed in Puras’chara<u>n</u>am in as much
as they play the principal part to success.

 

First of all shave yourself and have your hairs and nails, etc., cut off
and bathe and be pure. Then perform the Prâjâpatya prâyas’chitta for
one’s peace and purification and next do the puras’chara<u>n</u>am of
the Gâyatrî. Do not speak the whole day and night. Keep your thoughts
pure. If words are to be spoken, speak only what you take as true. First
recite Mahâvyârhiti and then the Sâvitrî mantra with Pra<u>n</u>ava
prefixed. Then recite the sin-destroying mantra “Âpohi<u>st</u>hâ,
etc.,” and Svasti matî Sûkta and “Pâvamânî Sûkta.” In every action, in
its beginning and at its end one is to understand the necessity of doing
the Japam, why and what for one is doing that.

 

One is to repeat the Pra<u>n</u>ava, the three Vyârhitis and Sâvitrî
ayuta times or one thousand times or one hundred times or ten times.
Then offer with water, the peace offerings (tarpa<u>n</u>am) to the
Âchârya, Ri<u>s</u>i, Chhandas, and the Devas. Being engaged in action,
do not speak any impure language

 

<span id="page_1130">p. 1130</span>

 

of the Mlechchhas or talk with any S’ûdra or any bad person. Do not talk
with wife in the period of menstruation, with one who has fallen, with
the low-class person, with any hater of the Devas and the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, Âchâryas and Gurus, with those who blame the fathers
and mothers; nor show any disrespect to anybody. Thus I have spoken in
due order about all the rules of Krichchhra vrata. Now I will speak of
the rules of the Prâjâpatya Krichchhra, S’ântapana, Parâka Krichchhra
and Chândrâya<u>n</u>a.

 

34-54. One becomes freed of all the sins, if one performs the above five
Chândrâya<u>n</u>as. By the performance of the Tapta Krichchhra, all
sins are burnt off in an instant. By the performance of the three
Chândrâya<u>n</u>as the people get purified and go to the Brahma Loka.
By doing eight Chândrâya<u>n</u>as, one sees face to face one’s Devatâ,
ready to grant boons. With ten Chândrâya<u>n</u>as, one gets the
knowledge of the Vedas and one acquires all what one wants.

 

In the observance of the Krichchhra Prâjâpatya Vrata, one has to take
food once in midday for three days, once in the evening for three days,
and for the next three days whatever one gets without asking anything
from anybody. For the next three days one is not to take any thing at
all and go on with one’s work. These twelve days’ work constitutes the
Prâjâpatya Vrata.

 

Now about the rules of the S’ântapana Vrata. On the preceding day one
has got to eat food consisting of the mixture of cow urine, cow-dung
milk, curd, ghee and the water of the Kus’a grass; the day following he
is to fast. These two days’ work constitutes the S’ântapana Vrata.

 

Now about the Ati Krichchhra vrata. For the first three days, one is to
eat one mouthful of food a day and for the next three days one is to
fast. This is the Ati Krichchhra vrata. This vrata repeated three times
is called Mahâ S’ântapana vrata. Note :-- According to the opinion of
Yama, the fifteen days’ work constitutes Mahâ S’ântapana. For the three
days one has to eat cow-urine; for the next three days, cow-dung, for
the next three days, curd; for the next three days milk; and for the
next three days one has to take ghee. Then one becomes pure. This is
called the all sin-destroying Mahâ S’ântapan Vrata. Now I am speaking of
the nature of the Tapta Krichchhra Vrata.

 

The Tapta Krichchhra vrata is carried out for the twelve days. For the
first three days, one has to drink hot water; for the next three days,
hot milk; for the next three days, the hot ghee and for the next three
days, air only. Everyday one has to bathe once only under the above
rules,

 

<span id="page_1131">p. 1131</span>

 

and remain self-controlled. If one drinks water simply everyday under
the above conditions, that is called the Prâjâpatya vrata.

 

To remain without any food for twelve days according to rules is called
the Parâka Krichchhra vrata. By this vrata, all sins are destroyed.

 

Now about the rules of taking food in the Chândrâya<u>n</u>a vrata. In
the dark fortnight one will have to decrease one mouthful of food every
day and in the bright fortnight one will have to increase one mouthful
every day and one has to fast completely on the Amâvasyâ (new moon) day.
One has to bathe thrice daily during every Sandhyâ time. This is known
as the Chândrâya<u>n</u>a Vrata.

 

In the S’is’u Chândrâya<u>n</u>a Vrata one will have to take four
mouthfuls of food in the midday and four mouthfuls in the evening. In
the Yati Chândrâya<u>n</u>a one has to take eight mouthfuls in the
midday and to control his passions.

 

55\. These abovementioned vratas are observed by the Rudras, Âdityas,
Vâsus, and Maruts; and they are enjoying thereby their full safety.

 

Each of the above vratas purifies the seven Dhâtus of the body in seven
nights simply! First skin, then blood, then flesh, bones, sinews,
marrows and semen are purified. There is no doubt in this. Thus
purifying the Âtman by the above vratas, one is to do religious actions.
The work done by such a purified man is sure to be met with success.
First control the senses, be pure and do good actions. Then all your
desires will be undoubtedly fructified. Fast for three nights, without
doing any actions and see the result. (You will not do anything and you
want self control! Is this a child’s play?) Perform for three days the
nocturnal vratas. Then proceed with your desired duties. If one works
according to these methods, one gets the fruits of
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am. O Nârada! By the Puras’chara<u>n</u>am of S’rî
Gâyatrî Devî all desires are fulfilled and all sins are destroyed.
Before doing Puras’chara<u>n</u>am purify your body by performing the
above vratas. Then you will get all your desires completely fulfilled. O
Nârada! Thus I have spoken to you of the secret rules of
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am. Never disclose this to any other body. For it is
recognised equivalent to the Vedas.

 

Here ends the Twenty-third Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Tapta
Krichchhra vrata and others in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](bk11ch24.md)
