[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch13)  [Next](bk11ch15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIV**

 

**On the greatness in holding the Bibhûti**

 

<span id="page_1088">p. 1088</span>

 

1-17. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Whatever is given as charities
to any man besmeared with the holy ashes, takes away instantly all the
sins of the donor. The S’rutis, Smritis, and all the Purâ<u>n</u>as
declare the greatness of this Bhasma. So the twice-born must accept
this. Whoever holds this Tripu<u>nd</u>ra, of this holy ashes at the
three Sandhyâ times, is freed from all his sins and goes to the region
of S’iva. The Yogi who takes a bath of ashes throughout his body during
the three Sandhyâs, gets his Yoga developed soon. By this bath of ashes,
many generations are lifted up. O Nârada! This ash bath is many times
superior to the water bath. To take once a bath of ashes secures to one
all the merits acquired by bathing in all the sacred places of
pilgrimages. There is no doubt in this. By this bath of ashes, all the
Mahâpâtakas (great heinous sins) and other minor sins as well are
instantly destroyed as heaps of wood are brought down to ashes in a
moment by the fire. No bath is holier than this one. This is first
mentioned by S’iva and He took Himself this bath. Since then this bath
of ashes has been taken with great care by Brahmâ and the other Devas
and the Munis for their own good in all the virtuous actions. This bath
of ashes is termed the bath of fire. So he who applies ashes on his
head, gets the state of Rudra while he is in this body of five elements.
Those who are delighted to see persons with this ashes on their bodies
are respected by the Devas, Asuras, and Munis. He who honours and gets
up on seeing a man besmeared with ashes is respected even by Indra, the
Lord of Heavens. Even if anybody eats any uneatables, then the sin
incurred thereby won’t touch him, if his body be then besmeared with
ashes. He who first takes a water bath and then an ash-bath, be he a
Brahmachârî or an house-holder or an anchorite (Vânaprasthî) is freed of
all sins and gets in the end the highest state. Specially for the Yatis
(ascetics), this ash bath is very necessary. This ash bath is superior
to the water bath. For the bonds of Nature, this pleasure and pain, are
cut asunder by this ash bath. The Munis know this Prakriti as moist and
wet; and therefore Prakriti binds men. If anybody desires to cut asunder
this bondage of the body, he will find no other remedy for this in the
three worlds than this Holy Bath of ashes.

 

<span id="page_1089">p. 1089</span>

 

18-43. In ancient days the ashes were first offered to the Devî gladly
by the Devas for their protection, their good and purification, when
they first saw the ashes. Therefore anybody who takes this bath of fire,
gets all his sins destroyed and he goes to S’iva Loka. He who daily uses
this ashes has not to suffer from the oppression of the Râk<u>s</u>asas,
Pis’âchas, Pûtanâs and the other Bhûtas or from disease, leprosy, the
chronic enlargement of spleen, all sorts of fistulae, from eighty sorts
of rheumatism, sixty four kinds of bilious diseases, twenty two
varieties of phlegmatic diseases and from tigers, thieves, and other
vicious planetary influences. Rather he gets the power to suppress all
these as a lion kills easily a mad elephant. Anybody who first mixes the
ashes with pure cold water and then besmears his body with that and puts
on the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras, attains soon the Highest Brahmâ. He who holds
the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra of ashes becomes sinless and goes to the Brahmâ
loka. He can even wipe off the ordnances of the fate on his forehead to
go to the jaws of Death, if he uses, according to the S’âstras, the
Tripu<u>nd</u>ras on his forehead. If the ashes be used on the neck,
then the sin, incurred through the neck, is completely destroyed. If the
ashes be used on the neck, then the sin incurred by the neck, in eating
uneatable things is entirely destroyed. If the ashes be held on the
arms, then the sin incurred by the arms is destroyed. If it be held on
the breast, the sin done mentally is destroyed. If it be held on the
navel, the sin incurred by the generative organ is destroyed. If it be
held on the anus, then the sin incurred by the anus is destroyed. And if
it be held on the sides, then the sin incurred in embracing other’s
wives is destroyed. So, know fully, to use ashes is highly commendable.
Everywhere three curved lines of ashes are to be used. Know these three
lines as Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a; Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âgni,
Gârhapatya fire and Âhavanîva fire; the Sâttva, Râjas and Tâmas
qualities, Heaven, earth and Pâtâla (nether regions). If the wise
Brâhmi<u>n</u> holds properly the ashes his Mahâpâtakas are destroyed.
He is not involved in any sin. Rather he, without any questionings, gets
his liberation. All the sins, in the body besmeared with ashes, are
burnt down by the ashes, which is of the nature of fire, into ashes. He
is called Bhasmani<u>st</u>ha (a devotee of Bhasma, i.e., ashes) who
takes a bath of ashes, who besmears his body with ashes, who use the
Tripu<u>nd</u>ras of ashes, who sleeps in ashes. He is called also
Âtmani<u>st</u>ha, a devotee of Âtman (Self). At the approach of such a
man, the Demons, Pis’âchas, and very serious diseases run away to a
distance. There is no doubt in this. In as much as these ashes reveal
the knowledge of Brahmâ, it is called Bhasita from Bhasma, to shine;
because it eats up the sins, it is called Bhasma; because it increases
the eight supernatural powers Animâ, etc., it is called

 

<span id="page_1090">p. 1090</span>

 

Bhûti; because it protects the man who uses it, it is called
“Rak<u>s</u>â.” As the sins are all destroyed by the mere remembrance of
Bhagavân Rudra, so seeing the person using the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra, the
demons, bad spirits and other vicious hosts of spirits fly away quickly,
trembling with fear. As a fire burns a great forest by its own strength,
so this bath of ashes burns the sins of those who are incessantly
addicted to sins. Even if at the time of death one takes a bath of
ashes, though he has committed an inordinate amount of vices, all his
sins are soon destroyed. By this bath of ashes, the Self is purified,
the anger is destroyed; the senses are calmed down. The man who uses
even once this Bhasma comes to Me; he has not to take any more births in
future. On Monday Amâvasyâ (also on the full moon day) if one sees the
S’iva Lingam, with his body besmeared all over with ashes, one’s sins
will all be destroyed. (All the sins are not seen; hence the tithi is
called Amâvas.) If people use Bhasma daily, all their desires will be
fructified whether they want longevity, or prosperity or Mukti. The
Tripu<u>nd</u>ra that represents Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and S’iva is very
sacred. Seeing the man with Tripu<u>nd</u>ra on, the fierce
Râk<u>s</u>asas or mischievous creatures flee to a distance. There is no
doubt in this. After doing the S’aucha (necessary cleanliness) and other
necessary things, one bathes in pure cold water and besmears his body
with ashes from head to foot. By taking the water bath only, the outward
unclean things are destroyed. But the ash bath not only cleanses the
outer external uncleanliness but cleanses also all the internal
uncleanliness. So even if one does not take the water bath, one ought to
take this ash bath. There is to be no manner of doubt in this.

 

44-47. All the religious actions performed without this ash bath seem as
if no actions are done at all. This ash bath is stated in the Vedas. Its
another name is the Fire Bath. By this ash bath both outside and inside
are purified. So a man who uses ashes gets the entire fruit of
worshipping S’iva. By the water Bath only the outside dirt is removed;
but by this bath of ashes, outside dirts and inside dirts, both are
fully removed. If this water bath be taken many times daily, still
without an ash bath, one’s heart is not purified. What more shall I
speak of the greatness of ashes, the Vedas only appreciate its glories
rightly! Yea, very rightly!

 

48-50. Or Mahâ Deva, the Gem of all the Devas, knows the greatness of
this Bhasma. Those who perform rites and works prescribed

 

<span id="page_1091">p. 1091</span>

 

by the Vedas, without taking this bath of ashes, do not get even a tithe
of the fruits of their works done. Only that man will be entitled to the
entire fruits of the Vedas who perform this bath of ashes duly. This is
the opinion of the Vedas. This bath of ashes purifies more the things
that are already pure; thus the S’ruti says. That wretch who does not
take the bath of ashes as aforesaid is a Great Sinner. There is no doubt
in this. By this bath greater interminable merits accrue than what is
obtained by innumerable baths taken by the Brâhma<u>n</u>as on the
Vâru<u>n</u>î momentous occasion. So take this bath carefully in the
morning, midday and evening. This bath of ashes is ordained in the
Vedas. So know those who are against this bath mentioned in the Vedas,
are verily fallen! After evacuating oneself of one’s urine and faeces,
one ought to take this bath of ashes. Otherwise men will not be
purified. Even if one performs duly the water bath and if one does not
take this bath of ashes, that man will not be purified. So he cannot get
any right to do any religious actions. After evacuating one’s abdomen of
the outgoing air, after yawning, after holding sexual intercourses,
after spitting and sneezing, and after easing oneself of phlegm, one
ought to take this bath of ashes. O Nârada! Thus I have described to you
here the greatness of S’rî Bhasma. I am again telling you more of it
specially. Listen attentively.

 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the greatness
in holding the Bibhûti (ashes) in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](bk11ch15.md)
