[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch07)  [Next](bk11ch09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VIII**

** **

**On Bhûta S'uddhi**

 

<span id="page_1074">p. 1074</span>

 

1-21. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Great Muni! Now I shall tell you the
rules of Bhûta S’uddhi, i.e., the purification of the elements of the
body (by respiratory attraction and replacement, etc.). Firstly, think
of the Highest Deity Ku<u>nd</u>alinî (the Serpent Fire) as rising up in
the hollow

 

<span id="page_1075">p. 1075</span>

 

canal Su<u>s</u>umnâ in the Spinal Cord from the Mulâdhâra (the sacral
plexus) to the Brahmârandhra (the aperture supposed to be at the crown
of the head). Next, the devotee is to meditate on the Mantra “Hamsa” and
consider his Jîvâtmâ (the embodied soul) united with Para Brahmâ. Then
think from leg to the knees in the form of a square Yantra (diagram as
furnished with Vajra thunderbolt, represented by 63 lines at the four
corners); consider this square as the earth, of a golden colour and
represented by the letter “Lam,” representing the Seed Mantra of earth.
Next from the knee to the navel consider the semi-moon and at its two
ends consider that the two Lotuses are situated. Consider this as the
circle of water, of white colour, represented by the letter “Vam” the
Seed Mantra of water. Then again from the navel to the heart consider it
as of a triangular form and the Svastik mark at its three angles and
think it as of fire and represented by the letter “Ram” its root Mantra,
of red colour. Next from the heart to the centre of the eyebrows,
consider as marked with six dots, with the Seed Mantra “Yam” of a
smoke-coloured colour (dark-red) and of a circular appearance and
consider it as air. Then again from the centre of the eyebrows to the
crown of the head consider as Âkâs’a Ma<u>nd</u>alam (a region of ether)
beautiful and clear and with “Ham” as its vîja letter. Thus thinking
consider firstly the earthy principle originated from watery principle,
dissolved in water. Then think water as dissolved in fire, its cause;
fire dissolved in air, its cause; and air dissolved in Âkâs’a ether, its
cause; then consider Âkâs’a dissolved in its cause Ahamkâra, egoism;
then again Ahamkâra dissolved in the Great Principle (Mahâttatva); and
Mahâttatva again in its cause Prakriti and consider Prakriti again
diluted in its cause, the Supreme Self. Then consider your ownself as
the Highest Knowledge and only that. Think, then, of the Pâpa
Puru<u>s</u>a, the Sinful Man in your body. The size of this Man is that
of a thumb and it is situated in the left abdomen. The head of him is
represented by Brahmahatyâ (murdering a Brâhma<u>n</u>); his area as
stealing gold; his heart as drinking wine; his loins as going to the
wife of his Guru, his legs as mixing with people who go to their Guru's
wives, and his toes as representing other sins and venial offences. The
Sinful Man holds axes and shield in his hands; he is always angry, with
his head bent down and his appearance is very horrible. Inhale air
through the left nostril thinking of “Vam” the Root Mantra of air and
make Kumbhaka, i.e., fill the whole body with that air, and hold it
inside, purifying the sinful man; then repeating “Ram,” the seed Mantra
of fire, think the sinful man with his own body burnt down to ashes.
Then exhale outside through the right nostril  those ashes of the Sinful
Man. Next consider the ashes

 

<span id="page_1076">p. 1076</span>

 

due to the burning of the Sinful Man, as rolled and turned into a round
ball with the nectar seed of the Moon. Think steadily this ball as
transformed into a golden egg by the Seed Mantra “Lam” of the earth.
Repeat then, “Ham” the seed Mantra of Âkâs’a and think yourself as an
ideal being; pure and clear, and shape thus your body and the several
limbs.

 

Create, then, fresh in an inverse order from the Brahmâ the elements
Âkâs’a, air, fire, water, earth and locate them in their respective
positions. Then by the Mantra “Soham” separate the Jîvâtmâ from the
Paramâtmâ and locate the Jîvâtmâ in the heart. Think also that the
Kundalinî has come to the Sacral Plexus, after locating the Jîvâtmâ,
turned into nectar by contact with the Highest Self, in the heart. Next
meditate on the vital force, the Prâ<u>n</u>a S’akti, thus located as
follows :-- There is a red lotus on a wide boat in a vast ocean of a red
colour; on this lotus is seated the Prâ<u>n</u>a S’akti. She has six
hands holding, in due order, the trident, the arrows made of sugarcane,
noose, goad, five arrows and a skull filled with blood. She is
three-eyed. Her high breasts are decorated; the colour of Her body is
like the Rising Sun. May She grant us happiness. Thus meditating on the
Prâ<u>n</u>a S’akti, Who is of the nature of the Highest Self, one ought
to apply ashes on his body in order to attain success in all actions.
Great merit arises from the application of ashes (besmearing ashes) on
the body. I will now dwell on this subject in detail. Listen. This point
of holding ashes on to the body is particularly proved in the Vedas and
Smritis.

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Eleventh Book on Bhûta S'uddhi
(purification of elements in the body) in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk11ch09)
