[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch17)  [Next](bk11ch19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XVIII**

 

**On the Greatness of the Devî Pûjâ**

 

<span id="page_1110">p. 1110</span>

 

1\. Nârada spoke :-- “O Bhagavân! I am now very eager to hear the
special Pûjâ of S’rî Devî. The people get their desires fulfilled if
they worship Her.”

 

2-23. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Devar<u>s</u>i! I shall now specially
speak to you how the World Mother Bhagavatî is worshipped; by
worshipping Whom one easily gets objects of enjoyments, liberation and
the destruction of all evils. Controlling one’s speech and making
Âchaman, one must make one’s sankalpa and perform Bhûtas’uddhi,
Mâtrikânyâsa, <u>s</u>adanganyâsa, placing conchshell and doing other
necessary acts. Offering the ordinary Arghya, one should give special
Arghya and with the mantra “Astrâya Pha<u>t</u>” sprinkle over all the
articles brought for worship. Taking the Guru’s permission, he is to go
on with his Pûjâ. First worship the pî<u>t</u>ha or seat whereon the
Devî would be placed; then perform dhyân (meditation of the Devî). Then
with great devotion, offer to the Deva, the seats (Âsana) and other
articles of worship; then perform the bath of the Devî by the water of
the Panchâmrita (the five nectars). If anybody performs the bath
ceremony of S’rî Devî with one hundred jars of sugarcane juice, he will
not have to incur any future birth.

 

He who performs this bath, and recites the Veda Mantras, with mango
juice or sugarcane juice gets for ever Lak<u>s</u>mî ever and ever and
Sarasvatî bound at his doors. He who gets this sacred bath of the Devî
with grape juice, along with his relatives and acquaintences dwells in
the Devî-loka for as many years as there are atoms in the juice. He who
bathes the Devî with the Vedic mantras, and with water scented with
camphor, the fragrant aloe wood (aguru), saffron, and musk, becomes
freed at once of the sins acquired in his hundred births. He who bathes
the Devî with jars of milk, lives in the ocean of milk (k<u>s</u>îra
samudra) for one Kalpa. So he who does this bathing ceremony with jars
of curd, becomes the lord of Dadhiku<u>nd</u>a (the reservoir of curd).
He who performs the Snânams of the Devî with honey, ghee and sugar
becomes the lord of these things. He who bathes the Devî with one
thousand jars, becomes happy in this world as in the next. Note :-- Make
the liquid current flow pure in your body is the esoteric meaning of the
bath. If you give Her a pair of silken clothes, you will go to the
Vâyu-Loka. If you give Her

 

<span id="page_1111">p. 1111</span>

 

the jewel ornaments, you will become the Lord of gems and jewels. (Make
your mind like the gem.) If anybody gives saffron, sandalpaste, musk,
Sindûra and Âlaktak (red things), he will go to the Heavens and become
there the Indra, the Lord of the Devas, in the next birth. Various
flowers ought to be offered in S’rî Bhagavatî’s worship; or the flowers
of the season offered to the Devî will lead the devotee to Kailâs’a. The
devotee that offers the beautiful Bel leaves to the Devî never
experiences anywhere pains and difficulties. The devotee who writes the
Vîja mantra of Mâyâ “Hrîm Bhuvanes’varyai Nama<u>h</u>” with red
sandalpaste thrice on the tri-leaves of the Vilva tree leaf and offers
this to the lotus feet of the Devî, becomes Manu by the merit of this
virtuous act! The devotee becomes the Lord of the whole universe who
worships the Devî Bhagavatî with ten millions of entire Vilva leaves,
fresh, green and spotless.

 

24-40. If any devotee worships with ten millions of entire fresh green
Ku<u>nd</u>a flowers, with eight scents, he gets surely the
Prajâpatihood. The worship of the Devî with ten millions of Mallikâ and
Mâlatî flowers besmeared with eight scents makes a man the four faced
(Brahmâ); and one hundred millions of such flowers will make the devotee
a Vi<u>sn</u>u. In days of yore, Vi<u>sn</u>u worshipped the Devî in the
aforesaid way and so got His Vi<u>sn</u>uhood. If any devotee worships
the Devî with one hundred Ko<u>t</u>is of Mallikâ or Mâlatî flowers, the
man becomes certainly Sutrâtmâ Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha. In ancient days
Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha worshipped thus the Devî with great devotion and so
he became Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha! (These Hira<u>n</u>yagarbha, Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes’a were mere ordinary men before. See the
Brihadâra<u>n</u>yaka Upani<u>s</u>ada). Note :-- The eight scents refer
to Ja<u>t</u>â mamsî Kapiyutâ S’aktergandhâs <u>t</u>akam! So will be
the results if Javâ, Vandhûka and Dâ<u>d</u>imî flowers be offered in
the worship. Various other beautiful flowers can be offered duly to the
Devî by the devotee. The merits accruing from such offers are not known
even to the God Îs’vara. The flowers that spring in their proper seasons
are to be offered every year to the Devî, repeating Her thousand names
enumerated in the Twelfth Book or in the Kûrma Purâ<u>n</u>a. If the
above worship be offered to the Devî, then that man, whether he be a
sinner or a great sinner, will be freed from all the sins and after
leaving his mortal coil, he will get, no doubt, the lotus feet of the
S’rî Devî Bhagavatî. Offer Dhûpa made of black Aguru, camphor,
sandalpaste, red sandalpaste, Sihlaka and Guggula, saturated with ghee
in such a way as the whole room of S’rî Bhagavatî scents with pure

 

<span id="page_1112">p. 1112</span>

 

fragrant smell. The Devî Bhagavatî becomes pleased with this and offers
the lordship of the three Lokas to the devotee. The devotee, who offers
daily the light of camphor to the Devî, goes to the Sûrya Loka. There is
no doubt in this. With one’s whole heart, one should give one hundred or
one thousand lights to the Devî. The devotee should offer heaps of food
consisting of six Râsas, the plates and dishes for chewing, sucking,
licking and drinking, that is, all kinds of food solid, and liquid,
mountain-like high. Always give food on golden flat plates and cups and
various delicious sweet juicy nice heavenly fruits, nicely arranged on
trays, cups and saucers. When S’rî Mahâdevî Bhuvane’svarî gets pleased,
the whole universe gets pleased. For the whole Universe is all Devî; as
a rope is mistaken for a snake, so this Mahâdevî is mistaken for the
universe.

 

41-59. Offer a jar of drinking Ganges water, cool and nice, scented with
camphor to the Devî; then offer betels with camphor, cardamum, cloves,
and various delicious scents. These all are to be offered with great
devotion so that the Devî may be pleased. Next have music with lovely
mrida<u>n</u>gas, flutes, murajas, Dhahkâs and dundubhis and so please
Her. The Veda mantras are to be recited, the Purâ<u>n</u>as are to be
read and the hymns to be chanted. With whole head and heart offer to the
Devî the umbrella and châmara, the two kingly offerings. Then
circumambulate round Her and prostrate before Her and ask Her kindness
and pray to Her to forgive all faults and shortcomings. The Devî is
pleased with anybody who remembers Her even once! What wonder then that
She will be pleased with all these offerings! The Mother is naturally
merciful to her child. When She is loved with devotion, then She becomes
very merciful. There is nothing strange here! On this point I will
recite to you the history of Vrihadratha Râjar<u>s</u>i. Hearing which
gives rise to Bhakti and Love.

 

Once in a certain region in the Himâlayâs there lived a bird called
Chakravâk. It flew over many countries and went once to Kâs’îdhâm. As a
fruit of his Prârabdha Karma, that bird, desirous to find some rice
beans, voluntarily went like an orphan round about the temple of S’rî
Annapûr<u>n</u>â Devî. There circumambulating round the Devî Bhagavatî
the bird left the city Kâs’î, that grants liberation and flew away to
another country. In time the bird left his body and went to Heavens.
There he assumed a heavenly form of a youth and began to enjoy various
pleasures. Thus he enjoyed for two Kalpas. Then he got back to the earth
and took his birth as the best in the K<u>s</u>attriya family. He became
celebrated as the king Vrihadratha in

 

<span id="page_1113">p. 1113</span>

 

this world. That King was truthful, controlled his senses, and practised
S’amyama and deep concentration and knew everything of the past, the
present and the future. He conquered all the enemies and performed
various sacrifices and became the Emperor of the sea-girt earth and
acquired the very rare faculty in the knowledge of everything of his
previous births. The Munis came to know of this from various rumours and
came to the King. The King Vrihadratha duly entertained those guests.
The Munis took their seats and asked :-- “O King! We hear that all the
events of previous births are vividly reflected in your memory. On this
point great doubts have come upon us. Kindly describe in detail. By what
Pu<u>n</u>yam (merits) you have come to know all about previous births
and the knowledge of the past, the present and the future. We have come
to you to know how you got this wonderful supersensual knowledge. Kindly
say to us sincerely everything about this and oblige.”

 

60-71. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Brâhma<u>n</u>! The very religious
King Vrihadratha heard them and began to speak out all the secret causes
for his knowledge of the past, the present and the future, thus :-- O
Munis! Hear how I acquired this knowledge. In my previous birth I was a
very low bird chakravâk. Once, out of my ignorance, I circumambulated
round the temple of the Devî Bhagavatî Annapur<u>n</u>â at Kâs’î. And,
as the result of that, I lived in the Heavens for a period of two Kalpas
and I have got this birth and I have got the knowledge of the past, the
present and the future. O You of good vows! Who can ascertain what
amount of merits accrues from remembering the Feet of the World-Mother.
Remembering Her glories, I always shed tears of joy. Those who do not
worship the adorable Deity Jagadambâ are the Great Sinners and they are
treacherous. Fie on their births! The worship of S’iva or Vi<u>sn</u>u
is not eternal. Only the Jagadambâ’s worship is eternal. Thus it is
stated in the S’rutis. What more shall I speak on this worship of the
World-Mother, which is void of the best trace of any doubt. Everyone
ought to serve devotedly the lotus feet of the Devî Bhagavatî. There is
no other act more glorious in this world than serving the feet of
Jagadambâ. It is highly necessary to serve the Highest Deity, whether in
Her Sagu<u>n</u>a or in Her Nirgu<u>n</u>a aspect. (Eat the sugarcandy,
holding it in any way. It makes no difference.) Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :--
Hearing the aforesaid words of the virtuous Râjar<u>s</u>i Vrihadratha,
the Munis went back to their respective abodes. Such is the power of the
Devî Jagadambikâ! So who can question about the certainty of the high
merits arising from the Jagadambikâ’s worship and who will not reply,
when so questioned? Their births are really fruitful who possess faith
in the Devî worship;

 

<span id="page_1114">p. 1114</span>

 

but of those who have no such faith, there is some wrong mixture, no
doubt; in their births.

 

Here ends the Eighteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Greatness
of the Devî Pûjâ, in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](bk11ch19)
