[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch18)  [Next](bk11ch20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIX**

 

**On the midday Sandhyâ**

 

<span id="page_1114">p. 1114</span>

 

1-24. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Now I am speaking of the
auspicious midday Sandhyâ, the practice of which leads to the
wonderfully excellent results. Listen. Here the Âchamana and other
things are similar to those of the morning Sandhyâ. Only in meditation
(Dhyânam) there is some difference. I will now speak of that. The name
of the midday Gâyatrî is Sâvitrî. She is ever a youthful maiden, of
white colour, three-eyed; She holds in Her one hand a rosary, in Her
other hand a trident and with Her two other hands She makes signs to Her
Bhaktas to dispel fear and to grant boons. Riding on the bull, She
recites the Yayur Vedas; She is the Rudra S’akti with Tâmo gu<u>n</u>as
and She resides in Brahmaloka, She daily traverses in the path of the
Sun. She is Mâyâ Devî, beginningless; I bow down to Her. After
meditating on the Âdyâ Devî Bhagavatî perform Âchamanas and other things
as in the morning Sandhyâ. Now, about the offering of Arghya (an offer
of green grass, rice, etc., made in worshipping a God or
Brâhma<u>n</u>). Collect flowers for Arghya; in the absence of flowers,
the Bael leaves and water will serve the purpose. Facing the Sun, and
looking upwards, offer the Arghya to the Sun upwards. Then perform other
acts as in the morning Sandhyâ. In midday, some offer Arghya to the Sun,
only with the recitation of the Gâyatrî mantra. But that is not approved
of by the tradition and community; there is the likelihood of the whole
work being thwarted or rendered fruitless. For, in the morning and
evening Sandhyâs, the Râk<u>s</u>ashas named the Mandehâs become

ready to devour the Sun. This is stated in the S’rutis. Therefore the
midday offering of the Arghya is not for the destruction of the Daityas
but for the satisfaction of the Devî; so with the mantra
“Âkri<u>sn</u>ena, etc.,” the offering of Arghya can be effected; and
the reciting of the infallible Gâyatrî mantra is only to create
disturbance in the shape of thwarting the action. So in the morning and
evening, the Brâhma<u>n</u>a is to offer the Sûryârghya, repeating the
Gâyatrî and Pra<u>n</u>ava; and in the midday to offer flowers and water
with the mantra “Âkri<u>sn</u>ena, rajasâ etc.,” else it will go against
the S’ruti. In the absence of flowers, the Durba grass, etc., can be
offered carefully as the Arghya; and the full fruits of the Sandhyâ

 

<span id="page_1115">p. 1115</span>

 

will be secured. O Best of Devar<u>s</u>is! Now hear the important
points in the Tarpa<u>n</u>am (peace offerings). Thus :--

 

“Om Bhuva<u>h</u> puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Yajurvedam tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Ma<u>nd</u>alam tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Hira<u>n</u>yagarbham tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om antarâtmânam tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Sâvitrîm tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Devamâtaram tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Sâmkritim tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Yuvatîm sandhyâm tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Rudrâ<u>n</u>îm tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Nîmrijâm tarpayâmi namo nama<u>h</u>.”

“Om Bhurbhuva<u>h</u> Sva<u>h</u> puru<u>s</u>am tarpayâmi namo
nama<u>h</u>.”

 

Thus finish the midday Sandhyâ mga Tarpa<u>n</u>am. Now, with your hands
raised high up towards the Sun, worship Him by the two mantras, praising
thus :--  “Om Udutyam Jâtavedasam, etc.,” “Om Chitram Devânâm, etc.”
Next repeat the Gâyatrî. Hear its method. In the morning, repeat the
Gâyatri at the proper moment with hands raised; in the evening time with
hands lowered and in the midday with hands over the breast. Begin with
the middle phalanx (joint) of the nameless finger, then the phalanx at
its root, then the phalanx at the root of the little finger, its middle
phalanx and its top, then the tops of the nameless, fore and ring
fingers, then the middle and finally the root of the ring finger (in the
direction of the hands of the watch; avoiding the middle and root
phalanx of the middle finger). Thus ten times it is repeated. In this
way if the Gâyatrî be repeated one thousand times, the sins arising from
killing a cow, father, mother, from causing abortions, going to the wife
of one’s Guru, stealing a Brâhma<u>n</u>a’s property, a Brâhma<u>n</u>’s
field, drinking wine, etc., all are destroyed. Also the sins acquired in
three births by mind, word, or by the enjoyments of sensual objects are
thereby then and there instantly destroyed. All the labours of him, who
works hard in the study of the Vedas without knowing the Gâyatrî, are
useless. Therefore if you compare on the one hand the study of the four
Vedas with the reciting of the Gâyatrî, then the Gâyatrî Japam stands
higher. Thus I have spoken to you of the rules of the midday Sandhyâ.
Now I am speaking of Brahmâ Yajñâ. Hear.

 

Here ends the Nineteenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the midday
Sandhyâ in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 20](bk11ch20)
