[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk10ch13)  [Next](bk11ch02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter I**

** **

**On what is to be thought of in the morning**

 

<span id="page_1054">p. 1054</span>

 

1-13. Nârada said :-- O Bhagavân! O Thou, the Eternal One! O
Nârâya<u>n</u>a! O Lord of the past and the future! Thou art the Creator
and the Lord of all the beings that lived in the past and that will come
into existence in the future. Thou hast described to me the highly
wonderful and excellent anecdote of the Exalted Devî. How She did assume
the forms of Mahâkâlî, Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî, Mahâ Sarasvatî and Bhrâmarî,
for the fulfilment of the Devas' purposes and how the Devas got back
their possessions by the Grace of the Devî. All you have described. O
Lord! Now I want to hear the rules of Sadâchâra (right way of living),
the due observance of which by the devotees pleases the World-Mother.
Kindly describe them.

 

Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Knower of Truth! Now I am telling you those
rules of the right way of living, which rightly observed, always please
Bhagavatî. Listen first, I will talk of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, how their
welfare is secured, what the Brâhma<u>n</u>as ought to do on getting up
early in the morning from their bed. From the sunrise to the sunset the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as should do all the daily and occasional duties (Nitya
and Naimittik Karmas) and they are to perform the optional works for
some particular object such as Puttre<u>st</u>i Yajña and other good
works (not acts of black magic as killing, causing pain and
inconveniences to others, etc.). It is the Self alone and not the
Father, Mother, etc., nor any other body that, helps us on our way to
that happiness in the next world. Father, Mother, wife, sons and others
are helps merely to our happiness in this world. None of them are
helpful to us in bettering our states in the next world.

 

Deliverance of one's Self depends verily on his own Self. Therefore one
should always earn and store dharma (religion) and observe always there
the right conduct to help one in the next world. If Dharma be on our
side, this endless sea of troubles can be safely crossed. The rules of
right living as ordained by Manu in S’rutis and Manu Smritis are the
principal Dharmas. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as should always be observant to
their Dharma as ordained in the S’âstras, S’ruti and Smriti. Follow the
right conduct and then you will get life, posterity and increase of
happiness easily here and hereafter. By right conduct, food is obtained
and sins are easily destroyed; the right conduct is the auspicious
principal

 

<span id="page_1055">p. 1055</span>

 

Dharma of men. Persons of right living enjoy happiness in this world as
well as in the next. Those, who are veiled in darkness by Ignorance and
thus wildly enchanted, can verily see their way to Mukti if they follow
the Great Light revealed to them by Dharma and the right conduct. It is
by Sadâchâra, that superiority is attained. Men of right conduct always
do good deeds. From good deeds, knowledge comes. This is the advice of
Manu.

 

14-24. Right way of living is the best of all the Dharmas and is great
Tapasyâ (asceticism). The knowledge comes from this Right Living.
Everything is attained thereby. He who is devoid of Sadâchâra, is like a
S’ûdra, even if he comes of a Brâhmi<u>n</u> family. There is no
distinction whatsoever betwen him and a S’ûdra. Right conduct is of two
kinds :-- (1) as dictated by the S’âstras, (2) as dictated by the
popular custom (Laukika). Both these methods should be observed by him
who wants welfare for his Self. He is not to forsake one of them. O
Muni! The village Dharma, the Dharma of one's own caste, the Dharma of
one's own family and the Dharma of one's own country all should be
observed by men. Never, never he is to do anything otherwise. With great
loving devotion that is to be preserved. Men who practise wrong ways of
living, are censured by the public; they always suffer from diseases.
Avoid wealth and desires that have no Dharma in them. Why? If in the
name of dharma, painful acts (e. g. killing animals in sacrifices) are
to be committed, those are blamed by the people; so never commit them.
Avoid them by all means. Nârada said :-- “O Muni! The S’âstras are not
one, they are many and they lay down different rules and contradictory
opinions, How then Dharma is to be followed? And according what Dharma
S’âstra?” Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- S’ruti and Smriti are the two eyes of
God; the Purâ<u>n</u>am is His Heart. Whatever is stated in S’ruti, the
Smriti and the Purâ<u>n</u>ams is Dharma; whatever else is written in
other S’âstras is not Dharma. Where you will find differences between
S’ruti, Smriti and Purâ<u>n</u>as, accept the words of the S’rutis as
final proofs. Wherever Smriti disagrees with the Purâ<u>n</u>as, know
the Smritis more authoritative.

 

And where differences will crop up in the S’rutis themselves, know that
Dharma, too, is of two kinds. And where the differences will crop up in
the Smritis themselves, consider, then, that different things are aimed
at. In some Purâ<u>n</u>as, the Dharma of the Tantras is duly described;
but of these, which go against the Vedas, they are not to be accepted
any means.

 

<span id="page_1056">p. 1056</span>

 

25-37. Tantra is accepted as the authoritative proof then and then only
when it contradicts not the Vedas. Whatever goes clearly against the
Vedas can in no way be accepted as a proof. In matters concerning
Dharma, the Vedas is the Sole Proof. Therefore that which is not against
the Vedas can be taken as proof; otherwise not. Whoever acts Dharma
according to other proofs than what is ordained in the Vedas, goes to
the hell in the abode of Yama to get his lesson. So the Dharma that is
by all means to be accepted as such, is what is stated in the Vedas. The
Smritis, the Purâ<u>n</u>as, or the Tantra S’âstras can be taken also as
authoritative when they are not conflicting to Vedas. Any other S’âstras
can be taken as authoritative when it is fundamentally coincident with
the Vedas. Else it can never be accepted.

 

Those who do injury to others even by the blade of a Kus'a grass used as
a weapon, go to hell with their heads downwards and their feet upwards.
Those that follow their own sweet free will, that take up any sort of
dress (e. g. Bauddhas), those that follow the philosophical doctrines
called Pâs'upatas, and the other hermits and saints and persons that
take up other vows contrary to the religions of the Vedas, for example,
the Vaikhânasa followers, those who brand their bodies by the hot
Mudrâs, at the places of pilgrimages, e. g. Dvârkâ, etc., they go to
hell with their bodies scorched by red hot brands (Tapta Mudrâs). So
persons should act according to the excellent religions commanded by the
Vedas. Everyday he should get up from his bed early in the morning and
think thus :-- “What good acts have I done, what have I given as
charities? Or what I advised others to do charities what greater sins
(Mahâpâtakas) and what smaller sins have I committed?” At the last
quarter of the night he should think of Para Brahmâ. He should place his
right leg on his left thigh and his left on his right thigh crosswise
keeping his head straight up and touching the breast with his chin, and
closing his eyes, he should sit steadily so that the upper teeth should
not touch the lower jaw.

 

He should join his tongue with his palate and he should sit quiet,
restraining his senses. He should be S’uddha Sattva. His seat should not
be very low. First of all he should practice Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma twice or
thrice; and within his heart he should meditate the Self of the shape of
the Holy Flame or the Holy Light. (Om Mani Padma Hum.)

 

38-49. He should fix his heart for a certain time to that Luminous Self
whose Eyes are everywhere. So the intelligent man should practise
Dhâra<u>n</u>â. Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma is of six kinds :-- (1) Sadhûma (when
the breaths are not steady), (2) Nirdhûma(better than the Sadhûma),

 

<span id="page_1057">p. 1057</span>

 

\(3\) Sagarbha (when united with one's mantra), (4) Agarbha (when the
practice is without the thought of any mantra), (5) Salak<u>s</u>ya
(when the heart is fixed on one's Deity) and (6) Alak<u>s</u>ya (when
the heart is not fixed on one's Deity). No yoga can be compared with
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma. This is equal to itself. Nothing can be its equal.
This Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma is of three kinds, called Rechaka, Pûraka and
Kumbhaka. The Prânâyâma consists of three letters, A, U, M, i. e. of the
nature of “Om”. Or, in other words the letter A, of the Pra<u>n</u>ava
Om indicates Pûraka, the letter “U” denotes Kumhhaka and the letter “M”
denotes Rechaka. By the Î<u>d</u>â Nâ<u>d</u>i (by the left nostril)
inhale as long as you count “A” (Vi<u>sn</u>u) thirty-two times; then
withold breath, i.e., do Kumbhaka as long as you count “U” (S’iva)
sixtyfour times and by the Pingalâ Nâ<u>d</u>i (the right nostril) do
the Rechaka, i.e., exhale the breath as long as you count “M" (Brahmâ)
for sixteen times. O Muni! Thus I have spoken to you of the Sadhûma
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma. After doing the Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma as stated above,
pierce the Six Chakras (i. e., plexuses) (called <u>S</u>a<u>t</u>hakra
bheda) and carry the Kula Ku<u>nd</u>alinî to the Brahmâ Randhra, the
brain aperture, or to the thousand petalled lotus in the head and
meditate in the heart the Self like a Steady Flame. (The Nâ<u>d</u>is
are not those which are known to the Vaidya or the Medical S’âstras. The
latter are the gross physical nerves, The Nâ<u>d</u>is here are the Yoga
Nâ<u>d</u>is, the subtle channels (Vivaras) along which the
Prâ<u>n</u>ik currents flow. Now the process of piercing the six Chakras
(or nerve centres or centres of moving Prânik forces) is being
described. Within this body, the six nerve centres called Padmas
(Lotuses) exist. They are respectively situated at the (1) Mûlâdhâra
(half way between Anus and Linga Mûla), called the Sacral Plexus; (2)
Linga Mûla (the root of the genital organs); called postatic plexus;
(this is also called Svâdhi<u>st</u>hâna) (3) Navel, the Solar Plexus
(4) Heart, the cardiac Plexus, (5) Throat (6) Forehead, between the eye
brows there; the lotus in the forehead, called the cavernous plexus
(Âjnâ Chakra) has two petals; in these two petals, the two letters “Ham”
“K<u>s</u>am” exist in the right hand direction (with the bands of the
watch; going round from left to right keeping the right side towards one
circumambulated as as a mark of respect). I bow down to these which are
the two-lettered Brahmâ. The lotus that exists in the throat laryngeal
or pharyngeal plexus has sixteen petals (vis’uddhâ chakra); in these are
in due order in right hand direction the sixteen letters (vowels) a, â,
i, î, u, û, <u>r</u>i, <u>r</u>î, lri, lrî, e, ai, o, au, am, a<u>h</u>;
I bow down to these which are the sixteen lettered Brahmâ. The lotus
that exists in the heart, the cardiac plexus (anâhata chakra), has
twelve petals; wherein are the twelve letters k, kh, g, gh, n, ch, chh,
j, jh, ñ, <u>t</u>, <u>t</u>h; I bow to to these twelve lettered Brahmâ.
The Solar

 

<span id="page_1058">p. 1058</span>

 

plexus forms the Great Junction of the Right and Left sympathetic chains
Î<u>d</u>â and Pingalâ with the Cerebro spinal Axis. The lotus that
exists in the navel, called the Solar Plexus, or Epigastric plexus
(Ma<u>n</u>ipura Chakra) has ten petals wherein are the ten letters
<u>d</u>, <u>d</u>h, <u>n</u>, t, th, d, dh, n, p, ph, counting in the
right hand direction (that is clockwise) (and the action of this clock
is vertical in the plane of the spinal cord; also it may be horizontal).
The lotus that exists at the root of the genital organ, the genital
plexus or postatic plexus has six petals. The petals are the
configurations made by the position of Nâ<u>d</u>is at any particular
centre. Svâdhi<u>st</u>hâna chakra or Svayambhu Linga, wherein are
situated the six letters, b, bh, m, y, r, l; I bow down to this
six-lettered Brahmâ. (These are the Laya Centres). The lotus that exists
in the Mûlâdhâra, called the sacral or sacrococcygeal plexus has four
petals, wherein are the four letters v, s', <u>s</u>, s. I bow down to
these four-lettered Brahmâ. In the above six nerve centres or Laya
Centres, or lotuses, all the letters are situated in the right hand
direction (clockwise). (Note :-- All the nerves of the body combine
themselves in these six nerve centres or Laya Centres. Each of these
centres is spheroidal and is of the Fourth Dimension. At each centre
many transitions take place, many visions take place, many forces are
perceived and wonderful varieties of knowledge are experienced. These
are called the Laya Centres. For many things vanish into non-existence
and many new Tattvas are experienced.) Thus meditating on the Six
Chakras or plexuses, meditate on the Kula Ku<u>nd</u>alinî, the Serpent
Fire. She resides on the four petalled lotus (Centre of S’akti) called
Mûlâdhâra Chakra (Coccygeal plexus); She is of Rajo Gu<u>n</u>a; She is
of a blood red colour, and She is expressed by the mantra “Hrîm,” which
is the Mâyâvîja; she is subtle as the thread of the fibrous stock of the
water lily. The Sun is Her face; Fire is Her breasts; he attains Jîvan
mukti (liberation while living) within whose heart such a Kula
Ku<u>nd</u>alinî arises and awakens even once. Thus meditating on Kula
Ku<u>nd</u>alinî, one should pray to Her :-- Her sitting, coming, going,
remaining, the thought on Her, the realisation of Her and chanting hymns
to Her, etc., all are Mine, Who is of the nature of all in all; I am
that Bhagavatî; O Bhagavatî! All my acts are Thy worship; I am the Devî;
I am Brahmâ, I am free from sorrow. I am of the nature of Everlasting
Existence, Intelligence and Bliss. Thus one should meditate of one's
own-self. I take refuge of that Kula Ku<u>nd</u>alinî, who appears like
lightning and who holds the current thereof, when going to
Brahmârandhra, in the brain, who appears like nectar when coming back
from the brain to the Mûlâdhâra and who travels in the Su<u>s</u>umnâ
Nâdi in the spinal cord. Then one is to meditate on one's own Guru, who
is thought of as one with God, as seated

 

<span id="page_1059">p. 1059</span>

 

in one's brain and then worship Him mentally. Then the Sâdhaka,
controlling himself is to recite the following Mantra “The Guru is
Brahmâ, the Guru is Vi<u>sn</u>u, it is the Guru again that is the Deva
Mahes'vara; it is Guru that is Para Brahmâ. I bow down to that S’rî
Guru.”

 

Here ends the First Chapter of the Eleventh Book on what is to be
thought of in the morning in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](bk11ch02)
