[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch10)  [Next](bk11ch12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XI**

** **

**On the description of the greatness of the three kinds of
Bha<u>s</u>mas**

 

<span id="page_1081">p. 1081</span>

 

Nârada asked :-- O Bhagavân! How is the above Bha<u>s</u>ma of three
kinds? I am eager to hear this. Kindly describe this to me.
Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I am now talking of the three kinds
of ashes; hearing this even destroys one's sins and brings in good fame.
When a cow evacuates her dung, just as the cow dung leaves her and is
far from reaching the ground, one should catch it with one's hand and
this cow-dung burnt with “Sadyojâtâdi,” i.e., Brahmâ Mantra, becomes
ashes which are called “S’ântika Bha<u>s</u>ma,” i.e., ashes producing
peace. Before the cowdung is about to reach the ground, the devotee
should take it with his hand and uttering the six lettered Mantra, he is
to burn the cowdung. The ashes from this are called Pau<u>st</u>ik
Bha<u>s</u>ma, i.e., ashes leading to nourishment.

 

If the cowdung be burned with the Mantra “Haum,” the ashes of this are
called “Kâmada Bha<u>s</u>ma,” i.e., ashes leading to the granting of
desires. O Nârada! On the full moon day, new moon day or on the eighth
lunar day, a man is to get up from his bed early in the morning and be
pure and go the cow enclosure. He is to salute the cows and take the
cowdung, uttering the Mantra Haum. If he be a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, he is to
collect the white cow dung; if he be a K<u>s</u>attriya, he would take
the red cow

 

<span id="page_1082">p. 1082</span>

 

dung; a Vais'ya, yellow cow dung and if he be a S’ûdra, he would take
the black cow dung. Then by the mantra “Nama<u>h</u>” he is to form that
into a ball and cover it with the husk of rice or some other grain and
dry it in a sacred place, repeating the mantra “Haum.” Bring fire from a
forest or from the house of a Veda-knowing Brâhmi<u>n</u> and reduce the
cowdung to ashes by this mantra, uttering the mantra Haum. Next take out
the ashes carefully from the fire place (Agni Ku<u>nd</u>a) and place it
in a new jar or pot, again remembering the mantra “Haum”. Mix with the
ashes the Ketakî dust, the Pâ<u>t</u>ala flower dust, the root of the
fragrant grass called khas khas, saffron and other sweet scented things
with the mantra “Satyojâtam prapadyâmi,” etc. First perform the water
bath, then the bath of the ashes. In case one cannot have the water
bath, one is to have the ash bath. Washing the hands, feet and head with
the mantra “Is'ânah Sarvavidyânâm,” etc., and uttering
“Tatpuru<u>s</u>a” one is to besmear one's face with ashes and by the
mantra “Aghora” apply ashes on one's chest; with the mantra Vâmadeva. He
is to use ashes on his navel; and with the mantra “Sadyo Jâta,” etc.,
all over his body; he is to quit his former cloth and put on another
fresh cloth. Wash your hands and feet and sip (do Âchaman). It will
serve the purpose if one simply uses Tripu<u>nd</u>rak and if one does
not besmear the whole body with ashes. Before the midday one is to use
Bha<u>s</u>ma with water; but after the midday with dry ashes one is to
draw the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra lines of ashes with the forefinger,
middlefinger and ringfinger. The head, forehead, ears, neck, heart, and
the arms are the places whereon the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras are used. On the
head the ashes are applied with five fingers and with the mantra “Haum”;
on the forehead, the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra is applied with mantra Svâhâ by
the forefinger, mindlefinger and ringfinger; on the right ear, it is
applied with “Sadyojâta” mantra; on the left ear, with “Vamadeva”
Mantra; on the neck with Aghora mantra by the middlefinger; on the chest
with “Nama<u>h</u>” mantra by the forefing middlefinger and ringfinger;
on the right arm with va<u>s</u>a<u>t</u> mantra by the three fingers;
on the left arm with “Ham” mantra by the three fingers; and on the
navel, the ashes are to be applied with the mantra Îs'âna<u>h</u> sarva
devânâm by the middlefinger. The first line in every Tripu<u>nd</u>ra is
Brahmâ; the second line is Vi<u>sn</u>u; and the third, the topmost line
is Mahâ Deva. The line of ashes that is marked by one finger is Îs'vara.
The head is the place of Brahmâ; the forehead is the site of Îs'vara;
the two ears are the seats of the two As'vins and the neck is where
Ga<u>n</u>es'a resides. The K<u>s</u>attriyas, Vais'yas, and S’ûdras are
to use Tripu<u>nd</u>ras without any mantra; they are also not to use
the ashes on

 

<span id="page_1083">p. 1083</span>

 

the whole of the body. The lowest classes (e.g. the châ<u>nd</u>âlas,
etc.,) and the uninitiated persons are to use the Tripu<u>nd</u>raks
without any mantra.

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the description
of the greatness of the three kinds of Bha<u>s</u>mas in the Mahâpurânam
S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk11ch12)
