[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch11)  [Next](bk11ch13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter XII**

** **

**On the greatness in holding the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra and Bha<u>s</u>ma**

 

<span id="page_1083">p. 1083</span>

 

1-20. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada! Hear now
the great secret and the fruits of besmearing one's body with ashes,
yieding all desires. The pure cowdung of the Kapila (brown) cow is to be
taken up by the hand before it reaches the ground. It should not be like
mire, i.e., not like a liquid; it should not be also very hard nor
should it emit a bad stench. And in case if the cowdung that has already
fallen on the earth, has to be taken, it should be scraped off from the
top and bottom; make it into a ball and then burn it in a pure fire,
repeating the principal mantra. Take the ash and tie it in a piece of
cloth and keep it in a pot. The pot in which the ashes are to be kept
should be nice and good, hard, clean and sprinkled over for
purification. Uttering the principal mantra, one is to keep the ashes in
the pot. The pot may be of metal, wood, earth, or cloth; or it can be
kept in any other nice pot. The ashes can be kept in a silken bag where
the mohurs are kept. In going to a distant land, the devotee can take
the ashes himself or kept with his accompanying servant. When it is to
be given to somebody, it is to be given with both the hands; never with
one hand. Never keep it in an unholy place. Never apply feet to the
ashes, nor throw it in an ordinary place nor ever cross it by your legs.
Use always the ashes after purifying it with mantra. These rules of
holding the Bha<u>s</u>ma are according to the Smritis. By holding
Bha<u>s</u>ma in this way, the devotee becomes, no doubt, like S’iva.
The ashes, that the Vaidik devotees of S'iva prepare are to be taken
with devotion. All can ask for that. But the ashes that the followers of
the Tantra cult prepare, are taken by the Tântriks only; it is
prohibited to the Vaidiks. The S’ûdras, Kâpâlikas, and other heretics
(e.g., Jains, Buddhists) can use the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras. Never do they
conceive in their minds that they would not take the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra.
The holding on of Bha<u>s</u>ma (ashes) is

 

<span id="page_1084">p. 1084</span>

 

according to the Vedas. Therefore one who does not apply it falls down.
The Brâhma<u>n</u>as must use the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras, repeating the
mantra; and they are to besmear their whole body with ashes; if they
don't do so, they are surely fallen. He can never expect to get
liberation even after ko<u>t</u>i births who does not besmear his body
with ashes devotedly and who does not hold the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras. O
Nârada! The vile man who does not hold Bha<u>s</u>ma duly, know the
birth of that man as futile as is the birth of a hog. Consider that body
as a burning ground which does not bear the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra marks. The
virtuous man should not cast a glance at him even. Fie on that forehead
which does not carry the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra! Fie on that village which has
not a single temple of S’iva! Fie on that birth which is void of the
worship of S’iva! Fie on that knowledge which is void of the knowledge
of S’iva. Know them to be the slanderers of S’iva who mock at
Tripu<u>nd</u>ra. Those that put on the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras, bear S’iva in
their forehead. The Brâhmi<u>n</u> who is Niragnik (without the holy
fire) is not nice in every way. So if the worship of S’iva be not done
with any Tripu<u>nd</u>ra is not praiseworthy, even it be attended with
abundance of other offerings. Those who do not besmear their bodies with
ashes or who do not use the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras, get their previous good
deeds converted into bad ones.

 

21-42. Unless the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra mark is taken up according to the
S’âstras, the Vaidik Karmas (works) or those performed according to the
Smritis prove injurious; the good works whatsoever done by any man count
for nothing; the holy words heard seem as if unheard and the study of
the Vedas counted as if not studied.

 

The study of the Vedas, Sacrifices, Charities, asceticisms, vows and
fastings of that man, who does not use the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra, all become
fruitless. Without using Bha<u>s</u>ma (ashes) if one wants liberation,
then that desire is equivalent to live after taking poison. There is no
doubt in this. The Creator has not made the forehead vertically high nor
round; but he has made it slightly slanting and curved fit to have the
Tripu<u>nd</u>ra. Making thus the forehead, the Creator wants, as it
were, to inform everyone that every one ought to use Tripu<u>nd</u>ra
marks; the curved lines also are made visible for this purpose. Still
the igorant illiterate man does not put up the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra. Unless
the Brâhma<u>n</u>as use the curved Tripu<u>nd</u>ras, their meditation
won't be successful; they will not have liberation, knowledge, nor their
asceticism would bear any fruit. As the S’ûdras have no right in the
study of the Vedas, so the Brâhma<u>n</u>s have not any right to perform
the worship of S’iva, etc., unless they use the Tripu<u>nd</u>ras. First
of all, facing eastward, and washing hands and feet, he ought to make a
resolve

 

<span id="page_1085">p. 1085</span>

 

and then he takes a bath of the ashes mentally, controlling his breath.
Then taking the ashes of the Agnihotra sacrifice he is to put some ashes
on his own head, uttering “Îs'âna” mantra. Then he is to recite the
Puru<u>s</u>a S’ûkta Mantra and apply ashes on his face; with the Aghora
mantra on his chest; with the Vâmadeva mantra, on his anus; with
Sadyojâta mantra on his legs; and with the mantra Om, he is to besmear
his whole body with ashes. This is called the bath of fire by the Munis.
So bring all the actions to a successful issue one is to take first of
all this bath of fire. Washing his hands, then, he is to make Âchaman
duly; and, according to the above-mentioned rules, he is to apply ashes
on his forehead, heart, and all round the neck with the five mantras
above-mentioned; or with each mantra he is to apply the
Tripu<u>nd</u>ras. Thus all works are fructified and he gets the right
to do all the Vaidik actions. The S’ûdras, even, are not to use the
ashes touched by the lowest classes. All the actions ordained by the
S'âstras are to be done after being besmeared with ashes of the
Agnihotra sacrifice; otherwise no action will bear any fruit. All his
truth, purity, Japam, offering, oblations to the sacrifice, bathing in
the holy place of pilgrimage, and worshipping the gods become useless,
who does not hold Tripu<u>nd</u>ra. No fear of disease, sins, famine, or
robbers comes to the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s who use Tripu<u>nd</u>ra and rosary
of Rudrâk<u>s</u>a and thus remain always pure. In the end, they get the
Nirvâ<u>n</u>a liberation. During the time of Srâddhas (solemn obsequies
performed in honour of the manes of deceased ancestors) the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s purify the rows where persons are fed; so much so that
the Devas glorify them. One must use the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra marks before
one performs any Srâddha, Japam sacrifice, offering oblations or
worshipping the Visvedevâs; then one gets deliverance from the jaws of
death. O Nârada! I am now speaking further of the greatness in holding
the Bha<u>s</u>ma; listen.

 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the greatness in
holding the Tripu<u>nd</u>ra and Bha<u>s</u>ma in the Mahâpurânam S’rî
Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](bk11ch13.md)
