[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch21)  [Next](bk11ch23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXII**

 

**On the rules of Vais’vadeva**

 

<span id="page_1124">p. 1124</span>

 

1-45. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! In connection with this
Puras’chara<u>n</u>am it comes now to my memory about the rules
concerning the Vais’va Deva worship (An offering made to the
Vis’vadevâs; an offering to all deities made by presenting oblations to
fire before meals). Hear. The five yajñâs are the following :-- (1) The
Devayajñâ, (2) Brahmâ yajñâ, (3) Bhûta yajñâ, (4) Pitri yajñâ, and (5)
Manu<u>s</u>ya yajñâ. Fireplace, the pair of stone pestles, brooms (for
sweeping, etc.), sieves and other house-hold things of the sort, wooden
mortars (used for cleansing grains from husk) and water-jars, these five
are the sources of evils inasmuch as they are the means of killing. So
to free one’s self from the above sins, one is to sacrifice before the
Vais’vadeva. Never offer oblations of Vais’vadeva on hearths, on any
iron vessel, on the ground or on broken tiles. They are to be offered in
any sacrificial pit (Ku<u>nd</u>a) or on any sacrificial altar. Do not
fire the hearth by fanning with hands, with winnowing baskets, or with
holy deer skin, etc., but you can do so by blowing by your mouth. For
the mouth is the origin of fire. If the fire be ignited by clothes, one
is liable to get disease; if by winnowing baskets, then less of wealth
comes; if by hands, one’s death ensues. But if it be done by blowing,
then one’s success comes. (There is the danger of catching fire.)

 

One should sacrifice with curd, ghee, fruits, roots and vegetables, and
water and in their absence with fuel, grass, etc., or with any other
substances soaked with ghee, curd, Pâyasa or lastly with water. But
never with oil or with salty substances. If one performs the Homa with
dry or stale substances, one is attacked with leprosy; if anybody
performs Homa with leavings of other food he becomes subdued by his
enemy; if one does so with rude and harsh substances, he becomes poor
and if one does with salty substances, he meets with a downward course,
gets degraded in position and honour. You can offer oblations to
Vais’vadeva with burning coals and ashes from the north side of the fire
of the hearth after the preparation of the meals. But you should never
offer sacrifices with salty things. The

 

<span id="page_1125">p. 1125</span>

 

illiterate Brâhma<u>n</u>a who eats before offering oblations to
Vais’vadeva goes headlong downwards into the Kâla Sûtra hell. Whatever
food that you are intending to prepare, whether they be vegetables,
leaves, roots or fruits, offer oblations to Vais’vadeva with that if,
before the Homa be performed of Vais’vadeva, any Brahmachârî comes, then
take off, for the Homa, first something; and then give to the beggar and
satisfy him and tell him to be off. For the Brahmâchârî mendicant can
remove any defects that may occur to Vais’vadeva but Vais’vadeva is
unable to remove any defects that may occur regarding the mendicant
Brahmachârî. Both the Paramahansa or Brahmachârî mendicant are the
masters of the prepared food (Pakkânna); so when anybody takes one’s
food without giving to any of these two, if they happen to come there,
he will have to make the Chândrâya<u>n</u>a (religious or expiatory
penance regulated by the moon’s age, that is, waxing or waning). O
Nârada! After the offering given to Vais’vanara, one is to offer
Gogrâsa, that is, mouthfuls of food to the cows. Hear now how that is
done. The mother Surabhi, the beloved of Vi<u>sn</u>u, is always
stationed in the region of Vi<u>sn</u>u (Vi<u>sn</u>upada); so O
Surabhi! I am offering you mouthfuls of food. Accept it. “Salutation to
the cows,” saying this, one is to worship the cows and offer food to
them. Hereby Surabhi, the Mother of the cows, becomes pleased. After
this, one is to wait outside for a period that is taken to milch a cow,
whether any guests are coming. For if any guest goes back disappointed
from any house without any food; he takes away all the pu<u>n</u>yams
(merits) of the house-holder and gives him back his own sin. The
house-holder is to support mother, father, Guru, brother, son, servants,
dependants, guests, those that have come, and Ag<u>n</u>i (Fire).
Knowing all these, he who does not perform the functions of the
house-hold is reckoned as fallen from his Dharma both in this world and
in the next. The poor house-holder gets the same fruit by performing
these five Mahâ jajñâs that a rich Brâhma<u>n</u>a gets by performing
the Soma Yajñâ. O Best of the Munis! Now I am talking of the Prânâgni
Hotra or about taking food, knowing the rules of which makes a man free
from birth, old age and death and from all sorts of sins. He who takes
his food according to proper rules, is freed of the threefold debts,
delivers his twenty one generations from the hells, obtains the fruits
of all the Yajñâs and goes unhampered to all the regions of the
righteous. Think of the belly as Ara<u>n</u>i or the piece of wood for
kindling the fire

(by attrition), think of the mind as the churning rod, and think of the
wind as the rope, and then kindle the fire, residing in the belly; the
eyes are to be considered as the sacrificer,  (the

 

<span id="page_1126">p. 1126</span>

 

 

Addharyu), and consider fire in the belly as the result of churning. In
this fire of the belly, one is to offer oblations for the satisfaction
of Prâ<u>n</u>a, etc., the five deities. First of all offer oblations to
the Prâ<u>n</u>a Vâyu with food taken by the forefinger, middlefinger
and thumb; next offer oblations to the Apâna Vâyu with the thumb, middle
finger and the nameless (anâmâ) finger; next offer oblations to the
Vyâna Vâyu (breath) with the thumb, nameless finger and the little
finger; next offer oblations to the Udâna Vâyu with the thumb,
forefinger and the little finger and lastly offer oblations to the
Samâna Vâyu with food taken by all the fingers. At the same time repeat
respectively the mantras :--

 

“Om Prâ<u>n</u>âya Svâhâ,”

“Om Apânâya Svâhâ,”

“Om Samânâya Svâhâ,”

“Om Udânâya Svâhâ,”

“Om Vyânâya Svâhâ.”

 

Within the mouth, there is the Âhavanîya fire; within the heart, there
is the Gârhapatya fire; in the navel, there is the
Dhak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âgni fire; below the navel, there is the Sabhyâgni
fire and below that there is the Âvasathyâgni fire. Think thus. Next
consider the Speech as the Hotâ, the Prâ<u>n</u>a as the Udgâthâ, the
eyes as the Addharyu, the mind as the Brahmâ, the ears as the Hotâ and
the keeper of the Ag<u>n</u>i, the Ahamkâra (egoism) as beast (Pas’u),
Om Kâra as water, the Buddhi (intellect) of the house-holder as the
legal wife, the heart as the sacrificial altar, the hairs and pores as
the Kus’a grass, and the two hands as the sacrificial ladles and spoons
(Sruk and Sruva.) Then think of the colour of the Prâ<u>n</u>a mantra as
golden the fire of hunger as the Ri<u>s</u>i (seer), Sûrya (the sun) as
Devatâ, the chhandas as Gâyatrî and Prânâya Svâhâ as the Mantra uttered;
also repeat “Idamâdityadevâya nama<u>h</u>” and offer oblations to the
Prâ<u>n</u>a. The colour of the Apâna mantra is milk white. S’raddhâgni
is the Ri<u>s</u>i, the Moon is the Devatâ, U<u>sn</u>ik is the
chhandas, and “Apânâya Svâhâ,” “Idam Somâya na nama<u>h</u>” are the
mantras. The colour of the Vyâna mantra is red like red lotuses; the
fire Deity Hutâsana is the Ri<u>s</u>i, the fire is the Devatâ;
Anu<u>st</u>up is the chhandas, “Vyânâya Svâhâ” and “Idamagnaye na
namah” are the mantras. The colour of the Udâna mantra is like that of
the worm Indra Gopa; fire is the Ri<u>s</u>i; Vâyu is the Devatâ,
Brihatî is the chhandas; “Udânâya Svâhâ’’ and “Idam Vâyave na
nama<u>h</u>” are the mantras. The colour of the Samâna mantra is like
lightning; Ag<u>n</u>i is the Ri<u>s</u>i; Parjanya (the rains, water)
is the Devatâ; Pankti is the chhanda; “Samânâya

 

<span id="page_1127">p. 1127</span>

 

Svâhâ” and “Idam Parjanyâya na nama<u>h</u>” are the mantras. O Nârada!
Thus offering the five oblations to the five breaths, next offer
oblations to the Âtman; the Bhî<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>a Vah<u>n</u>i is the
Ri<u>s</u>i; the Gâyatrî is the chhanda; the Self is the Devatâ; “Âtmane
Svâhâ,” and “Idamâtmane na nama<u>h</u>” are the mantras. O Nârada! He
who knows this Homa of Prânâgnihotra attains the state of Brahmâ. Thus I
have spoken to you in brief the rules of the Prânâgni hotra Homa.

 

Here ends the Twenty-Second Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the rules of
Vais’vadeva in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](bk11ch23)
