[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch09)  [Next](bk11ch11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter X**

** **

**On the subject of Gau<u>n</u>a Bhasma**

 

<span id="page_1079">p. 1079</span>

 

1-33. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Knower of Brahmâ! O Nârada! The ashes
prepared from ordinary fire are secondary (Gau<u>n</u>a). The greatness
of this secondary ashes is to be considered by no means trifling; this
also destroys the darkest ignorance and reveals the highest knowledge.
It is of various kinds. Amongst the secondary ashes, that prepared from
Virajâgni is the best; it is equivalent to that obtained from Agnihotra
Yajña and it is as glorious. The ashes obtained from the marriage
sacrificial fire, that obtained from the burning of the Samidh fuel,
what is obtained from the conflagration of fire are known as the
secondary ashes. The Brahmâ<u>n</u>as, K<u>s</u>attriyas and Vais'yas
should use the ashes from the Agnihotra and the Virajâ Fire. For the
householders, the ashes from the marriage sacrificial fire are good. For
the Brahmâcharis, the ashes from the Samid fuel are good and for the
S’ûdras the fire of the cooking place of the Veda knowing
Brahmâ<u>n</u>as is good. For the other persons, the ashes obtained from
the conflagration of fire are good. Now I will talk of the origin of the
ashes obtained from the Virajâ fire. The chief season of the Virajâ fire
sacrifice is the Full-moon night with Chitrâ asterism with the Moon. If
this does not take place, the sacrifice may be performed at other
seasons; and it should be remembered that the fit place is where one
adopts as one's dwelling place. The auspicious field, garden or forest
is also commendable for the above sacrifice. On the Trayodas'î Tithi,
the thirteenth night preceding the full-moon night, one is to complete
one's bathing and Sandhyâ; then one is to worship one's Guru and bow
down before Him. Then, receiving his permission, the sacrificer is to
put on pure clothing and perform the special Pûjâ. Then with his white
sacrificial thread, white garlands, and white sandal paste one is to sit
on the Kus'a seat with sacrificial (Kus'a) grass in one's hands. With
his face towards the east or north he is to perform Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma
thrice.

 

<span id="page_1080">p. 1080</span>

 

Then he is to meditate on S’iva and Bhagavatî and get mentally their
permissions. “O Deva Bhagavân! O Mother Bhagavatî! I will perform this
vow for my life-time.” Thus making the resolve, he should start with
this sacrifice. But this is to be known that this Vrata can be performed
for twelve years, for six years, for three years, for one year, for six
months, for twelve days, for six days, for three days, even at least for
one day. But in every case, he must take mentally the permission of the
Deva and the Devî. Now, to perform the Virajâ Homa, one is to light the
fire according to one's Grihya Sûtras and then perform Homa with ghee,
Samidh (fuel) or with charu (an oblation of rice, milk, and sugar boiled
together). Then on the fourteenth lunar day (Chaturdas'î) one is to pray
“Let the tattvas (principles) in me be purified” and then perform the
Homa ceremony with Samidh, etc., as above-mentioned. Now recollecting
that “My principles in my body are purified,” he is to offer oblations
to the fire. In other words, uttering “Priththitattvas me sudhyatâm
jyotiraham virajâ vipâpmâ bhûyâsam Svâhâ” one is to offer oblations to
the Fire. Thus uttering the five element (Mahâbhutas), five tanmâtrâs,
five Karmendriyas (organs of action), five Jñânendriyas (organs of
perception), five Prâ<u>n</u>as, seven dhâtus Tvak, etc., mind, buddhi
(intellect), Ahamkâra (egoism), Sattva, Raja, Tamah gu<u>n</u>as,
Prakriti, Puru<u>s</u>a, Râga, Vidyâ, Kalâ (arts etc,) Daiva (Fate),
Kâla (time), Mâyâ S’uddhavidyâ, Mahes'vara, Sadâ S’iva, S’akti
S’ivatattva, etc., respectively by its own name, one is to offer
oblations to the fire by the five-lettered Virajâ Mantra; then the
sacrificer will become pure. Then form a round ball of fresh cowdung and
purifying it by Mantram place it on fire and carefully watch it. On that
day, the devotee is to take Havi<u>s</u>yânna (a sacred food of boiled
rice with ghee). On the morning of the Chaturdas'î, he is to perform his
daily duties as above and then to perform Homa on that fire; uttering
the five lettered Mantra. He is not to take any food the rest of the
time. On the next day, that is, on the full-moon day, after performing
the morning duties, he is to do the Homa ceremony, uttering the Five
lettered Mantra and then take leave of the Fire (invoked for worship).
He is, then, to raise up the ashes. Then the devotee is to keep Jatâ
(matted hair) or to shave clean his head or to keep only one lock of
hair on the crown of the head. He is to take his bath, then; and if he
can, then he should be naked or put on a red coloured cloth, hide, or
one piece of rag or bark; he is to take a staff and a belt. Washing his
hands and feet and sipping twice he by his two hands, is to pulverise
the ashes and, uttering the six Atharvan Mantras, “Fire is ashes” and so
forth, apply ashes from his head to foot. Then, as before, he is to
apply ashes, gradually to his arms, etc., and all

 

<span id="page_1081">p. 1081</span>

 

over the body uttering the Pra<u>n</u>ava of S’iva, “Vam, Vam.” He is to
put on the Triyâyusa Tripu<u>nd</u>ra on his forehead. After he has done
this, the Jîva (the embodied self) becomes S’iva (the Free Self) and he
should behave himself like S’iva. O Nârada! Thus, at the three
Sandhyâ-periods; he is to do like this. This Pâs’upata vrata is the
source of enjoyment as well as liberation and as well as of the
cessation of all brutal desires. By the performance of this vrata the
devotee is to free himself gradually of his animal feelings and then to
worship Bhagavân Sada S’iva in the form of a phallic symbol. The above
bath ashes is highly meritorious and it is the source of all happiness.
By holding the ashes, one's longevity is prolonged, one gets even great
bodily strength, becomes healthy and his beauty increases and he gets
nourishment. This using of ashes is for the preservation of one's own
self; it is the source of one's good and of all sorts of happiness and
prosperity. Those who use ashes (Bhas'ma) are free from the danger of
plague and other epidemic diseases; this bhasma is of three sorts as it
leads to the attainment of peace, nourishment, or to the fufilment of
all desires.

 

Here ends the Tenth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the subject
Gau<u>n</u>a Bhasma (secondary ashes) in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rîmad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](bk11ch11.md)
