[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch04)  [Next](bk11ch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am rosaries**

 

<span id="page_1067">p. 1067</span>

 

1-14. Îs'vara said :-- O Kârtikeya! Now I will speak how to count the
Japam (repetition of the mantra) with the rosary. Hear. The face of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Brahmâ; the upper summit point is S’iva and the tail
end of Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Vi<u>sn</u>u. The Rudrâk<u>s</u>am has
two-fold powers :-- It can give Bhoga (Enjoyment) as well as
Mok<u>s</u>a (Liberation). Then string or tie together, like a cow's
tail, and like the snake's coiling a body, twenty-five five faced
Rudrâk<u>s</u>a seeds, thorny and of red, white, mixed colours bored
through and through. The rosary is to taper as a cow's tail tapers down.
In stringing the beads into a rosary, it should be seen that the flat
face of one Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is in front of the flat face of another
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am; so the tail, the pointed end of one, must come in
front of the tail or the narrower end of another. The Meru or the
topmost bead of the string must have its face turned upwards and the
knot should be given over that. The rosary, thus strung, yields success
of the Mantra (mantra-siddhi). When the rosary is strung, it is to be
bathed with clear and scented water and afterwards with the Pañchagavya
(cow-dung, cow urine, curd, milk, and ghee); then wash it with clear
water and sanctify it with the condensed electrical charge of the
Mantra. Then recite the Mantra of S’iva (Six limbed), with “Hûm” added
and collect the rosaries. Then repeat over them the Mantra “Sadyojâta,
etc.”, and sprinkle water over it one hundred and eight times. Then
utter the principal mantra and place them on a holy ground and perform
Nyâsa over it, i.e., think that the Great Cause S’iva and the
World-Mother Bhagavatî have come on them. Thus make the Samskâra of the
rosary (i.e., purify it) and you will find then that your desired end
will be attained successfully. Worship the rosary with the Mantra of
that Devata for which it is intended. One is to wear the Rudrâk<u>s</u>a
rosary on one's head, neck or ear and controlling oneself, one should
make japam with the rosary. On the neck, head, breast, or the ears or on
the arms, the rosary should he held with the greatest devotion. What is
the use in saying about it so often? It is highly meritorious and
commendable

 

<span id="page_1068">p. 1068</span>

 

to hold always the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. Especially on such occasions as
taking baths, making gifts, making japams, performing the Homas,or
sacrifices to Vi<u>s</u>ve Devas, in performing the Poojâs of the
Devas,in making Prâyaschittams (penances), in the time of S’râdh and in
the time of initiation, it is highly necessary to hold Rudrâk<u>s</u>am.
A Brâhmi<u>n</u> is sure to go to hell if he performs any Vaidik act
without wearing any Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. Note :-- It would be offering an
insult to S’iva!

 

15-29. It is advisable to use the true Rudrâk<u>s</u>am with gold and
jewel, on the head, neck or on one's hand. Never use the
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am worn by another. Use Rudrâk<u>s</u>am always with
devotion; never use it while you are impure. Even the grass that grows
with the air in contact with the Rudrâk<u>s</u>a tree, goes verily to a
holy region for ever. Jâbâla Muni says in the S’ruti :-- lf a man
wearing Rudrâk<u>s</u>am commits a sin, he gets deliverance from that
sin. Even if animals hold Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, they become S’iva; what of
men! The devotees of S’rî Rudra should always use at least one
Rudrâk<u>s</u>a on the head. Those great devotees, who with
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on take the name of the Highest Self S’ambhu, get
themselves freed of all sorts of sins and pains. Those who are
ornamented with Rudrâk<u>s</u>am are the best devotees. It is highly
incumbent on those who want their welfare to wear Rudrâk<u>s</u>am.
Those who hold Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on their ears, crown hair, neck, hands,
and breast, get Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u, and Mahes'vara under them as their
Vibhûtis (manifestations, powers). The Devas and all those Ri<u>s</u>is
that started the Gotra, the Âdipuru<u>s</u>as (the first chief men in
several families), held with reverence the Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams. All the
other Munis, that descended from their families, the ardent followers of
S’rauta Dharma, the pure souled, held the Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams. It may be,
that many might not like at first to hold this Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, the
visible giver of liberation and so well written in the Vedas; but after
many births, out of the Grace of Mahâdeva many become eager to take the
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams. The Munis that are the Jâbâla Sâkhîs are famous in
expounding the inestimable greatness of Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams.

 

The effect of holding Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams is well known in the three
worlds. Pu<u>n</u>yam (great merit) arises from the mere sight of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams; ten million times that merit arises by its touch; and
by wearing it, one hundred Ko<u>t</u>i times the fruit arises and if one
makes Japam every day, then one lakh ko<u>t</u>i times the pu<u>n</u>yam
arises. There is no manner of questionings in this.

 

<span id="page_1069">p. 1069</span>

 

30-36.  He who holds in his hand, breast, neck, ears, head, the
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams, becomes an image of Rudra. There is no manner of
doubt in this. By holding Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams, men become invulnerable of
all the beings, become respected, like Mahâ Deva, by the Devas and
Asuras and they roam on the earth like Rudra. Even if a man be addicted
to evil deeds and commits all sorts of sins, he becomes respected by
all, on holding Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams. By this men are freed of the sin of
taking Uchhi<u>st</u>a and of all the other sins. Even if you suspend a
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am rosary on the neck of a dog and if that dog dies in
that state, he gets liberation! Then what to speak of others! By holding
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams, men even if they be devoid of Japam and Dhyânam,
become freed of all sins and attain the highest state. Even if one holds
merely one Rudrâk<u>s</u>a seed purified and surcharged with Mantra
S’akti, he uplifts his twentyone generations, gets to Heaven and resides
there with respect. I am speaking now further of the Greatness of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
rosaries in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000
verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk11ch06)
