[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch23)  [Next](bk12ch01.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XXIV**

 

**On Sadâchâra**

 

<span id="page_1132">p. 1132</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- O Bhagavân! Thou art the ocean of mercy; kindly
speak out to me in brief all the things and the duties to be observed
and applied in the S’ânti Karmas (the peace bringing acts) of Gâyatrî.

 

2-20. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! The question asked by you is
esoteric. Never divulge this to a wicked person or any hypocrite. It is
to be kept secret. While doing this S’ânti Karma, the Brâhma<u>n</u>as
are to perform the Homas with fuel soaked in milk (Paya<u>h</u>). If the
fuel of the S’amî tree be offered in Homa ceremony, then diseases caused
by planets are cured. If the Homa be performed with wet As’vaththa or
Udumbara or other k<u>s</u>îra trees, the diseases caused by demons and
hob-goblins are cured. If one offers Tarpa<u>n</u>am with one palmful of
water, repeating the mantra “Sûryam Tarpayâmi nama<u>h</u>”, the pending
evils are also averted and troubles are ceased. The repetition of the
Gâyatrî mantra with knees immersed in water averts all evils. The
repetition of Gâyatrî with body immersed in water upto the throat,
averts the danger of life; and the same with whole body immersed grants
all success. This is the best of all the S’ânti karmas, the acts that
bring health, wealth, happiness and peace. While performing Homa, light
with the fuel of K<u>s</u>îravrik<u>s</u>a (the trees that emit milky
juice); place Pañchagavya in a vessel made of gold, silver, copper or
wood of k<u>s</u>îra trees, or in the vessels made of earth, without any
knot or crack; utter the Gâyatrî mantra and offer one thousand homas.
Sprinkle with water at every offering, touching the Pañchagavya with
Kus’a grass, thousand times. Then offer the sacrifices there where
calamities or nuisances are seen and meditate on the Highest Devatâ.
Thus all the magic spells used by other persons for a malevolent purpose
will be rendered nugatory. Bring under your control any Deva yoni, Bhûte
Yoni, or Pis’âcha Yoni that causes you troubles; then they will quit the
house, village, city, way, even that kingdom. Now hear how they are
brought under control. Prepare a sacrificial altar with sand, draw a
square on it, place a Sûla (spear) in its centre and plaster with
A<u>st</u>agandha. For the sake of converting all the evils, repeat
Gâyatrî mantra thousand times and impregnate it with the mantra, dig the
ground and place or bury the Sûla under it. Place on the level ground or
stha<u>nd</u>ila a jar or Navaphala, a fruit made of gold, silver, or
copper or a newly made earthen jar and enclose it with thread. Then have
the sacred waters brought from the several Tîrthas by the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s and fill the jar, repeating the Gâyatrî Mantra. Put
within this jar the twigs,

 

<span id="page_1133">p. 1133</span>

 

then of Cardamom tree, sandal tree, karpûra tree, jâti, aparâjitâ. Saha
Devî, Pâ<u>t</u>ala, Mallikâ flower, Bel leaves, rice, barley, Til,
mustard, as’vattha, and udumbara trees and throw them within the jar.
(The K<u>s</u>îra trees are As’vaththa, Udumbara, Plak<u>s</u>a, and
Nyagrodha.) Doing all these, prepare one Kus’a Kurcha made of twenty
seven Kus’a grass in the form of a braid of hair, round one end of a
straight rod and tied in a knot and place it there. Then take your bath
and repeat the Gâyatrî mantra over it one thousand times with your whole
mind fully concentrated. Then the Veda knowing Brâhma<u>n</u>as would
recite the Saura mantra and sprinkle the man attacked by the demon with
water and make him drink also the water saturated with the mantra and
bathe him also with that. Then that person will be dispossessed of the
devil and be happy. Even when the man (possessed by a devil), is going
to die, he gets his life again if he be made to drink this water
saturated with this mantra and have his bath with that. So a wise King
must do this, with a desire to have a long life; and after he is
sprinkled with this mantra-charged water he is to give one hundred cows
to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as as the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â.

 

21-44. The Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â is to be given according to one’s
might; and specially what gives satisfaction to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. If
one be terrified by a Devil or so or by the mischievous magic spells of
others, one is to sit on Saturday under an As’vattha tree and repeat one
hundred Gâyatrîs. For the cure of all diseases, if one has to perform
the Mrityunjaya Homa, one will have to do Homa with the Gulancha
creeper, soaked in milk and deducting the knots thereof. For the
pacification of fever, mango leaves soaked with milk ought to be used in
the Homa ceremony. The wasting diseases are cured if Homa be performed
with the leaves of the Vacha  soaked in milk; phthisis or consumption is
cured if Homa be performed with curd, milk and ghee. Again, if offerings
be given to the Solar Deity and if Pâyasânnam be given to him and if
this be given to the consumptive patient, his disease will be cured.
Again, on the Amâvasyâ tithi (new moon day) if Homa be performed with
Soma creeper (excluding the knot joints) soaked in milk, then
consumption will be cured. If Homa be made with the flowers of the
S’amkhya tree, then leprosy is cured; if the Homa be done with the seed
of Apâmârga, the Mrigis or the hysteric and epileptic fits are cured. So
if Homa be performed with the fuel of K<u>s</u>îra trees, lunacy is
cured; if, with the fuel of udumbara, meha (spermatorrhea) is cured; if
with sugarcane juice, gonorrhea is cured; if with curd, milk and ghee or
with the ghee of Kapilâ cow, the homa be performed, the Masûrikâ disease
or smallpox will be cured, and if Homa be performed with the fuels of
Udumbara, Va<u>t</u>a, and As’vatha be performed, then the diseases of
cows, elephants

 

<span id="page_1134">p. 1134</span>

 

and horses are cured. If the trouble be caused by many ants and
ant-hills (Madhu Valmîka) then perform the Homa ceremony with the fuel
of Samî tree one hundred times and with the food prepared of ghee one
hundred times and offer sacrifices with the rest of the food; then the
above troubles will cease. If there be a earth quake or if there be seen
flashes of lightnings, then homa is to be performed with the fuel of
Vana Vetasa and the whole kingdom will be happy. If you surcharge any
piece of iron with Gâyatrî mantra repeated hundred times and if you
throw it in any direction then no fear will arise from that quarter out
of fire, air, or any other enemy. If one be imprisoned, and if he
repeats the Gâyatrî mentally, he will be liberated from the prison. If
you touch the man possessed by a devil, disease or mortification and
sorrow with the Kus’a grass and repeat the Gâyatrî mantra, and thus
charge him with Divine electricity, that man will be liberated from the
fear caused thereby. If you make the man possessed by devils, etc.,
drink the water charged with the Gâyatrî mantra or if you cast on his
body the ashes charged with hundred Gâyatrîs or tie those ashes on his
head repeating the Gâyatrî mantra, he will be instantly freed of all
diseases and will live for one hundred years in happiness. In case a man
is unable to do fully all these himself, he can get all these done by
other Brâhma<u>n</u>as and pay Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â (fees) to them duly
for the same.

 

O Nârada! Now I will tell you how nourishment and wealth are attained.
Wealth is attained if the Homa be performed with red lotus or fresh Jâtî
flower or with the S’âli rice or with the fuel of Bel tress, leaves,
flowers, fruits or roots or with any portions thereof. If for one week
the oblations be offered with fuel of Bel tree mixed with Pâyasa or with
ghee one hundred times, then Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî will surely be attained.
If the Homa be performed with Lâja (fried rice) mixed with curd, milk,
and ghee, the daughter will be obtained. If for one week, the Homa be
performed with red lotus, then gold is obtained. If the Tarpa<u>n</u>am
(peace offering) be offered to the Sun, then the treasures, gold hidden
under the water, are obtained. If the Homa be performed with food (Anna)
then Anna is obtained; if Homa be performed with rice, then rice is
obtained.

 

45-51. If Homa be performed with calfdung, dried and powdered, then
animals are obtained. If Homa be performed with Priyangu, Pâyasa or ghee
then the progeny is obtained. If the oblations of Pâyasânna be offered
to the Solar Deity and if the Prasâdam (remnant) be given to one’s wife
under menstruation to eat, then

 

<span id="page_1135">p. 1135</span>

 

excellent sons will be obtained. If the Homa be performed with the fuel
of wet pointed K<u>s</u>îra trees, then longevity is attained. If Homa
be performed with the fuel of the Palâs’a tree, pointed and wet and
mixed with curd, milk, and ghee for one hundred times consecutively,
then longevity and gold are attained. If the Homa be performed with
Durbâ grass, milk, honey or ghee, one hundred times, then longevity and
golden lotus are obtained. If for one week the Homa ceremony be
performed with the fuel of S’amî tree mixed with food, milk or ghee one
hundred times of each or if for one week the Homa he performed with the
fuel of Nyagrodha tree and afterwards one hundred Homas be made with
Pâyasânna, the fear of unnatural death is removed.

 

52-60. That man can conquer death who can remain for one week living on
milk only and who performs during that time hundreds, and hundreds of
Homas and repeats the Gâyatrî, controlling his speech. If anybody can
fast three nights and control his speech and repeat Gâyatrî he gets
himself freed from the hands of Death; or totally immersed in water if
he repeats Gâyatrî, he will be saved from the impending danger of death.
If anybody repeats the Gâyatrî mantra for one month, taking his seat
under a Bel tree or performs Homa with Bel fruit, root or leaves, he
gets kingdoms. (Know all the Mantrams are electric in their effects).
Similarly if anybody performs Homa with one hundred lotuses, he gets a
foeless kingdom. So one becomes the lord of a village if one performs
Homa with Yavâgu (barley gruel) and Sâlidhânya. If the Homa be performed
with the fuel of Asvaththa tree, victory in battle is ensured and if the
Homa be performed with the fuel of Âkanda tree, then victory everywhere
is ensured. If one hundred Homas be performed extending a week with
Vetasa tree’s leaves or fruits, dipped in milk and mixed with Pâyasa,
the rainfall is ensured. Similarly if anybody repeats Gâyatrî for one
week with his body upto navel immersed in water, the rainfall is
ensured; on the contrary if the Homa be performed with ashes in water,
then the cessation of heavy rainfall is ensured. The Homa with the fuel
of Palâsa gives Brahmateja; Homa with the flowers of Palâsa gives
everything desired. Homa with milk or drinking Brâhmarasa, charged with
mantra, increases the intellect; and the Homa with ghee gives Buddhi
(medhâ) (intelligence).

 

61-69. Homa with flowers gives good smell; Homa with thread gives cloth;
Homa with salt and honey mixed or Bel flowers gives one power to control
anything and everything that is desired. If anybody bathes everyday
immersed completely within water and sprinkles water on his body, he
becomes cured of diseases and

 

<span id="page_1136">p. 1136</span>

 

he becomes very healthy. If any Brâhma<u>n</u>a does these things for
others, he becomes also no doubt healthy. If anybody wants to increase
his life period he should practise good deeds and repeat Gâyatrî
thousand times daily for one month. Thus his longevity will be
increased. Two months’ such practice gives long life and perpetual
health; three month’s such practice will give life, health, and wealth,
four months such practice gives longevity, wealth, fame, women, sons,
etc., five months such practice gives longevity, health, wealth, wife,
sons and learning. So one should repeat this as many months in
proportion to the number of his desires and he would get them. Again any
Brâhma<u>n</u>a who stands on one leg without holding any other thing
and raises both his hands and daily repeats three hundred Gâyatrîs for
one month, gets all his desires fulfilled. And if he repeats one
thousand one hundred Gâyatrîs, there is nothing in this world that is
not met and attained with success. Controlling the Prâ<u>n</u>a
(inhaling) and Apâna (exhaling) Vâyu (breath), he who repeats daily
three hundred Gâyatrîs to the Devî, his highest desires are satisfied.

 

70-77. Vis’vâmitra Ri<u>s</u>i says :-- Standing on one leg, with both
hands raised and controlling Vâyu he who repeats daily one hundred
Gâyatrîs for one month, gets all his desires fulfilled. Similarly with
three hundred or thousand repeatings, all things are attained. Submerged
under water, if one repeats Gâyatrîs as many times as mentioned above,
he gets everything. If, for one year, with hands uplifted and without
holding anything, anyone stands on one leg, controls one’s breath and
repeats Gâyatrî mantra three hundred times or thousand times, eating
Havisyânnam only in the night time, he becomes a Ri<u>s</u>i (Seer).
This thing repeated two years gives infallible speech; three years gives
knowledge of the present, past and future; four years will enable one to
see face to face the Solar God; five years will give the eight Siddhis,
lightness, etc., six years will enable one to assume forms as he
desires; seven years gives immortality; nine years gives Manuhood; ten
years gives Indrahood; eleven years gives Brahmâ-hood; and twelve years
gives the state of Parama Brahma.

 

78-90. O Nârada! By these practices of Tapasyâs you and other
Ri<u>s</u>is have been able to conquer the three Lokas (regions). Some
ate only vegetables; some fruits; some, roots; some simply water; some,
ghee; some, Somarasa; whereas some others ate only charu and did
tapasyâ. Some Ri<u>s</u>is practised this great Tapasyâ by eating very
little for a fortnight only. Some ate food, only what they got by
begging during the day; and some ate only Havi<u>s</u>yânna. O Nârada!
Now hear the rules for the purification and expiation of sins. For the
expiation of the sin incurred in stealing gold, one is to repeat three
thousand Gâyatrîs (daily) for one

 

<span id="page_1137">p. 1137</span>

 

month; then the sin will be destroyed. By this act also the sins
incurred by drinking or by going to one’s Guru’s wife are destroyed.
Vis’vâmitra Ri<u>s</u>i says :-- The sin incurred by killing a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a (Brahmahatyâ) is destroyed if one erects a shed in a
forest and, living there, repeats three thousand Gâyatrîs daily for one
month. Those Brâhma<u>n</u>as that have committed the Great Sins (i.e.,
Mahâpâtakas), become free, if they repeat one thousand Gâyatrîs daily,
submerged under water, for twelve successive days. By controlling speech
and by practising Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma, if one repeats three thousand
Gâyatrîs daily for one month, one will be free from the Mahâpâtakas. If
one practises one thousand Prâ<u>n</u>âyâmas repeating the Gâyatrî, one
becomes freed also of Brahmahatyâ. If one draws upwards the Prâ<u>n</u>a
and Apâna Vâyus six times, repeating the Gâyatrî with collected mind,
this destroys all the sins and it is called all-sin destroying
Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma. If one practises this Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma one thousand
times for one month, the lord of the earth becomes freed of all sins. If
any Brâhma<u>n</u>a incurs the sin of killing a cow, for twelve days he
is to repeat three thousand Gâyatrîs daily for expiation. Similarly the
repetition of ten thousand Gâyatrîs removes the sin of going to those
not fit to be gone into, eating the uneatables, stealing and killing and
this act brings in peace. All sins are destroyed by performing one
hundred Prâ<u>n</u>âyâmas with Gâyatrî. Again if there be a mixture of
various sins, one will have to live in the forest for one month and
repeat one thousand Gâyatrîs or practise fasting and repeat three
thousand Gâyatrîs; thus all sins will be destroyed.

 

91-100. To repeat Gâyatrî twenty-four thousand times is equal to
performing the Krichchhra vrata and to repeat sixty four thousand
Gâyatrîs duly is equal to performing the Chândrâyana. If anybody
repeats, in the morning and evening Sandhyâ times, the merit giving
Gâyatrî one hundred times, with Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma, all his sins are
destroyed. So, submerged under water, if one repeats the Gâyatrî Devî,
meditating Her in the Sun, one hundred times daily, one’s all the sins
are fully destroyed. O Nârada! Thus I have described to you all about
averting or destroying the evils and the purification of various sins.
All this is secret. Keep it carefully concealed. Never divulge this.
Whoever divulges this will bring his own ruin. I have spoken to you, in
brief, all about Sadâchâra (right way of living). If anybody practises
this duly, according to rules, S’rî Mahâmâyâ Durgâ Devî becomes pleased
with him. If anybody wants to have both enjoyment and liberation, he is
to practise all these daily, as well as the occasional, and Kâmya
(desired) duties duly according to rules. It is stated in all the
S’âstras, that this Âchâra (right way of living) is the foremost and the
chief Dharma, the Deity of which is

 

<span id="page_1138">p. 1138</span>

 

the Supreme Mother Herself. O Nârada! That man who practises duly this
Âchâra is, in this world, holy, happy and blessed. This I speak to you
truly. If anybody desires to get the Devî Bhagavatî’s Grace, he should
first of all set himself at once to practise this Sadâchâra. He who
hears this gets wealth and great happiness. There is no doubt in this.
Now speak what more you want to hear.

 

Here ends the Twenty fourth Chapter of the Eleventh Book on Sadâchâra in
the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa. The Eleventh Book Completed.

 

\[Here ends the Eleventh Book.\]

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](bk12ch01.md)
