[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk11ch06)  [Next](bk11ch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter VII**

** **

**On the greatness of one faced, etc., Rudrâk<u>s</u>am**

 

<span id="page_1072">p. 1072</span>

 

1-4. S’rî Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! When Girîs'a thus explained
to Kârtikeya the greatness of Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, he became satisfied. Now
I have spoken to you of the glories of the Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams as far as I
know. Now, as to our subject of right way of acting, I will now speak on
other things that ought to be known. Listen. The seeing of
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am brings in a lakh times of Pu<u>n</u>yam and ko<u>t</u>i
times the merit arises from touching that; holding it brings in
ko<u>t</u>i times merit; again if one makes the japam of a Mantra with
that Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, one obtains merit one hundred lakh ko<u>t</u>i
times and one thousand lakh ko<u>t</u>i times the merit. The merit in
holding the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is far superior to that in holding
Bhadrâk<u>s</u>am. The Rudrâk<u>s</u>am seed that is of the size of an
Âmalakî is the best; which is the of the size of a plum, is middling;
and which is of the size of a gram is the worst.

 

<span id="page_1073">p. 1073</span>

 

this is my word and promise. The Rudrâk<u>s</u>am tree is of four kinds
:-- Brâhma<u>n</u>a, K<u>s</u>attriya, Vais’ya, and S’ûdra. The white
colour is Brâhma<u>n</u>a; the red colour is K<u>s</u>attriya; the
yellow colour is Vais'ya and the black coloured Rudrâk<u>s</u>am seed is
S’ûdra. The Brâhma<u>n</u>as are to use the white coloured
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams; the K<u>s</u>attriyas, the red coloured ones, the
Vais'yas, the yellow coloured ones; and the S’ûdras, the black ones.
Those Rudrâk<u>s</u>a seeds that are nicely circular, smooth, hard, and
whose thorns or points are distinctly visible, are the best. Those that
are pierced by insects, broken in parts, whose thorns are not clearly
visible, with swells and holes and those that are coated over, these six
varieties of Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams are faulty. Those Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams that
have their holes by nature running through and through are best; and
those that base their holes pierced by men are middling. The
Rudrâk<u>s</u>a seeds that are all of uniform shape, bright, hard, and
beautifully circular should be strung together by a silken thread. How
to test the Rudrâk<u>s</u>a seed? As gold is tested by a touch stone; so
the Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is tested by drawing lines on it; those on which
the lines are most uniform, bright and beautiful are the best and they
should be worn by the S’aivas. One should hold one Rudrâk<u>s</u>am on
the crown hair, thirty on the head, thirty six on the neck; sixteen on
each arm, twelve on each wrist, fifty on the shoulders, one hundred and
eight Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams in the place of the sacrificial thread; and the
devotee should have two or three rounds on the neck. On the earrings, on
the crown of the head, the head, on bracelets, on armlets, on necklace,
on the ornament worn on the loins one should hold Rudrâk<u>s</u>am
always, whether one sleeps or eats. Holding three hundred
Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams is the lowest; holding five hundred is middling;
holding one thousand Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams is the best; so one ought to wear
one thousand Rudrâk<u>s</u>ams. At the time of taking Rudrâk<u>s</u>am,
on one's head, one should utter the Mantra of Îsâna; the mantra of Tat
Puru<u>s</u>a while holding on one's ears; Aghora mantra on one's
forehead and heart; and the vîja of Aghora mantra, i.e., “hasau” while
holding on one's hands. One should wear the rosary of fifty
Rudrâk<u>s</u>a seeds, suspended up to the belly, uttering the Vâmadeva
mantra, i.e., Sadyojâtâdi, etc., the five Brahmâ mantras, and the
six-limbed S’iva mantra. One is to string every Rudrâk<u>s</u>a seed,
uttering the root mantra and then hold it. One-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>a
reveals Paratattva (the highest Tattva); when worn, the knowledge of the
highest Tattva arises; the Brahmâ is seen then. The two-faced
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Ardhanârîs'vara, the Lord of the other half which
represents women (in the same person); if worn, Ardhanârîsvara S’iva is
always pleased with that man who holds it. The three-faced
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Fire made manifest; it destroys in a moment the sin
of killing a woman.

 

<span id="page_1074">p. 1074</span>

 

The three-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is the three Agnis,
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>âgni, Gârhapatya, and Âhavaniya; Bhagavân Agni is
always pleased with that man who wears the three-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am.
The four-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Brahmâ Himself. The wearer gets his
prosperity enhanced, his diseases destroyed, the divine knowledge
springs in him and his heart is always pleased. The five-faced
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is the five faced S’iva Himself; Mahâdeva gets pleased
with him who holds it. The Presiding Deity of the six faced
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Kârtikeya. Some Pundits take Ga<u>n</u>apati to be
the Presiding Deity of the six-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. The presiding
Deity of the seven-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is the seven Mâtrikâs, the Sun
and the seven Ri<u>s</u>is. By putting on this, the prosperity is
increased, health and the pure knowledge are established. It should be
put on when one becomes pure. The Presiding Deity of the eight-faced
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Brâhmî, the eight Mâtrikâs. By holding this, the
eight Vasus are pleased and the river Ganges is also pleased. The
putting on of this makes the Jîvas truthful and pleasant-minded. The
Devatâ of the nine-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Yama; holding this puts off
the fears of Death. The Devatâ of the eleven-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is
ten quarters, the ten quarters are pleased with him who wears the
ten-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am. The Devata of the eleven mouthed
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is the eleven Rudrâs and Indra. Holding this enhances
happiness. The twelve-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am is Vi<u>sn</u>u made
manifest; its Devatâs are the twelve Âdityas; the devotees of S’iva
should hold this. The thirteen-faced Rudrâk<u>s</u>am, if worn, enables
one to secure one's desires; he does nowhere experience failures. The
Kâma Deva becomes pleased with him who wears this. The fourteen-faced
Rudrâk<u>s</u>am destroys all diseases and gives eternal health. While
holding this, one ought not to take wine, flesh, onion, garlic, Sajñâ
fruit, Châltâ fruit and the flesh of the boar which eats excrements,
etc. During the Lunar and Solar eclipses, during the Uttarâya<u>n</u>a
S’amkrânti or the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>nâ</u>yana S’amkrânti, during the full
Moon or the New Moon day, if Rudrâk<u>s</u>am be worn, one becomes
instantly freed of all one's sins.

 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Eleventh Book on the greatness of
one faced, etc., Rudrâk<u>s</u>am in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahâr<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk11ch08)
