[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch02)  [Next](bk12ch04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter III**

** **

**On the description of the Kavacha of S’rî Gâyatrî Devî**

 

<span id="page_1141">p. 1141</span>

 

1-3. Nârada spoke :-- O Bhagavân! Thou art the Lord of this world; Thou
canst shew favour and disfavour both; Thou art specially versed in the
sixty-four Kalâs (arts of learning); Thou art the chief of the Yogis. I
therefore ask Thee to solve a doubt of mine. By what Pu<u>n</u>yam a man
can become free from all his sins and limitations and he can realise and
become of the nature of Brahmâ. O Lord! And what are duly the
Ri<u>s</u>is, Chha<u>n</u>das, Devatâs, Dhyân, and Nyâsa, etc., of this
meritorious act? I want to hear.

 

4-25. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! There is but one and the only
one way to this and though that is very secret, I will disclose that to
you. It is the Gâyatrî-Kavacha. It can destroy all sins. Therefore to
recite or to hold it on one's body enables the man to become free from
all his sins and to get all his desires fulfilled and he gets the Sâyuya
Mukti with the Devî (be merged in the Devî-Body). Now hear the
Ri<u>s</u>is, Chha<u>n</u>das, etc., of this Kavacha :-- Brahmâ,
Vi<u>sn</u>u and Mahes'vara are the Ri<u>s</u>is; the Rik, Yajus, Sâma
and Atharva Vedas are the Chha<u>n</u>das; the Paramâ Kalâ Gâyatrî of
the nature of Brahmâ is the Devatâ; “Tat” in Gâyatrî is the Vîja;
“Bharga” is the S’akti; and “Dhîyah” is the Kîlaka; and its viniyoga
(application) is in getting the Mok<u>s</u>a (liberation.). With the
first four syllables touch the heart; with

 

<span id="page_1142">p. 1142</span>

 

the next three letters touch the head; with the next four letters touch
the tuft on the crown of the head; with the next three letters on the
Kavacha; with the next four letters on the eyes and with the last four
letters make the Nyâsa, all over the body repeating “Astrâya
Pha<u>t</u>,” O Nârada! Hear now the Dhyânam of Gâyatrî, that grants all
desires. The Gâyatrî Devî has five faces; one of which is of white
colour; and the other four is of pearl, Vidruma, golden, and
Nîlakântama<u>n</u>i colour respectively. Each face has got three eyes;
on the head there is a crown of jewels and the digit of the Moon is
shining there. Her body is composed of the twenty-four tattvas. She has
ten hands :-- On the top right and left hands there are two lotuses;
lower down, there are disc and conch shell; lower down, there are rope
and skull; lower down, there are noose and goad; and on the bottom hands
right and left she is making signs of “No fear” and “ready to grant
boons.” Thus meditating on S’rî Gâyatrî, one is to recite the Kavacha
thus :-- Let the Gâyatrî Devî protect my front; Sâvitrî Devî protect my
right; the Sandhyâ Devî, my back and the Devî Sarasvatî, my left. Let my
Mother Pârvatî Devî protect my quarters. Let Jalas'âyinî protect the
southeast; Yâtudhâna Bhayankarî protect my South-west; Pavamânavilâsinî
my north-west; Rudrarûpi<u>n</u>î Rudrâ<u>n</u>î protect my north-east.
Let Brahmâ<u>n</u>î protect my top and Vai<u>sn</u>avî protect my nether
regions. Let the word “Tat” in the Gâyatrî protect my legs;
“Savitu<u>h</u>” protect my Knees; “Vare<u>n</u>yam,” protect my loins;
“Bhargah,” my navel. Let “Devasya” protect my heart; “Dhîmahî” protect
my neck; “Dhîyah,” protect my eyes; “Yah,” protect my forehead;
“Na<u>h</u>” protect my head; and “Prachodayât” protect the tuft on the
crown of my head.

 

Again let the “Tat” of the twenty-four syllabled Gâyatrî protect my
head; “Sa,” protect my forehead; “Vi” protect my eyes; “Tu” my cheeks;
“Va,” protect my nostrils; “Re,” my mouth; “<u>n</u>i” protect my upper
lip; “Ya<u>h</u>” protect my lower lip; “Bha” within my face; “rgo,”
protect my cheeks; “De,” my throat; “Va” my shoulders; “Sya” my right
hand; “Dhi” my navel; “ma,” my heart, “Hi,” my belly; “Dhî,” my navel;
“Yo” my loins; “Yo”, my anus; “na<u>h</u>,” my thighs, “Pra,” my Knees;
“Cho” my shanks “Da” my heels; “Yâ” my legs; and let “at” protect all my
sides. O Nârada! This divine Kavacha of the Devî Gâyatrî can baffle
hundreds and thousands of obstructions and evils; can grant sixty-four
Kalâs and liberation. By the glory of this Kavacha, man can become free
from all evils and can attain the state of Brahmâ. Moreover whoever
reads or hears this acquires the fruits of making a gift of a thousand
cows.

 

<span id="page_1143">p. 1143</span>

 

Here ends the Third Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of
the Kavacha of S’rî Gâyatrî Devî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî
Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](bk12ch04)
