[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch04)  [Next](bk12ch06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

** **

**Chapter V**

** **

**On the Gâyatrî Stotra**

 

<span id="page_1145">p. 1145</span>

 

1\. Nârada said :-- O All knowing One! Thou showest Thy grace to Thy
devotees! Thou hast described this sin-destroying Gâyatrî Hridaya. Now
describe Her Stava (hymn of praise).

 

2-29. Nârâyana said :-- O World-Mother! O Thou, favouring Thy devotees!
O Thou, the Prime Force, O Omnipresent! Infinite! S’rî Sandhye! I bow
down to Thee. Thou art the Sandhyâ; Thou art the Gâyatrî, Sâvitrî and
Sarasvatî; Thou art Brâhmî, Vai<u>sn</u>avî and Raudrî and Thou art red,
white, and black (the colours of Gâyatrî, Sâvitrî and Sarasvatî) that
Thou assumest respectively. O Bhagavatî! Thou art always meditated by
the Munis as young in the morning, full of youth in the mid-day, and
aged in the evening. I bow down to Thee. Thou art seen by the Tapasvis
(ascetics) as Brahmânî, riding on Hamsa (swan), Sarasvatî riding on
Garu<u>d</u>a, and Sâvitrî riding on Bull. Thou art seen within by the
ascetics as manifesting the Rigveda (in the form of Sâvitrî) in this
world, as manifesting Yayurveda in the middle space (antarik<u>s</u>am)
and as manifesting Sâmaveda everywhere in the Rudra loka, thus roaming
in the three worlds. I bow down to Thee. O Devî! Thou art Rudrânî in the
Rudra loka, Vai<u>sn</u>avî in the Vi<u>sn</u>u loka, and Brahmânî in
the Brahmâ loka; thus Thou shewest Thy favour to the Immortals. O Devî!
Thou art the Mother delighting the seven Ri<u>s</u>is (of the Great
Bear); Thou art Mâyâ. Thou grantest great many boons to Thy Bhaktas.
Thou art sprung from the eyes and hands, tears and perspiration of S’iva
and S’ivâ. Thou art the Mother of delights, Durgâ Devî, recited by the
following ten names :-- Vare<u>n</u>yâ, Varadâ, Vari<u>st</u>hâ,
Varavarni<u>n</u>î, Gari<u>st</u>hâ, Varâhâ, Varârohâ, Nîlagangâ,
Sandhyâ and Bhoga Mok<u>s</u>adâ. Thou art the Bhâgirathî (the river
Ganges) in this world; the Bhogavatî in the Pâtâla; and the Mandâkinî
(the milky way) in the Heavens. Thou art in this world (Bhur loka) the
all-enduring Prithvî (earth); Thou art the Vâyu S’akti (air power) in
the middle space (Bhubhar Loka); Thou art the energy (the ocean of
Tejas) in the Heavens (Svar loka); Thou art the Great Siddhi in the
Mahar loka; Thou art Janâ in the Janar Loka; Thou art Tapasvinî in the
Tapar loka; Thou art Truth (True Speech) in the Satya lokam. Thou art
Kamalâ in Vi<u>sn</u>u loka; Gâyatrî in Brahmâ loka; and the other half
of Hara as Gaurî in the Rudra loka. O Devî! Thou art sung as Prakriti –
“Aham” “Om-Mahat” tattva and beyond that the Highest Sarva

 

<span id="page_1146">p. 1146</span>

 

Brahmâ rûpi<u>n</u>î and Sâmyâvasthâ Prakriti. Thou art the Parâ S’akti;
Thou art the Paramâ S’akti; O Devî! Thou art the Tri-S’akti :-- the
Ichchhâ S’akti (the will power), the Kriyâ S’akti (power of action) and
the Jñâna S’akti (the force of knowledge). Thou art the Gangâ, Yamunâ,
Vipâs'â, Sarasvatî, Sarayu, Devîkâ, Sindhu; Narmadâ, Îrâvatî, Godâvarî,
S’atadru; Kâverî, Kaus'ikî, Chandra Bhâgâ, Vitastâ, Ga<u>nd</u>akî,
Tapinî, Karatoyâ, Gomatî, and Vetravatî and other rivers; Thou art the
I<u>d</u>â, Pingalâ, and Su<u>s</u>umnâ nerves; Thou art Gândhârî,
Hastajihvâ, Pû<u>s</u>â, Apû<u>s</u>â, Alambusâ, Kuhû, S’ankhinî,
Prânavâhinî and other nerves in the body; O Devî! Thou art the vital
power in the lotus of the heart; Thou art Svapna nâikâ in the throat;
Thou art Sadâdhârâ in the palate; and Thou art the Vindumâlinî S’akti in
the pituitary space between the eyebrows.

 

Thou art the Ku<u>nd</u>alinî in the Mûlâdhâra (sacral plexus), the
Vyâpinî extending upto the roots of the hairs; Thou art Madhyâsanâ on
the crown of the head, and Thou art Manonmanî in the Brahmârandhra. O
Devî! What need there is in stating these? Suffice it to say that
whatever there is seen in this universe, all art Thou; therefore, O S’rî
Sandhyâ Devî! I bow down to Thee. O Nârada! Thus I have spoken to you
about the Gâyatrî-Stotra that gives all successes, destroys all sins,
and yields all merits. He who reads this in the Sandhyâ times, with all
attention, will get sons if he has no sons, will get wealth if he has no
wealth. There is no doubt in this. Whoever reads this Stotra gets the
fruits of all Tîrthas, all Tapasyâs, all gifts, all sacrifices and all
Yogas. He enjoys happiness in this world and finally gets the
Mok<u>s</u>a. The Munis who are engaged in Tapasyâs read this Stotra.
While bathing, if one reads this, merged under water, acquires the
fruits of his being merged in the Sandhyâ. O Nârada! I speak this
verily, verily, verily, unto you that there is no trace of any doubt in
this statement. Whoever will hear with devotion this Sandhyâ stotra, the
nectar-like thing, will be freed from all sins.

 

Here ends the Fifth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the Gâyatrî Stotra in
the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](bk12ch06.md)
