[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch06)  [Next](bk12ch08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter VII**

 

**On the Dîk<u>s</u>â vidhi or on the rules of Initiation**

 

<span id="page_1154">p. 1154</span>

 

1-3. Nârada said :-- I have heard the one thousand names or nâma stotras
equivalent in its fruits to S’rî Gâyatrî, highly potent in making a good
fortune and tending to a splendid increase of the wealth and prosperity.
Now I want to hear about how initiations in Mantrams are performed,
without which nobody, be he a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, a K<u>s</u>attriya, a
Vais’ya or a S’ûdra, is entitled to have the Devî Mantra. O Lord! Kindly
describe the ordinary (Sâmânya) and the special (vis’e<u>s</u>a) rules
thereof.

 

4-41. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! Listen. I am now telling you
about the rules of initiation (Dîk<u>s</u>â) of the disciples, pure in
heart. When they are initiated, they become entitled then and not before
that, to worship the Devas, the Fire and the Guru. That method of
instruction, and religious act and ceremony is called the Dîk<u>s</u>â
(initiation) by which the Divine Knowledge is imparted; and at once
flashes in the heart and mind of the initiated that Knowledge and all
his sins are then destroyed. So the Pundits of the Vedas and the
Tantras, say. (The Divine Knowledge is like lightning, fire, arising and
permeating the body, mind, and spirit.) This Dîk<u>s</u>â ought to be
taken by all means. This gives excellent merits and pure results. Both
the Guru and the S’i<u>s</u>ya (disciple) ought to be very pure and
true. (This is the first essential requisite. Then the results are
instantaneous). First of all, the Guru is to perform all the morning
duties, he is to take his bath and perform his Sandhyâ Vandanams. He is
to return home from the banks of the river with his Kama<u>nd</u>alu and
observe maunam (silence). Then, in order to give Dîk<u>s</u>â, he is to
enter into the assigned room (Yâga Ma<u>nd</u>apa) and take his seat on
an Âsana that is excellent and calculated to please all. He is to
perform Âchanara and do Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma. Then he should take water in
his Arghya vessel and putting scents and flowers in that, charge that
water with Pha<u>t</u>kâra mantra (that is, condense electricity Spirit
in that). Then uttering the Pha<u>t</u> mantra, he is to sprinkle the
water on the doorways of the worshiproom and begin his Pûjâ. Firstly, on
the top of the door at one end invoke the Deity Ga<u>n</u>anâthâ by His
mantra, at the other end invoke Sarasvatî by Her mantra and at the
middle, invoke Lak<u>s</u>mî Devî by Her mantra duly and worship them,
with flowers. Then, on the right side worship Gangâ and
Bigh<u>n</u>es’a; and on the left side worship K<u>s</u>ettrapâla and
Yamunâ, the daughter of the Sun. Similarly, on the bottom of the door,
worship the Astra Devatâ by the

 

<span id="page_1155">p. 1155</span>

 

Pha<u>t</u> mantra. Then consider the whole Ma<u>nd</u>apa as inspired
with the presence of the Devî, and see the whole place as pervaded by
Her through and through. Then, repeat the Pha<u>t</u> mantra and destroy
the Celestial obstacles as well as those from the middle space
(Antarîk<u>s</u>a); strike the ground thrice with the left heel and thus
destroy the Terrene obstacles. Then touching the left branch on the left
side of the choukâ<u>t</u>, put the right foot forward and enter into
the Ma<u>nd</u>apa. Then instal the S’ânti Kumbha (the peace jar) and
offer the ordinary Arghya (Sâmânyârgha). Next worship the Vâstunâtha and
Padmayoni with flowers and Âtapa rice and the Arghya water, on the
south-west and then purify the Pa<u>n</u>cha Gavya. Next sprinkle all
the Ma<u>nd</u>apa and the entrance gate with that Arghya water. And,
while sprinkling with Arghya water, consider the whole space right
through as inspired with the presence of the Devî and repeat the Mûla
Mantra with devotion and sprinkle with Pha<u>t</u> mantra. The Kartâ,
then, uttering the mantra “Pha<u>t</u>,” is to drive away all the evils
from the Ma<u>nd</u>apa and uttering the mantra “Hûm” sprinkle water,
all around, thus pacifying the atmosphere and bringing peace into the
hearts of all present.

 

Then burn the Dhûpa incense inside and scatter Vikira (water,
sandal-paste, yava, ashes, Durba grass with roots, and Âtapa rice). Then
collect all these rice, etc., again with a broom made of Kus’a grass to
the north east corner of the Ma<u>nd</u>apa; making the Sankalpa and
uttering Svasti vâchana (invocation of good), distribute and satisfy the
poor and orphans with feeding, clothing and money. Then he should bow
down to his own Guru and take his seat humbly on the soft Âsanam
allotted to him with his face eastwards and meditate on the Deity
(Î<u>st</u>a Deva) of the mantra that is to be imparted to the disciple.
After meditating thus, he is to do the Bhûta s’ûddhi (purification of
elements) and perform Nyâsa, etc., of the Deya mantra (the mantra that
is to be imparted to the disciple) according to the rules stated below,
i.e., the Ri<u>s</u>i on the head; the chhandas in the mouth, the
Î<u>st</u>a Devatâ in the heart, Bîja on the anus and S’akti Nyâsa on
the two legs. Then he is to make sound thrice by the clap of his palm
and thus thwart off all the evils of the earth and the middle space and
then make digbandhan (tieing up the quarters) by the mudrâ
chho<u>t</u>ikâ three times (snapping the thumb and forefinger together
). Then perform the Prâ<u>n</u>âyâma with the Mûla mantra of the
would-be-Î<u>st</u>a-Devatâ and do the Mâtrikâ Nyâsa in one’s own body,
thus :-- O<u>m</u> Am nama<u>h</u> s’irasi, O<u>m</u> Âm nama<u>h</u> on
the face, O<u>m</u> Im nama<u>h</u> on the right eye, O<u>m</u> Îm
nama<u>h</u> on the left eye, and so on, assign all the letters duly to
their respective places. Then perform the Karânga Nyâsa on the fingers
and the <u>S</u>a<u>d</u>a<u>n</u>ga Nyâsa thus :-- Speak: O<u>m</u>
Hridayâya nama<u>h</u>, touching on the heart, utter O<u>m</u> S’irase
svâhâ, touching the head; O<u>m</u>

 

<span id="page_1156">p. 1156</span>

 

S’ikhâyai Va<u>s</u>at, touching the tuft; O<u>m</u> Kavachâya Hûm,
touching on the Kavacha, “O<u>m</u> netratrayâya Vau<u>s</u>a<u>t</u>,”
touching the eye, and “O<u>m</u> Astrâya Pha<u>t</u>” touching both the
sides of the hand, the palm and its back. Then finish the Nayâsa by
doing the Var<u>n</u>anyâsa of the Mûla mantra in those places that are
said in the cognate kalpas (i.e., throat, heart, arms, legs, etc.).

 

O Nârada! Next consider within your body the seat of an auspicious Âsana
(a seat) and make the Nyâsa of Dharma on the right side, Jñâna<u>m</u>
on the left side, of Vairâgyam (dispassion) on the left thigh,
prosperity and wealth on the right thigh, of non-Dharma in the mouth and
of Non-Jñânam on the left side, Avairâgyam (passion) on the navel, and
poverty on the right side. Then think of the feet of the Âsana (the
body) as Dharma, etc., and all the limbs as Adharma (non-Dharma). In the
middle of the Âsana (body), i.e., in the heart consider Ananta Deva as a
gentle bed and on that a pure lotus representing this universe of five
elements. Then make Nyâsa of the Sun, Moon, and Fire on this lotus and
think the Sun as composed of twelve Kalâs (digits) the Moon composed of
sixteen Kalâs (digits) and the Fire as composed of ten Kalâs. Over this
make Nyâsa of Sâttva, Râja and Tâmo Gu<u>n</u>as, Âtmâ, Antarâtmâ,
Paramâtmâ and Jñânâtmâ and then think of this as his Î<u>st</u>a’s altar
where the devotee is to meditate on his Î<u>st</u>a Devatâ, the Highest
Mother. Nyâsa-assignment of the various parts of the body to different
deities which is usually accompanied with prayers and corresponding
gesticulations. Next the devotee is to perform the mental worship of the
Deya Mantra Devatâ according to the rules of his own Kalpa; next he is
to show all the Mudrâs, stated in the Kalpa for the satisfaction of the
Deva. The Devas become very pleased when all these Mudrâs are shown to
them.

 

42-46. O Nârada! Now, on one’s left side, erect an hectagon; inside it a
circular figure; inside this again a square and then draw within that
square a triangle and over it show the S’ankha Mudrâ. After finishing
the Pûjâ of the Six Deities at the six corners of the hectagon, Fire,
etc., take the tripod of the S’ankha (conch-shell) and sprinkling it
with Pha<u>t</u> mantra, place it within the triangle. Utter, then, the
Mantra “Ma<u>m</u> Vahniman dalâya Das’a Kalâtmane Amuka Devyâ
Arghyapâtrasthânâya nama<u>h</u>” and thus worshipping the S’ânkhya
vessel place it within the ma<u>nd</u>ala. Then worship in the S’ankha
pâtra, the ten Kalâs of Fire, beginning from the East, then south-east
and so on. Sprinkle the S’ankha, conchshell, with the Mûla Mantra and
meditating on it, place the S’ankha (conch shell) on the tripod.
Repeating the mantra “Am Sûrya ma<u>nd</u>alâya Dvadas’akalâtmane
Amukodevyâ

 

<span id="page_1157">p. 1157</span>

 

Arghyapâtrâya nama<u>h</u>” worship in the Arghyapâtra S’ankha, sprinkle
water in the S’ankha with the Mantra “Sa<u>m</u> S’ankhya nama<u>h</u>.”
Worship in due order the twelve Kalâs of the Sun Tapinî, Tâpinî, Dhûmrâ,
etc., utter the fifty syllables of the Mâtrikâ in an inverse order
(i.e., beginning, see the Sâradâ Tilaka, with K<u>s</u>a<u>m</u>,
Ha<u>m</u>, <u>S</u>a<u>m</u>, Sam, S’a<u>m</u>, etc.,) and repeating
the Mûla Mantra also in an inverse order, fill the S’ankha,
three-fourths, with water. Next perform in it the Nyâsa of Chandrakalâ
and uttering the Mantra “U<u>m</u> Soma ma<u>nd</u>alâya
<u>S</u>o<u>d</u>as’akalâtmane Amukademtâyâ Arghyâ-mritâya
nama<u>h</u>,” worship in this conchshell. Next with Ankus’a mudrâ,
invoke all the tîrthas there, repeating the Mantra “Gange Cha Yamune
chaiva, etc.,” and repeat eight times the Mûla Mantra (the basic
Mantra). Then perform the S’a<u>d</u>amga Nyâsa in the water and with
the Mantra “Hridâ nama<u>h</u>, etc.,” worship and, repeating eight
times the Mûla Mantra, cover it with Matsyamundrâ. Next place on the
right side of the S’ankha, the Prok<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>î Pâtra (the Kos’â
vessel from which water is taken for sprinkling) and put a little water
in it. By this water sprinkle and purify all the articles of worship as
well as one’s own body and consider one’s Âtman as pure and holy.

 

47-81. After doing works thus far the until Vis’e<u>s</u>ârghya is
placed, the devotee should erect Sarvato bhadra ma<u>nd</u>ala within
the altar and put the S’âli rice within its pericarp. Next spread Kus’a
grass on that Ma<u>nd</u>ala and put on one Kurcha, looking well and
auspicious within it, made of twenty-seven Kus’a grass knotted with
Venyagra granthi. Worship here the Âdhâra S’akti, Prakriti, Kûrma,
S’e<u>s</u>a, K<u>s</u>amâ, Sudhâsindhu, Ma<u>n</u>ima<u>nd</u>ala,
Kalpa vrik<u>s</u>a and Î<u>st</u>a devatâ and the Pî<u>t</u>ha. (Durgâ
Devî yoga pî<u>t</u>hâya nama<u>h</u>). Then have an entire kumbha
(waterjar) having no defect, wash it inside with Pha<u>t</u> mantra, and
encircle it with the red thread thrice as symbolising the three
Gu<u>n</u>as. Place within this jar the Nava ratna (nine jewels) with
Kurcha and worshipping it with scents and flowers put them in the jar
repeating the Pra<u>n</u>ava, and place that on the Pî<u>t</u>ha (seat).
Next consider the Pîtha and Kumbha (waterjar) as one and the same and
pour waters from the Tîrthas, repeating in an inverse order the Mâtrikâ
Var<u>n</u>as (from K<u>s</u>a to Ka) and fill it, thinking of the
Î<u>st</u>a Deva and repeating the basic mantra, put the new and fresh
twigs (Pallavas) of As’vattha, Panasa and mango trees, etc., in the jar
and cover its mouth and place over it fruits, rice, and cha<u>s</u>aka
(honey) and wrap it with two red cloths. Then perform the
Prâ<u>n</u>a-Prati<u>st</u>hâ and invoke the Spirit of the Devî by the
Prâ<u>n</u>asthâpana Mantra and show the Mudrâs, Âvâhana, etc., and thus
satisfy the Devî. Then do the <u>S</u>o<u>d</u>as’opachâra Pûjâ of the
Devî after me-

 

<span id="page_1158">p. 1158</span>

 

ditating on the Parames’varî according to the rules of the Kalpa.

 

First offer “welcome” in front of the Devî and then duly offer the
Pâdya, Arghya, Âchamanîya water, Madhuparka, and oils, etc., for the
bath. Then offer nice red silken clothes and various jewels, ornaments;
repeating the Mâtrikâ syllables electrified with the Deya Mantra,
worship the whole body of the Devî with scents and flowers. Next offer
to the Devî the sweet scent of Kalâguru mixed with camphor and the
Kâs’mîri sandalpaste mixed with Kastûrî and various nice scented
flowers, for example, the Ku<u>nd</u>a flowers, etc. Then offer the
Dhûpa prepared from Aguru, Guggula, Us’îra, sandalpaste, sugar, and
honey and know that the Dhûpa is very pleasing to the Devî. Next offer
various lights and offerings of fruits, vegetables and fooding. Be
particular to sprinkle everything with the water of the Kosâ, thus
purifying, before it is offered to the Devî. Then complete the
A<u>n</u>ga Pûjâ, and the Âvara<u>n</u>a-Pûjâ of the Devî, then perform
the duty of Vais’vadeva. On the right side of the Devî erect an altar
(sthan<u>d</u>ila) six feet square and instal Ag<u>n</u>i (Fire) there.
Invoke there the Deity, thinking of Her Form and worship Her with scents
and flowers. Then with the Vyârhiti Mantra with Svâhâ prefixed and Mûla
(Deya) Mantra perform the Homa ceremony with oblations, charu and ghee,
twenty five times. Next perform Homa again with Vyârhiti. Next worship
the Devî with scents, etc., and consider the Devî and Pîtha Devatâ as
one and the same. Then take leave of (visarjana) the Ag<u>n</u>i (Fire).
Offer valis (sacrifices) all round to the Pârs’vadas of the Devî with
the remnant charu of the Homa.

 

Now again worship the Devî with five offerings and offer betel,
umbrella, châmara and others and repeat the Mûla mantra thousand times.
After finishing the Japam, place Karkarî (a water-jar with small holes
at the bottom, as in a sieve) on the rice in the north-eastern corner
and invoke the Devî there and worship Her. Uttering the mantra
“Rak<u>s</u>a Rak<u>s</u>a” moisten the place with water coming out of
Karkarî, and repeat the Pha<u>t</u> mantra. After re-worshipping the
Devî, place Karkarî in due position. Thus the Guru finishes the Adhivâsa
(foregoing) ceremony and takes his meals with the disciple and sleeps
that night on that altar.

 

82-106. O Nârada! Now I am describing briefly about the Homa
Ku<u>nd</u>a (a round hole in the ground consecrated to the Deity) and
the Samskâra ceremony of the Sthan<u>d</u>ila (the sacrificial altar).
Uttering, first, the Mûla Mantra, see, fix your gaze on the
Ku<u>nd</u>a; then sprinkle it with water and the Pha<u>t</u> mantra and
drive away the evil-spirits from there. Then with mantra “Hûm” again
sprinkle it with water.

 

<span id="page_1159">p. 1159</span>

 

Then draw within it three lines Prâgagra and Udagagra (on the eastern
and northern sides). Sprinkling it with water and the Pra<u>n</u>ava,
worship within the Pî<u>t</u>ha, uttering the mantras from Âdhâra
S’aktaye nama<u>h</u> to Amuka Devî Yoga Pî<u>t</u>hâya nama<u>h</u>.
Invoke, in that Pîtha, the Highest One, Who is S’iva S’ivâ with all
one-ness of heart and worship Her with scents and offerings. Then think
for a moment the Devî as having taken bath and as one with S’ankara.
Bring then fire in a vessel and taking a flaming piece thereof throw
that in the south-west corner. Then purifying it by the gaze and
quitting the portions of Kravyâda<u>h</u>, impart the Chaitanya by
“Ra<u>m</u>,” the Vah<u>n</u>ivîja repeat “O<u>m</u>” over it seven
times. Shew, then, the Dhenumudrâ and protect it by Pha<u>t</u> Kâra and
cover, veil, it with the mantra “Hûm.” Then turn the fire, thus
worshipped with sandalpaste, etc., thrice over the Ku<u>nd</u>a and with
both the knees on the ground and repeating the Pra<u>n</u>ava, consider
the Ag<u>n</u>i as the Vîrya of S’iva and throw it on the yoni of the
Devî in the Pîtha. Then offer Âchamana, etc., to the Deva and the Devî
and worship. Then light the flame with the mantra “Chit Pingala Hana
Hana Daha Daha Pacha Pacha Sarvajñâ Jñâpaya Svâhâ.” Then utter the
stotra to the Ag<u>n</u>i Deva with great love, repeating the mantra
“Agnim Prajvalitam vande Jâtavedam Hutâs’ana<u>m</u> suvar<u>n</u>a
var<u>n</u>amamalam samiddham Visvatomukha<u>m</u>.” Then perform the
<u>S</u>a<u>d</u>a<u>m</u>ganyâsa to the Ag<u>n</u>i Deva “Om
Sahasrârchchi<u>s</u>e nama<u>h</u>, Om Svasti Pûr<u>n</u>âya Svâhâ,”
“Om Utti<u>st</u>ha puru<u>s</u>âya va<u>s</u>at,” “Om Dhûma vyâpine
Hû<u>m</u> Om Sapta Jihvâya vau<u>s</u>at” “Om Dhanur dharâya
Pha<u>t</u>.” Repeating the above six mantras, perform the Nyâsa on the
heart, etc., the six places. Now meditate on the Ag<u>n</u>i as of a
golden colour, three-eyed, seated on a lotus and holding in His four
hands signs of granting boons, S’akti, Svastika and sign of “no fear,”
also meditate on Ag<u>n</u>i, as the seat of the greatest
auspiciousness. Then moisten the Ku<u>nd</u>a on the top of the belt
(mekhalâ) with water. Next spread the Kus’a grass all around and draw
the Ag<u>n</u>i yantra over it, i.e., triangle, hectagon, circle,
eight-petalled figure and Bhûpura; rather have this drawing before the
Ag<u>n</u>isthâpanâ. Now meditate this only. Then, within the Yantra,
recite “Vais’vânara Jâtaveda Lohitâk<u>s</u>a sarvakarmâ<u>n</u>i
Sâdhaya Svâhâ” and worship Ag<u>n</u>i. Then worship in the centre and
in the hectagon at the corners worship the Saptajihvâ (seven tongues
Hira<u>n</u>ya, Gaganâ, Raktâ, Kri<u>sn</u>â, Suprabhâ, Bahurûpâ,
Atiraktikâ) and next worship within the pericarp of the lotus the Anga
Devatâs. Then recite the following mantras within the eight petals :--
“O<u>m</u> Agnaye Jâtavedase nama<u>h</u>,” “ O<u>m</u> Agnaye
Saptajihvâya namah,” “ O<u>m</u> Agnaye Havyavâhanâya

 

<span id="page_1160">p. 1160</span>

 

nama<u>h</u>,” “O<u>m</u> Agnaye As’vodarajâya nama<u>h</u>,” “O<u>m</u>
Agnaye Vais’vânarâya nama<u>h</u>,” “O<u>m</u> Agnaye Kaumâra tejase
nama<u>h</u>,” “O<u>m</u> Agnaye Vis’vamukhâya nama<u>h</u>,” “O<u>m</u>
Agnaye Devamukhâya nama<u>h</u>” and considering the forms to hold
S’akti and Svastik, worship them. Then consider Indra and the other
Lokapâlas (Regents of the several quarters) situated in the east,
south-east, and so on together with their weapons, the thunderbolt and
the other weapons, and thus worship them.

 

107-134. O Nârada! Next purify the sacrificial ladles, etc., sruk,
sruva, etc., and ghee; then, taking ghee by sruva, go on with the Homa
ceremony. Divide the ghee of the Âjyasthâlî (the vessel in which the
ghee for the Homa purposes is kept) in three parts; take ghee from the
right side and saying “O<u>m</u> Agnaye Svâhâ” offer oblations on the
right eye of the Ag<u>n</u>i; take ghee from the left side and saying
“Om Somâye Svâhâ” offer oblations on the left eye of the Ag<u>n</u>i;
take ghee from the centre and saying, “O<u>m</u>
Agni<u>s</u>omâbhyâ<u>m</u> Svâhâ,” offer oblations on the central eye
of the Agni. Take ghee again from the right side and saying “O<u>m</u>
Agnaye Svi<u>st</u>ak<u>r</u>ite Svâhâ” offer oblations to the mouth of
the Ag<u>n</u>i. Then the devotee is to repeat “O<u>m</u> Bhu<u>h</u>
Svâhâ,” “O<u>m</u> Bhuva<u>h</u> Svâhâ,” “O<u>m</u> Sva<u>h</u> Svâhâ”
and offer thrice the oblations; next he is to offer oblations thrice
with the Ag<u>n</u>i mantra. After this, O Muni! for impregnation and
each of the ten Samskâras, natal-ceremony, tonsure, etc., he is to
repeat the Pra<u>n</u>ava Mantra and offer the eight oblations of ghee
on each occasion. Now hear of the tenfold Sa<u>m</u>skâras :-- (1)
Impregnation, (2) Pu<u>m</u>savan (a ceremony performed as soon as a
woman perceives the foetus to be quick), (3) Sîmantonnayana (a ceremony
observed by women in the fourth, sixth or the eighth month of
pregnancy), (4) Jâta Karma (ceremony at the birth of a child), (5)
Nâmakara<u>n</u>a, (naming the child), (6) Ni<u>s</u>krâma<u>n</u>a (a
ceremony performed when a new-born child is first taken out of the house
into the open air usually in the fourth month), (7) Annaprâs’ana (when
the rice is put in the mouth of the child), (8)
Chû<u>d</u>âkara<u>n</u>a (the ceremony of the first tonsure), (9)
Upanayana (holding the sacrificial thread; (10) Godâna and Udvâha (gift
of cows and marriage). These are stated in the Vedas. Next worship S’iva
Pârvatî, the Father and the Mother of Ag<u>n</u>i and take leave of
them. Next in the name of Ag<u>n</u>i, offer five Samidhas (fuel) soaked
in ghee and offer one oblation of ghee to each of the Âvara<u>n</u>a
Devatâs.

 

Then take the ghee by the S’ruk and covering it with the S’ruva, offer
ten oblations to Ag<u>n</u>i, and Mahâ Ganes’a with mantras ending in
Vau<u>s</u>a<u>t</u>,

 

<span id="page_1161">p. 1161</span>

 

The Mahâ Ganes’a mantras run as follows :-- (1) O<u>m</u>, O<u>m</u>
Svâhâ (2) O<u>m</u> S’rîm Svâhâ, (3) O<u>m</u> S’rîm Hrîm Svâhâ, (4)
O<u>m</u> S’rîm Hrîm Klîm Svâhâ, (5) O<u>m</u> S’rîm Hrîm Klîm
Glau<u>m</u> Svâhâ, (6) O<u>m</u> S’rîm Hrîm Klîm Glau<u>m</u>
Ga<u>m</u> Svâhâ, (7) O<u>m</u> S’rîm Hrîm Klîm Glau<u>m</u>
ityanta<u>h</u> Ga<u>m</u> Ga<u>n</u>apataye Svâhâ, (8) O<u>m</u> Vara
Varada ityanta<u>h</u> Svâhâ, (9) Sarvajana<u>m</u> me Vas’a<u>m</u>
ityanto Svâhâ and (10) Ânaya Svâhâ ityanta<u>h</u>.

 

Next perform in the Ag<u>n</u>i the Pî<u>t</u>ha Pûjâ and meditate on
the Deya Î<u>st</u>adeva and worship him. Next offer twenty-five
oblations to his face, repeating the Mûla Mantra. Then think of that and
Ag<u>n</u>i Deva as one and the same, and then again as one with Âtman.
Then offer oblations to each of the <u>S</u>a<u>d</u>a<u>m</u>ga Devatâs
separately. Then search for the Nâdis (veins) of Vah<u>n</u>i and
Î<u>st</u>a Devatâ and offer twenty one oblations. Then offer oblations
to each of the two Devatâs separately. Next offer one thousand and eight
oblations to the Î<u>st</u>a Deva with Til soaked in ghee or with the
materials enumerated in the Kalpa. O Muni! Thus finishing the Homa
ceremony, consider that the Î<u>st</u>a Deva (the Devî), Ag<u>n</u>i and
the Âvara<u>n</u>a Deities are all satisfied. Then, by the command of
the Guru, the disciple is to take his bath and perform his Sandhyâ,
etc., and put on new clothes (cloth and châdar) and golden ornaments. He
is to come then, to the Ku<u>nd</u>a with Kama<u>nd</u>alu in his hand
and with a pure heart. He is to bow down to the elders and superiors
seated in the assembly and take his seat in his Âsana. S’rî Guru Deva
then would look at the disciple with kind eyes and think the Chaitanya
of the disciple within his own (the Guru’s) body. Then the Guru Deva
would perform the Homa and look at the disciple with a divine gaze, so
that the disciple becomes pure-hearted and able to get the favours of
the Devas. Thus the Guru must purify all the Adhvas (the passages) of
the body of the disciple.

 

Then the Guru is to touch respectively the feet, generative organ,
navel, heart, forehead, and the head of the disciple with Kûrcha (a
bundle of Kus’a grass) and til soaked in ghee, in his left hand and
offer at each touch eight oblations, repeating the mantra “O<u>m</u>
adya S’i<u>s</u>yasya Kalâdhvânam S’odhayâmi Svâhâ, etc.” Thus the Guru
would purify Kalâdhva (in the feet) Tattvâdhva (in the generative
organ), Bhûvanâdhva (in the navel), Var<u>n</u>âdhva (in the heart),
Padâdhva (in the fore-head) and Mantrâdhva (on the head), the six Adhvâs
and think these all to be dissolved in Brahmâ (Brahmalîna).

 

135-155. Then, again, the Guru would think all these to be re-born from
Brahmâ and transfer the Chaitanya of the disciple that was in him to the
disciple. Then the Guru must offer Pûr<u>n</u>âhuti and consider

 

<span id="page_1162">p. 1162</span>

 

the Î<u>st</u>a Devatâ, placed in the fire by the visarjana mantra for
the Homa purposes, as entered into the water-jar. He is to perform again
the Vyârhiti Homa and offer all the A<u>m</u>gâhutis (oblations to all
the limbs) of the fire and take leave of the fire withdrawing the Deity
from the jar, into his own body. Uttering then the Vau<u>s</u>a<u>t</u>
Mantra he would tie the eyes of the disciple with a piece of cloth and
would bring him from the Ku<u>nd</u>a to the ma<u>nd</u>ala and make the
disciple offer pu<u>s</u>pâ<u>n</u>jali (flowers in his palm) to the
Î<u>st</u>a deva. Then he would take away the bandage or piece of cloth
from his eyes and ask him to take his seat in the seat Kusâsana. Thus
the Guru, after having purified the elements of the body of the disciple
and performed the Nyâsa of the Deya Mantra, would make the disciple sit
in another ma<u>nd</u>ala. Then he would touch the head of the disciple
with the twigs (Pallavas) of the Ku<u>nd</u>a and repeat the Mâtrikâ
Mantra and make him have his bath with the water of the jar which is
considered as the seat of the Î<u>st</u>a Deva. Then, for the protection
of the disciple, he would sprinkle (abhi<u>s</u>eka) him with the water
of the Vardhani vessel placed already in the north-east corner. Then the
disciple would get up and put on the pair of new clothes and besmear his
whole body with ashes and sit close by the Guru. When the merciful Guru
would consider that the S’iva S’akti has now passed out of his own body
and that Divine Force, the Devî, has entered into the body of the
disciple, i.e., charged the disciple with the pass. Thinking now the
disciple and the Devatâ to be one and the same, the Guru would now
worship the disciple with flowers and scents. The Guru would then place
his right hand on the head of the disciple and repeat clearly in his
right ear the Mahâ Mantra of the Mahâ Devî . The disciple is to repeat
also the Mahâ Mantra one hundred and eight times and fall prostrate on
the ground before the Guru and thus bow down to the Guru, whom the
disciple now thinks as the incarnate of the Deva.

 

The disciple, the devotee of the Guru, would now give as a
Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â all his wealth and property for his whole life to
the Guru. Then he would give Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â to the priests and
make charities to the virgins; the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, the poor and the
destitute and the orphans. Here he is not to be miserly in any way in
the expenditure. O Nârada! Thus the disciple would consider himself
blessed and he would daily remain engaged in repeating the Mahâ Mantra.
Thus I have described to you above

The most excellent Dîk<u>s</u>â. Thinking all these, you are to remain
ever engaged in worshipping the lotus feet of the Great Devî. There is
no Dharma higher than this in this world for the Brâhma<u>n</u>as. The
followers of the Vedas would impart this Mantra according to the rules
stated respectively in their own Grihya Sûtras; and the Tântrikas

 

<span id="page_1163">p. 1163</span>

 

would also do the same according to their own Tantras. The Vaidiks
should not follow the Tantra rules and the Tantriks are not to follow
the Vaidik rules. Thus all the S’âstras say. And this is the Sanâtan
Creed. Nârâya<u>n</u>a said :-- O Nârada! I have described all about the
ordinary Dîk<u>s</u>â that you questioned me. Now the essence in brief
is this that you would remain always merged in worshipping the Parâ
S’akti, the Highest Force, the Mahâ Devî. What more shall I say than
this that I have got the highest pleasure and the Nirvâna, the peace,
that passeth all understanding, from my daily worshipping That Lotus
Feet duly. Vedavyâsa said :-- O Mahârâja! O Janamejayan! After having
said this Dîk<u>s</u>âtattva, the highest Yogi Bhagavân Nârâya<u>n</u>a,
meditated by the Yogis, closed his eyes and remained merged in Samâdhi,
in the meditation of the Lotus Feet of the Devî.

 

Knowing this Highest Tattva, Nârada, the chief of the Ri<u>s</u>is,
bowed down at the feet of the Great Guru Nârâya<u>n</u>a and went away
immediately to perform the tapasyâ so that he also might see the Mahâ
Devî.

 

Here ends the Seventh Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the Dîk<u>s</u>â
vidhi or on the rules of Initiation in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](bk12ch08)
