[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XIV**

 

**On the recitation of the fruits of this Purâ<u>n</u>am**

 

<span id="page_1190">p. 1190</span>

 

1-17. Sûta said :-- “O Ri<u>s</u>is! In days of yore, from the Lotus
Face of the Devî Bhâgavata came out S’rî Mad Bhâgavatam in the form of
half a S’loka, as the decided conclusion of the Vedas. About what She
gave instructions to Vi<u>sn</u>u, sleeping on a leaf of a Banyan tree,
that same thing, the seed of the S’rî Mad Bhâgavata, Brahmâ Himself
expanded into

 

<span id="page_1191">p. 1191</span>

 

one hundred Ko<u>t</u>i s’lokas. Then, Veda Vyâsa, in order to teach his
own son S’uka Deva, condensed them into eighteen thousand s’lokas, in
Twelve Books and named it S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam, the present volume.
That voluminous book comprising one hundred Ko<u>t</u>i s’lokas compiled
by Brahmâ are still extant in the Deva loka. There is no Purâ<u>n</u>a
like the Devî Bhâgavatam, so merit-giving, holy and capable to destroy
all the sins. The reading of every line yields the fruits of performing
many As’vamedha sacrifices. Human beings addicted to worldly affairs
will get the merit of giving lands to the Brâhma<u>n</u>as and they will
enjoy also all the pleasures of the world and in the end will go to the
region of the Devî, if they can hear, after they have fasted and
controlled their passions, the recitation of this Purâ<u>n</u>am from
the mouth of a Paurâ<u>n</u>ik Brâhma<u>n</u>a, who has been worshipped
and given clothings and ornaments and is considered as a second Veda
Vyâsa. Or, if anybody writes the whole of the Devî Bhâgavatam with his
own hand or gets it written by a writer from the beginning to the end
and gives to a Paurâ<u>n</u>ik Brâhmi<u>n</u> the book placed in a box
of the form of a lion made up of gold and a cow yielding milk with her
calf with gold as his sacrificial fee; or if he feeds as many
Brâhma<u>n</u>as as there are the number of chapters of the Devî
Bhâgavatam and worship as many Kumârîs (virgin girls) with saffron,
sandalpaste and ornaments and feeds them with Pâysânna, he gets the
merits of giving lands and enjoys all the pleasures of the world and
goes in the end to the region of the Devî. He has no want of anything
who daily hears with rapt devotion this Devî Bhâgavatam. One who has no
wealth gets abundance of wealth, those who are students get knowledge,
one who has no sons, gets sons if one hears this Devî Bhâgavatam with
true devotion. A barren woman, or one who bears still-born children or
whose offsprings never live long or who bears only a single child, gets
all her defects removed, if she hears this Devî Bhâgavatam with a
steadfast devotion. The house where this Purâ<u>n</u>a is worshipped,
Lak<u>s</u>mî and Sarasvatî dwell there, leaving their animosities
towards each other. By the influence of this Devî Bhâgavatam the
Dâkinîs, Vetâlas, Râk<u>s</u>asas, and other ghosts cannot cast a glance
even on its devotee. If anybody gets fever and if the S’rî Devî
Bhâgavatam be read touching him with a concentrated attention, all the
complaints disappear. By reading this Bhâgavatam, one hundred times even
more difficult than the severe disease pthisis is cured.

 

18-20. If after performing the Sandhyâ, one reads only one chapter of
this Bhâgavatam with a collected mind, he soon acquires the Real
Knowledge. O Muni S’aunaka! While going to read this Bhâgavatam, first
examine omens and then read. I have spoken already on this subject. If
during the S’âradîya Pûjâ (the autumnal Durgâ Pûjâ), at the

 

<span id="page_1192">p. 1192</span>

 

Navarâtra period, one reads with devotion this Bhâgavatam, the Devî
Bhagavatî becomes greatly pleased and awards him results more than his
desires.

 

21-31. During the Navarâtri period all can read well this book for the
satisfaction of his Î<u>st</u>a Deva (his own deity) whether he be a
Vai<u>sn</u>ava, S’aiva, Saura, Gâ<u>n</u>apatya or a S’âkta. All can
read this for the satisfaction of Lak<u>s</u>mî, Umâ and other S’aktis.
The Vaidik Brâhma<u>n</u>as are to recite this daily for the
satisfaction of the Devî Gâyatrî. This Purâ<u>n</u>am is not
contradictory to any sectarian belief. The reason of this being that to
whatever deity he pays his worship, he must worship some S’akti or
other, this is stated everywhere. So for the satisfaction of one’s own
S’akti, all can read this, without contradicting each other. Never any
woman nor any S’ûdra, is to read this herself or himself, even out of
ignorance; rather they should hear this from the mouth of a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a. This is the rule of the S’âstras. (The vibrations and
the consequent results would be truer then.) O Ri<u>s</u>is! What more
to say on this book than this, that this Purâ<u>n</u>am is the most
excellent of all and yields great merits. It is the essence of the
Vedas. This I tell you with great certainty. There is not the least
doubt in this. Reading or hearing this yields results equivalent to
reading or hearing the Vedas. I now bow to the Devî of the nature of
Hrîm and established by Gâyatrî, of the nature of Everlasting Existence,
Intelligence and Bliss, Who stimulates our activities to the
understanding of various subjects. Thus hearing the excellent words of
Sûta, the great Paurâ<u>n</u>ik, all the Munis of
Naimi<u>s</u>âra<u>n</u>ya worshipped him specially and as the result of
hearing this Purâ<u>n</u>am glady became the servants of the Lotus Feet
of the Devî and they attained the Highest Rest. The Munis expressed
their humility and gratitude to Sûta frequently and bowed down to him
again and again. And they said :-- “O Sûta! It is you that have saved us
from this ocean of world.” Thus (the great Bhâgavata) Sûta, the bee
drinking the honey of the Lotus Feet of the Devî, recited before the
assemblage of the best of the Munis this Purâ<u>n</u>am from the
beginning to the end, the Secret of all the Nigamas and full of the
Glories of the Devî Bhagavatî. After this the Ri<u>s</u>is bowed down to
him and he blessed and honoured them.

 

Then he went away to his desired place. Here the Devî Bhâgavatam ends
and is fully completed.

 

THE END.

 

Here ends the Fourteenth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the recitation
of the fruits of this Purâ<u>n</u>am in the Mahâ Purâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

Here ends as well the Full Treatise, S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam.

O<u>m</u>. O<u>m</u>. O<u>m</u>. O<u>m</u> Tat Sat. O<u>m</u> Hari
O<u>m</u>.

 
