[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch07)  [Next](bk12ch09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter VIII**

 

**On the appearance of the Highest S’akti**

 

<span id="page_1163">p. 1163</span>

 

1-8. Janamejaya spoke to Veda Vyâsa :-- O Bhagavân! Thou art the knower
of all the Dharmas and Thou art the chief, the crown of the Pundits,
knowing all the S’âstras. Now I ask Thee how is it that the twice-born
have ceased to worship the Highest S’akti, the Gâyatrî and they now
worship the other Devatâs, on the face of the distinct command in the
S’rutis that the worship of the Gâyatrî is nityâ, that is, daily to be
done at all times, especially during the three Sandhyâ times, by all
those that are twice-born?

 

In this world some are the devotees of Vi<u>sn</u>u, some, the followers
of Ga<u>n</u>apatî, some are Kâpâlikas, some follow the doctrines
prevalent in China; some are the followers of Buddha or Chârvâka; some
of them again wear the barks of trees and others roam naked. So various
persons are seen having no trace of faith in the Vedas.

 

O Brâhma<u>n</u>a! What is the real cause underlying secretly here in
this! Kindly mention this to me. Again there are seen many men, well
versed in various metaphysics and logic, our B.A.s and M.A.s but then,
again, they have no faith in the Vedas. How is this? Nobody wants
anything ominous to him consciously. But how is it that these so-called
learned men are

 

<span id="page_1164">p. 1164</span>

 

fully aware and yet they are wonderfully void of any trace of faith in
the Vedas? Kindly mention the cause underlying this, O Thou! The
foremost of the knowers of the Vedas.

 

There is, again, another question :-- Thou hadst described before the
glories of Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa, the highest and the best place of the Devî.
Now I want to hear how is that Dvîpa greater than the great. Satisfy
this servant of thine by describing these. If the Guru be pleased, he
reveals even the greatest and the highest esoteric secret to his
disciple.

 

9-10. Sûta spoke :-- Hearing the words of the King Janamejaya, the
Bhagavân Veda Vyâsa began to answer the questions in due order. The
hearing of this increases the faith of the twice-born in the Vedas.

 

11-30. Vyâsa said :-- Well has this been asked by you, O King! in due
time and in an appropriate moment. You are intelligent and it seems that
you have got the faith in the Vedas. I now answer. Listen. In ancient
days, the Asuras, maddened with pride, fought against the Devas for one
hundred years. The war was very extraordinary and remarkable. In this
great war various weapons were used, variegated with numerous Mâyâs or
ingenious devices. It tended to destroy the whole world. By the mercy of
the Highest and the Most Exalted S’akti, the Daityas were overcome by
the Devas in that Great War. And they quitted the Heavens and the Earth
and went to the nether regions, the Pâtâla. The Devas were all delighted
and began to dwell on their own prowesses and became proud. They began
to say :-- “Why shall not victory be ours. Why are not our glories
great? We are by far the best! Where are the Daityas? They are devils,
powerless. We are the causes of creation, preservation and destruction.
We all are glorious! Oh! What can be said before us in favour of the
Asuras, the devils?” Thus, not knowing the Highest S’akti, the Devas
were deluded. At this moment, seeing this plight of the Devas, the World
Mother took pity on the Devas and, to favour them, O King! She appeared
before them in the form of the Most Worshipful, the Great Holy Light. It
was resplendent like ten million Suns, and cool as well like ten million
Moons. It was brilliant and dazzling like ten million lightning flashes,
without hands and feet, and exceedingly beautiful! Never was this
witnessed before! Seeing this Extraordinary Beautiful Lovely Light, the
Devas were taken aback; they spoke amongst themselves, thus :-- “What is
this! What is this! Is this the work of the Daityas or some other great
Mâyâ (Mayic) played by them or is it the work of another for creating
the surprise of the Devas!” O King! Then they all assembled together and
decided to approach towards that Adorable

 

<span id="page_1165">p. 1165</span>

 

Light and to ask It what It was. They, then, would determine its
strength and decide what to do afterwards. Thus, coming to this ultimate
conclusion, Indra called Ag<u>n</u>i and said :-- “O Ag<u>n</u>i! You
are the mouth-piece of the Devas. Therefore do you go first and
ascertain distinctly what this Light is.” Hearing thus the words of
Indra, Ag<u>n</u>i, elated by his own prowess, set out immediately from
the place and went to that Light. Seeing Ag<u>n</u>i coming, the Light
addressed him thus :-- “Who are you? What is your strength? State this
before Me.” At this Ag<u>n</u>i replied :-- “I am Ag<u>n</u>i. All the
yajñâs, ordained in the Vedas are performed through me. The power of
burning everything in this universe resides in me.” Then that adorable
Light took up a straw of grass and said :-- “O Ag<u>n</u>i! If you can
burn everything in this universe, then do you burn this trifling straw.”
Ag<u>n</u>i tried his best to burn the straw but he could not burn it.
He got ashamed and fast went back to the Devas. Asked by the Devas,
Ag<u>n</u>i told them everything and said :-- “O Devas! Know verily that
the pride cherished by us that we are supreme, is entirely false.”

 

31-50. Indra then asked Vâyu (wind) and said :-- “O Vâyu! You are
dwelling in this universe, through and through; by your efforts, all are
moving; therefore you are the Prâ<u>n</u>a of all; it is possible that
all forces are concentrated within you. Go and ascertain what is this
Light? Verily I do not see any other person here than you who can
ascertain this great adorable Light.” Hearing these commendable words of
Indra, Vâyu felt himself elated and went at once to that place where was
that Light. Seeing the Vâyu, the Light, the Yak<u>s</u>a, the demi-god,
the Spirit asked in a gentle language :-- “Who are you? What strength is
there in you? Speak out all these to me.” At this, Vâyu spoke
arrogantly, “I am Mâtarisvan, I am Vâyu; about my strength, I can move
anything and I hold everything. It is through the strength of mine, that
this universe is, and is alive and brisk with movements and works.” That
Highest Mass of Light then replied :-- “O Vâyu! Move this straw that
lies before you, and if you cannot, quit your pride and go back to Indra
ashamed.” At this Vâyu tried all his might but, alas! He could not move
the straw a bit from that place!

 

Vâyu then gave up his pride and returned to the Devas and spoke to them
all about the Yak<u>s</u>a (a sort of demi-god, a ghost). O Devas! Our
pride is vain; in no way can we be able to ascertain the nature of that
Light. It seems that that Holy Light, adorable by all, is extraordinary.
Then all the Devas spoke with one voice to Indra :--

 

<span id="page_1166">p. 1166</span>

 

 “When You are the King of the Devas, better go yourself and ascertain
the reality of Its Nature.” Indra, then, with great pride, went himself
to the Light; the Light, too, began to disappear gradually from the
place, and ultimately vanished from Indra’s sight. When Indra found that
he could not even speak to That Light, he became greatly ashamed and
began to conceive of his own nothingness. He thought thus :-- “I won’t
go back to the Devas. What shall I say to them? Never will I disclose to
them my inferiority; one is better to die than do this. One’s
self-honour is the only treasure of the great and honourable. If honour
is gone, what use, then, is there in living?” O King! Then Indra, the
Lord of Devas, quitted his pride and took refuge unto That Great Light
which exhibited, ere long, such a glorious character. At this moment, a
celestial voice was heard from the Heavens :-- “O Indra! Go on now and
do the japam, the reciting of the Mâyâ Vîja Mantra, the basic Mantra of
Mâyâ. All your troubles will, then, be over.” Hearing this celestial
voice, Indra began to repeat the Mâyâ Vîja, the Seed Mantra of Mâyâ,
with rapt concentration and without any food.

 

51-61. Then on the ninth lunar day of the month of Chaitra when the Sun
entered the meridian, suddenly there appeared in that place a Great Mass
of Light as was seen before. Indra saw, then, within that Mass of Light,
a Virgin Form in full youth. The lustre from Her body was like that of
ten million Rising Suns; and the colour was rosy red like a full-blown
Javâ flower. On Her forehead was shining the digit of the Moon; Her
breasts were full, and, though veiled under the cloth, they looked very
beautiful. She was holding noose and a goad in Her two hands and Her
other two hands indicated signs of favour and fearlessness.

 

Her body was decked with various ornaments and it looked auspicious and
exceedingly lovely; nowhere can be seen a woman beautiful like Her. She
was like a Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a (celestial tree yielding all desires);
she was three eyed and Her braid of hair was encircled with Mâlatî
garlands. She was praised on Her four sides by the Four Vedas,
Incarnate, in their respective Forms. The brilliancy of Her teeth shed
lustre on the ground as if ornamented with Padmarâga jewels. Her face
looked smiling. Her clothing was red and Her body was covered with
sandalpaste. She was the Cause of all causes. Oh! She was all Full of
Mercy. O King Janamejaya! Thus Indra saw, then, the Umâ Parvatî
Mahes’varî Bhagavatî and the hairs of his body stood on ends with
ecstasy. His eyes were filled with tears of love and deep devotion and
he immediately fell prostrate before

 

<span id="page_1167">p. 1167</span>

 

the feet of the Devî. Indra sang various hymns to Her and praised Her.
He became very glad and asked Her, “O Fair One! Art Thou that Great Mass
of Light? If this be, kindly state the cause of Thy appearance.” O King!
Hearing this, the Bhagavatî replied.

 

62-83. This My Form is Brahmâ, the Cause of all causes, the Seat of
Mâyâ, the Witness of all, infallible and free from all defects or
blemishes. What all the Vedas and Upani<u>s</u>adas try to establish,
what ought to be obtained, as declared by all the rules of austerity,
and for which the Brâhma<u>n</u>as practise Brahmacharyam, I am all
that. I have told you about that Brahmâ, of the nature of the Great Holy
Light. The sages declare that That Brâhma<u>n</u> is revealed by
“O<u>m</u>” and “Hrîm”, the two Vîjas (mystic syllables) that are My two
first and foremost Mantras wherein I remain hidden. I create this
universe with My two parts (in My two aspects); therefore My Vîja mantra
is two. “O<u>m</u>” Vîja is denominated as Sachchidânanda (everlasting
existence, intelligence and bliss) and “Hrîm” Vîja is Mâyâ Prakriti, the
Undifferentiated Consciousness, made manifest. Know, then, That Mâyâ as
the Highest S’akti and know Me as that Omnipotent Goddess at present
revealed before your eyes. As moonlight is not different from the Moon,
so this Mâyâ S’akti in the state of equilibrium is not different from
Me. (The powerful man and the power he wields are not different. They
are verily one and the same.) During Pralaya (the Great Latency period),
this Mâyâ lies latent in Me, without there being any difference. Again
at the time of creation, this Mâyâ appears as the fructification of the
Karmas of the Jîvas. When this Mâyâ is potential and exists latent in
Me, when Mâyâ is Antarmukhî, it is called Unmanifested and when the Mâyâ
becomes Kinetic, when the Mâyâ is Bahirmukhî, when She is in an active
Kinetic state, it is said to be Manifested. There is no origin or
beginning of this Mâyâ. Mâyâ is of the nature of Brahmâ in a state of
equilibrium. But, during the beginning of the creation, Her form
consisting of the several Gu<u>n</u>as appears, when Mâyâ is Bahir
Mukhî, She becomes Tâmas, in Her Unmanifested state. O Indra! For this
reason Her state of abstraction, and becoming introspective, this is Her
Antarmukhî state; it is known as Mâyâ and Her looking outward is Her
Bahirmukhî state; it is denominated by Tâmas and the other gu<u>n</u>as.
From this comes Sâttva and then Râjas and Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and
Mahes’a are of the nature of the three gu<u>n</u>as. Brahmâ has the Râjo
gu<u>n</u>a in Him preponderating; in Vi<u>sn</u>u, the Sâttva
gu<u>n</u>a preponderates and in Mahes’a, the Cause of all Causes, is
said to reside the Tâmo gu<u>n</u>a. Brahmâ is known as of the Gross
Body; Vi<u>sn</u>u is known as of the Subtle Body; and Rudra is known as
of the Causal Body and I am known as Turîya, transcending the
Gu<u>n</u>as.

 

<span id="page_1168">p. 1168</span>

 

This Turîya Form of Mine is called the state of equilibrium of the
Gu<u>n</u>as. It is the Inner Controller of all. Beyond this there is
another state of Mine which is called the Formless Brahmâ
(Brâhma<u>n</u> having no Forms). Know, verily, that my Forms are two,
as they are with or without attributes (Sagu<u>n</u>a or
Nirgu<u>n</u>a). That which is beyond Mâyâ and the Mâyic qualities is
called Nirgu<u>n</u>a (without Prâkritic attributes) and that which is
within Mâyâ is called Sagu<u>n</u>a. O Indra! After creating this
universe, I enter within that as the Inner Controller of all and it is I
that impel all the Jîvas always to their due efforts and actions. Know,
verily, that It is I that engage Brahmâ, Vi<u>sn</u>u and Rudra, the
causes of the several works of creation, preservation and destruction of
this universe (they are performing their functions by My Command).
Through the terror from Me the wind blows; through my terror, the Sun
moves in the sky; through My terror, Indra, Ag<u>n</u>i, and Yama do
their respective duties. I am the Best and Superior to all. All fear Me.
Through My Grace you have obtained victory in the battle. Know, verily,
that it is I that make you all dance like inert wooden dolls as My mere
instruments. You are merely My functions. I am the Integral Whole. I
give sometimes victory to you and sometimes victory to the Daityas; Yea,
I do everything as I will, keeping My independence duly and, according
to the Karmas, justly. Oh! You all, have forgotten me though your pride
and sheer nonsense. You have been carried deep into dire delusion by
your vain egoism. And know now that to favour you, this My Adorable
Light has issued suddenly. Hence forth banish ever from your heart all
your vain boastings and idle pratings. Take refuge wholly unto Me with
all your head, heart and soul, unto My Sachchidânanda Form and be safe.
(At times the Devas forget and so fall into troubles).

 

84-93. Vyâsa said :-- Thus saying, the Mûla Pakriti, the Great Devî, the
Goddess of the Universe, vanished from their sight. The Devas, on the
other hand, began to praise Her then and there, with rapt devotion.
Since that day, all the Devas quitted their pride and engaged themselves
in worshipping the Devî devotedly. They worshipped the Gâyatrî Devî
daily during the three Sandhyâ times and performed various Yajñâs and
thus they worshipped Bhagavatî daily. Thus, in the Satya Yuga, everybody
engaged themselves in repeating the Mantra Gâyatrî and worshipped the
Goddess indwelling in the Pra<u>n</u>ava and Hrî<u>m</u>kâra. So, See
now for yourself, that the worship of Vi<u>sn</u>u or S’iva or
initiation in the Vi<u>sn</u>u Mantra or in the S’iva Mantra are not
mentioned anywhere in the Vedas as to be done always and for ever. They
are done for a while and not required any more when the objects are
fulfilled; only the worship of Gâyatrî is always compul-

 

<span id="page_1169">p. 1169</span>

 

sory, to be done at all times, as mentioned in the Vedas. O King! If a
Brâhma<u>n</u>a does not worship the Gâyatrî, know, then, for certain,
that in every way, he is sure to go down lower and lower. There is no
doubt in this. A Brâhmi<u>n</u> is not to wait, no never, to do any
other thing; he will have all his desires fulfilled if he worships only
the Devî Gâyatrî. Bhagavân Manu says that a Brâhmi<u>n</u>, whether he
does any other thing or not, can be saved if he worships only the Divine
Mother Gâyatrî. (This worshipping the Gâyatrî is the highest, greatest,
and most difficult of all the works in this universe). If any devotee of
S’iva or Vi<u>sn</u>u or of any other Deity worships his desired Deity
without repeating the Gâyatrî, he is sure to suffer the torments of
hell. (But this age of Kâlî deludes the people and draws away their
minds from reciting this Gâyatrî save a few of them.) O King! For this
reason, in the Satya Yuga, all the Brâhma<u>n</u>as kept themselves
fully engaged in worshipping the Gâyatrî and the lotus feet of the Devî
Bhagavatî.

 

Here ends the Eighth Chapter in the Twelfth Book on the appearance of
the Highest S’akti in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](bk12ch09)
