[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch11)  [Next](bk12ch13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XII**

 

**On the description of Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa**

 

<span id="page_1185">p. 1185</span>

 

1-17. Vyâsa said :-- O King Janamejaya! The Ratnagriha, above mentioned,
is the Central, the Chief and the Crowning Place of Mûla Prakriti. \[The
nine jewels are :-- (1) Muktâ, (2) Mâ<u>n</u>ikya, (3) Vaidûrya, (4)
Gomeda, (5) Vajra, (6) Vidruma, (7) Padmarâga, (8) Marakata, and (9)
Nîla.\] This is situated in the centre of all the enclosures. Within
this there are the four Ma<u>nd</u>apas, i.e., halls built of one
thousand (i.e., innumerable) pillars. These are the S’ringâra
Ma<u>nd</u>apa, Mukti Ma<u>nd</u>apa, Jñâna Ma<u>nd</u>apa and Ekânta
Ma<u>nd</u>apa; on the top there are canopies of various colours; within
are many scented articles scented by the Dhûpas, etc. The brilliance of
each of these is like that of one Ko<u>t</u>i Suns. On all sides of
these four Ma<u>nd</u>apas there are nice groups of gardens of Kas’mîra,
Mallikâ, and Ku<u>nd</u>a flowers. Various scents, and scented articles,
for example, of musk, etc., are fully arranged in due order. There is a
very big lotus tank here; the steps leading to it are built of jewels.
Its water is nectar, on it are innumerable full-blown lotuses and the
bees are humming always over them. Many birds, swans, Kâra<u>nd</u>avas,
etc., are swimming to and fro. The sweet scents of lotuses are playing
all round. In fact, the whole Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa is perfumed with various
scented things. Within the S’ringâra Ma<u>nd</u>apa, the Devî Bhagavatî
is situated in the centre on an Âsana (seat) and She hears the songs
sung in tune by the other Devîs along with the other Devas. Similarly
sitting on the Mukti Ma<u>nd</u>apa, She frees the Jîvas from the
bondages of the world. Sitting on the Jñâna Ma<u>nd</u>apa, She gives
instructions on Jñâna, and sitting on the fourth Ekânta Ma<u>nd</u>apa,
She consults with Her ministers, the Sakhîs, Ananga Kusuma, etc., on the
creation, preservation, etc., of the universe. O King! Now I shall
describe about the main, Khâs, room of S’rî Devî. Listen. The Khâs Mahâl
palace of the Devî Bhagavatî is named S’rî Chintâma<u>n</u>i Griha.
Within this is placed the raised

 

<span id="page_1186">p. 1186</span>

 

platform, the dais and sofa whereon the Devî taketh Her honourable seat.
The ten S’akti-tattvas form the staircases. The four legs are (1)
Brahmâ, (2) Vi<u>sn</u>u, (3) Rudra, and (4) Mahes’vara. Sadâs’iva forms
the upper covering plank. Over this S’rî Bhuvanes’vara Mahâ Deva or the
Supreme Architect of the Universe is reigning. Now hear something about
this Bhuvanes’vara. Before creation while intending to sport, the Devî
Bhagavatî divided Her Body into two parts and from the right part
created Bhuvanes’vara. He has five faces and each face has three eyes.
He has four hands and He is holding in each hand speer, signs indicating
do not fear, axe, and signs granting boons. He looks sixteen years old.
The lustre of of His Body is more beautiful then Ko<u>t</u>i Kandarpas
and more fiery than thousand Suns; and at the same time cool like
Ko<u>t</u>i Suns. His colour is crystal white, and on His left lap S’rî
Bhuvanes’varî Devî is always sitting.

 

18-29. On the hip of S’rî Bhuvanes’varî, is shining the girdle with
small tinkling bells, built of various jewels; the ornaments on the arms
are made of burnished gold studded with Vaidûryama<u>n</u>is; the
Tâ<u>t</u>anka ornaments on Her ears are very beautiful like S’rîchakra
and they enhance very much the beauty of Her lotus face. The beauty of
Her forehead vies with, or defies the Moon of the eighth bright lunar
day. Her lips challenge the fully ripened Bimba fruits. Her face is
shining with the Tilaka mark made of musk and saffron. The divine crown
on Her head is beautified with the Sun and Moon made of jewels; the nose
ornaments are like the star Venus and built of transparent gems, looking
exceedingly beautiful and shedding charming lustre all around. The neck
is decorated with necklaces built of gems and jewels. Her breasts are
nicely decorated with camphor and saffron. Her neck is shining like a
conchshell decorated with artistic designs. Her teeth look like fully
ripe pomegranate fruits. On Her head is shining the jewel crown. Her
lotus face is beautified with alakâ as if these are mad bees. Her navel
is beautiful like the whirls in the river Bhâgirathî; Her fingers are
decorated with jewel rings; She has three eyes like lotus leaves; the
lustre of Her body is bright like Padmarâgama<u>n</u>i cut and carved
and sharpened on stone. The bracelets are adorned with jewel tinkling
bells; Her neck ornaments and medals are studded with gems and jewels.
Her hands are resplendent with the lustre of the jewels on the fingers;
the braid of hair on Her head is wreathed with a garland of Mallikâ
flowers; Her bodice (short jacket) is studded with various jewels.

 

30-45. O King! S’rî Devî is slightly bent down with the weight of Her
very high hard breasts. She has four hands and She is holding noose,
goad and signs granting boons and “do not fear.” The all beautiful all
merciful Devî is full of love gestures and beauties. Her voice is
sweeter than that of lute; the lustre of Her body is like Ko<u>t</u>is
and Ko<u>t</u>is of Suns and

 

<span id="page_1187">p. 1187</span>

 

Moons if they rise simultaneously on the sky. The Sakhîs, attendants,
the Devas and the Devîs surround Her on all sides. Ichchâ S’akti, Jñâna
S’akti, and Kriya S’akti all are present always before the Devî. Lajjâ,
Tu<u>st</u>i, Pu<u>st</u>i, Kîrti, Kânti, K<u>s</u>amâ, Dayâ, Buddhi,
Medhâ, Smriti, and Lak<u>s</u>mî are always seen here incarnate in their
due Forms. The nine Pî<u>t</u>ha S’aktis, Jayâ, Vijayâ, Ajitâ,
Aparâjitâ, Nityâ, Vilâsinî, Dogdhrî, Aghorâ, and Mangalâ reside here
always and are in the service of the Devî Bhuvanes’varî. On the side of
the Devî are the two oceans of treasures; from these streams of
Navaratna, gold, and seven Dhâtus (elements) go out and assume the forms
of rivers and fall into the ocean Sudhâ Sindhu. Because such a Devî
Bhuvanes’varî, resplendent with all powers and prosperities, sits on the
left lap of Bhuvanes’vara, that He has, no doubt acquired His
omnipotence. O King! Now I will describe the dimensions of the
Chintâma<u>n</u>i Griha. Listen. It is one thousand Yojanas wide; its
centre is very big; the rooms situated further and further are twice
those preceding them. It lies in Antarîk<u>s</u>a (the intervening
space) without any support. At the times of dissolution and creation it
contracts and expands like a cloth. The lustre of this Chintâma<u>n</u>i
Griha is comparatively far more bright and beautiful than that of other
enclosure walls. S’rî Devî Bhagavatî dwells always in this place. O
King! All the great Bhaktas of the Devî in every Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a, in
the Devaloka, in Nâgaloka, in the world of men or in any other loka, all
those that were engaged in the meditation of the Devî in the sacred
places of the Devî and died there, they all come here and reside with
the Devî in great joy and festivity.

 

46-59. On all sides rivers are flowing; some of ghee, some of milk,
curd, honey, nectar, pomegranate juice, jambu juice, and some of mango
juice, sugarcane juices are flowing on all sides. The trees here yield
fruits according to one’s desires and the wells and tanks yield water
also as people desire. Never is there any want felt here of anything.
Never are seen here diseases, sorrow, old age, decrepitude, anxiety,
anger, jealousy, and envy and other lower ideas. All the inhabitants of
this place are full of youth and look like one thousand Suns. All enjoy
with their wives and they worship S’rî Bhuvanes’varî. Some have attained
Sâlokya, some Sâmîpya, some Sârûpya and some have attained Sâr<u>st</u>i
and pass their days in highest comfort. The Devas that are in every
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a all live here and worship S’rî Devî. The seven
Ko<u>t</u>i Mahâ Mantras and Mahâ Vidyâs here assume forms and worship
the Mahâ Mâyâ S’rî Bhagavatî, Who is of the nature of Brahmâ. O King!
Thus I have described to you all about this Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa. The lustre
of Sun, Moon and Ko<u>t</u>is and Ko<u>t</u>is of lightnings cannot be
one Ko<u>t</u>ieth of one Ko<u>t</u>i part of Its lustre. At some places
the lustre is like Vidrumama<u>n</u>i; some places as are illumined like
the lustre of Marakata Ma<u>n</u>i; some, like Sûrya Kânta ma<u>n</u>i
and some

 

<span id="page_1188">p. 1188</span>

 

places are rendered brilliant like Ko<u>t</u>is and Ko<u>t</u>is of
lightnings. The light at some places is like Sindûra; at some places
like Indranîlama<u>n</u>i; at some places, like Mâ<u>n</u>ikya, and at
some places like diamond. Some places are blazing like the conflagration
of fire; and some places look like molten gold; some places seem filled
with the lustre of Chandrakântama<u>n</u>i, and some places look
brilliant like Sûryakântama<u>n</u>i.

 

60-73. The mountains here are all built of gems and jewels; the entrance
gates and enclosures are built of gems and jewels; the trees and their
leaves all are of gems; in fact all that exist here are all of gems and
jewels. At some places numbers of peacocks are dancing; at some places
cuckoos are captivating the minds of persons by cooing in the fifth tune
and at others doves and pigeons and parrots are making sweet cackling
sounds. Lakhs and lakhs of tanks are there with their pure crystal-like
waters. The Red lotuses have blown fully and enhanced the beauty of the
place. The captivating scents of these lotuses extend to a distance one
hundred Yojanas all round and gladden the minds of people. The leaves
are rustling with gentle breeze. The whole sky overhead is radiant with
the lustre of Chintâma<u>n</u>i gems and jewels. All the sides are
illuminated with the brilliancy of the gems and jewels. O King! These
jewels act like lamps. And the sweet scented trees emit their flagrance
and it is transmitted by breeze all around. Thus these trees serve the
purpose of dhûp (scent). The rays of these gems pierce through the
openings of the jewel screens on the houses and fall on the mirrors
inside, thus causing a nice brilliant appearance that captivates the
mind and causes confusion. O King! And what shall I say of this place,
more than this, that all the powers, and wealth, all the love
sentiments, all the dress suited to amorous interviews, all the
splendours, fire, energy, beauty and brilliance, the omniscience, the
indomitable strength, all the excellent qualities and all mercy and
kindness are present here! The All Comprehending Bliss and the
Brahmâna<u>nd</u>a can always be witnessed here! O King! Thus I have
described to you about the Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa, the most exalted place of
the Devî Bhagavatî. At Her remembrance all the sins are instantly
destroyed. The more so, if a man remembers the Devî and about this place
at the time of death, He surely goes there. O King! He who daily reads
the five Chapters, i.e., from the eighth to this twelfth chapter, is
surely untouched by any obstacles due to the Bhûtas, Pretas and
Pis’âchas. Especially the recitation of this at the time of building a
new house and at the time of Vâstuyâga ensures all good and
auspiciousness.

 

<span id="page_1189">p. 1189</span>

 

Here ends the Twelfth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the description of
Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of
18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 13](bk12ch13)
