[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch08)  [Next](bk12ch10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter IX**

 

**On the cause of S’râddha in other Devas than the Devî Gâyatrî**

 

<span id="page_1169">p. 1169</span>

 

1-20. Vyâsa said :-- O King Janamejaya! Once on a time, on account of an
evil turn of Fate (Karma) of the human beings, Indra did not rain on
this earth for fifteen years. Owing to want of rain, the famine appeared
horribly; and almost all the beings lost their lives. No one could count
in every house the number of the dead persons. Out of hunger the people
began to eat horses; some began to eat bears and pigs, some began to eat
the dead bodies while some others carried on any how their lives. The
people were so much distressed with hunger that the mother did not
refrain from eating her baby child and the husband did not refrain from
eating his wife. O King! The Brâhma<u>n</u>as then united and after due
discussion, came to the conclusion that they would go to the hermit
Gautama who would be able to remove their distress. So all of them
wanted to go quickly to the hermitage of the Muni Gautama. They began to
say :-- “We hear that there is no famine in the hermitage of Gautama.
Various persons are running there from various quarters.” Thus coming to
a conclusion, the Brâhma<u>n</u>as went to the Gautama’s Âs’rama with
their cows, servants and relations. Some went from the east; some from
the south; some from the west, and some from the north. Thus from
various

 

<span id="page_1170">p. 1170</span>

 

quarters the people flocked there. Seeing the Brâhma<u>n</u>as coming
there, the Ri<u>s</u>i Gautama bowed down to them and gave them a
cordial welcome and served them with seats, etc. When all took their
seats and became calm and quiet, Gautama enquired about their welfare
and the cause of their arrival. They described everything about the dire
famine and their own states and expressed their deep regret. Seeing them
very much distressed, the Muni gave them word not to have any fear; he
said :-- “I am today become blessed by the arrival of the great ascetics
and honourable persons like you. I am your servant. You consider all my
houses as yours. Be quite comfortable. Bear no uneasiness. When your
servant is alive, what fear do your entertain and whom do you fear? When
the demerits are transformed into good merits by your mere sight, and
when you have blessed my house with the dust of your holy feet, then who
is more blessed than me? O Vipras! Kindly perform your Sandhyâs, and
Japams and rest here at ease.” Vyâsa said :-- O King Janamejaya! Thus
consoling the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, the Ri<u>s</u>i Gautama began to worship
the Gâyatrî Devî with rapt devotional trance. “O Devî Gâyatrî! Obeisance
to Thee! Thou art the Great Vidyâ, the Mother of the Vedas, Higher than
the Highest; Thou art Vyârhiti represented by the Mantra ‘Om Bhur
Bhuva<u>h</u> Sva<u>h,’</u> O Mother! Thou art the state of equilibrium,
i.e., the Turîya; Thou art of of the Form of Hrîm; Thou art Svâhâ and
Svadhâ; Thou grantest the desires of the Bhaktas. Thou art the Witness
of the three states, Jâgrat (waking), Svapna (dreaming) and
Su<u>s</u>upti (deep sleep). Thou art the Turîya and Sachchidânanda
Brahmâ. O Devî! Thou resident in the Solar Orb and appearest as a ruddy
girl in the morning, an youthful maiden at noon and a black old woman in
the evening. O Devî! Obeisance to Thee! Now shew favour on us at this
severe famine time when all the beings are well nigh on the way to
destruction.”

 

21-40. Thus praised and worshipped, the World-Mother appeared and gave
to the Ri<u>s</u>i one vessel (cup) full to the brim by which every one
can he fed and nourished. The Mother told the Muni :-- “This full
vessel, given by me to you will yield whatever you wish.” Thus saying,
the Devî Gâyatrî, Higher than the Highest, vanished. Then, according to
the wish of the Muni, came out from that cup, mountains of cooked rice,
various curries and sweetmeats, lots of grass and fodder, silken
clothings, various ornaments and various articles and vessels for
sacrificial purposes. In fact whatever the Muni Gautama wished, that
came out of the brimful cup, given by the Devî Gâyatrî. Then the Muni
Gautama called the other Munis that came there and gave them wealth,
grains, clothing, ornament, and the sacrificial ladles and spoons and
cows and buffaloes for the sacrificial purposes. The

 

<span id="page_1171">p. 1171</span>

 

Munis then assembled and performed various yajñâs. The place all round,
then flourished and became so much prosperous that it looked like a
second heaven. In fact whatever fair and beautiful there exist in the
Trilokas, all came from the brimful cup given by the Devî Gâyatrî. At
this time the Munis, with sandalpaste all over on their bodies, and
decorated with very bright ornaments looked like the gods and their
wives looked like goddesses. Daily utsabs began to be held in in the
Âs’rama of Gautama. Nowhere were seen any diseases or dacoities and
there was no fear from any such things. Gradually the Âs’rama’s boundary
extended to one hundred Yojanas (4 hundred miles). Hearing this
greatness of Gautama, many persons came there from various quarters. And
the Muni Gautama, too, gave them words, “cast away fear” and fed them.
The Devas, on the other hand, became very much satisfied by the various
Yajñâs and extolled the Muni’s greatness. So much so, that the famous
Indra, the Lord of the Devas, came in the midst of the assembly and
extolled his greatness, thus :-- “This Gautama has fulfilled all our
wishes and has verily become a Kalpa Vrik<u>s</u>a (celestial tree
yielding all desires). If this man had not done such things, in this
hard famine time, we would not have got the Havih offered in sacrifices
and the prospect of our lives would have been at stake.” O King
Janamejaya! Thus the Muni Gautama fed and nourished for twelve years all
the Munis, like his sons and that place came to be recognised as the
chief centre (the Head Quarters) of the Gâyatrî Devî. Even today, all
the Munis perform with devotion the Pura<u>s</u>acharanams and worship
thrice the Bhagavatî Gâyatrî Devî. Even today the Devî is there seen as
a girl in the morning, as a youthful maiden at noon, as an old woman in
the evening. Then, once on a time, Nârada, of best conduct, came there
playing on his great lute and singing in tune the highest glories of
Gâyatrî and took his seat in the assembly of the Munis.

 

41-62. Seeing the tranquil hearted Nârada coming there, Gautama and the
other Munis received him duly and worshipped him with the Pâdya and
Arghya. In course of conversation he began to describe the glories of
Gautama and said :-- “O Best of Munis! I have heard from the mouth of
Indra, in the assembly of the Devas, your glories as to your supporting
and feeding the pure-hearted Munis and I have come to see you. By the
Grace of S’rî Bhagavatî Gâyatrî Devî, you have now become blessed. There
is no doubt in this.” Thus saying, the Devar<u>s</u>i Nârada entered
into the temple of the Devî Gâyatrî and with eyes gladdened by love, saw
the Devî there and offered due hymns in praise of Her and then ascended
to the Heavens. Here, on the other hand, the Brâhma<u>n</u>as that were
fed by Gautama, became jealous at so much honour offered

 

<span id="page_1172">p. 1172</span>

 

to Gautama and tried their best so that no further honour be paid to
him. They further settled not to stay any longer in his Âs’rama, when
the next good harvest season comes. (Thus his glories will wane). O
King! Some days passed when good rains fell and there was an abundance
of crops everywhere and the famine ended. Hearing this, all the
Brâhmi<u>n</u>s united, Alas! O King! to curse the Gautama. Oh! Their
fathers and mothers are blessed in whom do not arise such feelings of
jealousy! This all is the wonderful play of the powerful Time; it cannot
be expressed by any person. O King! These Brâhmi<u>n</u>s created, by
Mâyâ, an aged cow, who was to die and pushed her in the sacrificial hall
of the Muni Gautama at the time of the Homa ceremony. Seeing that cow
entering into the enclosure where the Homa was being performed, Gautama
cried out “Hoom Hoom” when the cow fell there and died. And the other
Brâhma<u>n</u>as instantly cried out “Look! Look! The wicked Gautama has
killed the cow.” Seeing this inconceivable event, Gautama was greatly
nonplussed and, completing his Homa ceremony, entered into Samâdhi and
began to think the cause of it. Then, coming to know that this has been
concocted by the Mâyâ of the Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, he became angry like Rudra
at the time of dissolution; his eyes were reddened and he cursed the
Ri<u>s</u>is, thus :-- Oh vile Brâhmi<u>n</u>s! When you are ready to
cause mischief to me unjustly then let you be averse to meditate and do
the japam of the Devî Gâyatrî, the Mother of the Vedas. For your this
act, never you will be eager to perform any Vedic sacrificial acts or
any action concerning thereof. There is no doubt in this. You will be
always averse to the mantra of S’iva or the Tantra of S’iva. You will be
always averse to Mûla Prakriti S’rî Devî, to Her Dhyânam, mantra, to any
conversation regarding Her; to the visiting of Her place or Temple, to
do worship and other ceremonies to Her, to see the Grand Festivals of
the Devî, to singing the names and glories of the Devî, to sit before
the Devî and to adore Her.

 

63-81. O vile Brâhma<u>n</u>as! You will be always averse to see the
festivals of S’iva, to worship S’iva, to Rudrâk<u>s</u>a, to the Bel
leaves, and to the holy Bha<u>s</u>ma (ashes). You will be wholly
indifferent to practise the right ways of living as presented in the
Vedas and Smritis, to preserve your conduct good and to observe the path
of knowledge to Advaita Jñânam, to practise restraint of senses and
continence, to the daily practices of Sandhyâ Bandanam, to performing
the Agnihotra ceremonies, to the study of the Vedas according to one’s
own S’âkhâ or to the daily studies thereof as to teach those things or
to give, as gifts, cows, etc., or to perform the S’râddhas of the
fathers, etc., or to perform Krichchra Chândrâya<u>n</u>a and other
penances. O Vile Brâhma<u>n</u>as! As you are ready to do these mean
things, you will have to suffer for this that you will desist from
worshipping the Most

 

<span id="page_1173">p. 1173</span>

 

Adorable S’rî Bhagavatî Devî and that you will worship the other Devas
with faith and devotion and hold on your bodies S’amkha, Chakra and
other signs. You will follow the Kâpâlikas, Bauddha S’âstras and other
heretics. You will sell your father, mother, brothers, sisters, sons and
daughters and even your wives too!

 

You will sell the Vedas, Tîrthas, and your Dharma. You will not feel
ashamed in any way to sell all these. You will certainly have faith in
Kâpâlika and Bauddha opinions, Pâñcharâtras and Kâma S’âstras. O vile
Brâhma<u>na</u>s! You will not hesitate to go to your mother, daughters
or sisters and you will always be licentious with others’ wives and
spend your time in that. This is not to you only but to the women and
men, all that will come in your families. Let the Gâyatrî Devî be always
indignant with you and let you all go in the end to the Andha Kûpa
hells, etc. Vyâsa said :-- O Janamejaya! Thus taking the water
symbolising the true rules and laws of creation, and cursing the
Brâhma<u>n</u>as, the Muni Gautama went hastily to see the Gâyatrî Devî
and, on arriving at the temple there bowed down to Her. The Devî, too,
became surprised to see their actions. O King! Even to day Her Lotus
Face looks similarly astonished!

 

82-90. Then the Gâyatrî Devî told Gautama with amazement :-- “O Gautama!
The venom of the snake does not become less if you feed the serpents
with milk; so never mind all these things; the Karmas take their
peculiar turns; it is hard to say when will happen what things. Now be
peaceful. Do not be sorry.” Hearing these words of the Devî, Gautama
bowed down to Her and went thence to his own Âs’rama. Here, on the other
hand, the Brâhma<u>n</u>as forgot everything due to the curse of
Gautama, of the Vedas and the Gâyatrî Mantra. They then began to look at
this event with wonder as unique and extraordinary. All united they
afterwards repented and going before Gautama, fell prostrate at his
feet. But they could not speak any word out of shame. Only they said
frequently :-- “Be pleased, be pleased with us.” When all the assembly
of the Brâhma<u>n</u>as prayed to him for favour and grace, the Muni
Gautama took pity on them and replied. My word will never turn out
false. You will have to remain in Kumbhîpâka hell upto the time when
S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a will take his incarnation. Then you will be born in
the earth in the Kâlî age and whatever I have uttered will exactly come
unto you. And if you are in earnest to avert my curse then go and
worship the Lotus Feet of S’rî Gâyatrî Devî. The is no other remedy.

 

<span id="page_1174">p. 1174</span>

 

91-100. Vyâsa said :-- Thus dismissing the Brâhma<u>n</u>as, Gautama
Muni thought that all these occurred as a result of Prârabdha Karma and
he became calm and quiet. For this reason, after S’rî Kri<u>sn</u>a
Mahârâja ascended to the Heavens, when the Kâlî age came, those cursed
Brâhma<u>n</u>as got out of the Kumbhîpâka hell and took their births in
this earth as Brâhmi<u>n</u>s, devoid of the three Sandhyâs, devoid of
the devotion to Gâyatrî, devoid of faith in the Vedas, advocating the
heretics’ opinion and unwilling to perform Agnihotra and other religious
sacrifices and duties and they were devoid of Svadhâ and Svâhâ. They
forgot entirely the Unmanifested Mûla Prakriti Bhagavatî. Some of them
began to mark on their bodies various heretical signs, e.g., Taptamûdrâ,
etc.; some became Kâpâlikas; some became Kaulas; some Bauddhas and some
Jainas. Many of them, though learned, became lewd and addicted to
other’s wives and engaged themselves in vain and bad disputations. For
these, they will have to go again surely to the Kumbhîpâka hell. So O
King! Worship with your heart and soul S’rî Bhagavatî Parames’varî Devî.
The worship of Vi<u>sn</u>u or S’iva is not constant (to be done
everyday); only the worship of S’akti is to be constantly performed. For
this reason whoever does not worship S’akti is sure to fall. Thus I have
answered all your questions. Now I shall describe the highest and most
beautiful place, Ma<u>n</u>idvîpa of the Primal Force Bhagavatî, the
Deliverer from this bondage of world. Listen.

 

Here ends the Ninth Chapter of the Twelfth Book on the cause of S’râddha
in other Devas than the Devî Gâyatrî in the Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad
Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](bk12ch10)
