[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bk12ch10)  [Next](bk12ch12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TWELFTH BOOK**

 

**Chapter XI**

 

**On the description of the enclosure walls built of Padmarâga
ma<u>n</u>i, etc., of the Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa**

 

<span id="page_1179">p. 1179</span>

 

1-30. Vyâsa said :-- O King Janamejaya! Next to this Pu<u>s</u>parâga
ma<u>n</u>i enclosure wall comes the tenth enclosure wall, made of
Padmarâga ma<u>n</u>i, red like the red Kunkuma and the Rising Sun. It
is ten yojanas high. All its ground, entrance gates and temples and
arbours are all made of Padmarâga ma<u>n</u>i. Within this reside the
sixty four Kalâs or Sub-S’aktis adorned with various ornaments and
holding weapons in their hands. Each of them has a separate Loka
(region) allotted and within this Loka he has get his own formidable
weapons, Vâhanas, families and their

 

<span id="page_1180">p. 1180</span>

 

leaders or Governors. O King! Now hear the names of the sixty four
Kalâs. They are :-- Pingalâk<u>s</u>î, Vis’âlâk<u>s</u>î, Samriddhi,
Vriddhi, S’raddhâ, Svâhâ, Svadhâ, Mâyâ, Sañgñâ, Vasundharâ,
Trîlokadhâtrî, Sâvitrî, Gâyatrî, Tridas’es’vsrî, Surûpâ, Bahurûpâ,
Skandamâtâ, Achyutapriyâ, Vimalâ, Amalâ, Aru<u>n</u>î, Ârunî, Prakriti,
Vikriti, S’rî<u>st</u>i, Sthiti, Sa<u>m</u>rhiti, Sandhyâ, Mâtâ, Satî,
Hamsî, Mardikâ, Vajrikâ, Parâ, Devamâtâ, Bhagavatî, Devakî, Kamalâsanâ,
Trimukhî, Saptamukhî, Surâsura vimardinî, Lambo<u>st</u>hî, Ûrdhakes’î,
Bahusîr<u>s</u>â, Vrikodarî Ratharekhâhvayâ, S’as’irekâ, Gaganavegâ,
Pavanavegâ, Bhuvanapâlâ, Madanâturâ, Anangâ, Anangamathanâ,
Anangamekhalâ, Anangakusumâ, Visvarûpâ, Surâdikâ,
K<u>s</u>aya<u>m</u>karî, Ak<u>s</u>yobhyâ, Satyavâdinî, Bahurûpâ,
S’uchivratâ, Udârâ and Vâgi<u>s</u>’î. These are the sixty four Kalâs.
All of them have got luminous faces and long lolling tongues. Fire is
always coming out from the faces of all of them. The eyes of all of them
are red with anger. They are uttering :-- We will drink all the water
and thus dry up the oceans; we will annihilate fire, we will stop the
flow of air and control it. Today we will devour the whole universe and
so forth. All of them have got bows and arrows in their hands; all are
eager to fight. The four quarters are being reverberated with the
clashing of their teeth. The hairs on their heads are all tawny and they
stand upwards. Each of them has one hundred Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î
forces under them. O King! What more to say than this that each of them
has got power to destroy one lakh Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as; and their one
hundred Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î forces also can do the same. There is
nothing that is not impracticable with them. What they cannot do cannot
be conceived by mind nor can be uttered in speech. All the war materials
exist within their enclosures. Chariots, horses, elephants, weapons, and
forces all are unlimited. All the war materials are ready at all times
and in abundance. Next comes the eleventh enclosure wall built of
Gomedama<u>n</u>i. It is ten Yojanas high. Its colour is like the newly
blown Javâ flower. All the ground, trees, tanks, houses, pillars, birds
and all other things are all red and built of Gomedama<u>n</u>i. Here
dwell the thirty-two Mahâ S’aktis adorned with various ornament made of
Gomedama<u>n</u>i and furnished with various weapons. They are always
eager to fight. Their eyes are always red with anger; their bees are
like Pis’âchas and their hands are like chakras (discs). “Pierce him,”
“Beat him,” “Cut him,” “Tear him asunder,” “Burn him down,” are the
words constantly uttered by them. The inhabitants of the place always
worship them. Each of them has ten Ak<u>s</u>auhi<u>n</u>î forces. These
are inordinately powerful. It is impossible to describe that. It seems
that each S’akti can easily destroy one lakh Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as.

 

<span id="page_1181">p. 1181</span>

 

Innumerable chariots, elephants, hordes, etc., and other vâhanas are
here. Verily all the war materials of the Devî Bhagavatî are seen in
this Gomedama<u>n</u>i enclosure.

 

31-51. Now I am mentioning the auspicious, sin destroying names of these
S’aktis :-- Vidyâ, Hrî, Pu<u>st</u>i, Prajñâ, Sinî vâlî, Kuhû, Rudrâ,
Viryâ, Prabhâ, Nandâ, Po<u>s</u>a<u>n</u>î, Riddhidâ, S’ubhâ, Kâlarâtri,
Mahârâtri, Bhadra KâIî, Kaparddinî, Vikriti, Da<u>nd</u>i,
Mu<u>nd</u>inî, Sendukha<u>nd</u>â, S’ikha<u>nd</u>inî, Nis’umbha
s’umbha mathanî, Mahi<u>s</u>âsura marddinî, Indrâ<u>n</u>î,
Rudrâ<u>n</u>î, S’ankarârdha sarîri<u>n</u>î, Nârî, Nirâya<u>n</u>î
Tris’ûlinî, Pâlinî, Ambikâ, and Hlâdinî. (See the Dak<u>s</u>i<u>n</u>â
Mûrti Samhitâ and other Tantras.)

 

Never there is any chance that they will be defeated anywhere. Hence if
all those S’aktis get angry at any time, this Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a ceases to
exist. Next to this Gomeda enclosure comes the enclosure made of
diamonds. It is ten yojanas high; on all sides there are the entrance
gates; the doors are hinged there with nice mechanisms. Nice new diamond
trees exist here. All the roads, royal roads, trees, and the spaces for
watering their roots, tanks, wells, reservoirs, Sâranga and other
musical instruments are all made of diamonds. Here dwells S’rî
Bhuvanes’varî Devî with Her attendants. O King! Each of them has a lakh
attendants. All of them are proud of their beauty. Some of them are
holding fans in their hands; some are holding cups for drinking water;
some, betelnuts; some are holding umbrellas; some chowries; some are
holding various clothings; some flowers; some, looking glasses; some,
saffrons; some collyrium, whereas some others are holding Sindûra (red
lead). Some are ready to do the painting works; some are anxious to
champoo the feet; some are eager to make Her wear ornaments; some are
anxious to put garlands of flowers on Her neck. All of them are skilled
in various arts of enjoyments and they are all young. To gain the Grace
of the Devî, they consider the whole universe as trifling. Now I shall
mention to you the names of the attendants of the Devî, proud of their
possessing lots of amorous gestures and postures. Listen. They are :--
Anangarûpâ, Anangamadanâ, Madanâturâ, Bhuvanavegâ, Bhuvanapâlikâ,
Sarvas’is’ira, Anangavedanâ, Anangamekhalâ, these are the Eight Sakhîs.
Each of them is as fair as Vidyullatâ. Each is adorned with various
ornaments and skilled in all actions. When they walk to and fro with
canes and rods in their hands in the service of the Devî, they look as
if the lightning flashes glimmer on all sides.

 

52-71 On the outer portion of the enclosure wall, on the eight sides are
situated the dwelling houses of these eight Sakhîs and they are always
full of various vâhanas and weapons. Next to this enclosure of diamond

 

<span id="page_1182">p. 1182</span>

 

comes the thirteenth enclosure wall made of Vaidûrya ma<u>n</u>i. Its
height is ten yojanas. There are entrance gates and doorways on the four
sides. The court inside, the houses, the big roads, wells, tanks, ponds,
rivers and even the sands are all made of Vaidûrya ma<u>n</u>i. On the
eight sides reside the eight Mâtrikâs Brâhmî, etc., with their hosts.
These Mâtrikâs represent the sum-total of the individual Mâtrikâs in
every Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a. Now hear their names :-- (1) Brâhmî, (2)
Mâhes’varî, (3) Kaumârî, (4) Vai<u>sn</u>avî, (5) Vârâhî, (6)
Indrâ<u>n</u>î, (7) Châmu<u>nd</u>â, and (8) Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî. Their
forms are like those of Brahmâ and Rudra and others. They are always
engaged in doing good to the Universe and reside here with their own
Vâhanas and weapons.

 

At the four gates, the various Vâhanas of Bhagavatî remain always fully
equipped. Somewhere there are Ko<u>t</u>is and Ko<u>t</u>is of
elephants. At some places there are Ko<u>t</u>is and Ko<u>t</u>is of
horses; at others there are camps, houses, at others there are swans,
lions; at others there are Garu<u>d</u>as; at other places there are
peacocks, bulls and various other beings all fully equipped and arranged
in due order. Similarly the above mentioned animals are yoked to
Ko<u>t</u>is and Ko<u>t</u>is of chariots; there are coachmen (syces);
at some places flags are fluttering high on them so as to reach the
heavens and thus they are adding beauty. At other places the aerial cars
are arranged in rows, countless, with various sounding instruments in
them, with flags soaring high in the Heavens and endowed with various
ensigns and emblems. O King! Next to this Vaidûrya enclosure, comes the
fourteenth enclosure wall built of Indranîlama<u>n</u>i; its height is
ten Yojanas. The court inside, houses, roads, wells, tanks and
reservoirs, etc., all are built of Indranîlama<u>n</u>i. There is here a
lotus consisting of sixteen petals extending to many Yojanas in width
and shining like a second Sudars’ana Chakra. On these sixteen petals
reside the sixteen S’aktis of Bhagavatî, with their hosts. Now I am
mentioning the names of these. Hear :-- Karâlî, Vikârâlî, Umâ,
Sarasvatî, S’rî, Durgâ, Û<u>s</u>â, Lak<u>s</u>mî, S’ruti, Smriti,
Dhriti, S’raddhâ, Medhâ, Mati, Kânti, and Âryâ. These are the 16
S’aktis. They all are dark blue, of the colour of the fresh rain-cloud;
they wield in their hands axes and shields. It seems they are ever eager
to fight. O King! These S’aktis are the Rulers of all the separate
S’aktis of the other Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as. These are the forces of S’rî
Devî.

 

72-90. Being strengthened by the Devî’s strength, these are always
surrounded by various chariots and forces, various other S’aktis follow
them. If they like, they can cause great agitation in the whole
universe. Had I thousand faces, I would not have been able to describe
what an

 

<span id="page_1183">p. 1183</span>

 

amount of strength they wield. Now I describe the fifteenth enclosure
wall. Listen. Next to this Indranîlama<u>n</u>i enclosure, comes the
enclosure made of pearls (muktâ), very wide and ten Yojanas high. The
court inside, its space, trees, all are built of pearls. Within this
enclosure there is a lotus with eight petals, all of pearls. On these
petals reside the eight S’aktis, the advisers and ministers of the Devî.
Their appearances, weapons, dresses, enjoyments, everything is like
those of S’rî Devî. Their duty is to inform the Devî of what is going on
in the Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as. They are skilled in all sciences and arts and
clever in all actions. They are very clever, skillful and clever in
knowing beforehand the desires and intentions of S’rî Devî and they
perform those things accordingly. Each one of them has many other
S’aktis who also live here. By their Jñâna S’akti they know all the news
concerning the Jîvas in every Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a. Now I mention the names
of those eight Sakhîs. Listen. Anangakusumâ, Anangakusumâ-turâ,
Anangamadanâ, Ananga madanâturâ, Bhuva<u>n</u>apâla, Gaganavegâ,
S’as’irekhâ, and Gaganarekhâ. These are the eight Sakhîs. They look red
like the Rising Sun; and in their four hands they hold noose, goad, and
signs of granting boons and “no fear.” At every instant they inform S’rî
Devî of all the events of the Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a. Next to this comes the
sixteenth enclosure wall made of emerald (marakata); it is ten Yojanas
high; the court inside, its space, and houses and everything are built
of emeralds (marakata ma<u>n</u>i). Here exist all the good objects of
enjoyments. This is hexagonal, of the Yantra shape. And at every corner
reside the Devas. On the eastern corner resides the four-faced Brahmâ;
he lives with Gâyatrî Devî; he holds Kama<u>nd</u>alu, rosary, signs
indicating “no fear” and Da<u>nd</u>a (rod). The Devî Gâyatrî is also
decorated with these. Here all the Vedas, Smritis, the Purâ<u>n</u>as,
and various weapons exist incarnate in their respective forms. All the
Avatâras of Brahmâ, Gâyatrî, and Vyâhritis that exist in this
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a, all live here. On the south-west corner Mahâ
Vi<u>sn</u>u lives with Sâvitrî; He holds conch shell, disc, club, and
lotus. Sâvitrî has got also all these. The Avatâras of Vi<u>sn</u>u that
exist in every Brahmâ<u>nd</u>a Matsya, Kûrma, etc., and all the
Avatâras of Sâvitrî that exist in every universe, all dwell in this
place. On the north western corner exists Mahâ Rudra with Sarasvatî.
Both of them hold in their hands Paras’u, rosary, signs granting boons
and “no fear.”

 

91-110. All the Avatâras of Rudra and Pârvatî (Gaurî, etc.) facing south
that exist in all the Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as, dwell here. All the chief
Âgamas, sixty four in number and all the other Tantras reside here,
incarnate in their due forms. On the south-eastern corner, the Lord of
wealth, Kuvera, of Bhagavatî, surrounded by roads

 

<span id="page_1184">p. 1184</span>

 

and shops resides here with Mahâ Lak<u>s</u>mî and his hosts holding the
jar of jewels (Ma<u>n</u>i Kara<u>nd</u>ikâ). On the western corner
exists always Madana with Rati, holding noose, goad, bow and arrow. All
his amorous attendants reside here, incarnate in their forms. On the
north-eastern corner resides always the great hero Ga<u>n</u>es’a, the
Remover of obstacles, holding noose and goad and with his Pu<u>st</u>i
Devî. O King! All the Vibhûtis (manifestations) of Ga<u>n</u>es’a that
exist in all the universes reside here. What more to say than this, that
Brahmâ and the other Devas and Devîs here represent the sum-total of all
the Brahmâs and the Devas and the Devîs that exist in all the
Brahmâ<u>nd</u>as. These all worship S’rî Bhagavatî, remaining in their
own spheres respectively. O King! Next come the seventeenth enclosure
wall made of Prabâla. It is red like saffron and it is one hundred
Yojanas high. As before, the court inside, the ground and the houses all
are made of Prabâla. The goddesses of the five elements, Hrillekhâ,
Gaganâ, Raktâ, Karâlikâ, and Mahochchhu<u>s</u>mâ reside here. The
colours and lustres of the bodies of the goddessses resemble those of
the elements over which they preside respectively. All of them are proud
of their youth and hold in their four hands noose, goad and signs
granting boons and “no fear.” They are dressed like S’rî Devî and reside
here always. Next to this comes the eighteenth enclosure wall built of
Navaratna (the nine jewels). It is many yojanas wide. This enclosure
wall is superior to all others and it is higher also. On the four sides
there exist innumerable houses, tanks, reservoirs, all built of
Navaratna; these belong to the Devîs, the presiding Deities of Âmnâyas
(that which is to be studied or learnt by heart; the Vedas). The ten
Mahâ Vidyâs, Kâlî, Târâ, etc., of S’rî Devî and the Mahâbhedâs, that is,
their all the Avatâras all dwell here with their respective
Âvara<u>n</u>as, Vâhanas and ornaments. All the Avatâras of S’rî Devî
for the killing of the Daityas and for showing favour to the devotees
live here. They are Pas’a<u>m</u>kus’es’varî, Bhuvanes’varî, Bhairavî,
Kapâla Bhuvanes’varî, A<u>m</u>kus’a Bhuvanes’varî, Pramâda
bhuvanes’varî, S’rî Krodha Bhuvanes’varî, Tripu<u>t</u>âs’vârûdhâ,
Nityaklinnâ, Annapurnâ, Tvaritâ, and the other avatâras of
Bhuvanes’varî, and Kâlî, Târâ and the other Mahâvidyâs are known as
Mahâvidyâs. They live here with their Âvara<u>n</u>a Devatâs, Vâhanas,
and ornaments respectively. (Note :-- The Âvara<u>n</u>a Deities are the
attendant Deities.) Here live also the seven Ko<u>t</u>is of Devîs
presiding over the Mahâ Mantras, all brilliant and fair like the
Ko<u>t</u>i Suns. O King! Next to this enclosure wall comes the chief
and crowning palace of S’rî Devî, built of

 

<span id="page_1185">p. 1185</span>

 

Chintâma<u>n</u>i gems. All the articles within this are built of
Chintâma<u>n</u>i gems. Within this palace are seen hundreds and
thousands of pillars. Some of these pillars are built of
Sûryakântama<u>n</u>i, some are built of Chandrakânta ma<u>n</u>i, and
some are built of Vidyutkânta ma<u>n</u>i. O King! The lustre and
brilliance of these pillars is so strong that no articles within this
palace are visible to the eye. (Note :-- The face of the Goddess Kâlî is
so bright that it appears like a shadow, i.e., black.)

 

Here ends the Eleventh Chapter on the description of the enclosure walls
built of Padmarâga ma<u>n</u>i, etc., of the Ma<u>n</u>i Dvîpa in the
Mahâpurâ<u>n</u>am S’rî Mad Devî Bhâgavatam of 18,000 verses by
Mahar<u>s</u>i Veda Vyâsa.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](bk12ch12.md)
