[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ulh03)  [Next](ulh05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0024FAH3E/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Unwritten Literature of Hawaii*, by Nathaniel B. Emerson, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

# INTRODUCTION

This book is for the greater part a collection of Hawaiian songs and
poetic pieces that have done service from time immemorial as the stock
supply of the *hula*. The descriptive portions have been added, not
because the poetical parts could not stand by themselves, but to furnish
the proper setting and to answer the questions of those who want to
know.

Now, the hula stood for very much to the ancient Hawaiian; it was to him
in place of our concert-hall and lecture-room, our opera and theater,
and thus become one of his chief means of social enjoyment. Besides
this, it kept the communal imagination in living touch with the nation's
legendary past. The hula had songs proper to itself, but it found a mine
of inexhaustible wealth in the epics and wonder-myths that celebrated
the doing of the volcano goddess Pele and her compeers. Thus in the
cantillations of the old-time hula, we find a ready-made anthology that
includes every species of composition in the whole range of Hawaiian
poetry. This epic <span id="fr_0"></span>[a](#fn_0) of Pele was chiefly
a more or less detached series of poems forming a story addressed not to
the closet-reader, but to the eye and ear and heart of the assembled
chiefs and people; and it was sung. The Hawaiian song, its note of joy
par excellence, was the *oli*; but it must be noted that in every
species of Hawaiian poetry, *mele*--whether epic or eulogy or prayer,
sounding through them all we shall find the lyric note.

The most telling record of a people's intimate life is the record which
it unconsciously makes in its songs. This record which the Hawaiian
people have left of themselves is full and specific. When, therefore, we
ask what emotions stirred the heart of the old-time Hawaiian as he
approached the great themes of life and death, of ambition and jealousy,
of sexual passion, of romantic love, of conjugal love, and parental
love, what his attitude toward nature and the dread forces of earthquake
and storm, and the mysteries of spirit and the hereafter, we shall find
our answer in the songs and prayers and recitations of the hula.

The hula, it is true, has been unfortunate in the mode and manner of its
introduction to its moderns. An institution of divine, that is,
religious, origin, the hula in modern times has wandered so far and
fallen so low that foreign and critical esteem has come to associate it

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

with the riotous and passionate ebullitions of Polynesian kings and the
amorous posturing of their voluptuaries. We must make a just
distinction, however, between the gestures and bodily contortions
presented by the men and women, the actors in the hula, and their
uttered words. "The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands
of Esau." In truth, the actors in the hula no longer suit the action to
the word. The utterance harks back to the golden age; the gesture is
trumped up by the passion of the hour, or dictated by the master of the
hula, to whom the real meaning of the old bards is ofttimes a sealed
casket.

Whatever indelicacy attaches in modern times to some of the gestures and
contortions of the hula dancers, the old-time hula songs in large
measure were untainted with grossness. If there ever were a Polynesian
Arcadia, and if it were possible for true reports of the doings and
sayings of the Polynesians to reach us from that happy land--reports of
their joys and sorrows, their love-makings and their jealousies, their
family spats and reconciliations, their worship of beauty and of the
gods and goddesses who walked in the garden of beauty--we may say, I
think, that such a report would be in substantial agreement with the
report that is here offered; but, if one's virtue will not endure the
love-making of Arcadia, let him banish the myth from his imagination and
hie to a convent or a nunnery.

If this book does nothing more than prove that savages are only children
of a younger growth than ourselves, that what we find them to have been
we ourselves--in our ancestors--once were, the labor of making it will
have been not in vain.

For an account of the first hula we may look to the story of Pele. On
one occasion that goddess begged her sisters to dance and sing before
her, but they all excused themselves, saying they did not know the alt.
At that moment in came little Hiiaka, the youngest and the favorite.
Unknown to her sisters, the little maiden had practised the dance under
the tuition of her friend, the beautiful but ill-fated Hopoe. When
banteringly invited to dance, to the surprise of all, Hiiaka modestly
complied. The wave-beaten sand-beach was her floor, the open air her
hall. Feet and hands and swaying form kept time to her improvisation:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Look, Puna is a-dance in the wind;  
The palm groves of Kea-au shaken.  
Haena and the woman Hopoe dance and sing  
On the beach Nana-huki,  
A dance of purest delight,  
Down by the sea Nana-huki.</span>

</div>

The nature of this work has made it necessary to use occasional Hawaiian
words in the technical parts. At their first introduction

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

it has seemed fitting that they should be distinguished by italics; but,
once given the entrée, it is assumed that, as a rule, they will be
granted the rights of free speech without further explanation.

A glossary, which explains all the Hawaiian words used in the prose
text, is appended. Let no one imagine, however, that by the use of this
little crutch alone he will be enabled to walk or stumble through the
foreign ways of the simplest Hawaiian mele. Notes, often copious, have
been appended to many of the mele, designed to exhaust neither the
subject nor the reader, but to answer some of the questions of the
intelligent thinker.

Thanks, many thanks, are due, first, to those native Hawaiians who have
so far broken with the old superstitious tradition of concealment as to
unearth so much of the unwritten literary wealth stored in Hawaiian
memories; second, to those who have kindly contributed criticism,
suggestion, material at the different stages of this book's progress,
and, lastly, to those dear friends of the author's youth--living or
dead--whose kindness has made it possible to send out this fledgling to
the world. The author feels under special obligations to Dr. Titus
Munson Coan, of New York, for a painstaking revision of the manuscript.

   <span class="small">HONOLULU, HAWAII.</span>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[7:a](ulh04.htm#fr_0) It might be termed a
handful of lyrics strung on an epic thread.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I.--The Hula](ulh05)
