<div>

[Intangible Textual Heritage](../index) [Press](../press)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Sacred Sleuth

Learning about alchemy, Zoroastrianism and even sacred sexuality got a
little bit harder last month when a student at the Freie Universität in
Berlin hacked into the Santa Cruz-based Intangible Textual Heritage

Site administrator **John Bruno Hare** says a German hacker, purportedly
a Christian fundamentalist, nearly brought down the site, which is one
of the largest on the web on the topic of religion and carries a wide
spectrum of religious texts in an effort to promote religious tolerance.

Determined to keep the site open, **Hare** sleuthed out the hacker, one
Robert Mücke, who apparently used a machine in his university's physics
department to conduct a series of denial of service attacks (which means
a program is used to download the pages at a website repeatedly, thereby
overloading the web server and preventing other users from accessing the
site) against the sacred-texts archive for a 10-day period in March.
Mücke reportedly downloaded the site twice a day, with attacks peaking
mid-March, when he downloaded it five times over.

**Hare** says he first became aware something was wrong when sales of
the Intangible Textual Heritage CD-ROM dropped dead.

"I had just shipped a new version of the CD, which had drawn a lot of
interest, and I was mystified as to why it wasn't selling," says
**Hare**, noting that customers leave if response time is slow, which is
what denial of service does.

Concerned, **Hare** examined the site logs and found a massive number of
hits arriving from a machine named "broiler.physik.fu-berlin.de."

Recognizing this address to mean the Freie Universitaet of Berlin,
**Hare** contacted system administrators who promptly barred the hacker.

So, why did Mücke muck with **Hare's** sacred site?

An email (reproduced verbatim below) Mücke sent to **Hare** on being
closed down may shed some light.

"I surely can not agree with to mix up all the pagan cults, idols,
witchcrafts (6. & 7. book of "Moses"), esoteric, ocullt, theosophic and
even satanic views and the God that created heaven and earth that hates
these former things with one another without distinction. I am probably
not the first who tells you this, but also not the last. God will be
last one for sure. There would be no martyrs Fox could have been writing
about, and no **John** Bunyan suffering persecution and writing such
precious allegories about the way and fight of believers towards Heaven,
if these people of former generations had such relativistic view of
truth that comes more and more common today, that calls evil good and
good evil."

**Hare** says the site usually gets a positive response.

"I get emails from people of all faiths saying that it's a valuable
resource. Two days after Sept. 11, we saw a big spike in use, with up to
a million hits a day, with people mostly referencing Nostradamus after
receiving an email, saying the terrorist attacks were part of his
predictions--a claim our site helped show to be an urban legend."

Noting that Buddhism, Taoism and Sacred Sexuality usually get the most
hits, **Hare** says the purpose of the site is to promote religious
tolerance.

"Unfortunately, there are also a lot of people who don't like the idea
of religious tolerance and are willing to go to any extreme to quash it.
Fundamentalism is beyond my comprehension and everybody is welcome at
the website, but when someone starts denying others access, I have to
draw the line. I'm just glad the whole episode is over."

Us, too. Come to think of it, **Hare** probably has the only functioning
dotcom left in town.

<div align="center">

</div>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

From the April 3-10, 2002 issue of Metro Santa Cruz
(https://www.metroactive.com/cruz/).

Copyright © Metro Publishing Inc. Maintained by Boulevards New Media.

<div>

</div>

</div>
