[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md)  [Shiite
Texts](../shi)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sal023)  [Next](sal025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\(23\)

His Supplication expressing devotion to

Allah

*In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful*

O Allah, shower blessings on Muhammad and his Progeny (s.a.w.a.) Be

merciful when I pass away from the world or the people forget my

memories or I am counted among those who are forgotten. O Allah, I

have become old. My skin and bones have become weak and thin.

People have acquired whatever I had and my youth has passed. Death

has come near and my life is getting over, my desires have gone and

only the results are remaining. O My Lord, have mercy on me when I will

pass away from the world and my parts of the body will be broken and

scattered. O My Lord, my sins have made me quiet and I have become

dumb. Now I don't have any excuses or arguments. Now I confess my

sins and bad deeds. I am guilty and misled from the right path. Allah

send Your blessings on Muhammad and his Progeny (s.a.w.a.) and be

merciful and forgive my sins. O my Lord, though my deeds are indiscrete

against my obeying but my expectations are more than hopes. O Allah,

why should I be disappointed? Though I am supposed to gain liberation

by Your compassion. O Allah do not disappoint me from Your gracious

presumption and do not prove to be wrong my true expectations among

Your candidates. O My Lord! My sin is great because You will ask for an

explanation but when I remember of my sins and see Your forgiveness I

feel that You would forgive. If Your severe chastisement calls me

towards hell because of my sins, my expectations of Your gracious

presumption call me towards Paradise. If my errors threaten me and

disappoints me from Your favour and grace, Your kindness encourages

my faith. O my Lord! If my carelessness misled me, my Lord! Your

honourable bounties make me alert. O my Lord! My sense, my reforms,

and my strength become helpless, but my faith has not vanished as

Your gainful gratification is with me. If the days of my life have
passed

without efforts in Your way, at least and few years have passed with

faith. O Allah! I am a plaintiff in Your court as a needy and poor. The

trouble of my hardship has made me helpless. O Allah! You are

honourable! Make me succeed because I am one of Your petitioners. Do

favour on me and count me with those who benefit from You. O My

Lord! No one can turn out my poverty except You and no one can fulfill

my desires without Your reward. O My Lord! I am standing as a beggar

at the door of Your generosity. I have abandoned asking others. O Allah!

Bestow Your blessings to the petitioner. As I am in one of the dangerous

points. I am involved in the trial of deeds and standard. I shall perish
if

You do not help me. O My Lord! Have You created me like an

unfortunate one to cry? Or ask my wants from the fortunate ones? O My

Lord! If You debarred from the Paradise to visit Muhammad Mustafa

(s.a.w.a.) and prevent Angels of Darussalam (heaven) round about on

me for the service and turn out my desires unsuccessful in the world.

Whatever hopes I have from You is quite different from it. O Excellence!

I swear of Your respect and glory, if You keep me bound and away from

Your blessings and keep me aloof from the respectable persons I shall

not leave my hopes from You. I shall await for Your blessings. O Allah,
I

would not be rightly guided without Your guidance. I cannot accept a

faith if You wouldn't guide me I would not call You if You would not
have

given the power to speak. I would not recognize You if You had not

forgiven with friendly attitudes. I would not ask for shelter if You
would

not mention about the wrath. O Allah, I carry out Your orders and it is

monotheism and if I disobey Your orders it is infidelity. So pardon
both.

O my Lord! I like Your obedience if I would be neglected or do mistake

purposely, for that bestow me the heaven, though I am not a righteous

person for the heaven and save me from the hell because I am not fit for

it. O my Lord! Though my sins have prevented me to go ahead from the

virtuous people but my faith has made me stand on the point of good

deeds. O My Lord! The heart, which You have filled by love, then how

can the flames of fire of hell overpower it? O Allah! How can You

disgrace in hellfire the soul satisfied with faith? O Allah, how can You

burn in the blazing fire the tongue which recites Your name? O My Lord!

All disaster affected persons request You; All grief-stricken people
seek

protection from You, O my Lord! The pious people heard about the great

rewards they bring down their heads down in humility and ascetic

people heard about Your extant blessings and became contented. And

the misled people heard about Your generosity they turn back again.

The culprits heard about Your great extent of forgiveness, they became

hopeful. The believers heard about Your reward of forgiveness they

became seeker. O My Lord! The Group of unbelievers gathered and

prayed loudly. These people are in the world and all people live by hope

alone. They have showed the feelings of their mind. They have no fear

of any obstacle and are restless and You are the centre of them that

seekers are not dishonoured and insulted in Your court. O Allah! If I

have made a mistake to consider for myself that there is safety and

honour after the request, I would surely get the right path. O Allah!

Perhaps this time I have become fortunate after getting Your help, and I

hope You will forgive me. O Allah! If my effort of getting benefit left
me

but Your gracefulness have not become separate. O My Lord! If I gave

decision for me in which I had hopes I fulfilled my duties to bring it
near

by Your grace and blessings. O My Lord! The lack of preparation for

hereafter stopped me to be present in Your court, so I have sent my

precious feelings to You with faith and trust. O my Lord whenever I

remember Your blessings, my face shines and when I remember of Your

wrath I cry with fear. O my Lord! Do favour on this miserable person,

who is thirsty and whose veins of the neck bow down by tiredness. O my

Lord! I pray like one who does not expect from anyone except You. I

depend on You that my hopes cannot turn towards anyone except You.

O My Lord! One who says seeing Your bounties that why should I return

back and I am dependent on You to get my livelihood. O Allah! How can

I reticent my tongue to request You. As I am very restless for the
result

of hereafter. O My Lord! You are aware of my expectation and You have

promised to provide livelihood in the life. And You are aware that after

my death I am not contented of heaven. O Your personality is so great,

that You showed Your mercy by Your favour. Do not disappoint me of

Your favour on the Day of Judgment when I would be badly in need of it.

The observation of the blessings of Generous and His Generosity are

completed if I would not be ignored of my matters I would not take false

step and if I would consider of my transgression of limits I would not
cry.

O My Lord! Send Your blessing on Prophet, Muhammad Mustafa and

his progeny (s.a.w.a.) and erase the documents of taking false steps in

the course of time. For the sake of my running tears, forgive my great

sins forgive them for the sake of my minor good deeds. O Allah if You

are not merciful on anyone except the obedient people, where would

they go and complain for their mistakes? If You do not accept a

suggestion of anyone except the hard workers, then where would the

wrongdoer go for their request? If You respect only the elegance people,

then what would the sinful people do? If no one can be successful

except the pious people in hereafter, then to whom should we ask for

help? O My Lord! One who he can pass from extremely narrow bridge

which is the pathway of Paradise and whose good deeds are permitted,

then how will they cross the way who have not repented before death?

O My Lord! You show Your favour only to those who have submitted

their whole life in pious devotion, then who will be helpful to this
sinful

person, who has not become happy though he tried hard. O Allah! If You

don't care to look at a monotheist because he is a sinner and You will

put him in difficulty by Your curse? If You do not help us by Your

gratitude, we would be mixed up along with those who associate with

You. O Allah! For the sake of Islam, make us righteous of Your

endowments and forgive our sinful manners which make Your clean

bestowals dirty, cleanse them. O My Lord! Take pity on our miserable

condition when we would be buried in the grave and our grave will be

packed by bricks and we would be laid down by the right side in the

grave and the people leave us alone in the narrow resting place and our

death will settle us in a strange place and we would be surrounded in

the crowd of the dead. Though they would be uninhabited. O my God,

be Merciful at that time, when we would be bare-footed and naked and

the dust of the grave covers our head and our eyes would be wide open

with the fear of the day of reckoning and our lips dried in thirst, and
our

stomach, hungry due to the long wait. And if on the Day of Judgment if

none can be successful except the pious people, we would be

absolutely naked before the people. Our backs shall be heavy with our

load. We shall be involved in the calamities created by our kith and
kin.

You do not add to my problems by turning away Your kind attention from

us, and by keeping us away from Your Mercy that we have visualized. O

my Lord! These eyes are not attentive to their tears for nothing, nor
this

sinner is weeping aimlessly, nor it has wept like an emotional woman for

nothing. The reason is that he has already committed sins intentionally

and unintentionally. Now the consequences of his examination are

calling him. And O, the Owner of Might, You are capable of removing his

misery. O my God! If we sinners are weeping because of our

shortcomings in paying homage to You, and if we are failures, we are

weeping due to the lack of Mercy that we beg from You. O my God!

Increase the eloquence of the sweetness of my expression so that it may

guide our heart towards piety in the light of the matters it
understands. O

my God! You have commanded to do good and Yourself are the best of

the good-doers and You have issued the orders to ask You for our

needs while You are the best of those who are asked. O my God! How

can despair prevent us from asking that we are accustomed to beg.

Moreover, we have reposed high hopes in You. O Allah! When the

storm of terror shakes the leaves of our fear, those trees get uprooted,

and when the breeze of our attachments touch the branches of our

desires, its fruits ripen due to the glad tidings. When Your epithet,
“the

severest of those who requite” comes on our lips, we feel extreme

sorrow and remorse and when we recite: O The Concealer of Faults,

The Compassionate, we become very happy. Now we are in the middle

of fear and hope. Fear does not make us satisfied and Your divine

favour does not disappoint us. O Allah! Our efforts fail to cast off
from

Your favour and keep me safe from Your wrath. O Allah! You always

send Your blessing as a gift and has made me respectable in the world.

And You always helped and showed Your elegant attitude to the

notorious and disgraceful people. The past centuries, promises of past

times and termination in the course of time in remaining nights. O
Allah!

Our life is depending on whatever is necessary in life, increase them

through the medium of Your blessings. How could our heart be happy by

the worldly desires? How could our dealings be formal in worldly

trouble? How could our happiness be ruined and how could our deceits

prevent from absurdity and useless talk. Though our graves inform us

that death is coming near. O My Lord! How could we find the way when

pits are ready for us to make us sleep and the strings of treacherous

world has been distributed by the hands of death and made us helpless

and made us drink bitter drought of water. Our soul has been informed

us that the life would be terminated. I wish that I would not distant
about

the worldly comforts and would not take a false step O My Lord! I pray
to

You earnestly to help me to pass across the bridge and request You to

save us from the false desires and request You to raise the curtains of

confusion from the heart and save me from the wrong and uncivilized

intentions of the mind. O My Lord! Do the houses have strength to save

from the attack of troubles? When one of the arrows of death falls in

every house. O Allah! If our heart would not fear while shifting from
the

world or if You would not keep us aloof from the virtuous people there.
O

Allah! If You keep us near to You, then separation of our brothers and

other relatives will not harm us. O Allah the Bestower! Veins of our

throat and tongues would not dry up if unnatural offence would not turn

round and round like birds. O Allah! I was an obedient person and You

had created me to obey Your commands. You cursed me and kept me

away from Your bounties because of my bad deeds. And if You show

mercy on me, whenever I was obedient to You but You found me guilty

and made me free. O My Lord! There is no way to be saved from evils

without Your protection. There is no source to reach up to the good

deeds except Your will. Now after Your previous will I shall try to take

advantage of my deeds so I can protect myself from sins and for that if

You would not help me. O My Lord! I did not know anything but when

You gave the guidance for the heaven and after knowing about that my

heart turned towards it. Is that so that after turning towards the good

deeds, You would disappoint me? Though You do what You like and it

is praiseworthy. O Allah! The Lord of Majesty and Generosity! If I do
not

deserve Your blessing then do a favour. It is Your capability because
the

Generous never blesses only the deserving ones. O my God! If I am not

deserving of Your mercies that I hope from You but You are the One to

bestow favours upon the sinful ones. O Allah! If my sins frighten me, do

favour on me due to Your great personality and my hopes turn out to be

pleasant. O My Lord! My request is not like that of common beggars

because if they are unsuccessful they give up begging and I do not feel

ashamed to ask for my request at any cost. O my Lord! Be pleased with

me. Sometimes the master forgives his slave for his error. O my Lord!

How can I say, I am a great sinner and how can I be disappointed from

You because You are generous and Merciful. O my Lord! My life and my

soul are present before You and You cast a shadow of beauty on it. As

You did what is suitable for You and hid me in Your rewards. If my death

is near and if my deeds do not allow me to come to You then I have also

decided to confess my sin again and again in Your court for forgiveness.

O My Lord! You are the Forgiving. Who can be the other Forgiving

except You and if You would punish me then who is the judge higher

than You? O my Lord! If I show high-handedness for the defence of my

soul and then also Your given limits continuing as before and even then

if I do not hang my neck down then rebuke on my soul. O My Lord! You

showed Your mercy on my whole life so do not discontinue Your

kindness after my death. O Allah! Why should I be disappointed from

Your favour after death? As You showed Your good favour in my life. O

my Lord! My sins frightened me but my love towards You gave me

protection. Help me as You are capable and take care of my ignorance.

O Allah! Nothing is concealed for Your great personality. And send Your

blessing on Your Prophet Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and his progeny. And

forgive my sins, which are hidden from the sight of common people. O

My Lord! You concealed my sins from me in the world and did not

disclose them. As I deserve that my sins should not be disclosed in the

hereafter. As You showed Your favour and concealed my sins before

the Muslims. Do not disgrace me on the day of resurrection before the

world. My hopes increased seeing Your generosity and You accepted

my deeds. Make me cheerful when my death is near. O my Lord! My

repentance is like that of a sinner, whose excuses are accepted. O

Allah, The Great! The accused apologize and do not disgrace me for my

only one wish for which I passed my whole life and that is Your

forgiveness. O my Lord! If You would be desirous for my insult then You

would not give the guidance or if You would like my infamy, You would

not conceal my faults and for that You showed me the right path to get

good benefit and whatever my sin You have concealed, keep it firm. O

my Lord! In Your trial, I praise You for Your expected trial and
mentioned

Your elegance. This is the completion of Your forgiveness O Allah! If I

would not fear of my sin then how would I be saved from Your wrath and

would become a petitioner of Your reward? Your Personality is best from

all virtuous people. You excuse the sinners and fulfill the desires of

needy people who beg for Your mercy. O Allah, I hope, You will forgive

me then let my desires succeed. I have heard about Your forgiveness so

now fulfill all my desires and forgive my sins, which I have committed.
O

Allah! My virtues lay down before You and bad deeds are laid between

forgive and forgiveness. I hope You will not cast off my good and bad

deeds from Your favour. O Allah! My faith accepted Your oneness and I

keep my tongue in utterance Your praise and the Holy Quran showed

me the initiative of Your mercy then how can it be possible that I shall

lose hope about Your promises? O Allah! Your coherent obligations

guided me nicely and I became satisfied then how can You make a man

unfortunate and villainous? O my Lord! If You have become very angry

but I hope, Your kind attitude would save me from Your wrath O Allah! If

my sins brought me forth for punishment my hopes also has come

forward for reward. O Allah! Forgive me and bless me and save me from

Your wrath. Your personality is such that none can expect anything

except Your Grace and no fear of anything except Your final judgment.

O Allah! Send blessing on Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and his progeny and

do a favour on me and do not investigate more against me due to

judgment. O My Lord! You have created my body and its parts and I pay

homage with it and sometimes disobey orders and sometimes make You

unhappy and sometimes happy and You granted me passion in my heart

and chose me for this house which is full of disasters and then You said

that I am prevented due to my sin. Now I beseech You for protection and

support and want to protect myself from Your wrath and beseech good

guidance for Your willingness. O my Lord! I ask You only as my question

is not concealed from You. O my Lord! I beg You like a beggar and not

feel ashamed to beg because You are my master and I beseech You as

one who is agreed against his argument. If I knew of something more

important the confession of sin, I would pray. O Allah, forgive my sin.

After the confession do not make me fail. And his wishes have opened

their mouths for Your Mercy, while they are not in need of kindness. O

our Deity! Grant to them what they beg of You and bestow on them what

they ask. Because You are the most merciful of those who are kind upon

the ones that repose hopes in You. O Allah! I have committed such

terrible sins that You are well aware of and the injustices I have

committed upon myself are well known to You. Then You consider me

as a slave emancipated by You or a disobedient one forgiven by You. O

my Deity! O my Allah! I am thinking as if I have been made to lie down
in

my grave. The participants of my funeral have returned home after

burying me. The travelers have already mourned my condition and the

kind relatives have stopped weeping on me. And the friends have

already finished reciting the Talqeen from besides the grave. And they

were seeing this grave at that time. They are no more thoughtful of his

needs. Neither did they witness his torture. The failure of his efforts

were concealed by the soil (of the grave). Then You said - O My Angels!

A man has arrived and his friends and relatives have gone away. He is

all-alone and his friends and relatives have showed high-handedness.

Now he has come to Me. He is lying without his inheritance in the grave.

He was calling Me in the world. Now it is My duty to look after him. Now

Allah will show His hospitality and He will be more kind than my friends

and relatives. O Allah! If You stopped Your atmosphere between the

earth and sky and split the stars or take me down deep under the

ground due to my sins, I shall not give up my hopes for Your rewards.

My disappointment cannot prevent me from seeking Your pleasure.

O Allah! I have called You politely as per Your guidance. Now do not

say it was Your promise. This was Your blessing that shows me the nice

manners for supplication. Now it is the only way, fulfill my prayer and

make me righteous and able for Your praise. O my Lord! I swear by Your

honour and respect, my affection is vigilant in my heart for You and it
is

sweet. And Your beloved believers do not believe anyhow that You

would hate them. O my Lord I am waiting for Your forgiveness like an

accused and I am not disappointed from Your blessings and good

deeds. O my Lord! Do not be angry with me. I have no courage to

tolerate Your anger. And do not be displeased with me because I cannot

tolerate it. O my Lord! Did my mother brought me up for hell? I wish if

she had not brought me up. Had she gave birth to me for wretchedness?

I wish she had not. O Allah! When I remember about my false step, tears

flow from my eyes and why should I not cry? Though I don't know my

last destination and I don't know when and where my journey would end.

I even know my soul deceives me and my days deceive me and death is

hovering on my head and staring at me from near. The caller's cry

poisoned my ears. O Allah! I devoted my life to One Who bestows me

good health. I hope You will not awake me naked among the dead. I

hope You showed Your kindness in my life and recommend the same

kindness at the time of my death. O the companion of every traveler,

have pity on my journey of the grave. O the companion of every person

in solitude, have mercy on my solitude in the grave. O one Who is aware

of every secret, O one Who wards off every calamity and trouble, how

would You deal with me in the habitations of the grave? And how much

esteem You’d have for me in the land of horror and calamities? You

were very kind to me in my worldly life. O one Who showers the best of

the bounties among all those who bestow bounties and one Who is the

best of those Who do favours. O Allah! Your favours upon me are so

numerous that I cannot count them and I am unable repay all of them by

thanking for them. Praise for that You bestowed on me and thankfulness

upon the way You have tested me. O one Who is better than the call of

everyone who calls You and O, one Who is better than the hope of all

those who hope. I have come to beg to You by the right of Islam and the

sanctity of the Quran. And by the Sadaqah of the right of Muhammad

(s.a.w.a.) and Aale Muhammad (s.a.w.a.), I seek nearness to Your

realm. Bless Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and the Progeny of Muhammad

(s.a.w.a.) and grant Your attention to my duty of Your obedience. By

which I harbour hopes in You. Please accept my entreaty O the most

merciful of all the mercifuls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An elegy (Munajat)](sal025.md)
