[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index)  [Shiite
Texts](../shi)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sal154)  [Next](sal156) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\(154\)

His supplication for Friday

*In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful*

Praise is for Allah Who is not created by anything nor took any help in

creating the creatures; creation of new things is a proof of His
eternity.

And the way He has pointed out the helplessness among His creatures,

points out towards His power and the world is in need of Him proves His

eternity. No place is without His presence and the word 'Where' cannot

be addressed to Him. Neither He has a replica, nor a similarity to by

which He can be praised, neither He is heedless of anything, so that

one could comprehend the position of the Creator, different from His

attributes and far away from comprehension, by the intellect, as those

are imaginable things. He is away from all the misfortunes by His

Magnanimity and Greatness. It is prohibited for the intellect to
restrict a

limit for Allah, and the depth; mentions His conditions. And it is

prohibited for the small eyes of nature to imagine about Him. Neither

space encloses Him due to His greatness, nor can a quantity be

ascertained due to His Magnanimity, nor can imagination comprehend

Him. It is prohibited to imagine a portrait of Him by imagination or

intellect. The intellects faster than perfection are also helpless in
limiting

Him. And the oceans of knowledge have dried up in the quest of

understanding Him, the debate lovers whose argumentation reaches the

zenith, their evidences fall short and returns, and that once is not

sufficient, it is always but not restricted to time. It is forever but
not

without help. Neither He is like man, that can be compared with man, nor

He has a face that it can resemble any face. Neither He is a thing which

has part. The intellect is lost in the stormy ocean of recognition and
the

human strength is perplexed at ascertaining the beginning of His

Creation, the intelligent man is helpless in understanding the limit of
His

power and the minds are drowned in the heavenly gust of blast in His

territory. He is having power on the bounties due to His Magnificence,

He is saved from the force of possibilities, having possession over all

the things. Rather time created Him not and no attribute can restrict
Him,

the agitated necks are low because it is the height of their
helplessness

and in front of the greatness of His Power, the proofs of cause and

effect lie low on this eternity and a proof of Allah due to helplessness

and due to His being created a proof that Allah is foremost and due to

our annihilation a proof of His Eternity. These facts and the Creation
has

no respite from His Hold, nor an excuse to escape from the Domain, nor

anything hidden due to His knowledge, nor anything to stop from His

Greatness, the stability of the creation is a complete proof, the habits
of

the creatures are the best evidence and the creation of the inherent

qualities of ancientness, and its strength is a great lesson about
Allah.

Now no complete praise can be attributed to Him, nor can be explained

with examples. He is far above to be categorised by His signs.

Glorification is for Allah Who created the earth for destruction and

annihilation and the hereafter for perpetuity and eternity. Pure is
Allah

for Whom His Bestowals does not straiten Him but becomes a cause for

His Majestic, however great, and out of proportions and higher than

expectations the bestowals are. Whatever You decide cannot be

rejected and Your commands cannot be refused, whatever He bestows,

cannot be stopped, neither He chastises immediately, nor He forgets,

nor He hastens but gives chance, He forgives, pardons, has mercy and

is patient. He will not be questioned for His actions but the creatures
will

be questioned. There is no Lord except Allah Who cares for His

creatures, granting a respite to the polytheists, nearer to the one who

invokes but is far away. He is kind and merciful for the one who seeks

asylum and refuge. There is no god other than Allah Who responds to

the one who invokes Him in solitude and secretly. He listens to the one

who discloses His secrets. He is kind to the one who has hopes of

averting their sorrows. He comes nearer to those who pray for warding

off their sorrow and pain. There is no god except Allah Who is tolerant

with the one who does alteration and polytheism with His signs, and

turns away from clear proofs and are ready to rebel under all

circumstances. Allah is too High, overpowering the opponents,

affectionate to the adversaries, and Unique in obliging and bestowing

favours on entire mankind, and Allah is Great, who is covered due to His

creation and Honour, is incomparable in Majesty and Power and is

veiled in greatness and grandeur. And Allah is too Great and High; Who

is Pure due to His everlasting Honour, and is overpowering due to His

Proofs and Arguments. Whose will always persist. O Allah! Send Your

blessings on Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and his progeny as he is Your slave

and Your Messenger, bestow on him a best support, a honourable

bestowal, a great reward, a very near place, an auspicious limit and

coolness of eyes and satisfaction in abundance. O Allah! Bestow

blessings on Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and his progeny, grant him support

and greatness, increase his status, a position which is envied, greatest

honour, complete praise, the last limit and the right of achieving

nearness to You, so that he is satisfied and then increase this

satisfaction manifolds. O Allah! Bless Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and his

progeny as You have ordered complete obedience to him, have

cleansed him from all impurities and have bestowed purity on them in

true sense. O Allah! Bless Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and his progeny on

whom You have revealed Your knowledge and have Your book

protected through him, and have entrusted the custody of Your

creatures to him. O my Lord! Bless Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) Your slave

and Your messenger and the progeny of Muhammad, who are Your

special creatures, and Your beloved and the chief of the first and the

last of the Prophet and all the creatures. And send Your blessings on
his

infallible progeny, whose complete obedience and love You have made

obligatory on us. O Allah! Due to Your fear I invoke on You like a
fearful

person who is afraid of Your wrath, he has taken asylum in You due to

Your fear. There is none who can fulfill his needs and grant him asylum

nor can provide him a place, obligations and satisfaction other than
You.

O my master and my chief! Excessive disobedience has diverted my

attention to You, although my sins have become a curtain between us

(still I present myself) because You are a support for those who rely on

You, a hope for those who await You, Your bestowals do not harm You.

The invocation of the people does not dry up Your kindness. The great

obligations and the great bounties are not insufficient. O the One Whose

treasures does not deplete and Whose kingdom will not perish, and

vision cannot perceive You, no movement or stagnancy is concealed

from You, from its inception till its conclusion, whether its in the
depth of

earth or height of the skies, or the far off limits cannot be an
impediment

for You. O the Sustainer! You have taken the responsibility of

distributing sustenance. You are pure so as to attribute qualities to
You.

You are too High that tongues can limit or set a boundary to You.

Neither You are an invented thing so that Your development stages can

be witnessed. O the subduer from the beginning till the end. O the

Bestower of bounties in abundance. O the giver of complete bounties

and O the one to pardon the lapse of the tongue and forgive the action

of unjust. You possess the Power to forgive the people abundantly. O

my God! Your creature is praising You, and relies on You in trials. He

reserves all the admiration, and greatness is exclusively for You

because You are a permanent and perpetual Lord. You have made it

firm by the invention of times the second time or Yourself accept such a

state that the rules of praise may be applied there or that Your being

should accept such a state that Your deniers may Praise You due to the

change of state. Or some increase or decrease so that it can be

discussed, or the thoughts of the people gather at a place to define You

or nature comes as an example in their intellect by which their power of

understanding and insight is deviated. O my Lord! The whole creation is

obedient to You after accepting Your Lordship, heads are in prostration.

You are pure, how high is Your fame and how dignified is Your status,

how true are Your arguments and Your command prevails. Your limits

are beautiful. When You raised the sky it became a shade and when

You laid the earth it became a carpet, then You grew beneficial herbs

and vegetables from it, the vegetables also glorify You, and the water

flows at Your command; both the orders are as per Your commands. O

One Who is Powerful since the existence of creatures and is

overpowering upon their morality save my honour, as this is the best

way to ward off the sorrow. O He Who is a ray of hope in all the

troubles, and in all easiness the place of desire. Today I have brought

my wishes to You and I supplicate to You humbly, thus don't make me

unsuccessful in whatever I have asked from You, and don't turn down

my prayers, as You have opened the door and I have asked You from it.

Bless Muhammad (s.a.w.a.) and His progeny turn my fear into valour,

conceal my defects, grant me abundance sustenance by Your vast

grace and a complete safety and protection. O Allah! Let the best of my

day be the one when I meet You, forgive my sins as You have made me

fearful. You overlook my sins, else I will be destroyed as You are the

one Who hears, one Who accepts, one Who protects, one Who is near,

one possessing power, forgiver of sins, the domineering, the Merciful,

the self-existing, and it is easy for You to accept the supplications,
You

are the best of the creators. O Allah! You have made rights of my

parents incumbent on me, have bestowed them honour, and You are the

one Who brings down the burden in the best way and make it light, and

pay of the rights of Your debased creatures, and whatever rights of my

parents is incumbent on me that You fulfill it, forgive both of them, in

such a way as one desires, and with them forgive every believing man

and woman and count us among the people of goodness, place us and

them with pious people in heaven, because surely You accept the

supplication excessively, are near and accept the prayer of whom You

desire, O Allah! Bless our chief Muhammad Mustafa (s.a.w.a.) and his

progeny bestow Your Mercy on them and protect them with a great

protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His supplication for Saturday](sal156)
