[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index.md)  [Tarot
Reading](../pkt/tarot0)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mtar01.md) 
[Next](mtar03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SYMBOLISM OF EACH OF THE KEYS

I will now describe carefully the symbolism of each of these
hieroglyphical keys.

1\.

*The Juggler or Magician.* Before a table covered with the appliances of
his art stands the figure of a juggler, one hand upraised holding a wand
(in some packs, a cup), the other pointing downwards. He wears a cap of
maintenance like that of the kings, whose wide brim forms a sort of
aureole round his head. His body and arms form the shape of the Hebrew
letter Aleph, to which this card corresponds. He symbolises

Will.

2\. *The High Priestess, or Female Pope.* A woman crowned with a high
mitre or tiara (her head encircled by a veil), a stole (or a solar
cross) upon her breast, and the Book of Science open in her hand. She
represents

Science, Wisdom, or Knowledge.

3\. *The Empress.* A winged and crowned woman seated upon a throne,
having in one hand a sceptre bearing a globe surmounted by a cross,
while she rests the other upon a shield with an eagle blazoned therein
on whose breast is the cross. She is the Symbol of *Action,* the result
of the union of Science and Will.

4\. *The Emperor.* He is crowned (and leaning against a throne, his legs
form a cross, and beside him, beneath his left hand, is a shield
blazoned with an eagle). In his right hand he bears a sceptre similar to
that of the Empress. His body and arms form a triangle, of which his
head is the apex, so that the whole figure represents a triangle above a
cross. He represents

Realisation.

5\. *The Hierophant or Pope.* He is crowned with the papal tiara, and
seated between the two pillars of Hermes and of Solomon, with his right
hand he makes the sign of esoterism, and with his left he leans upon a
staff surmounted by a triple cross. (Before him kneel two ministers.) He
is the symbol of *Mercy* and

Beneficence.

6\. *The Lovers.* This is usually described as representing Man between
Vice and Virtue, while a winged genius threatens Vice with his dart. But
I am rather inclined to the opinion that it represents the Qabalistical
Microprosopus between Binah and Malkuth *(see* my *Kabbalah Unveiled),*
while the figure above shows the Influence descending from Kether. It is
usually considered to mean *Proof* or *Trial;* but I am inclined to
suggest *Wise Disposition* as its signification.

7\. *The Chariot.* This is a most complicated and important symbol,
which has been restored by Eliphas Levi. It represents a Conqueror
crowned and bearing a sceptre, riding in a cubical chariot, surmounted
by four columns and a canopy, and drawn by two horses, one of which
looks straight forward, while the other turns his head towards him. (Two
wheels are shown in the complete single-headed figure.) It represents
*Triumph,* and *Victory* of Justice and Judgment.

8\. *Justice.* A woman crowned and seated on a throne (between two
columns), holding in her right hand an upright sword, and in her left
the scales. She symbolises *Equilibrium* and

Justice.

9\. *The Hermit.* An old and bearded man wrapped in a mantle, and with
his head covered with a cowl, bearing in his right hand the lantern of
occult science, while in his left he holds his magic wand half hidden
beneath his cloak. He is

Prudence.

10\. *The Wheel of Fortune*. A wheel of *seven* spokes (the two halves
of the double-headed cards make it *eight* spokes, which is incorrect)
revolving (between two uprights), On the ascending side is an animal
ascending, and on the descending side is a sort of monkey descending;
both forms are bound to the wheel. Above it is the form of an angel (or
a sphinx in some) holding a sword in one hand and a crown in the other.
This very complicated symbol is much disfigured, and has been well
restored by Levi. It symbolises *Fortune,* good or bad.

11\. *Strength or Fortitude.* A woman crowned with crown and cap of
maintenance, who calmly, and Without effort, closes the jaws of a
furious lion. She represents

Strength.

12\. *The Hanged Man.* This extraordinary symbol is almost
unintelligible in the double-headed cards. Properly, it represents a man
hung head downwards from a sort of gibbet by one foot (his hands are
bound behind his back in such a manner that his body forms a triangle
with the point downwards), and his legs a cross above it. (Two sacks or
weights are attached to his armpits.) He symbolises

Sacrifice.

13\. *Death.* A skeleton armed with a Scythe (wherewith he mows down
heads in a meadow like grass). He signifies *Transformation,* or

Change.

14\. *Temperance* An angel with the sign of the Sun on her brow Pouring
liquid from one vessel into another. She represents

Combination.

15\. *The Devil.* A horned and winged demon with eagle's claws (standing
on an altar to which two smaller devils are bound by a collar and cord).
In his left hand he bears a flame-headed sceptre. He is the image of
*Fate* or *Fatality,* good or evil.

16\. *The Lightning-struck Tower.* A Tower whose Upper part is like a
crown, struck by a lightning-flash. (Two men fall headlong from it, One
of whom is in such an attitude as to form a Hebrew letter *Ayin.)*
Sparks and *debris* are falling. It shows

Ruin, Disruption.

17\. *The Star.* A nude female figure pours water upon the earth from
two vases. In the heavens above her shines the Blazing Star of the Magi
(surrounded by seven others), trees and plants grow beneath her magic
influence (and on one the butterfly of Psyche alights). She is the star
of

Hope.

18\. *The Moon.* The moon shining in the heavens, drops of dew falling,
a wolf and a dog howling at the Moon, and halted at the foot of two
towers, a path which loses itself in the horizon (and is sprinkled with
drops of blood, a crayfish emblematic of the sign Cancer, ruled over by
the Moon, crawls through water in the foreground towards the land). It
symbolises *Twilight, Deception,* and

Error.

19\. *The Sun.* The Sun sending down his rays upon two children, who
suggest the sign Gemini. (Behind them is a low wall.) It signifies

Earthly Happiness.

20\. *The Last Judgment.* An Angel in the heavens blowing a trumpet, to
which a standard with a cross thereon is attached. The Dead rise from
their tombs. It signifies

Renewal, Result.

0\. *The Foolish Man.* A man with a fool's cap, dressed like a jester,
with a stick and bundle over his shoulder. Before him is the butterfly
of pleasure luring him on (while in some packs a tiger, in others a dog,
attacks him from behind). It signifies

Folly, Expiation.

21\. *The Universe.* Within a flowery wreath is a female figure nude
save for a light scarf. She represents Nature and the Divine Presence
therein. In each hand she should bear a wand. At the four angles of the
card are the four cherubic animals of the Apocalypse. Above, the Eagle
and the Man; below, the Lion and the Bull. It represents

Completion, Reward.

Thus the whole series of the twenty-two trumps will give a connected
sentence which is capable of being read thus:--The Human *Will* (1)
enlightened by *Science* (2) and manifested by

Action (3) should find its *Realisation* (4) in deeds of *Mercy* and
*Beneficence* (5). The *Wise Disposition* (6) of this will give him
*Victory* (7) through *Equilibrium* (8) and *Prudence* (9), over the
fluctuations of *Fortune* (10). *Fortitude* (11), sanctified by
*Sacrifice* of Self (12), will triumph over *Death* itself (13), and
thus a Wise *Combination* (14) will enable him to defy *Fate* (15). In
each *Misfortune* (16) he will see the Star of *Hope* (17) shine through
the twilight of *Deception* (18); and ultimate *Happiness* (19) will be
the *Result* (20). *Folly* (0), on the other hand, will bring about an
evil *Reward* (21).

To prepare the pack for Fortune-telling, write at the top of each card
its number and signification when in its proper position, and at the
bottom its meaning when reversed. To facilitate this, and to assist in
reading them I here append a list of the cards with the meanings, which,
I think, will be found to answer all practical purposes R. means
Reversed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Meanings of the Cards](mtar03.md)
