[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg00)  [Next](btg02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE

This booklet needs no preface for those who are familiar with the sacred
books of Buddhism, which have been made accessible to the Western world
by the indefatigable zeal and industry of scholars like Beal, Bigandet,
Buehler, Burnouf, Childers, Alexander Csoma, Rhys Davids, Dutoit, Eitel,
Fausboell, Foucaux, Francke, Edmund Hardy, Spence Hardy, Hodgson,
Charles R. Lanmann, F. Max Mueller, Karl Eugen Neumann, Oldenberg,
Pischel, Schiefner, Senart, Seidenstuecker, Bhikkhu Nyanatiloka, D. M.
Strong, Henry Clarke Warren, Wasselijew, Weber, Windisch, Winternitz &
c.

To those not familiar with the subject it may be stated that the bulk of
its contents is derived from the old Buddhist canon. Many passages, and
indeed the most important ones, are literally copied in translations
from the original texts. Some are rendered rather freely in order to
make them intelligible to the present generation; others have been
rearranged; and still others are abbreviated. Besides the three
introductory and the three concluding chapters there are only a few
purely original additions, which, however, are neither mere literary
embellishments nor deviations from Buddhist doctrines. Wherever the
compiler has admitted modernization he has done so with due
consideration and always in the spirit of a legitimate development.
Additions and modifications contain nothing but ideas for which
prototypes can be found somewhere among the traditions of Buddhism, and
have been introduced as elucidations of its main principles.

The best evidence that this book characterizes the spirit of Buddhism
correctly can be found in the welcome it has received throughout the
entire Buddhist world. It has even been officially introduced in
Buddhist schools and temples of Japan and Ceylon. Soon after the
appearance of the first edition of 1894 the Right Rev. Shaku Soyen, a
prominent Buddhist abbot of Kamakura, Japan, had a Japanese translation
made by Teitaro Suzuki, and soon afterwards a Chinese version was made
by Mr. O'Hara of Otzu, the talented editor of a Buddhist periodical, who
in the meantime has unfortunately met with a premature death. In 1895
the Open Court Publishing Company brought out a German edition by E. F.
L. Gauss, and Dr. L. de Milloue, the curator of the Musee Guimet, of
Paris, followed with a French translation. Dr. Federigo Rodriguez has
translated the book into Spanish and Felix Orth into Dutch. The
privilege of translating the book into Russian, Czechic, Italian, also
into Siamese and other Oriental tongues has been granted, but of these
latter the publishers have received only a version in the Urdu language,
a dialect of eastern India.

Buddhism, like Christianity, is split up into innumerable sects, and
these sects not infrequently cling to their sectarian tenets as being
the main and most indispensable features of their religion. The present
book follows none of the sectarian doctrines, but takes an ideal
position upon which all true Buddhists may stand as upon common ground.
Thus the arrangement into a harmonious and systematic form is the main
original feature of this Gospel of Buddha. Considering the bulk of the
various details of the Buddhist canon, however, it must be regarded as a
mere compilation, and the aim of the compiler has been to treat his
material in about the same way as he thinks that the author of the
Fourth Gospel of the New Testament utilized the accounts of the life of
Jesus of Nazareth. He has ventured to present the data of the Buddha's
life in the light of their religio-philosophical importance; he has cut
out most of their apocryphal adornments, especially those in which the
Northern traditions abound, yet he did not deem it wise to shrink form
preserving the marvellous that appears in the old records, whenever its
moral seemed to justify its mention; he only pruned away the exuberance
of wonder which delights in relating the most incredible things,
apparently put on to impress while in fact they can only tire. Miracles
have ceased to be a religious test; yet the belief in the miraculous
powers of the Master still bears witness to the holy awe of the first
disciples and reflects their religious enthusiasm.

Lest the fundamental idea of the Buddha's doctrines be misunderstood,
the reader is warned to take the term

*"self"* in the sense in which the Buddha uses it. The "self" of man
translates the word *atman* which can be and has been understood, even
the Buddhist canon, in a sense to which the Buddha would never have made
any objection. The Buddha denies the existence of a "self" as it was
commonly understood in his time; he does not deny man's mentality, his
spiritual constitution, the importance of his personality, in a word,
his soul. But he does deny the mysterious ego-entity, the atman, in the
sense of a kind of soul-nomad which by some schools was supposed to
reside behind or within man's bodily and psychical activity as a
distinct being, a kind of thing-in-itself, and a metaphysical agent
assumed to be the soul.

Buddhism is monistic. It claims that man's soul dies not consist of two
things, of an atman (self) and of a manas (mind or thoughts), but that
there is one reality, our thoughts, our mind or manas, and this manas
constitutes the soul. Man's thoughts, if anything, are his self, and
these is no atman, no additional and separate "self" besides.
Accordingly, the translation of atman by "soul", which would imply that
the Buddha denied the exitstence of the soul, is extremely misleading.
Representative Buddhists, of different schools and of various countries,
acknoledge the correctness of the view here taken, and we emphasize
especially the assent of Southern Buddhists because they have preserved
the tradition most faithfully and are very punctilious in the statement
of doctrinal points.

"The Buddhist, the Organ of the Southern Church of Buddhism," writes in
a review of The Gospel of Buddha:

"The eminent feature of the work is its grasp of the difficult subject
and the clear enunciation of the doctrine of the most puzzling problem
of atman, as taught in Buddhism. So far as we have examined the question
of atman ourselves from the works of the Southern canon, the view taken
by Dr. Paul Carus is accurate, and we venture to think that it is not
opposed to the doctrine of Northern Buddhism."

This atman-superstition, so common not only in India, but all over the
world, corresponds to man's habitual egotism in practical life. Both are
illusions growing out of the same root, which is the vanity of
worldliness, inducing man to believe that the purpose of his life lies
in his self. The Buddha puroposes to cut off entirely all thought of
self, so that it will no longer bear fruit. Thus Nirvana is an ideal
state, in which man's soul, after being cleansed from all selfishness,
hatred and lust, has become a habitation of the truth, teaching him to
distrust the allurements of pleasure and to confine all his energies to
attending to the duties of life.

The Buddha's doctrine is not negativism. An investigation of the nature
of man's soul shows that, while there is no atman or ego-entity, the
very being of man consists in his karma, his deeds, and his karma
remains untouched by death and continues to live. Thus, by denying the
existence of that which appears to be our soul and for the destruction
of which in death we tremble, the Buddha actually opens (as he expresses
it himself) the door of immortality to mankind; and here lies the
corner-stone of his ethics and also of the comfort as well as the
enthusiasm which his religion imparts. Any one who does not see the
positive aspect of Buddhism, will be unable to understand how it could
exercise such a powerful influence upon millions and millions of people.

The present volume is not designed to contribute to the solution of
historical problems. The compiler has studied his subject as well as he
could under the circumstances, but he does not intend here to offer a
scientific production. Nor it this book an attempt at popularizing the
Buddhist religious writings, nor at presenting them in a poetic shape.
If this Gospel of Buddha helps people to comprehend Buddhism better, and
if in its simple style it impresses the reader with the poetic grandeur
of the Buddha's personality, these effects must be counted as
incidental; its main purpose lies deeper still. The present book has
been written to set the reader thinking on the religious problems of
to-day. It sketches the picture of a religious leader of the remote past
with the view of making it bear upon the living present and become a
factor in the formation of the future.

It is a remarkable fact that the two greatest religions of the world,
Christianity and Buddhism, present so many striking coincidences in the
philosophical basis as well as in the ethical applications of their
faith, while their modes of systematizing them in dogmas are radically
different; and it is difficult to understand why these agreements should
have caused animostity, instead of creating sentiments of friendship and
good-will. Why should not Christians say with Prof. F. Max Mueller:

"If I do find in certain Buddhist works doctrines identically the same
as in Christianity, so far from being frightened, I feel delighted, for
surely truth is not the less true because it is believed by the majority
of the human race."

The main trouble arises from a wrong conception of Christianity. There
are many Christians who assume that Christianity alone is in possession
of truth and that men could not, in the natural way of his moral
evolution, have obtained that nobler conception of life which enjoins
the practice of a universal good-will towards both friends and enemies.
This narrow view of Christianity is refuted by the mere existence of
Buddhism.

Must we add that the lamentable exclusivesness that prevails in many
Christian churches, is not based upon Scriptural teachings, but upon a
wrong metaphysics?

All the essential moral truths of Christianity, especially the principle
of a universal love, of the eradication of hatred, are in our opinion
deeply rooted in the nature of things, and do not, as is often assumed,
stand in contradiction to the cosmic order of the world. Further, some
doctrines of the constitution of existence have been formulated by the
church in certain symbols, and since these symbols contain
contradictions and come in conflict with science, the educated classes
are estranged from religion. Now, Buddhism is a religion which knows of
no supernatural revelation, and proclaims doctrines that require no
other argument that the "come and see." The Buddha bases his religion
solely upon man's knowledge of the nature of things, upon provable
truth. Thus, we trust that a comparison of Christianity with Buddhism
will be a great help to distinguish in both religions the essential from
the accidental, the eternal from the transient, the truth from the
allegory in which it has found its symbolic expression. We are anxious
to press the necessity of discriminating between the symbol and its
meaning, between dogma and religion, between metaphysical theories and
statements of fact, between man-made formulas and eternal truth. And
this is the spirit in which we offer this book to the public, cherishing
the hope that its will help to develop in Christianity not less than in
Buddhism the cosmic religion of truth.

The strength as well as the weakness of original Buddhism lies in its
philosophical character, which enabled a thinker, but not the masses, to
understand the dispensation of the moral law that pervades the world. As
such, the original Buddhism has been called by Buddhists the little
vessel of salvation, or Hinayana; for it is comparable to a small boat
on which a man may cross the stream of worldliness, so as to reach the
shore of Nirvana.

Following the spirit of a missionary propaganda, so natural to religious
men who are earnest in their convictions, later Buddhists popularized
the Buddha's doctrines and made them accessible to the multitudes. It is
true that they admitted many mythical and even fantastic notions, but
they succeeded nevertheless in bringing its moral truths home to the
people who could but incompletely grasp the philosophical meaning of the
Buddha's religion. They constructed, as they called it, a large vessel
of salvation, the Mahayana, in which the multitudes would find room and
could be safely carried over. Although the Mahayana unquestionably has
its shortcomings, it must not be condemned offhand, for it serves its
purpose. Without regarding it as the final stage of the religious
development of the nations among which it prevails, we must concede that
it resulted from an adaptation to their condition and has accomplished
much to educate them. The Mahayana is a step forward in so far as it
changes a philosophy into a religion, and attempts to preach doctrines
that were negatively expressed, in positive propositions.

Far from rejecting the religious zeal which gave rise to the Mahayana in
Buddhism, we can still less join those who denounce Christianity on
account of its dogmatology and mythological ingredients. Christianity
has certainly had and still has a great mission in the evolution of
mankind. It has succeeded in imbuing with the religion of charity and
mercy the most powerful nations of the world, to whose spiritual needs
it is especially adapted. It extends the blessings of universal
good-will with the least possible amount of antagonism to the natural
selfishness that is no stronly developed in the Western races.
Christianity is the religion of love made easy. This is its advantage.
which, however, is not without its drawbacks. Christianity teaches
charity without dispelling the ego-illusion; and in this sense it
surpasses even the Mahayana; it is still more adapted to the needs of
multitudes than a large vessel fitted to carry over those who embark on
it; it is comparable to a grand bridge, a Mahasetu, on which a child who
has no comprehension as yet of the nature of self can cross the stream
of self-hood and worldly vanity.

A comparison of the many striking agreements between christianity and
Buddhism may prove fatal to sectarian conceptions of either religion,
but will in the end help to mature our insight into the true
significance of both. It will bring out a nobler faith which aspires to
be the cosmic religion of universal truth. Let us hope that this Gospel
of Buddha will serve both Buddhists and Christians as a help to
penetrate further into the spirit of their faith, so as to see its full
height, length and breadth. Above any Hinayana, Mahayana, and Mahasetu
is the Religion of Truth.

Paul Carus  
LaSalle, Illinois, United States.  
1894

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Disciple Speaks](btg02)
