[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg15)  [Next](btg17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# FOUNDING THE KINGDOM

### UPAKA SEES THE BUDDHA

Now the Blessed One thought: "To whom shall I preach the doctrine first?
My old teachers are dead. They would have received the good news with
joy. But my five disciples are still alive. I shall go to them, and to
them shall I first proclaim the gospel of deliverance."

At that time the five bhikkhus dwelt in the Deer Park at Benares, and
the Blessed One rose and journeyed to their abode, not thinking of their
unkindness in having left him at a time when he was most in need of
their sympathy and help, but mindful only of the services which they had
ministered unto him, and pitying them for the austerities which they
practiced in vain.

Upaka, a young Brahman and a Jain, a former acquaintance of Siddhattha,
saw the Blessed One while he journeyed to Benares, and, amazed at the
majesty and sublime joyfulness of his appearance, said to him: "Thy
countenance, my friend, is serene; thine eyes are bright and indicate
purity and blessedness."

The holy Buddha replied: "I have obtained deliverance by the extinction
of self. My body is chastened, my mind is free from desire, and the
deepest truth has taken abode in my heart. I have obtained Nirvana, and
this is the reason that my countenance is serene and my eyes are bright.
I now desire to found the kingdom of truth upon earth, to give light to
those who are enshrouded in darkness and to open the gate of
deathlessness."

Upaka replied: "Thou professest then, friend, to be Jina, the conqueror
of the world, the absolute one and the holy one.

The Blessed One said: "Jinas are all those who have conquered self and
the passions of self; those alone are victorious who control their minds
and abstain from evil. Therefore, Upaka, I am the Jina."

Upaka shook his head. "Venerable Gotama, he said, "thy way lies yonder,"
and taking another road he went away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sermon At Benares](btg17)
