[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg10)  [Next](btg12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# URUVELA, PLACE OF MORTIFICATION

THE Bodhisattva went in search of a better system and came to a
settlement of five bhikkhus in the jungle of Uruvela; and when the
Blessed One saw the life of those five men, virtuously keeping in check
their senses, subduing their passions, and practicing austere
self-discipline, he admired their earnestness and joined their company.
With holy zeal and a strong heart, the Sakyamuni gave himself up to
meditative thought and a rigorous mortification of the body. Whereas the
five bhikkhus were severe, the Sakyamuni was severer still, and so they
revered him, their junior, as their master.

So the Bodhisattva continued for six years patiently torturing himself
and suppressing the wants of nature. He trained his body and exercised
his mind in the modes of the most rigorous ascetic life. At last, he ate
each day one hemp grain only, seeking to cross the ocean of birth and
death and to arrive at the shore of deliverance.

And when the Bodhisattva was ahungered, lo! Mara, the Evil One,
approached him and said: "Thou art emaciated from fasts, and death is
near. What good is thy exertion? Deign to live, and thou wilt be able to
do good work." But the Sakyamuni made reply: "O thou friend of the
indolent, thou wicked one; for what purpose hast thou come? Let the
flesh waste away, if but the mind becomes more tranquil and attention
more steadfast. What is life in this world? Death in battle is better to
me than that I should live defeated."

And Mara withdrew, saying: "For seven years I have followed the Blessed
One step by step, but I have found no fault in the Tathagata."

The Bodhisattva was shrunken and attenuated, and his body was like a
withered branch; but the fame of his holiness spread in the surrounding
countries, and people came from great distances to see him and receive
his blessing. However, the Holy One was not satisfied. Seeking true
wisdom he did not find it, and he came to the conclusion that
mortification would not extinguish desire nor afford enlightenment in
ecstatic contemplation.

Seated beneath a jambu-tree, he considered the state of his mind and the
fruits of his mortification. His body had become weaker, nor had his
fasts advanced him in his search for salvation, and therefore when he
saw that it was not the right path, he proposed to abandon it. He went
to bathe in the Neranjara River, but when he strove to leave the water
he could not rise on account of his weakness. Then espying the branch of
a tree and taking hold of it, he raised himself and left the stream. But
while returning to his abode, he staggered and lay as though dead.

There was a chief herdsman living near the grove whose eldest daughter
was called Nanda; and Nanda happened to pass by the spot where the
Blessed One had swooned, and bowing down before him she offered him
rice-milk and he accepted the gift. When he had partaken of the
rice-milk all his limbs were refreshed, his mind became clear again, and
he was strong to receive the highest enlightenment.

After this occurrence, the Bodhisattva again took some food. His
disciples, having witnessed the scene of Nanda and observing the change
in his mode of living, were filled with suspicion. They feared that
Siddhattha's religious zeal was flagging and that he whom they had
hitherto revered as their Master had become oblivious of his high
purpose.

When the Bodhisattva saw the bhikkhus turning away from him, he felt
sorry for their lack of confidence, and was aware of the loneliness of
his life. Suppressing his grief he wandered on alone, and his disciples
said, "Siddhattha leaves us to seek a more pleasant abode." MARA

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mara, The Evil One](btg12)
