[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg38)  [Next](btg40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BHIKKHUS REBUKED

IT happened that the Blessed One walked up and down in the open air
unshod. When the elders saw that the Blessed One walked unshod, they put
away their shoes and did likewise. But the novices did not heed the
example of their elders and kept their feet covered.

Some of the brethren noticed the irreverent behavior of the novices and
told the Blessed One; and the Blessed One rebuked the novices and said:
"If the brethren, even now, while I am yet living, show so little
respect and courtesy to one another, what will they do when I have
passed away?"

The Blessed One was filled with anxiety for the welfare of the truth;
and he continued: "Even the laymen, O bhikkhus, who move in the world,
pursuing some handicraft that they may procure them a living, will be
respectful, affectionate, and hospitable to their teachers. Do ye,
therefore, O bhikkhus, so let your light shine forth, that ye, having
left the world and devoted your entire life to religion and to religious
discipline, may observe the rules of decency, be respectful,
affectionate, and hospitable to your teachers and superiors, or those
who rank as your teachers and superiors. Your demeanor, O bhikkhus, does
not conduce to the conversion of the unconverted and to the increase of
the number of the faithful. It serves, O bhikkhus, to repel the
unconverted and to estrange them. I exhort you to be more considerate in
the future, more thoughtful and more respectful."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Jealousy Of Devadatta](btg40.md)
