[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg46)  [Next](btg48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# AVOIDING THE TEN EVILS

THE Buddha said: "All acts of living creatures become bad by ten things,
and by avoiding the ten things they become good. There are three evils
of the body, four evils of the tongue, and three evils of the mind.

"The evils of the body are, murder, theft, and adultery; of the tongue,
lying, slander, abuse, and idle talk; of the mind, covetousness, hatred,
and error.

"I exhort you to avoid the ten evils: 1. Kill not, but have regard for
life. 2. Steal not, neither do ye rob; but help everybody to be master
of the fruits of his labor. 3. Abstain from impurity, and lead a life of
chastity. 4. Lie not, but be truthful. Speak the truth with discretion,
fearlessly and in a loving heart. 5. Invent not evil reports, neither do
ye repeat them. Carp not, but look for the good sides of your
fellow-beings, so that ye may with sincerity defend them against their
enemies. 6. Swear not, but speak decently and with dignity. 7. Waste not
the time with gossip, but speak to the purpose or keep silence. 8. Covet
not, nor envy, but rejoice at the fortunes of other people. 9. Cleanse
your heart of malice and cherish no hatred, not even against your
enemies; but embrace all living beings with kindness. 10. Free your mind
of ignorance and be anxious to learn the truth, especially in the one
thing that is needful, lest you fall a prey either to scepticism or to
errors. Scepticism will make you indifferent and errors will lead you
astray, so that you shall not find the noble path that leads to life
eternal."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Preacher's Mission](btg48.md)
