[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg55)  [Next](btg57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# ONE ESSENCE, ONE LAW, ONE AIM

THE Tathagata addressed the venerable Kassapa, to dispel the uncertainty
and doubt of his mind, and he said: "All things are made of one essence,
yet things are different according to the forms which they assume under
different impressions. As they form themselves so they act, and as they
act so they are. It is, Kassapa, as if a potter made different vessels
out of the same clay. Some of these pots are to contain sugar, others
rice, others curds and milk; others still are vessels of impurity. There
is no diversity in the clay used; the diversity of the pots is only due
to the moulding hands of the potter who shapes them for the various uses
that circumstances may require.

"And as all things originate from one essence, so they are developing
according to one law and they are destined to one aim which is Nirvana.
Nirvana comes to thee, Kassapa, when thou understandest thoroughly, and
when thou livest according to thy understanding, that all things are of
one essence and that there is but one law. Hence, there is but one
Nirvana as there is but one truth, not two or three.

"And the Tathagata is the same unto all beings, differing in his
attitude only in so far as all beings are different. The Tathagata
recreates the whole world like a cloud shedding its waters without
distinction. He has the same sentiments for the high as for the low, for
the wise as for the ignorant, for the noble-minded as for the immoral.

"The great cloud full of rain comes up in this wide universe covering
all countries and oceans to pour down its rain everywhere, over all
grasses, shrubs, herbs, trees of various species, families of plants of
different names growing on the earth, on the hills, on the mountains, or
in the valleys. Then, Kassapa, the grasses, shrubs, herbs, and wild
trees suck the water emitted from that great cloud which is all of one
essence and has been abundantly poured down; and they will, according to
their nature, acquire a proportionate development, shooting up and
producing blossoms and their fruits in season. Rooted in one and the
same soil, all those families of plants and germs are quickened by water
of the same essence.

"The Tathagata, however, O Kassapa, knows the law whose essence is
salvation, and whose end is the peace of Nirvana. He is the same to all,
and yet knowing the requirements of every single being, he does not
reveal himself to all alike. He does not impart to them at once the
fullness of omniscience, but pays attention to the disposition of
various beings."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lesson Given To Rahula](btg57)
