[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](btg86)  [Next](btg88.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SICK BHIKKHU

AN old bhikkhu of a surly disposition was afflicted with a loathsome
disease the sight and smell of which was so nauseating that no one would
come near him or help him in his distress. And it happened that the
World-honored One came to the vihara in which the unfortunate man lay;
hearing of the case he ordered warm water to be prepared and went to the
sick-room to administer unto the sores of the patient with his own hand,
saying to his disciples:

"The Tathagata has come into the world to befriend the poor, to succor
the unprotected, to nourish those in bodily affliction, both the
followers of the Dharma and unbelievers, to give sight to the blind and
enlighten the minds of the deluded, to stand up for the rights of
orphans as well as the aged, and in so doing to set an example to
others. This is the consummation of his work, and thus he attains the
great goal of life as the rivers that lose themselves in the ocean."

The World-honored One administered unto the sick bhikkhu daily so long
as he stayed in that place. And the governor of the city came to the
Buddha to do him reverence and having heard of the service which the
Lord did in the vihara asked the Blessed One about the previous
existence of the sick monk, and the Buddha said:

"In days gone by there was a wicked king who used to extort from his
subjects all he could get; and he ordered one of his officers to lay the
lash on a man of eminence. The officer little thinking of the pain he
inflicted upon others, obeyed; but when the victim of the king's wrath
begged for mercy, he felt compassion and laid the whip lightly upon him.
Now the king was reborn as Devadatta, who was abandoned by all his
followers, because they were no longer willing to stand his severity,
and he died miserable and full of penitence. The officer is the sick
bhikkhu, who having often given offense to his brethren in the vihara
was left without assistance in his distress. The eminent man, however,
who was unjustly beaten and begged for mercy was the Bodhisattva; he has
been reborn as the Tathagata. It is now the lot of the Tathagata to help
the wretched officer as he had mercy on him."

And the World-honored One repeated these lines: "He who inflicts pain on
the gentle, or falsely accuses the innocent, will inherit one of the ten
great calamities. But he who has learned to suffer with patience will be
purified and will be the chosen instrument for the alleviation of
suffering."

The diseased bhikkhu on hearing these words turned to the Buddha,
confessed his ill-natured temper and repented, and with a heart cleansed
from error did reverence unto the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Patient Elephant](btg88.md)
