[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht108)  [Next](ht110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI.

THE PERSECUTIONS OF THE TALMUD IN THE PERSIAN AND BYZANTINE EMPIRES IN
THE SIXTH CENTURY AFTER THE CLOSE OF THE TALMUD.

In the reign of Kobad (Cabades) in Persia, a fanatic reformer named
Mazdak desired to introduce the doctrine of the community of property
and wives, thus modifying the Zoroastrian creed. (501). The king became
an adherent of the new doctrine and decreed its acceptance by the
people. The lower classes eagerly availed themselves of the license thus
granted. To this communism, the Jews, led by Mar Zutra II., son of R.
Huna, the young exilarch, offered an armed resistance. The occasion of
the revolt was the murder of Mar Isaac, president of one of the
colleges. It is related that they established an independent Jewish
state, having for king the Prince of Captivity, with Machuza as the
capital. At last, after seven years, Mar Zutra and his grandfather, Mar
Chanina, were taken prisoners, executed, and their bodies nailed to the
cross on the bridge of Machuza (about 520). On account of the ensuing
persecutions the office of Exilarch remained for some time in abeyance.
The colleges were closed, as the teachers were compelled to conceal
themselves, and Abuna and Giza, two of the most, eminent, fled. When
peace was restored after Kobad's death, the college at Sura, received
Giza as president, and that at Pumbeditha, Semuna. A third name of
eminence survives, that of Rabbi or Rab (near Nahardea), of whom little
is known. Men of religious mind of the period devoted themselves to the
study of the Talmud, the love for which persecution had but increased,
which satisfied religious zeal and promoted tranquillity of mind, and
the knowledge of which raised its possessor to positions of honor and
trust.

The original development of the Talmud had at that period

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

ceased. Giza and Semuna conceived the desire to fix the laws for
practical use, casting aside theoretical speculation, for it was
necessary that there be no doubts or wavering. Their activity in this
work was but a continuation of that which had begun at the close of the
Talmud. The labors of the presidents of the colleges were confined to
this task and to assembling, as of old, the disciples in Adar (March)
and Ellul (September) and instructing them by lectures, and to assigning
themes for private study. To fix the laws, the arguments *pro* and *con*
needed to be weighed; therefore they were called Sabureans (Saburai).
Many points of practice in the ritual, the civil law, and the marriage
code were settled at this period.

Giza and Semuna gave chief attention to committing the Talmud to
writing, making use of oral traditions and of notes made to aid the
memory by various individuals. All legends were incorporated, and the
obscure passages elucidated by their additions, for everything emanating
from the Amoraim was thought important. In this form it has reached us.
The vowel points to the Bible were also invented at this time, according
to Graetz.

"The names of the immediate successors of Giza and Semuna have not been
preserved either by chronicles or tradition"--forgotten in the
persecution visited on the colleges during this century by both
Christian and Zoroastrian churches.

Hormisdas IV., Chosroes Nushirvan's son, was unlike his father. Led by
the Magi, who strove to check the approaching dissolution of their
religion by persecution of the adherents of other faiths, he vented his
wrath upon the Jews and Christians of his empire. The Talmudical
colleges at Sura and Pumbeditha were closed, and again many teachers
fled (about 581) this time to Firuzshabar, where, under an Arabian
governor, they were less exposed to espionage. New colleges arose there,
among which that of Mari was eminent, and there they continued their
Talmudic labors. A general, Babram Tshubin, who had experienced the
ingratitude of the king, usurped the Persian throne. In this he was
assisted by the Jews with money and men, and in return granted them many
favors and concessions. As a result, the colleges of Sura and Pumbeditha
were reopened; Chanan of Iskia returned from Firuzshabar to Pumbeditha,
and restored the college there; it is also probable

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

that the president of Sura, which was of far greater repute, was elected
at that time, though his name is not mentioned in the chronicles.

With Babram's fall the vengeance of the lawful heir to the throne,
prince Chosru, was visited on the Jews. With the aid of the Byzantine
emperor, Mauritius, and the loyal portion of the Persian people, he
defeated the usurper, putting to the sword also the greater part of the
Jewish population of Machuza, and probably of other cities as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: The Eight Century: the Persecution of the Talmud by
the Karaites](ht110)
