[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht104)  [Next](ht106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE TALMUD DURING THE LAST CENTURY OF THE SECOND
TEMPLE'S EXISTENCE (*i.e.* THE FIRST A.C.)
SHEMAIA--ABTALIAN--HILLEL--SHAMMAI--THE PRINCES (NASIS) OF ISRAEL--R.
JOHANAN B. ZAKKAI--SANHEDRIN OF JAMNIA--THE JEWISH CHRISTIANS.

After the triumph of Simon b. Shetah over the Sadducees, when he had
finally cleared the Sanhedrin of them, and only the Pharisees remained
there, the development of the Talmud progressed rapidly, for the number
of the sages, the adherents, reverers, sanctifiers of the Talmud,
increased greatly in the colleges of the Ashkaloth (Duumviri) who
succeeded to ben Shetah: Shemaia and Abtalian, and, after them, Hillel
and Shammai. And although at that time new enemies arose, in the
Boethuseans, Essenes, and many other sects who were opposed to its
particular doctrines, yet those had not the power to check its progress
or to weaken its influence--not only on all Israelites, wherever they
dwelt, but also on many Gentiles: for at that time we see that prominent
persons of other nations (App. No. 5) come to the chief men of Israel
and express their wish to

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

adopt Judaism. Hillel the Elder received them with open arms. Helen the
Queen, and her son, Isotis, also accepted the creed of the Talmud. All
this was due to the fact that its morality came at this time to be
before the world. The Polytheists began to perceive the great difference
between the teaching of their priests in the names of the gods, and the
Torah as explained by its sages. From all places of the world came
persons to learn the doctrines and the morality of the Talmud. This
period of good fortune, however, was only of short duration, as the time
of the destruction of the Temple was nigh, and with it the victims of
the sword and of hunger were many. Among these were the great sages who
bore the banner of the Talmud, and their wisdom died with them. The
Sanhedrin had been forced, while the Temple was still in existence, to
transfer their meeting places from the "marble hall" to the "shops."
Rabban Gamaliel the Elder, the son of Hillel the Prince (Nasi) was
persecuted by them, and his son Simeon was slain, together with many
sages. Thus, if R. Johanan b. Zakkai had not, risking his life,
petitioned Vespasian to spare the Sanhedrin, who had been compelled
during the tumults at Jerusalem to move with their college to Jamnia,
there would have remained no vestige of the Talmud, since most of those
who cherished it had passed away by the sword, by hunger and by the
plague. Besides, the disciples of Jesus (see App. No. 6), who then
believed in his Messiahship, but not in his divinity, began secretly to
undermine the Talmud, which laid more stress on external ceremonies than
they deemed necessary, and endeavored with all their might to weaken its
influence among the populace, but R. Jehanan b. Zakkai and the Sanhedrin
in Jamnia, with Rabban Gamaliel, the son of the slain Simeon, at their
head, restored the Talmud to its prestige, and took pains to raise up
others in the places of the murdered sages.

Thus the study of the Talmud flourished after the destruction of the
Temple, although beset with great difficulties and desperate struggles.
All his days, R. Johanan b. Zakkai was obliged to dispute with Sadducees
and Bathueians and, no doubt, with the Messiahists also; for although
these last were Pharisees, they differed in many points from the
teaching of the Talmud after their master, Jesus, had broken with the
Pharisees

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

and their doctrines in public. So R. Johanan b. Zakkai was obliged to
introduce many reforms; and Rabban Gamaliel of Jamnia, notwithstanding
his office of Nasi, and his lofty bearing towards his colleagues and
adversaries, was compelled to go many times to Rome to ask for mercy for
his college and the Pharisaic sages. And this first Nasi, after the
Temple's destruction, also had to witness the evil consequences of
quarrels in the midst of his own nation, added to the calamities from
without.

As the interpretations of every letter and vowel point of the written
law had multiplied, and liberty had been given to every learned man to
construe biblical texts at his pleasure, the differences of opinion
multiplied, and the disciples of Shammai and Hillel, whose master's
characters differed to the utmost, split into two factions and studied
in separate colleges. Thus the teaching of the Talmud was differently
interpreted by two parties, and what the one permitted, the other
forbade. This circumstance was of more danger to the Talmud than any
external foe, for when there is no internal union, the whole fabric will
go to pieces, and its influence will, of course, diminish. Therefore the
sages of Jamnia, with R. Gamaliel at their head, strove not only to
decide the law according to the school of Hillel, but also to decree
that the words of Shammai's school in the place of Hillel's had no value
at all. And what a world of difficulty the sages had to surmount before
they succeeded! .R. Simeon ben Gamaliel rightly says "If we proceeded to
record all the troubles and calamities we had endured, time would not
suffice."

But in the long run they did succeed in widening and increasing the
sphere of influence of the Talmud, for both the internal dissensions and
external opposition only tended to sink more deeply into the hearts of
the people its doctrines (Halakhas), legends (Hagadas) and morals. At
the end of the first century it was to them a substitute for their
destroyed Temple; it was their stronghold, their entertainment by day
and by night. It was only when they were occupied with it that they
forgot all the calamities past and present; it was the sole bond which
kept together the scattered colonies of Israelites, which strengthened
them to bear the yoke of the Romans, to hope for brighter days, to be
patient unto the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Persecution of the Talmud from the destruction of
the Temple to the Third Century](ht106)
