[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht109)  [Next](ht111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII.

THE EIGHTH CENTURY. THE DOMINION OF THE GAONIM. THE OPPOSITION OF THE
KARAITES. THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A SECT OF THAT NAME.

The Pharisees had been victorious over the Sadducees and the other sects
opposed to the Oral Law, but had not annihilated them entirely; since
only because these latter could not withstand them, they kept silence
and were discontented in their hearts, As the Talmud gained strength and
became more severe in its decrees against the Sadducees and Samaritans,
so that in the end the Kuthim were declared as idolaters in all
respects, then their indignation burned and they awaited a favorable
time for revenge. In the time of the dominance of the Gaonim, who
carried out the Talmud in practice, the measure became full, and Anan,
the nephew of the Gaon at Sura, when he was not elected as Gaon, for the
reason of his liberal ideas and his opposition to the Talmud,
established the Karaite sect.

Those who hold that the Karaites were a new sect founded by Anan (760
C.E.), are mistaken, for a small sect under the name of Karaites, or
adherents of the Text, had existed already in the days of the Talmud,
where they are mentioned in many places, as "adherents of the Text," or
once "the Karaites add" (Pesachim, 117a in text; in our edition, Vol.
V., p. 145). Doubtless the remainder of the Sadducees assumed this name,
having lost political influence since they had been vanquished, and the
word "Sadducees" being hated by the people. Therefore the remains of the
sect called themselves "Karaites,"

i.e.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

those who occupy themselves with the text of Scripture, and endeavor to
understand its real meaning. Owing to their. small numbers, or to the
lack of a great man to head them, this, sect kept secret its hatred of
the Talmud, though it existed so long as to outlive even the close of
the latter, and the Talmudic sages paid no attention to them. Finally,
however, chance gave them a man fit to be their leader, who publicly
opposed the Talmud so that all its enemies made one league against it,
and they were at first a great power; and in the course of 700 years
they did not cease to persecute the Talmud and almost destroyed it;
finally, however, they lost their influence which they never regained,
and to-day are decayed so that small numbers only live in Austria,
Crimea, and many other places in Russia, numbering in all to-day no more
than 4,000 or 5,000 souls altogether.

This man was Anan ben David, nephew of the exilarch Solomon, in Bagdad,
who had died childless. Anan expected to be elected as his successor,
but his younger brother was chosen instead, and he was rejected because
of his liberal ideas and want of sympathy with the Talmud. Then he
publicly began to make war on the Talmud and Talmudists, and became the
head of all its opponents and ill-wishers. He made his headquarters at
Jerusalem, after having been, it seems, obliged to leave Babylonia.
There he assumed the title of exilarch, and around him were assembled a
great multitude who made, war on the Oral Law, its scholars, and in
particular on the two colleges of Sura and Pumbeditha.

By his general precept, "Search well in the Scriptures," he declared as
naught the whole Oral Law. And wishing to find favor in the eyes of the
Caliphs, who fixed the dates of their festivals by observation of the
new moon, he also renewed this custom, once in force among the Jews
while the Temple had existed, repealing thus the calculation of R. Adda
received among all Talmudists. He openly said to the Caliph Almanzur
that the Jews had been guilty of persecuting Jesus and opposing Mahomet,
though (said he) both these men did much to drive idolatry out of
existence, and cannot be attacked without guilt. Of the first he said
that he had been a holy man who did not want to appear as a prophet, or
a god, but only desired to reform the faith which the Pharisees had
perverted. Of the second

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

he said that be really was a prophet for the Arabs, only he does not
believe that the Law (of Moses) is repealed by Mahommedanism.

His first work was to separate himself from the Jews by fixing the date
of Pentecost to be fifty days after the first Sabbath after Passover, as
the Sadducees fixed it formerly. The dates of New Year and the Day of
Atonement, Passover and the Feast of Booths were determined by watching
for the new moon, which did not agree with the Jewish dates. As in the
leap year one month is added to the year, he allowed, in case of need,
to begin Passover when barley is ripe in the fields. The Phylacteries
(not a grave ceremony among the Jews, at any rate), the four species of
the Lulab and the semi-holiday Hanuka (Dedication), he abolished. On the
other hand he made the observation of Sabbath more burdensome, so that
the lighting of candles was prohibited on the eve of Sabbath, even by a
non-Jew, also the leaving of one's house during Sabbath when most
neighbors are not Jews, *i.e.* Karaites; the dietary laws he also made
stricter, so as to prohibit his adherents eating in company with Jews
for the latter are not careful enough and oftentimes eat with Gentiles.

Soon Anan saw that if every one were left to interpret the Biblical text
according to his own mind, etc., his sect would be split, and not endure
(as actually was the case in the course of time, as will be explained
further on), and that a fixed commentary is needed at least for those
passages which can by no means be interpreted literally. *Therefore he
claimed many great authorities, long deceased, as Karaites, and declared
that R. Jehuda b. Tabai*, the colleague of Simeon b. Shetah, etc. Shamai
the elder, the colleague of Hillel the Elder, and other such, were some
of the founders of their sect, and he ascribed to them some
interpretations of passages which he claimed to have received by
tradition from them. "Abandon the Talmud and Mishna," he said to his
followers, "and I will make you a Talmud of my own, according to the
traditions I have." Though in reality he took the rules of the Mishna as
basis, yet he said that as far as details are concerned he is as wise as
the sages of the Mishna, or more so, and can construe the Biblical texts
by his own intellect.

His hatred of the Talmud became so great that he said that if he could
have swallowed the Talmud, he would cast himself

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

into a lime-kiln, that it might be burned with him and leave no vestige
of its existence. Thus the people of Israel separated itself then into
two hostile hosts. The Talmudists declared the Karaites not to be Jews,
and forbade to give them any holy ceremony to perform, while the
Karaites said of the followers of the rabbis that they are Jewish
sinners, and it is sinful to intermarry with them. The city of Jerusalem
witnessed for the third time a splitting of Israel into parties.

Of Anan's writing we know nothing, although according to the Karaites he
wrote some comments on the Bible and prayers. From the compositions
imputed by them to him, we can see that only the love of resistance and
victory absorbed him; how great his learning was we can not judge, as in
general his biography is unknown to us, but it is known that he was not
given, to philosophy, nor ingenious in interpreting Scripture. One good
effect we can ascribe to him, that, owing to his opposition, the
Talmudic rabbis were also forced to pay more attention to the
Scriptures, and make researches and learn the niceties of the Hebrew
language, so that Anan and his sect were the prime cause of all the
compositions on grammar, Massorah and vowel points, and even poetic
compositions that the Talmudists gave birth to in the course of time.

After Anan's death Saul, his son, succeeded him as exilarch of the
Karaites, but Anan's disciples separated from him, as they did not agree
with him about some ceremonies, according [](errata.htm#22) to Saul's
interpretation of biblical passages. They became a distinct sect calling
themselves Ananites; so it also happened after the death of Saul, who
was succeeded by Josiah, his son. And so almost every age sprang a new
Karaite sect with a name of its own, each interpreting Scripture in its
own way. Some of them will be mentioned presently, It is self-evident
that an attempt to get at the profound meaning of the Scriptures was the
business of every such sect; through their activity the knowledge of
Hebrew grammar, of Massorah, the vowel-points and punctuation marks, was
diffused; theological philosophizing was also not strange to some
Karaites, as they had to explain such words as God's "hand," "eye,"
"finger," which they were unwilling to take literally and materialize
God, just as the other Jews. Thus gradually a large literature sprang
among the Karaites, not inferior, taken as a whole, to the Talmud itself
in bulk.

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

At all events, the Talmud was menaced by a much greater danger from
these internal enemies than from its external foes. For the latter did
not attack the Talmud itself, except so far as it was an obstacle in
their way, but their main and avowed object was to convert the *Jews* to
another religion, or even merely to fill their own pockets with Jewish
gold, given to avert the persecution instigated for that very purpose.
The Talmud was then attacked only incidentally, not for its sake, while
the main object was something else.

But the Karaites made it their great aim to drive the Talmud itself out
of existence, to direct their arrows against it for its own sake, and
endeavored to bring about, that the Jews should become Christians, or
Mussulmans, or join any sect whatever, the Karaites did not care which,
provided that the Jews should forsake the hateful Talmud, and its
Halakhas and Hagadas should get lost. Therefore the struggle with them
was very great, especially as they pretended that their traditions were
based on the great authorities of the remnants of the nation.

As their doctrines, however, were not fixed, and as almost every age the
Karaites were split into diverse sects, therefore they could not resist
or make headway against the Talmud, whose strength is, to those who
rightly understand it, that it has never purposed to make fixed rules,
to last for all ages; deliberation and reasoning concerning the Halakhas
according to the circumstances, is the principle of the Talmud; and the
saying of the Talmud, "even when they say to you of *right* that it is
*left*, and of *left* that it is *right*, thou shalt not swerve from the
commandment," shows the opinion of the Talmud, that the practice of the
ceremonies and precepts is dependent on the time, place and other
circumstances. With this power the Talmud combatted all its enemies, and
was victorious.

The controversies between the Jews and the Karaites are recorded in many
books, Karaite and Talmudistic, from the age of R. Saadia the Gaon, and
his opponent Sahal ben Matzliah to the present time. In them can also be
found the history of their alternate triumphs. But this is not our task
here: we will remark only that from the days of R. Saadiah the Gaon,
when the Rabbis had begun to have polemics with them, can be seen the
deep mark the Karaite literature left on the Rabbinical

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

one. Philosophy was from that time used in conjunction with the Torah;
many Gaonim followed R. Saadiah's method of harmonizing the Torah and
the philosophy of that time, that they should seem as mutual enemies. So
the Karaites charged such men with infidelity, but others were
themselves compelled to imitate them, and called in the aid of
philosophy, of the divinity, to interpret the texts of the Holy
Scriptures.

The effect of the Karaites on the Talmudist Rabbis is made evident also
in this: that since their time the rabbis also began to write down fixed
Halakhas taken from the Talmud, that the readers should not otherwise by
error adopt the Karaite rules, made by the Karaite leaders, which they
might mistake for the rules of the Talmud itself, since they could not
know the whole Talmud by heart. They composed, therefore, the "Halakhoth
G'doloth" (Great Halakhas), "Sh'iltoth'derab A'bai" (Queries of R.
Ahai), for the sake of the students, who could not themselves wade
through the whole Talmud. But thereby they opposed the spirit and object
of the Talmud itself, that the Halakhas should be matter for discussion,
and modified in accordance with the requirements of the time and place.
As soon as the Gaonim had permitted to propound decisions of the
Halakhas, and to fix them, those Gaonim, who succeeded them, were
compelled to teach that these decisions of the former Gaonim, even
though given without proofs, are holy for the people, as if giver, from
Mount Sinai. This circumstance added fuel to the quarrel of the
Karaites, and gave them new points of attack. The hope of some great men
of the nation to reconcile the Jews with the Karaites became naught, for
although the Karaites quarrelled among themselves, and split into rival
sects, yet they all equally hated the Talmud, reviled it, and insulted
it, styling the two colleges, at Sura and Pumbeditha, "the two harlots"
spoken of in Ezekiel, who (claimed they) referred to these colleges in
his prophecy.

According to Makrizi there were among the Karaites ten sects, differing
from each other in their opinions, practice and festivals; they had no
permanence, some rose, some fell, and in the tenth century only five
large sects were found, named:

1\. Jod'anim or Jodganim.

2\. Makrites or Magrites.

3\. Akhbarites.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

4\. Abn Amronites or Tiflisites.

5\. Balbekites.

The reader will find in the books of Jost, Grätz, Fürst, Geiger, and in
Hebrew, in "Bequoreth L'toldoth Hakaraim" an account of the particulars
about which the various sects of the Karaites differed, and also the
names of their leaders. We do not think it necessary to give these
details in this place. We will mention for illustration the latest sect,
which wished to fix the day of Atonement only on a Saturday every year,
because it is said "Sabbath Sabbathan," which means a Sabbath of rest
(Lev. xxiii. 32), and they translate "a Sabbath of Sabbaths," and the
first day of Passover on Thursday. Thus each Karaite sect celebrated the
Biblical festivals on different days, for each sect construed the texts
in the Pentateuch by preference without being able to come to an
agreement. Thus also in respect of the observation of Sabbath: for some
Karaites, their houses were during the Sabbath their prisons, where they
did sit in darkness, and which they could not leave when their neighbors
happened not to be Karaites like themselves. In this we see the power of
the Talmud, that even those who were inimical to it or hostile to a
large portion of it, Halakhas never had different opinions concerning
the festivals and other such things, important to one particular nation;
for they could not deny its general tradition.

The effects of Karaism are also traceable in some religious practices,
which had not been usual among the people of ancient times. Thus
Phylacteries, which it had not been customary to use, in spite of the
literal interpretation of the Talmud of the passage "and thou shalt bind
them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes," (Deut. vi. 8); perhaps for the reason that Hillel had said:
"Leave Israel alone; if they are not prophets, they are children of
prophets," (Pesachim); for after all, the arguments of the Talmud in
favor of the literalness of that passage, the people felt that it was
only a figurative expression; and the Talmud itself prohibited the use
of phylacteries to the people, permitting it only to confirmed scholars.
But when the Karaites interpreted the passage figuratively, the Gaonim
permitted the use of Tephilin to the people also, to show their
difference from the Karaites.

The opposition of the Karaites effected also that the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gaonim should
declare that the Hagada of the Talmud is not obligatory to believe for
any man; and that it is not to be taken literally, but as allegorical.
"Leave to every one the right to hold what opinions he chooseth about
the Hagada of the Talmud" says R. Samuel b. Hopni, father-in-law to Hai
Gaon, to ward off the attacks of the Karaites and opponents of the
Talmud generally, who made it responsible for many Hagadic things
cautioned in it. And indeed we see that the collections of Halakhas from
the Talmud, as Rab Alphasi and his colleagues inserted but little of the
Hagada, as if to show that the Hagadas are not minded. Though in truth
the Hagadas of the Talmud relating to morality are the main element of
the Talmud, mostly require no change, addition, or subtraction, even in
our age. While on the other hand, the absence of the ethics of the
Talmudic Hagada is painfully felt in Karaite literature to the present
day. In points of morality their opinions are as various as concerning
the Halakhas, in the course of time issued from the Karaite ascetics who
abstained from meat and wine, left their homes, dwelt in deserts, and
mourned over the destruction of Jerusalem. The Karaites styled them "the
sixty heroes who are around Solomon's bed," for there were sixty in
number, and called them the great teachers, for they had been taught by
them that it is not legal to eat meat in exile, since a text says one
should not slaughter outside the camp. In contrast with these, from
among the Karaites came also Hiri Hakalhi or Habalki who, owing to his
opposition to the Talmud, denied also Moses' Torah, providence,
creation, etc., so that the Karaites repulsed him also. There were among
them also some who believed in a material God, eating something of the
sacrifices, and enjoying the agreeable flavor of them. Such was the
destiny of those who rejected tradition, and relied on their own
intellect.

The issue was that, though among the Karaites were also great men and
great sects--and many times they triumphed over the Talmudists for
centuries--the following peculiarities made them a sect secluded from
the whole world (especially from the Rabbis, who were to them as if
unclean); their scrupulousness about cleanliness and uncleanliness,
their separation from anybody who was not a Karaite Jew, so as not to
take from him bread and other articles of the bakery, and so as not

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

to eat anything that had been touched by a non-Jew (some prohibited even
meat fit for a sacrifice). Gradually their numbers diminished, so that
now they number only about four thousand souls in the world, and even
these few differ among themselves in their usages and festivals. To this
day the Karaites in Egypt and the East remain in the dark during the eve
of Sabbath; the dates of their festivals are not alike every year, and
by their attacks on the Talmud they not only failed to weaken its
influence or diminish the number of its adherents, but brought about its
increased influence and accepted holiness. Though the Rabbis kept apart
from them, and said to those who wished to make peace between them, "the
Karaites (or *torn pieces*, *Kraim Kra'im*), never became joined," still
they did not forbear to borrow from them what seemed to them good,
adopting the Massorah and vowel points of Ben Asher, who was one of
them.

About the Judaized Chazars, of their time, the Karaites say that they
had the Karaite form of Judaism, but modern scholars contradict this.
They say that the Chazars were Talmudic Jews and A. B. Gottlober has
written admirably about this subject. His argument seems to savor of the
truth. But there is no doubt, that among the Jewish tribes of Arabia,
and those of the Judaized Arabian kingdom, there were Talmudic Jews who
rendered many services to the Jews of the Byzantine empire; but as these
matters do not pertain to our subject, we will not speak further of
them, and conclude hereby the present chapter. (See App. at the end of
this volume.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Islam and Its Influence on the Talmud](ht111)
