[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht115)  [Next](ht117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XIII.

RELIGIOUS DISPUTES OF ALL PERIODS.

From the earliest recorded times there have been disputes between men on
faith and religion. When, in pagan countries, the idols had become great
in number and each man considered his own the right one, he strove to
convert his fellows to his own opinion, whether through benevolence or
from wrath that the idol of his neighbor should be considered greater
than his own. Traces of such disputes are found in the Prophets. To the
Jewish people was probably due the increase in the violence and
frequency of such disputes, since its mission was always the
annihilation of idol-worship. Being monotheistic, it could not live at
peace with any gods besides its own. No historical importance can be
attached to such disputes among and with the heathen, because the number
of idols was often as large as that of the worshippers. But when
Christianity, whose great aim was to convert all humanity and to
extinguish all theologies, began to spread over and to dominate the
world, the matter of religious disputes assumed a new and baleful
aspect, for [persecutions](errata.htm#23) and trials were mercilessly
inflicted on

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

all who opposed it, whether those who took an active part in the
controversies or those who refused to enter into them.

In recording the history of the Talmud and of its persecutions we cannot
pass over the disputes concerning it from the time of its birth, and
continuing throughout its troubled history in succeeding ages. A minute
history of all these controversies, however, their dates, the names of
the disputants, the topics of the disputes, as well as the consequences
to the Talmud, would require a volume twice the bulk of the Talmud
itself. We will therefore content ourselves with devoting to it a
separate chapter, mentioning only the greater historical controversies
and giving a résumé of the subject matter of the disputes as we deem
them of value to our readers.

Already in the first century we have seen that the disputes between the
Jewish Christians and their brethren who did not believe in Jesus'
Messiahship were many. In the Talmud are given the names of many sages
and Amoraims who were compelled to enter upon disputations with their
Christian brethern. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) But in the second
and third centuries, houses for disputations (see App. No. 10) had
already been established, as well in Palestine as in Babylonia, and
doubtless also in many other places where Jews dwelt. Those known to us
by name are the house of Abidan, the house of Abiani, and that of
Nitzraphi. The Talmud relates that the Jews were forced to come hither,
or to furnish sufficient explanation for not so doing.

We have no record of the results of these disputes, but in the sixth
century we see Priscus, a Jewish officer of King Eilprich, forced to a
controversy. When ordered to embrace Christianity he naïvely replied
"that he could not believe that, to save sinners, God was compelled to
enter into marital relations with a woman, and finally, in order to
redeem the world, underwent the death-agony, when at his command were
hosts of angels not needed in heaven." For this he was imprisoned.
Henceforward in almost every century of the Christian era there arose
fanatics who forced the Jews into controversy. In the seventh century
these disputes were used as weapons against the Jews of Spain in
documents issued by Isidorie, Bishop of Seville. These and other
writings against the Jews,

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

added to the verbal disputes, finally resulted in the ninth century,
during the reign of Charles the Bald, in invectives promulgated by the
Bishop of Amulo, denouncing the Jewish creed as "superstition" and
inciting all Christians to their duty in eradicating the error from the
minds of the Jews, to force them to accept the Gospel in place of their
belief in the two Messiahs, one a descendant of David and the other a
descendant of Joseph. It is remarkable that in these documents the
bishop complains that the Jews, by their eloquent sermons and lectures,
made more impression on their hearers than did the preaching of the
Christians, as he was convinced by personal experience. And, indeed, in
this he was not mistaken; for where the Jews' lot was ameliorated, as in
the reign of Louis the Saint--who, as well as his wife, Judith, honored
the Jews, so much so as to change for their sake the fair-day from
Saturday to Sunday--many Christians came to the synagogues to hear the
Rabbis and the scholars among them read with pleasure the writings of
Philo and Flavius instead of the Gospel, and likewise learned from
Jewish scholars the interpretation of Scripture, as Rhabanus Maurus of
Fulda avows in his commentary on the Bible.

The Jews in Arabia also were forced to dispute with the Mussulmans, who
assured them that the teaching of the Talmud had its day and Islam was
even then usurping its place. When Basilius, the Macedonian ascended the
throne of Byzantium he summoned learned Jews to argue with Christian
priests, who strove to convince them that Jesus had become the center of
the law and prophets. But these disputes are insignificant compared with
those of the last four centuries of the Middle Ages; during this period
the number of Jewish apostates increased, who challenged their brethern
of the old faith to arguments. Massacre and pillage were the results of
these disputes, the invitation to which was, briefly, as follows: "If ye
be willing and obey, the good of the land shall ye eat; but if ye refuse
and rebel, by the sword shall ye be devoured." And, as if no loophole
should exist through which the Jews, might evade persecution, if a
Christian were converted to the Jewish faith and mocked his former
religion the Jews were held responsible and punished. Thus in the ninth
century the priest Boda accepted Judaism and ridiculed

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the Christians, going even so far as to beg the Mohammedan rulers in
Spain to permit residence in that country only to Jews and Mussulmans,
and not to Christians. Coystan Becelelonus in 1005, in the reign of
Henry II., wrote a pamphlet in which he addressed his former
co-religionists thus: "Fools read the prophet Malachai, who says in
God's name, 'I am God, without change.' How then can you believe that
the Divinity underwent any change?" The culmination of all this was a
renewed outburst of wrath and persecution directed against the Jews.

The Christians did not consider the fact that he who exchanges his
religion for another, from any motive whatever, by so doing is held in
enmity by his former co-religionists and his affirmations esteemed of no
value. They declared that the spirit of Satan had seduced the Jewish
proselytes, while at the same time they gave credit to all the calumnies
uttered by the Christianized Jews and granted them power to compel the
Jews to enter into dispute with them. For this alleged guilt of Satan
they punished the Jews with restriction of rights, confiscation of
property, or total exile. An instance is recorded of the conversion in
London in 1275, during the reign of Henry II., of the great Dominican
preacher Robert de Redinge to Judaism, who adopted the name of Haggai.
The Christianized Jews of France and Spain were also the cause of great
trouble to the Jews in those countries during the Middle Ages, though
Christianity had been the dominant religion but for a short period.

Of the more prominent controversies of that time may be mentioned that
of Rabbi Nathan Haupniel, one of the writers of the commentaries called
"Tosphoth" (Taanith IX., the Tosphoth beginning at "Aser T'aser"), known
among Gentiles as Nathan Official, the colleague of Rabenu Tam and
perfect under the Archbishop of Cens, with this same archbishop, and,
near the close of the twelfth century, with Pope Alexander and the king
himself. At this epoch the status of the Jews of France was one of peace
and prosperity, and R. Nathan and his colleague, Rabenu Tam, were
honored at court. The bishop attempted to prove by the passage, "Let us
make man in our image," that the Trinity is meant, since the plural is
used. R. Nathan's answer was: "Before replying to this, I

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

desire to ask of you a question in law concerning myself. You are aware
that I loan no money at interest (this he mentioned because the Jews
were then charged with usury). I gave to a friend a sum of money with
which to purchase merchandise, and in the profits arising from which I
was to share. He transported the goods to Paris, but finding that their
market price had greatly diminished, he threw all into the Seine without
consulting with me. I am therefore of opinion that I may demand of him
to return to me the whole sum; for by what right did he inflict on me a
financial loss without first asking my consent?" The bishop replied:
"You may without doubt; and according to my opinion you are entitled to
additional compensation besides, since how dared he destroy your
property?" "If that is so," answered R. Nathan, "you will of course
grant that God is at least as just as men, and if, according to you, he
had created men with the assistance of the other two Persons of the
Trinity, how comes it that he declares, 'I will destroy man whom I have
created from the face of the earth?' \[Gen. vi. 7\], without first
consulting the other Persons of the Trinity? They also were entitled to
a part in disposing of man." On another occasion, being asked why the
Jews were obstinate in refusing to worship Mary, the mother of God, R.
Nathan replied: "Tell me, you who are so learned, whether the question
never occurred to you: how was it possible that the idea of worshipping
the golden calf entered the Jews' minds after they had been witnesses,
shortly before, of all the signs and wonders of the Eternal, and the
thunders and lightnings on Mount Sinai?" The bishop replied: "True;
whenever I read this passage it seems a great problem to me." "But I am
not in the least surprised," answered R. Nathan, with hidden irony. "The
Jews saw that the gold when thrown into the fire was made into a calf,
and they doubted not that the Holy Ghost had clothed itself in this
precious metal; but you who affirm that the Holy Ghost became incarnate
in a woman must needs remember that when God wished to give to the
Israelites the Decalogue he warned them: 'For three days you shall not
approach a woman' \[Ex. xix. 15\]. How, then, can the Jews believe,
after this, that when He desired to endow Israel with a new testament,
He should himself approach a woman?" Replies of this kind were numerous
from R. Nathan, as well as

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

from his sons Joseph and Asher. Thus it is also told of R. Joseph Bchor
Shor that to the question, "Why did God choose to appear to Moses in a
thorn?" ("bush" in the incorrect version), he replied, "Because from it
no image can be made, nor can it be used to form a cross."

These disputes, however, did not bring about the terrible calamities
which usually followed those in the Middle Ages, Judith, the Queen of
Louis the Saint, protected the Jews and their studies, preventing the
priests from taking vengeance for such ironical expressions as those
given above. When Bishop Bodo perceived that his aims were not furthered
by the disputes, he prohibited altogether such controversies with the
hated Jews. A few decades passed, and not only was this prohibition
ignored, but the Jews were again constrained to dispute in the presence
of Louis IX. and his wife, and the chief civil and ecclesiastical
dignitaries, the latter representing Pope Gregory IX. It fell to the lot
of the four rabbis, R. Jechiel of Paris, the disciple of Jehudah the
Pious; R. Moses of Coucy, the famed travelling lecturer; R. Jehudah b.
David of Melon, and R. Solomon b. Samuel, to dispute with the apostate
Donin, who took the name of Nicolus. This man while yet a Jew had
evinced a tendency, as it appeared to the rabbis, to rebel against
Judaism, and therefore they had excommunicated him. In revenge, he went
to Rome in 1239, and charged that the Talmud contained sacrilegious
sayings as to Jesus Christ and his mother, and so distorted the
Scriptures by its interpretations and comments that thereby the
[Deity](errata.htm#24) was blasphemed. He further charged that it gave
license to illegally deprive Gentiles of their property and granted
permission to deceive them. The sum of his libel, which contained
thirty-five points, was that the Talmud was the enemy of Christian truth
and the sole cause of the refusal of the Jews to recognize the divinity
of Jesus.

It will be in place here, before further consideration of the character
and consequences of this and many other disputes in which Jewish
apostates were the accusers and disputants, to speak of the Jews of the
Middle Ages, what they were, and, having in view only the truth, to
expose their faults. For by their great intolerance, and their conduct
towards all who entertained opinions of the least liberality, differing
ever so

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

slightly from their own, they brought down upon themselves, as it were
by their own hands, terrible calamities. There was at that period, as is
well known, a division of opinion among the Rabbis themselves concerning
the books of Maimonides. Many Rabbis excommunicated him after his death,
and even defaced his epitaph; and the intolerant R. Solomon of
Montpelliers, with his colleagues and disciples, resorted to the
Flagellants and Dominicans for aid, saying: "Behold, there are among us
heretics and infidels, for they were seduced by Moses ben Maimon of
Egypt. You who clear your community of heretics, clear ours too"
(Karpeles, P. 346). They assented -gladly, and the books of Maimonides
were burned at the stake in Paris and Montpelliers. From the conduct of
these fanatics towards that lion of Israel (they themselves avowed that
he was infinitely superior to them in science and learning) we can
conceive their terrible vengeance against an ordinary man or scholar
when he ventured to express opinions in any degree at variance with
their own, or to transgress the Sabbath by carrying a handkerchief or
drinking of Gentile wine, which in their opinion is against the law.
Who, then, could resist their terrible weapon of excommunication, which
they used for the purpose of making a man a ravenous wolf whom every
human being fled from and shunned as though plague-smitten? Many who
drank of that bitter cup were driven to the grave, and many others went
mad. But woe to the excommunicators if the excommunicated afterward
received baptism from the Dominicans I Then the vengeance of those who
had been banished was fearful; like serpents they stung their former
brethern, and caused misfortunes to thousands of souls who became as
sheep for the slaughter.

Thus on the 24th of July, 1240, the complete Talmud was brought by Donin
to the royal palace, and R. Jechiel, who, because of the fact that he
had disputed with many priests, had been elected head of the disputants,
was asked by him, in the presence of the king and the whole assembly,
whether he believed in *all* that was written in all these books, now
more than four hundred years old. To this R. Jechiel replied, addressing
the king: "Our Talmud is not four hundred years old, but more than
fifteen hundred, and this alone suffices to prove that the controversy
concerning what is *said* in it is superfluous;

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

for up to this time there have been Jewish apostates and many learned
Christian priests who were conversant with its contents and found no
evil in them. "Hieronymus," continued the Rabbi, "known to all as a wise
and devout Christian writer, who was familiar with Jewish literature,
much better than this apostate sinner, would doubtless have sought the
destruction of the Talmud, if he had found therein such terrible things
as this apostate alleges. Therefore I feel sure that this liar, who
seeks our lives, will never attain his object; he may indeed deprive us
of our lives, but not of our Torah, dear to us as the pupil of our eye.
If you vent on us here in France all your anger, still will the Talmud
be found in Spain, Greece, Babylon, Media and Mesopotamia, in possession
of the Jews of these countries, and there you cannot reach to destroy
it." The king was not satisfied with this, but bade R. Jechiel give a
direct answer to Donin. To this the rabbi answered that the moral and
legal doctrines of the Talmud were held sacred, but that full credence
need not be given to the Hagada, which should not be taken too
literally, since it is for the most part allegorical. The Ramban gave
expression to a like opinion, but it would be superfluous to quote him
entire. To the other accusations of Donin, that the Talmud terms the
followers of Jesus Christ "Minim" (infidels), that it condemns Jesus,
that it allows ill-usage of people of other nationalities, etc., he
replied: "In the Talmud there is no mention of Jesus (Jesu) Christ, but
only of another Jesus (Jeshua) who was a disciple of R. Joshua b.
Prachia, who lived two hundred years before Christ; that the term
'Minim' in the Talmud includes all who deny the Oral Law; that it grants
equality before the civil law to all men, idolators included, and
commands visitation of sick idolators, support of their poor, and
interment of their dead even in Jewish cemeteries. He also proved that
according to the Talmud, the Christians are not included among
idolators, since the prohibition as to sharing in divine power is
directed only to Israel and has not been enjoined on other people; and,
moreover, since the Christians abhor idolators, they cannot themselves
be counted among them. There is no distinction drawn between them and
Jews by the criminal laws of all civilized lands," as well as in the
Talmud. (See App. No. 15.)

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

Thus two days passed in disputing with R. Jechiel, whose replies were
written down by a disciple and collected later in a book, "Joseph
Ham'qane" (The Zealot). On the third day, R. Jehudah b. David, having
been prohibited from holding intercourse with R. Jechiel the first two
days, was called to the dispute, and when his assertions were found to
agree with those of R. Jechiel, the controversy came to an end.

The second dispute which must be noted is that started by the apostate
Pablo Christiani, in July, 1263, with the rabbis of Spain. This was the
reverse of the previous dispute, in that the first charged the Talmud
with despising Jesus and Christians, while this dispute endeavored to
prove from the Talmud itself the Messiahship of Jesus; Pablo claiming
that the book contained many such passages. Rabbi Moses ben Nachmani
(Ramban) was selected as disputant. This controversy also took place in
the royal palace in Barcelona, and lasted four days. The principal
topics for discussion were: Whether the Messiah had already appeared or
was still expected; whether he would appear as a warrior, to restore the
kingdom of the Jews, or as God's son, as Jesus. The passage, "the
sceptre shall not depart from Judah until Shiloh come" (which the Jews
also understand as referring to a Messiah), Pablo adduced as proof that
after the destruction of the Temple and the fall of the Jewish kingdom
it must of necessity be considered that the Messiah had arrived. Again,
the Talmud itself says, "The Messiah was born when the Temple was
destroyed," and "Elijah said to R. Joshua the son of Levi, The Messiah
sits at the gates of Rome, among the sick," etc.

Thereupon Nachmani addressed the king. "Know," said he, "we possess
three different books; before every other, the Bible, in which we
implicitly believe; then the Talmud, which we hold sacred as an
indispensable commentary on the biblical laws; but the third book, which
we call Midrash, comprises mere sermons or speeches, which are listened
to by the Jews but which exercise no authority over them. "The Hagada,"
he continued, "is, as its name indicates, a mere collection of legends,
fiction, a creation of fancy, communicated by one person to another, but
not held by the Jews as dogma, and which I myself do not believe." Then
turning to Pablo, "I will reply directly to you as to the question at
issue. If the Talmud, as

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

you assert, regards the founder of your church as the true Messiah, why
have not the Talmudists believed in him? Why did they not avow him, as
you, Pablo, have done? For five hundred years have men been at work on
the Talmud, and none had been convinced or induced to enter the church.
Where," he asked further, "is it to be found in the Bible or the Talmud
that the Messiah will suffer at the hands of men? On the contrary, it is
said of him, "He will reign from sea to sea," "Dwellers of the desert
will kneel before him" and "nations will adore him," which certainly was
not the case with your Messiah, who, by the way, was born long before
the destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, and therefore the Talmudic
passage can have no reference to him. Rome had not your alleged Messiah
to thank for its greatness; on the contrary, its power and dominion
gradually declined after his advent, and since the birth of your
religion a new creed, the world-dominating Islam, has arisen. Further,
were the omens and prophecies of the Messianic time fulfilled? Of this
the prophets predicted 'that homicidal war will cease, a universal peace
reign in the world; the swords will be beaten ploughshares, the spears
into pruning hooks, and the harmless animal will graze by the side of
the wild one;' that 'no injustice will occur, a moral elevation will
ennoble men, God's spirit will enlighten all peoples, and a universal
purified knowledge will be introduced.' But since your Messiah appeared,
numberless wars have disturbed mankind, justice, morality, and brotherly
love have not yet become the ruling principles of the world, your
religious truths have not satisfied the adherents of Islam, and one God
does not as yet reign on earth. If you make of your Messiah a God, then
we cannot believe at all in him. The Messiah must be, according to the
prophets, a man 'out of the stem of Jesse'; he must be sprung a child
born of ordinary parents, not a son of God need he be. Nay, the passage
in the Talmud which you bring forward as favoring the Messiahship of
Jesus, 'that Messiah sits on God's right, and Abraham on his left,'
shows him not to be a God, else could not the Talmud say directly after
this 'that Abraham's countenance darkened on account of the favor shown
the Messiah.' Were he God's son, surely Abraham would have known him as
Divinity and have yielded to him, with no feeling of jealousy, the first
place. The language of

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

the Talmud is peculiar, and by its assertion that the Messiah was born
with the Temple's destruction must be understood the revival among the
Jews, through this barbarity and injustice, of the hope of a Messiah.
They assuredly do not accept him as Messiah who saw the light of day
fully a hundred years before this event, and who, in spite of his
sufferings, brought to the world neither salvation nor redemption. And
how stands it with your assumption that your Messiah redeemed the world
from original sin? The penalties decreed for that sin still exist. Women
still suffer pain in childbirth; in the sweat of the brow must the
ground be ploughed, and Death still thins the hosts of the living-evils
which, according to your construction of the Bible, result only from
original sin. As to the passage quoted by you from the Bible, this is
its significance: 'The sceptre shall not depart from Judah
eternally'--*ad* being equivalent to *load* (forever). The clear meaning
of this is that Judah's dependence, if he be condemned to it, will not
last forever, for the Messiah will come and restore to him his
independence; simply, that he *will* appear, but is not yet come. For
the rest," continued Nachmani, "I do not long for the Messiah. With us
it is accounted as of greater merit if we, living in foreign lands,
among strange people, and under the protection of the king, worship our
God, than if we, as free masters, adhere to the law in our own land."
Pablo was no match to Nachmani and his striking proofs. The next Sunday,
King Jacob I. of Aragon appeared with Peñaforte in the synagogue. The
general of the Dominicans resumed the dispute, and sought to prove the
Trinity by the simile of wine, which also contains a trinity in it,
color, flavor and odor, and yet is one thing. Nachmani, however, refuted
him, and demonstrated that to accept this argument would be to assume
also a fifth person in God. Peñaforte became perplexed and replied that
the Trinity is so deep a mystery that the angels are unable to
comprehend it. When Nachmani had asked the modest question, "Why, then,
should men raise themselves above the angels to dispute about and to
hold fast to so deep a mystery?" The king dismissed him with rich
presents, adding these strange words: "I have never yet heard a wrong
cause so masterfully defended." Nevertheless, Nachmani was banished, He,
did not, as contemporary

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

ecclesiastical chronicles affirm, flee in deep shame, but was
expatriated through the intrigues of the clergy, and emigrated to
Palestine, which, in his opinion, should be a Mecca for every Jew, and
arrived there shortly after Jerusalem had been reduced to ashes by the
Mongols. There he continued his labors in behalf of Judaism and compiled
his commentary on the Bible. To his disciples whom he left behind it is
related that he said, on their asking of him a sign of the day of his
death, that his mother's grave stone would be rent in twain.

After seeing, however, that the dispute led to no satisfactory results,
and that Nachmani and other Jews were not convinced by the argument of
"no salvation outside the church," Peñaforte changed his tactics and
impeached the Talmud before Pope Clement IV., claiming that it abused
and blasphemed the founder of the church. The Pope appointed a committee
to examine the matter, and on their adverse report the obnoxious
passages were stricken out, the erasing stylus was drawn through the
pages of the Talmud by ignorant Dominicans, and for the first time it
was subjected to the [judgement](errata.htm#25) of a censor. What a sad
concurrence of historic events! Twenty years later the writings of
Maimonides were again consigned to the stake at Acco through the efforts
of the Kabbalistic fanatic Solomon Petit; in Tiberia the tombstone of
Moses b. Maimon, the greatest thinker to whom Judaism had given birth in
a thousand years, was shamefully dishonored and its epitaph replaced by
the words; "Here rests an excommunicated heretic."

Of far more importance were the attacks on Judaism and the Talmud in the
dispute which took place at Tortosa, in, Aragon, in 1413, under the
supervision of Pope Benedict XIII., and which required no less than
sixty-eight sessions. Long before this time the Jews had held polemics
with Christian scholars, and the Jewish literature in defense of the
faith which had been current in the thirteenth century, and which
included also attacks on Christian dogma, was now in full bloom. Raymond
Martin, a Dominican Hebraist and one of the censors of the Talmud
appointed by the Pope, who treated the Talmud with comparative leniency,
wrote against Judaism two hostile books under the titles "Religious
Dagger" (Dagger of Faith) and "Scourge for the Jews," wherein arguments
in

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

favor of Christianity were adduced both from Scripture and from
rabbinical writings. These books were imposing not less from their
powerful logic than from their exhibition of profound scholarship, and
the renowned Talmudist, R. Solomon b. Adereth, was called to refute
them. The apostate Abner Alfonso Burgensis, a polemic of more danger to
Judaism, at the commencement of the fourteenth century, wrote a number
of controversial works against his former religion, to whom Isaac Pulgar
replied with a trenchant satirical poem as well as an argumentative
work. In 1375, Moses Kohen de Tordesillas disputed in the church at
Avilla with the renegade John of Valladolid, and soon after this
proselytizing cardinal Pedro de Cuna challenged Shem Teb b. Isaac
Shoprat to a public religious discussion. The latter published in 1380,
a comprehensive defensive work, "Eben Bochan," and also translated the
Gospels into Hebrew to enable his co-religionists to arm themselves from
the Christian arsenal; they subsequently found themselves obliged to use
these weapons only too often. In 1391 occurred the first great
persecution of the Jews in Spain, during which many, to escape the
sword, embraced Christianity. Whereas the greater part of those who were
forced into conversion usually returned to the fold of Judaism, some of
these new Christians were, conversely, possessed by a great zeal for
proselytizing, as, for example, the physician Astruc Raimuch, and
particularly the former rabbi, Paul Burgensis, the latter of whom was a
source of much mischief to his people. The satirical poet, Solomon
Bonfed, the ingenious thinker Chasdai Crescas, the physician and
philosopher, Profiat Duran, indited convincing replies to the attacks of
these apostates. But in the foremost rank of these polemic writings
stands the circular letter of Joshua Lorqui, which he addressed in an
apparently submissive tone to his former teacher, Paul Burgensis,
wherein, along with keen attacks on Christian dogma, he tells Burgensis
that as a thinking and learned man he could not have accepted
Christianity through conviction. When one reads this letter he must hold
it almost a psychological impossibility that the man who adopted such an
attitude towards Christianity should in later years have gone over to
the Christian church and become a scourge to his co-religionists of the
Jewish faith; and yet this Joshua Corqui was, with scarcely a doubt,
identical

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

with him who later assumed the name of Geronimo, Santa Fe, and came
forward to impeach Judaism and the Talmud at the dispute in Tortosa.

Benedict XIII., one of the three popes who were then striving for
dominion, had a particular interest in this dispute. This pope had been
deposed at the Council of Pisa as a heretic and perjurer, and had been
excommunicated; in Spain, however, he was recognized as pope, and from
that place he set in motion his plans to make himself universally
recognized. If he could succeed in breaking the obstinacy of the Jews
and effecting finally their conversion as a people, it would be a great
triumph for the church, and for himself personally. From these motives
he willingly permitted King Fernando of Aragon to invite Jewish rabbis
and scholars to a theological discussion at Tortosa. Sixteen of the most
prominent appeared at that memorable dispute, which lasted, with many
interruptions, from February, 1413, till November, 1414. The apostate
Geronimo, the physician-in-ordinary-of the pope, had arranged previously
the following programme for the controversy. First he desired to prove
from the Talmud that the Messiah must already have arrived. Should this
argument be ineffectual, however, then a war to the death was to be
declared against the Talmud, which sustains the Jews in their unbelief.
When the Jewish notables appeared in the session hall on the first day,
the thousand there assembled, presided over by the pope (who was
pompously arrayed and seated on an elevated throne), made upon them an
overwhelming impression. The pope himself opened the session with an
address, wherein he laid emphasis on the fact that the question now was
not as to the truth of Judaism or Christianity; Judaism *once* had been
true, but was replaced by the later revelation. The discussion must turn
only on the point whether, according to the Talmud, Jesus is the
promised Messiah or not. Thereupon, Geronimo delivered a lengthy speech,
which he concluded with the text, "If ye be willing and obey, ye shall
eat the good of the land; but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured by the sword." In his reply, Don Vidal Benvenisti placed the
apostate's wickedness in its true light, inasmuch as he had threatened
with the sword before any proof for or against had been brought. In the
subsequent sessions, Geronimo cited passages, more or less familiar,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

from the Talmud and Midrash, to prove to the unbelievers that the Talmud
itself, when rightly understood, attested Jesus' Messiahship. But as the
representatives of the Jews explained these passages according to their
real meaning, and at the expiration of sixty-two sessions evinced not
the slightest inclination to be converted, Geronimo, at the pope's
bidding, came forth as impeacher of the Talmud, asserting that it
contained blasphemies and abominations of all kinds and must therefore
be unconditionally condemned. To prove this, he wickedly or ignorantly
perverted many passages. The Halakha teaches, for example, in relation
to the verse in Exodus xxi. 15, "He that smiteth his father or his
mother shall be put to death," that he only is guilty of death who
wounds his parent by beating; from this Geronimo inferred that the
Talmud allows the beating of parents. The Halakha also teaches in
reference to blasphemy that "only he who blasphemes God by his name of
four letters (Jehovah) is guilty of death," and from this Geronimo
concluded that the Talmud permits blasphemy. Geronimo was also the first
to affirm that the Jews may break oaths, in conformity to the prayer
"Kol-Nidre." Every one at all familiar with this prayer knows that it is
for forgiveness for the non-fulfillment of vows and oaths, taken
*unconsciously* or broken through *forgetfulness*, and is but an
argument in favor of the Talmud's scrupulousness in this matter. The
Jewish delegates defended themselves, it is true, with skill against
these accusations, but were finally so hard pressed that they divided
into two parties. Most declared that the passages of the Hagada brought
forward by Geronimo had no authority; whereas Don Vidal Benvenisti and
the religious philosopher Joseph Albo declared that the Hagada was held
by them as of full authority, but must not be construed literally and
then judged. At all events, the pope did not succeed in causing even one
of the delegates to waver or in effecting the hoped-for general
conversion of the Jews. Driven to anger at his failure, he dismissed
them in a very unfriendly manner, and soon thereafter issued a bull in
which he interdicted the reading or study of the Talmud by the Jews, and
ordered that search be made for copies of the book and they be then
destroyed. He also directed that in Spain the Jews should live
separately from the Christians, fill no official station,

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

practice no trade, nor devote themselves to medicine. Fortunately the
hostility of the pope had no effect. The Council of Costnitz deposed
him; his former protectors, King Fernando and Emperor Sigismund,
renounced his cause, and the fanatic Flagellator and preacher, Vincent
Ferrer, preached openly "that such a man as this pope deserved to be
persecuted to the utmost and to be killed by any good Christian." Filled
with rage at the issue of the dispute, Geronimo published later a
voluminous book against the Talmud, and the apostate Paul Burgensis, who
was elevated to the bishopric, composed in his eightieth year, a work
hostile to Jews and Judaism. To these and similar attacks the Jews were
free as yet to reply without restriction. Answers were published by
Joseph Albo, Vidal ibn Lobi, and Joseph ibn Shemtob, defending their own
creed and winging arrows at Christian dogmas also. Several decades later
the Jews of Spain were attacked not with the pen, but with the fist, not
with spiritual weapons, but with physical force, and met with bloody
persecutions till finally, in the total exile of 1492, the proud Spanish
Jews were compelled to empty the cup of misery to the dregs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[62:1](ht116.htm#fr_5) R. Aqiba with R. Gamaliel,
Joshua b. Hanania, Ishmael, Abuhu, and many others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV: The Talmud in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries](ht117)
