[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht114)  [Next](ht116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XII.

THE DOCTORS OF FRANCE. AUTHORS OF THE TOSPHOTH.

Through the Tosphoth which were begun by Rashi's own descendants as his
two sons-in-law, Meir b. Samuel and Jehudah bar Nathan and the sons of
the first Samuel and Jacob Tam, the activity of the scholars of France
and Germany assumed great proportions and was exalted, so that all
Israel in the Middle Ages accepted them unanimously, and in the course
of time the numbers of their disciples and the pupils of their disciples
increased. So that more than two hundred great Talmudists are known to
the historian, but whom it is needless to enumerate here, except a few
which we deem necessary for our work.

His grandson, R. Samuel b. Meir, or Rashbam (1085-1158), did not content
himself with the commentary of his grandfather on the Bible, as well as
on the Talmud, and tried his strength to explain them after his own
method, that is, according to their deep literal meaning, and leaving
ingenious but forced constructions to dialecticians, even when the
literal interpretation will thus be in direct contradiction to the
Halakha (see App. No. 15) however, without any opposition to the
traditions expressed. He only added in his commentary "according to the
deep literal meaning," but leaves one to think that even the traditional
interpretation about the Halakha can find place. To the Hagada, however,
which tries to interpret biblical texts according to its legends, he
opposes with all the strength of his intellect, and makes manifest their
contradiction,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

so as to demolish the Hagada to the foundation, In his commentary on the
Talmud, however, he is given to lengthy reasonings and dialectics and
also endeavors to arrive at decisions of Halakhas, which his grandfather
took care to avoid. Whoever sees critically, Rashi's commentary on Tract
Baba Bathra up to 29b, and from there onwards, Rashbam's commentary
which is its substitute from that place onwards, will be astonished at
the great difference between them, if but at the relative quantities of
Rashi's comments and Rashbam's.

From his commentaries and compositions we see that he had much knowledge
of diverse languages, and of the manners and customs of nations and
their modes of life, and gave human reasons for many commandments of the
Pentateuch. In Northern France his commentaries were accepted in the
colleges and it became their main authority.

But his younger brother, Jacob, styled "Rabenu Tam," devoted his whole
mind to studies of the Talmud chiefly, and he became the center of the
authors of the Tosphoth, to him flocked men with questions from all ends
of the earth, to whom he was as an oracle. justly we may entitle him the
Pillar of the Talmud. He went to the depths of the sea of the Talmud,
and made it his first task to reconcile apparent contradictions therein.
He likewise mended many corrupted texts in the Talmud, though of him it
has been said that he decreed on the pain of excommunication not to
amend any text in the Talmud, and in many places he disagrees with his
grandfather. Aside from this he did not at one's own conjecture, neglect
commentaries on Scriptures and grammatical studies, and decided in favor
of Menachem b. Sruk against Duns b. Labrat in his book "Hahakhraoth"
(Reconciliations); he also tried his ability for poetry. As his
biography has been written by the learned A. H. Weiss in a separate
book, it is unnecessary to expatiate on it.

Here is the place to remark that in late generations the second pair of
phylacteries which pietists put on after the prayer, have been styled
after him on account of two or three words which he wrote in his
commentary on an obscure passage in Tract Mena'hoth in opposition to
Rashi's commentary, on account of a hair-splitting discussion in the
language of the Gemara, though he had never the intention to decide so
the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

Halakha, as his grandfather Rashi had also not intended in his
commentary on the Halakha, still those phylacteries are called after
him. In truth neither the one nor the other was used yet as
phylacteries, as testifies the greatest among the authors of Tosphoth,
R. Isaac the Elder (as this is explained in one book on Phylacteries).

Among the faithful disciples whom Pashi had in the college at Troy it is
proper to mention R. Joseph b. Simeon Kara who was revealed to us
recently by modem criticism; and R. Joseph Bchor Shor who was a disciple
of Rabenu Tam, and composed a commentary on the Pentateuch in the spirit
of that of Rashbam. The other commentators on Scripture among the
authors of the Tosphath and their disciples, however, as the author of
"Hagan" (The Garden) a commentary on the Pentateuch, which is to be
found in two different versions, and some more commentaries by R.
Hezekiah b. Manoah, R. Isaac Halevi, R. Jehuda b. R. Eliezer, R. Jacob
d'Illesques, do not cling to the principle of literal interpretation,
but of Drash and Mysticism. Rashi's commentary was, however, their
model. The chiefs of the authors of Tosphoth in the period of from 1167
till 1300 were: R. Isaac b. Samuel, called R. Isaac the Elder, from
Dampirere, the nephew of Jacob Tam, his son Elchanan, Eliezer b. Samuel
("Ram") of Metz, author of "Sepher Yereim" (Book of the God-Fearing),
Isaac b. Abraham, Junior (Ritzba), his brother, Simsan of Chanz
(Rashba), his great labors are called Tosphoth of Chanz, Jehudah b.
Isaac from Paris, called Sirlian, Ephraim b. Isaac from Reugspurk, and
Nathan Official, who will be mentioned by us further in a separate
chapter. Among the latest of the authors of the Tosphoth, however, we
may name the Rabbi Moses of Caucy, author of "Smag" who is also
mentioned in Tosphoth thrice (Berakhoth, 14b, 43a, Aboda Zarah, 13a),
and R. Jacob of Courbel to whom have been attributed the questions and
answers *from Heaven*, and we doubt whether Isaac of Vienna author of
the well-known book "Or Zarua" (Diffused Light), who also lived at that
time, has also been mentioned in Tosphoth (see our work on
*Phylacteries*, p. 140), by the name of R. Isaac--simply, as not every
time when the name R. Isaac--barely is mentioned in Tosphoth, R. Isaac
the Elder is meant.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

This last, R. Moses of Caucy, contributed much to restore the study of
the Talmud to its former splendor in his days, when in Spain it was
almost stopped, and along with it many ceremonies, as phylacteries,
Mezuzoth and Tzitzith, which were not seen in his time in any part of
Spain or other countries. Owing to the oppression of the other religions
by the dominant religion, the Israelites began to blend with the
nations, and thousands of them embraced ostensibly the dominant
religion, and some even conscientiously, having despaired of the former
hope of Israel, Moses of Coucy therefore devoted himself to his work and
travelled from city to city, and from land to land, to encourage Israel
in the study of the Talmudic literature, and restore the activity, and
he is the first who required help for his aim from gentiles, his
friends, though not co-religionists, and that his works should find
acceptance he backed them by dreams and natural phenomena that took
place at the time, which he warned the people that they were signs from
heaven, and also by astrology, to arouse the people to return to the
study of the Talmud and its commandments. As he testified himself in his
book which he wrote in his later days (1288), "*Sepher Mitzvoth Gadol*"
(Positive Commandments) whose title is abbreviated "Smag." After writing
the sermons in exile, he concludes: "After the year 4995 after creation
(1235), an event took place from heaven to chastize. And in the year
1236 I was in Spain *preaching* to and reproving them, God strengthened
my arms by Jews *and Gentiles*' dreams, and visions of the stars and
extended his mercy to me, and the earth trembled <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) and there was general terror, great
repentances were made, and thousands as well as myriads accepted the
sacred ceremonies of Tephilin, Mezuzoth, and Tzitzith. So I was
afterwards in other countries, and they were accepted in all places, and
I was asked for a commentary on these commandments in brief." Not only
in France and Spain were such books written about the practical
ceremonies in the spirit of the Talmud, but also in Germany, R. Baruch
of Germisa composed "Sepher Hatrumah" and R. Isaac from Vienna, his book
"Diffused Light" (Or Zarua) which all treat of ceremonies and Halakhas
after the rules of the Talmud, which those sages saw

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

a great necessity to renew and arouse the nation to observe them, after
the Halakahs of Alfasi and Maimonides had become already too ancient in
their tone, and the violent persecutions then directed against the
Talmud diminished the number of the students. It would seem that at that
time was composed also the small book "Questions and Answers from
Heaven" in the name of R. Jacob of Corbel who was known as a holy man,
to show to the people that its hope was not yet at end, that in heaven
all wards of the Talmud are venerated, and so are all sages who occupy
themselves with it, as seen from the contents of the questions and
answers given from heaven especially in case of R. Isaac Alfasi, about
whom from heaven it was answered: "Not in an old man is wisdom, nor in
schoolboys counsel, but my covenant I shall fulfil with Isaac," and this
may be a kind of basis for the programme made by Shem Tobb, Joseph
Falkira (1264), that diligent study of Alfasi may substitute the study
of the Talmud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[60:1](ht115.htm#fr_4) See our "Phylacterien,"
page 85, concerning the trembling of the earth, mentioned here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: Religious Disputes of All Periods](ht116)
