[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht119)  [Next](ht121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XVII.

THE POLEMICS AND THE ATTACKS UPON THE TALMUD IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.

The nineteenth century was the jubilee of the Talmud's 2,000 years since
its beginning, and the twelfth century since its conclusion, in which it
overcome all attacks directed against it and remained safe, not only
bodily but spiritually. This did not prevent the anti-Semites from
renewing the persecutions and the accusations of it with increased
energy.

Although the accusations were not brought to a public dispute, and to
the intervention of the government, still the polemics in books and
pamphlets were greatly increased by different persons in different
countries. We do not desire to linger on these books, as their
discussion would take up too much time and space, still we cannot
refrain from mentioning them briefly, as they pertain to the history of
the Talmud.

In 1848, A. Büchner, a teacher in Warsaw, printed a book, "Der Talmud in
Seine Nichtigkeit," and according to Strack, Jacob Kittseer also printed
a volume called "Inhalt des Talmuds und seine Autoritat," etc, both in
the German language. The contents of these two books were mainly attacks
upon attacks, and accusations upon accusations, rained down upon the
Talmud in general and its followers in particular.

At the same time a missionary, McCaul, printed a book in the English
language, entitled "The Old Paths," and S. Hoga, an apostate and also a
missionary, translated it into Hebrew. The latter edition was
distributed gratis and in tens of thousands

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

among the Hebrews. We cannot deny that it was somewhat effective, as it
caused many Jews to embrace Christianity.

At about the same time Isaac bär Levinson of Kremenetz, named the
Russian Mendelssohn, wrote a book, entitled "Teuda b'Israel," in which
he collected all the savings of the Talmud relating to the following
topics, (*a*) that every Jew is obliged to learn the language of his
country; (*b*) to engage in scientific pursuits; (*c*) that he must
learn some trade and occupy himself, if possible, with agriculture, and
(*d*) that be must be patriotic to his country, and must respect the
laws of his country just as much as the laws of the "Torah," etc., etc.
This book was so excellent that the eye of Nicholas I., Emperor of
Russia, was attracted to it and he assisted Levinson both morally and
financially. Finally he presented him with 3,000 roubles to enable him
to publish his later works, "Zerubbabel," in which he proved the
falsehood of the misinterpretations of McCaul in every respect, "Beth
Jehuda," and "Efes Damin" (no blood), written against the blood
accusation. His books were so effective that as a result McCaul's books
were almost ignored.

The later affair in Alexander II.'s reign, however, we intend to
elaborate on more fully, as at that time it created a great stir in
Russia.

In 1876 a Roman Catholic priest, Lyotostansky by name, who embraced
Greek Catholicism, published a book in the Russian language which he
entitled, "Upotreblayut li Jewreay christansky Krov?" (Do the Jews need
Christian blood for religious purposes?)

This book, which contains about 300 pages, was dedicated to Alexander
III., then Crown Prince of Russia. He accepted the dedication with
thanks to the author.

Lyotostansky, desiring to have the thanks of the Crown Prince publicly
made known, printed posters announcing the Crown Prince's thanks for the
dedication, and set them up everywhere, even on the railroad cars.

The dailies and periodicals in Russia also announced the works favorably
owing to the fact that the book found favor in the eyes of his highness,
the Crown Prince. The contents of the book are chiefly attacks upon the
Talmud, accusing it of being the source of all the bad customs of the
Jews, etc.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

A meeting of the prominent Jews was then called and resolutions were
passed as follows:

First, that Lyotostansky's attacks upon the Talmud itself should be
silently ignored, for a debate on this subject in Russia would do the
Jews more harm than good.

Second, to republish and distribute the voluminous book of Prof.
Chwolson, who was a Christian, which defends the Talmud in general, and
conclusively proves, both theoretically and practically, that the blood
accusation is a trumped-up affair, and that all investigations in many
countries have shown that no instance occurred in which the Jews used
Christian blood.

Third, to republish the "Ukase" (decree) of Nicholas I., which declared
that no blood accusation for religious purposes should be directed
against the Jews as a people, and that if it should happen that a Jew be
accused of murdering a Christian, he should be tried as an individual
merely.

As is well known, there are people who endeavor to benefit themselves
from all current calamities, and to announce themselves as leaders
without considering that from such actions the calamity or affliction
may become still greater.

At that time there were two such men, one in Russia and one in Austria,
who desiring to make themselves popular, endeavored to place themselves
in the front ranks of the defenders of Judaism for their own benefit.

In Russia there was Alexander Zederbaum, publisher of the periodical
"Hamelitz" in St. Petersburg, a man of little knowledge, and who was
never fitted for a public debate. He challenged Lyotostansky to a public
debate, which, however, the latter declined to accept.

The real leaders of Israel, like the well known S. I. Fünn of Wilna and
Perez Smolensky, editor of the "Hashachar" in Vienna, and others, were
angry because of Zederbaum's challenge, believing that such a challenge
had caused an extremely unfavorable impression upon the Russian people,
especially as the newspapers declared that Lyotostansky's declination
was due to the fact that the alleged leader of the Russian Jews was an
ignoramus.

The very learned Lazar Zweifel, teacher of the Rabbinical Seminary in
Zhitomir, who, besides publishing a great book in

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

Hebrew, entitled "The Defender," against Lyotostansky's book, appealed
in our periodical "Hakol," Vol. I. No's 27 to 31, to his co-religionists
in Russia that they should appoint a committee to petition the Czar,
Alexander II., to forbid all polemics about the blood accusation in
newspapers, books or pamphlets, for such incitations always do harm to
the government itself.

However, Zweifel's appeal was a voice in the desert, as the attempts
upon the life of the Czar, in which, to our sorrow, some of our race
took part at that time, made it impossible to bother the Czar with such
petitions.

We may say, however, that even in this case the Talmud itself was saved,
and the government did not stop the publication and circulation of it in
Russia and even the study of it in the Jewish schools and institutions.
Even in the curriculums of the institutes for Hebrew teachers,
established by the government, some tracts of the Talmud were inserted.

Alas, we cannot say that the blood accusation by Lyotostansky had no
effect; as in 1882, there were massacres in many cities where Jews
dwelt. Although these were secretly instigated by the government itself
from a political standpoint, the provoking of the mob was on the basis
of the blood accusation. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](ht121.htm#fn_7)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Affair of Rohling-Bloch](ht121)
