[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Talmud](../talmud)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ht207)  [Next](ht209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tn_talm.jpg)](index)  
*Babylonian Talmud, Book 10: History of the Talmud*, tr. by Michael L.
Rodkinson, \[1918\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII.

TRANSLATIONS OF THE TALMUD

A. THE MISHNA.

English Translations.

W. Walton. Translation of the treatises Sabbath and Erubin, London,
1718.

D. A. de Sola and *M. I. Raphall*. Eighteen treatises from the Mishna
translated. London, 1843.

Joseph Barclay published under the title "The Talmud" a translation of
eighteen treatises of the Mishna with annotations. London, 1878.

C. Taylor. Sayings of the Jewish Fathers (the treatise Aboth).
Cambridge, 1877.

REMARK.--The treatise "Aboth" has been translated into almost all of the
European languages.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

B. THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.

To translate the Mishna is a comparatively easy task. Its generally
plain and uniform language and style of expression, and its compendious
character could easily enough be rendered into another language,
especially when accompanied by some explanatory notes. But it is quite
different with the Gemara, especially the Babylonian. There are, of
course, also passages in the Gemara which offer no great difficulties to
a translator who is sufficiently familiar with the idiom in which the
original is composed. We refer to the historical, legendary and
homiletical portions (Hagadas), which the compilers have interspersed in
every treatise. The main part of the Gemara, however, which is
essentially of an argumentative character, giving minute reports of
discussions and debates on the law, this part, so rich in dialectical
subtilities, and so full of technicalities and elliptical expressions,
offers to the translator almost insurmountable difficulties.

English Translations.

A. W. Streane. Translation of the treatise *Chagiga*. Cambridge, 1891.

Michael L. Rodkinson: Babylonian Talmud--Section Moed (Festivals).
Complete, consisting of the following volumes: Vol. I., <span
id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) Tract Sabbath (first ten chapters); Vol.
H., Tract Sabbath (continued), fourteen chapters; Vol. III., Tract
Erubin (Mingling); Vol. IV., Tracts Skekalim (Duties), and Rosh Hashana
(Hebrew Calendar); Vol. V., Tract Pesachim (Passover); Vol. VI., Tracts
Yomah (Day of Atonement), and Hagiga (Holocaust); Vol. VII., Tracts
Betzah (Feast), Succah (Tabernacles), and Moed Katan (Minor Festivals);
Vol. VIII., Tracts Taanith (Fasts), Megilla (Book of Esther), and Ebel
Rabbathi (Great Mourning).

Section Jurisprudence: Vol. I., Ethics of Judaism, (Tracts Aboth, Aboth
of R. Nathan, Derech Eretz, Rabba and Zutta); Vol. H., Bab Kama (First
Gate, eight chapters); Vol. III., Baba Metziah (Middle Gate), five
chapters, and the last two of

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Baba Kama; Vol.
IV., the last five chapters of Baba Metziah; Vol. V.-VI., Baba Bathra
(Last Gate, five chapters in each); Vol. VII.-VIII., Sanhedrin; Vol.
IX., Maccath, Shebuoth, and Eduyoth; Vol. X., Abuda Zara and Horioth,
New York, 1896-1903. <span id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)

C. THE PALESTINIAN TALMUD.

a\. Latin Translation.

Blasius Ugolinus, published in volumes XVII.-XXX. of his Thesaurus
antiquitatum sacrarum. (Venice, 1755-65), the following treatises in
Latin: Pesachim (vol. XVII.); Shekalim, Yoma, Succah, Rosh Hashanah,
Taanith, Megilla, Chagiga, Betza, Moed Katan (vol. XVIII.); Maaseroth,
Maaser Sheni, Challah, Orlah, Biccurim (vol. XX.); Sanhedrin, Maccoth
(Vol. XXV.); Kiddushin, Sota, Kethuboth (vol. XXX.).

b\. German Translations.

Joh. Jacob Rabe, besides translating Berachoth in connection with that
treatise in the Babylonian Gemara, as mentioned above, published: Der
Talmudische Tractat *Peah*, übersetzt und erläutert. Anspach, 1781.

August Wünsche. Der Jerusalemische Talmud in seinen haggadischen
Bestandtheilen zum ersten Male in's Deutsche übertragen. Zurich, 1880.

c\. French Translation.

Moise Schwab. Le Talmud de Jerusalem traduit pour la première fois. X.
volumes. Paris, 1871-90.

D. GEMARA.

M. Schwab, the author of the French translation published in English:
The Talmud of Jerusalem. Vol. I. Berachoth. London, 1886.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[56:1](ht208.htm#fr_48) Of Vol. I. and IV. a
second revised and enlarged edition was published.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[57:1](ht208.htm#fr_49) See "Kritische
Geschichte der Talmud Übersetzung" by Bischof, p. 62. In this book all
the translations from both Talmuds in *all languages* and all tracts or
parts of them, with criticisms, are mentioned. The English translations
are given here for the English reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Bibliography of Modern Works and Monographs on
Talmudic Subjects](ht209)
