[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vre18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA43W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Varieties of Religous Experience*, by William James, \[1902\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### WILLIAM JAMES

#### (1842-1910)

##### A NOTE ON THE AUTHOR OF "THE VARIETIES OF RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE"

The road by which William James arrived at his position of leadership
among American philosophers was, during his childhood, youth and early
maturity, quite as circuitous and unpredictable as were his father's
ideas on the training of his children. That Swedenborgian theologian
foresaw neither the career of novelist for his son Henry, nor that of
pragmatist philosopher for the older William. The father's migrations
between New York, Europe and Newport meant that William's education had
variety if it did not have fixed direction. From 13 to 18 he studied in
Europe and returned to Newport, Rhode Island, to study painting under
the guidance of John La Farge. After a year, he gave up art for science
and entered Harvard University, where his most influential teachers were
Louis Agassiz and Charles W. Eliot. In 1863, William James began the
study of medicine, and in 1865 he joined an expedition to the Amazon.
Before long, he wrote: "If there is anything I hate, it is collecting."
His studies constantly interrupted by ill health, James returned to
Germany and began hearing lectures and reading voluminously in
philosophy. He won his medical degree at Harvard in 1870. For four years
he was an invalid in Cambridge, but finally, in 1873, he passed his
gravest physical and spiritual crises and began the career by which he
was to influence so profoundly generations of American students. From
1880 to 1907 he was successively assistant professor of philosophy,
professor of psychology and professor of philosophy at Harvard. In 1890,
the publication of his *Principles of Psychology* brought him the
acknowledged leadership in the field of functional psychology. The
selection of William James to deliver the Gifford lectures in Edinburgh
was at once a tribute to him and a reward for the university that
sponsored the undertaking. These lectures, collected in this volume,
have since become famous as the standard scientific work on the
psychology of the religious impulse. Death ended his career on August
27th, 1910.

 
