[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cjw01)  [Next](cjw03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

# Preface

THIS little volume with its foundation-stones of Truth is an effort to
further the second object of the Theosophical Society as it was
originally expressed by H. P. Blavatsky in *The Key to Theosophy*:

To promote the study of Aryan and other Scriptures, of the World's
religion and sciences, and to vindicate the importance of old Asiatic
literature, namely, of the Brahmanical, Buddhist, and Zoroastrian
philosophies.

The translations herein are reprints from the *Oriental Department
Papers* published by William Quan Judge in 1894, 1895, and 1896, as well
as from Judge's Magazine, *The Path*. In introducing Charles Johnston,
then a member of the Theosophical Society, as the translator of the
Sanskrit works to be produced in his Oriental Papers, judge writes:

Of his qualifications there is no doubt, as he has had experience in
this field, has also for some time been teaching Sanskrit, and brings to
the work a sincere sympathy with Indian thought as well as devotion to
the Society which will without question make the matter furnished of
value as well as of interest.

In Śankarâchârya (the blessed teacher) we have an example of the
statement that "Masters are living facts." Mankind needs such assurance
these days, and needs not only the inspiration of the story of a man who
has lived divinely, but also his kindly and strengthening words of
wisdom. What greater gift could the Hindu sage have left us than that of
a collection of soul-stirring thoughts?

For those who, with hearts fervent with compassion, seek

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

the holy path that brings to birth a 'sage of boundless vision,'
Śankarâchârya's *Crest-Jewel of Wisdom* will be a practical and
inspiring guide to life. Its teachings, the shared realizations of an
enlightened god-man, tell us the laws by which we may 'untie the bonds
of unwisdom,' and thus, evermore free, with minds calm and pellucid and
hearts purified of reward-desiring actions, come to know and partake of
the majestic power, light, and universal kinship of the Divine within
us, our birthright as humans, and our passport to grander attainments in
vaster spheres of consciousness.

Just as the sun with its splendor and its glories greets us every
morning when we awake and silently through the day nourishes us in all
parts of our being, and later as it sets at night, leaves a glow of rich
color suggesting a spiritual mystery to be grasped somewhere,
somehow--maybe in the morn's returning light--so the challenging message
of Śankarâchârya's jewel-thoughts braces the spirits of world-weary ones
as they turn to its radiant wisdom. They become illumined by the divine
fire permeating its words, and as they turn from the study of its verses
enriched for another of life's experiences, the glow of the gleaned
awakenings will become a haunting memory leading them back to its
precepts for another sunrise and sunset of the spirit.

JUDITH TYBERG

*Theosophical University  
    March, 1946*    

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](cjw03)
