[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst063)  [Next](inst065) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 11.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p1"></span>OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. BOTH THE NAME
AND THE REALITY DEFINED.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p2"></span>In this chapter and the seven which
follow, the doctrine of Justification by Faith is expounded, and
opposite errors refuted. The following may be regarded as the
arrangement of these chapters:—Chapter 11 states the doctrine, and the
four subsequent chapters, by destroying the righteousness of works,
confirm the righteousness of faith, each in the order which appears in
the respective titles of these chapters. In Chapter 12 the doctrine of
Justification is confirmed by a description of perfect righteousness; in
Chapter 13 by calling attention to two precautions; in Chapter 14 by a
consideration of the commencement and progress of regeneration in the
regenerate; and in Chapter 15 by two very pernicious effects which
constantly accompany the righteousness of works. The three other
chapters are devoted to refutation; Chapter 16 disposes of the
objections of opponents; Chapter 17 replies to the arguments drawn from
the promises of the Law or the Gospel; Chapter 18 refutes what is said
in support of the righteousness of faith from the promise of reward.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p3"></span>There are three principal divisions in
the Eleventh Chapter. I. The terms used in this discussion are
explained, sec. 1-4. II. Osiander’s dream as to essential righteousness
impugned, sec. 5-13. III. The righteousness of faith established in
opposition to the righteousness of works.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p4"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p5"></span>1. Connection between the doctrine of
Justification and that of Regeneration. The knowledge of this doctrine
very necessary for two reasons.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p6"></span>2. For the purpose of facilitating the
exposition of it, the terms are explained. 1. What it is to be justified
in the sight of God. 2. To be justified by works. 3. To be justified by
faith. Definition.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p7"></span>3. Various meanings of the term
Justification. 1. To give praise to God and truth. 2. To make a vain
display of righteousness. 3. To impute righteousness by faith, by and on
account of Christ. Confirmation from an expression of Paul, and another
of our Lord.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p8"></span>4. Another confirmation from a
comparison with other expressions, in which justification means free
righteousness before God through faith in Jesus Christ. 1. Acceptance.
2. Imputation of righteousness. 3. Remission of sins. 4. Blessedness. 5.
Reconciliation with God. 6. Righteousness by the obedience of Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p9"></span>5. The second part of the chapter.
Osiander’s dream as to essential righteousness refuted. 1. Osiander’s
argument: Answer. 2. Osiander’s second argument: Answer. Third argument:
Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p10"></span>6. necessity of this refutation. Fourth
argument: Answer. Confirmation: Another answer. Fifth and sixth
arguments and answers.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p11"></span>7. Seventh and eighth arguments.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p12"></span>8. Ninth argument: Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p13"></span>9. Tenth argument: Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p14"></span>10. In what sense Christ is said to be
our righteousness. Eleventh and twelfth arguments and answers.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p15"></span>11. Thirteenth and fourteenth
arguments: Answers. An exception by Osiander. Imputed and begun
righteousness to be distinguished. Osiander confounds them. Fifteenth
argument: Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p16"></span>12. Sixteenth argument, a dream of
Osiander: Answer. Other four arguments and answers. Conclusion of the
refutation of Osiander’s errors.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p17"></span>13. Last part of the chapter.
Refutation of the Sophists pretending a righteousness compounded partly
of faith and partly of works.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p18"></span>14. Sophistical evasion by giving the
same name to different things: Two answers.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p19"></span>15. Second evasion: Two answers. First
answer. Pernicious consequences resulting from this evasion.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p20"></span>16. Second answer, showing wherein,
according to Scripture, Justification consists.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p21"></span>17. In explanation of this doctrine of
Justification, two passages of Scripture produced.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p22"></span>18. Another passage of Scripture.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p23"></span>19. Third evasion. Papistical objection
to the doctrine of Justification by Faith alone: Three answers. Fourth
evasion: Three answers.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p24"></span>20. Fifth evasion, founded on the
application of the term Righteousness to good works, and also on their
reward: Answer, confirmed by the invincible argument of Paul. Sixth
evasion: Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p25"></span>21. Osiander and the Sophists being
thus refuted, the accuracy of the definition of Justification by Faith
established.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p26"></span>22. Definition confirmed. 1. By
passages of Scripture. 2. By the writings of the ancient Fathers.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p27"></span>23. Man justified by faith, not because
by it he obtains the Spirit, and is thus made righteous, but because by
faith he lays hold of the righteousness of Christ. An objection removed.
An example of the doctrine of Justification by Faith from the works of
Ambrose.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p28"></span>1. I trust I have now sufficiently
shown  <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) how man’s only resource
for escaping from the curse of the law, and recovering salvation, lies
in faith; and also what the nature of faith is, what the benefits which
it confers, and the fruits which it produces. The whole may be thus
summed up: Christ given to us by the kindness of God is apprehended and
possessed by faith, by means of which we obtain in particular a twofold
benefit; first, being reconciled by the righteousness of Christ, God
becomes, instead of a judge, an indulgent Father; and, secondly, being
sanctified by his Spirit, we aspire to integrity and purity of life.
This second benefit—viz. regeneration, appears to have been already
sufficiently discussed. On the other hand, the subject of justification
was discussed more cursorily, because it seemed of more consequence
first to explain that the faith by which alone, through the mercy of
God, we obtain free justification, is not destitute of good works; and
also to show the true nature of these good works on which this question
partly turns. The doctrine of Justification is now to be fully
discussed, and discussed under the conviction, that as it is the
principal ground on which religion must be supported, so it requires
greater care and attention. For unless you understand first of all what
your position is before God, and what the judgment which he passes upon
you, you have no foundation on which your salvation can be laid, or on
which piety towards God can be reared. The necessity of thoroughly
understanding this subject will become more apparent as we proceed with
it.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p30"></span>2. Lest we should stumble at the very
threshold (this we should do were we to begin the discussion without
knowing what the subject is), let us first explain the meaning of the
expressions, *To be justified in the sight of God, to be Justified by
faith or by works*. A man is said to be justified in the sight of God
when in the judgment of God he is deemed righteous, and is accepted on
account of his righteousness; for as iniquity is abominable to God, so
neither can the sinner find grace in his sight, so far as he is and so
long as he is regarded as a sinner. Hence, wherever sin is, there also
are the wrath and vengeance of God. He, on the other hand, is justified
who is regarded not as a sinner, but as righteous, and as such stands
acquitted at the judgment-seat of God, where all sinners are condemned.
As an innocent man, when charged before an impartial judge, who decides
according to his innocence, is said to be justified by the judge, as a
man is said to be justified by God when, removed from the catalogue of
sinners, he has God as the witness and assertor of his righteousness. In
the same manner, a man will be said to be *justified by works*, if in
his life there can be found a purity and holiness which merits an
attestation of righteousness at the throne of God, or if by the
perfection of his works he can answer and satisfy the divine justice. On
the contrary, a man will be *justified by faith* when, excluded from the
righteousness of works, he by faith lays hold of the righteousness of
Christ, and clothed in it appears in the sight of God not as a sinner,
but as righteous. Thus we simply interpret justification, as the
acceptance with which God receives us into his favor as if we were
righteous; and we say that this justification consists in the
forgiveness of sins and the imputation of the righteousness of Christ
(see sec. 21 and 23).

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p31"></span>3. In confirmation of this there are
many clear passages of Scripture. First, it cannot be denied that this
is the proper and most usual signification of the term. But as it were
too tedious to collect all the passages, and compare them with each
other, let it suffice to have called the reader’s attention to the fact:
he will easily convince himself of its truth. I will only mention a few
passages in which the justification of which we speak is expressly
handled. First, when Luke relates that all the people that heard Christ
“justified God,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p31.1"></span>[Luke
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p31.1"></span>), and when Christ declares, that “Wisdom
is justified of all her children,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p31.2"></span>[Luke
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#035)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p31.2"></span>), Luke means not that they conferred
righteousness which always dwells in perfection with God, although the
whole world should attempt to wrest it from him, nor does Christ mean
that the doctrine of salvation is made just: this it is in its own
nature; but both modes of expression are equivalent to attributing due
praise to God and his doctrine. On the other hand, when Christ upbraids
the Pharisees for justifying themselves (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p31.3"></span>[Luke
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p31.3"></span>), he means not that they acquired
righteousness by acting properly, but that they ambitiously courted a
reputation for righteousness of which they were destitute. Those
acquainted with Hebrew understand the meaning better: for in that
language the name of wicked is given not only to those who are conscious
of wickedness, but to those who receive sentence of condemnation. Thus,
when Bathsheba says, “I and my son Solomon shall be counted offenders,”
she does not acknowledge a crime, but complains that she and her son
will be exposed to the disgrace of being numbered among reprobates and
criminals (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p31.4"></span>[1 Kings
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p31.4"></span>). It is, indeed, plain from the context,
that the term even in Latin40  <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398)
must be thus understood—viz. *relatively*—and does not denote any
quality. In regard to the use of the term with reference to the present
subject, when Paul speaks of the Scripture, “foreseeing that God would
justify the heathen through faith,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.1"></span>[Gal.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.1"></span>), what other meaning can you give it than
that God imputes righteousness by faith? Again, when he says, “that he
(God) might be just, and the justifier of him who believeth in Jesus,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p32.2"></span>[Rom.
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.2"></span>), what can the meaning be, if not that
God, in consideration of their faith, frees them from the condemnation
which their wickedness deserves? This appears still more plainly at the
conclusion, when he exclaims, “Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the
right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.3"></span>[Rom.
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.3"></span>). For it is just as if he had said, Who
shall accuse those whom God has acquitted? Who shall condemn those for
whom Christ pleads? To *justify*, therefore, is nothing else than to
acquit from the charge of guilt, as if innocence were proved. Hence,
when God justifies us through the intercession of Christ, he does not
acquit us on a proof of our own innocence, but by an imputation of
righteousness, so that though not righteous in ourselves, we are deemed
righteous in Christ. Thus it is said, in Paul’s discourse in the Acts,
“Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins; and by
him all that believe are justified from all things from which ye could
not be justified by the law of Moses,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.4"></span>[Acts
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.4"></span>). You see that after remission of sins
justification is set down by way of explanation; you see plainly that it
is used for acquittal; you see how it cannot be obtained by the works of
the law; you see that it is entirely through the interposition of
Christ; you see that it is obtained by faith; you see, in fine, that
satisfaction intervenes, since it is said that we are justified from our
sins by Christ. Thus when the publican is said to have gone down to his
house “justified,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p32.5"></span>[Luke
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.5"></span>), it cannot be held that he obtained this
justification by any merit of works. All that is said is, that after
obtaining the pardon of sins he was regarded in the sight of God as
righteous. He was justified, therefore, not by any approval of works,
but by gratuitous acquittal on the part of God. Hence Ambrose elegantly
terms confession of sins “legal justification,” (Ambrose on <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p32.6"></span>[Psalm
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii.xii-p32.6"></span>
Serm. 10).

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p33"></span>4. Without saying more about the term,
we shall have no doubt as to the thing meant if we attend to the
description which is given of it. For Paul certainly designates
justification by the term *acceptance*, when he says to the Ephesians,
“Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p33.1"></span>[Eph.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p33.1"></span>). His meaning is the very same as where he
elsewhere says, “being justified freely by his grace,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p33.2"></span>[Rom.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p33.2"></span>). In the fourth chapter of the Epistle to
the Romans, he first terms it the *imputation* of righteousness, and
hesitates not to place it in forgiveness of sins: “Even as David also
describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth
righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven,” &c. (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p33.3"></span>[Rom.
4:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p33.3"></span>). There, indeed, he is not speaking of a
part of justification, but of the whole. He declares, moreover, that a
definition of it was given by David, when he pronounced him *blessed*
who has obtained the *free* pardon of his sins. Whence it appears that
this righteousness of which he speaks is simply opposed to judicial
guilt.40  <span id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) But the most
satisfactory passage on this subject is that in which he declares the
sum of the Gospel message to be reconciliation to God, who is pleased,
through Christ, to receive us into favor by not imputing our sins (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p34.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p34.1"></span>). Let my readers carefully weigh the whole
context. For Paul shortly after adding, by way of explanation, in order
to designate the mode of reconciliation, that Christ who knew no sin was
made sin for us, undoubtedly understands by reconciliation nothing else
than justification. Nor, indeed, could it be said, as he elsewhere does,
that we are made righteous “by the obedience” of Christ (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p34.2"></span>[Rom.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p34.2"></span>), were it not that we are deemed righteous
in the sight of God in him and not in ourselves.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p35"></span>5. But as Osiander has introduced a
kind of monstrosity termed *essential righteousness*, by which, although
he designed not to abolish free righteousness, he involves it in
darkness, and by that darkness deprives pious minds of a serious sense
of divine grace40  <span id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) ; before I
pass to other matters, it may be proper to refute this delirious dream.
And, first, the whole speculation is mere empty curiosity. He indeed,
heaps together many passages of scripture showing that Christ is one
with us, and we likewise one with him, a point which needs no proof; but
he entangles himself by not attending to the bond of this unity. The
explanation of all difficulties is easy to us, who hold that we are
united to Christ by the secret agency of his Spirit, but he had formed
some idea akin to that of the Manichees, desiring to transfuse the
divine essence into men.40  <span id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401)
Hence his other notion, that Adam was formed in the image of God,
because even before the fall Christ was destined to be the model of
human nature. But as I study brevity, I will confine myself to the
matter in hand. He says, that we are one with Christ. This we admit, but
still we deny that the essence of Christ is confounded with ours. Then
we say that he absurdly endeavors to support his delusions by means of
this principle: that Christ is our righteousness, because he is the
eternal God, the fountain of righteousness, the very righteousness of
God. My readers will pardon me for now only touching on matters which
method requires me to defer to another place. But although he pretends
that, by the term essential righteousness, he merely means to oppose the
sentiment that we are reputed righteous on account of Christ, he however
clearly shows, that not contented with that righteousness, which was
procured for us by the obedience and sacrificial death of Christ, he
maintains that we are substantially righteous in God by an infused
essence as well as quality. For this is the reason why he so vehemently
contends that not only Christ but the Father and the Spirit dwell in us.
The fact I admit to be true, but still I maintain it is wrested by him.
He ought to have attended to the mode of dwelling—viz. that the Father
and the Spirit are in Christ; and as in him the fulness of the Godhead
dwells, so in him we possess God entire. Hence, whatever he says
separately concerning the Father and the Spirit, has no other tendency
than to lead away the simple from Christ. Then he introduces a
substantial mixture, by which God, transfusing himself into us, makes us
as it were a part of himself. Our being made one with Christ by the
agency of the Spirit, he being the head and we the members, he regards
as almost nothing unless his essence is mingled with us. But, as I have
said, in the case of the Father and the Spirit, he more clearly betrays
his views—namely, that we are not justified by the mere grace of the
Mediator, and that righteousness is not simply or entirely offered to us
in his person, but that we are made partakers of divine righteousness
when God is essentially united to us.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p38"></span>6. Had he only said, that Christ by
justifying us becomes ours by an essential union, and that he is our
head not only in so far as he is man, but that as the essence of the
divine nature is diffused into us, he might indulge his dreams with less
harm, and, perhaps, it were less necessary to contest the matter with
him; but since this principle is like a cuttle-fish, which, by the
ejection of dark and inky blood, conceals its many tails,40  <span
id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402) if we would not knowingly and
willingly allow ourselves to be robbed of that righteousness which alone
gives us full assurance of our salvation, we must strenuously resist.
For, in the whole of this discussion, the noun *righteousness* and the
verb to *justify*, are extended by Osiander to two parts; to be
justified being not only to be reconciled to God by a free pardon, but
also to be made just; and righteousness being not a free imputation, but
the holiness and integrity which the divine essence dwelling in us
inspires. And he vehemently asserts (see sec. 8) that Christ is himself
our righteousness, not in so far as he, by expiating sins, appeased the
Father, but because he is the eternal God and life. To prove the first
point—viz. that God justifies not only by pardoning but by regenerating,
he asks, whether he leaves those whom he justifies as they were by
nature, making no change upon their vices? The answer is very easy: as
Christ cannot be divided into parts, so the two things, justification
and sanctification, which we perceive to be united together in him, are
inseparable. Whomsoever, therefore, God receives into his favor, he
presents with the Spirit of adoption, whose agency forms them anew into
his image. But if the brightness of the sun cannot be separated from its
heat, are we therefore to say, that the earth is warmed by light and
illumined by heat? Nothing can be more apposite to the matter in hand
than this simile. The sun by its heat quickens and fertilizes the earth;
by its rays enlightens and illumines it. Here is a mutual and undivided
connection, and yet reason itself prohibits us from transferring the
peculiar properties of the one to the other. In the confusion of a
twofold grace, which Osiander obtrudes upon us, there is a similar
absurdity. Because those whom God freely regards as righteous, he in
fact renews to the cultivation of righteousness, Osiander confounds that
free acceptance with this gift of regeneration, and contends that they
are one and the same. But Scriptures while combining both, classes them
separately, that it may the better display the manifold grace of God.
Nor is Paul’s statement superfluous, that Christ is made unto us
“righteousness and sanctification,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p39.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p39.1"></span>). And whenever he argues from the
salvation procured for us, from the paternal love of God and the grace
of Christ, that we are called to purity and holiness, he plainly
intimates, that to be justified is something else than to be made new
creatures. Osiander on coming to Scripture corrupts every passage which
he quotes. Thus when Paul says, “to him that worketh not, but believeth
on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness,” he expounds *justifying* as *making just*. With the same
rashness he perverts the whole of the fourth chapter to the Romans. He
hesitates not to give a similar gloss to the passage which I lately
quoted, “Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God
that justifieth.” Here it is plain that guilt and acquittal simply are
considered, and that the Apostle’s meaning depends on the antithesis.
Therefore his futility is detected both in his argument and his
quotations for support from Scripture. He is not a whit sounder in
discussing the term righteousness, when it is said, that faith was
imputed to Abraham for righteousness after he had embraced Christ (who
is the righteousness of Gad and God himself) and was distinguished by
excellent virtues. Hence it appears that two things which are perfect
are viciously converted by him into one which is corrupt. For the
righteousness which is there mentioned pertains not to the whole course
of life; or rather, the Spirit testifies, that though Abraham greatly
excelled in virtue, and by long perseverance in it had made so much
progress, the only way in which he pleased God was by receiving the
grace which was offered by the promise, in faith. From this it follows,
that, as Paul justly maintains, there is no room for works in
justification.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p40"></span>7. When he objects that the power of
justifying exists not in faith, considered in itself, but only as
receiving Christ, I willingly admit it. For did faith justify of itself,
or (as it is expressed) by its own intrinsic virtue, as it is always
weak and imperfect, its efficacy would be partial, and thus our
righteousness being maimed would give us only a portion of salvation. We
indeed imagine nothing of the kind, but say, that, properly speaking,
God alone justifies. The same thing we likewise transfer to Christ,
because he was given to us for righteousness; while we compare faith to
a kind of vessel, because we are incapable of receiving Christ, unless
we are emptied and come with open mouth to receive his grace. Hence it
follows, that we do not withdraw the power of justifying from Christ,
when we hold that, previous to his righteousness, he himself is received
by faith. Still, however, I admit not the tortuous figure of the
sophist, that faith is Christ; as if a vessel of clay were a treasure,
because gold is deposited in it.41  <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403) And yet this is no reason why faith,
though in itself of no dignity or value, should not justify us by giving
Christ; Just as such a vessel filled with coin may give wealth. I say,
therefore, that faith, which is only the instrument for receiving
justification, is ignorantly confounded with Christ, who is the material
cause, as well as the author and minister of this great blessing. This
disposes of the difficulty—viz. how the term *faith* is to be understood
when treating of justification.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p42"></span>8. Osiander goes still farther in
regard to the mode of receiving Christ, holding, that by the ministry of
the external word the internal word is received; that he may thus lead
us away from the priesthood of Christ, and his office of Mediator, to
his eternal divinity.41  <span id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404) We,
indeed, do not divide Christ, but hold that he who, reconciling us to
God in his flesh, bestowed righteousness upon us, is the eternal Word of
God; and that he could not perform the office of Mediator, nor acquire
righteousness for us, if he were not the eternal God. Osiander will have
it, that as Christ is God and man, he was made our righteousness in
respect not of his human but of his divine nature. But if this is a
peculiar property of the Godhead, it will not be peculiar to Christ, but
common to him with the Father and the Spirit, since their righteousness
is one and the same. Thus it would be incongruous to say, that that
which existed naturally from eternity was made ours. But granting that
God was made unto us righteousness, what are we to make of Paul’s
interposed statement, that he was so made by God? This certainly is
peculiar to the office of mediator, for although he contains in himself
the divine nature, yet he receives his own proper title, that he may be
distinguished from the Father and the Spirit. But he makes a ridiculous
boast of a single passage of Jeremiah, in which it is said, that Jehovah
will be our righteousness (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p43.1"></span>[Jer.
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p43.1"></span>; 33:16). But all he can extract from this
is, that Christ, who is our righteousness, was God manifest in the
flesh. We have elsewhere quoted from Paul’s discourse, that God
purchased the Church with his own blood (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p43.2"></span>[Acts
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p43.2"></span>). Were any one to infer from this that the
blood by which sins were expiated was divine, and of a divine nature,
who could endure so foul a heresy? But Osiander, thinking that he has
gained the whole cause by this childish cavil, swells, exults, and
stuffs whole pages with his bombast, whereas the solution is simple and
obvious—viz. that Jehovah, when made of the seed of David, was indeed to
be the righteousness of believers, but in what sense Isaiah declares,
“By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p43.3"></span>[Isa.
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p43.3"></span>). Let us observe that it is the Father who
speaks. He attributes the office of justifying to the Son, and adds the
reason,—because he is “righteous.” He places the method, or *medium* (as
it is called), in the doctrine by which Christ is known. For the word
(((

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p44"></span> is more properly to be understood in a
passive sense. Hence I infer, first, that Christ was made righteousness
when he assumed the form of a servant; secondly, that he justified us by
his obedience to the Father; and, accordingly that he does not perform
this for us in respect of his divine nature, but according to the nature
of the dispensation laid upon him. For though God alone is the fountain
of righteousness, and the only way in which we are righteous is by
participation with him, yet, as by our unhappy revolt we are alienated
from his righteousness, it is necessary to descend to this lower remedy,
that Christ may justify us by the power of his death and resurrection.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p45"></span>9. If he objects that this work by its
excellence transcends human, and therefore can only be ascribed to the
divine nature; I concede the former point, but maintain, that on the
latter he is ignorantly deluded. For although Christ could neither
purify our souls by his own blood, nor appease the Father by his
sacrifice, nor acquit us from the charge of guilt, nor, in short,
perform the office of priest, unless he had been very God, because no
human ability was equal to such a burden, it is however certain, that he
performed all these things in his human nature. If it is asked, in what
way we are justified? Paul answers, *by the obedience of Christ*. Did he
obey in any other way than by assuming the form of a servant? We infer,
therefore, that righteousness was manifested to us in his flesh. In like
manner, in another passage (which I greatly wonder that Osiander does
not blush repeatedly to quote), he places the fountain of righteousness
entirely in the incarnation of Christ, “He has made him to be sin for us
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p45.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p45.1"></span>). Osiander in turgid sentences lays hold
of the expression, *righteousness of God*, and shouts victory! as if he
had proved it to be his own phantom of essential righteousness,41  <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) though the words have a very different
meaning—viz. that we are justified through the expiation made by Christ.
That the righteousness of God is used for the righteousness which is
approved by God, should be known to mere tyros, as in John, the praise
of God is contrasted with the praise of men41  <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p47.1"></span>[John
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p47.1"></span>). I know that by the righteousness of God
is sometimes meant that of which God is the author, and which he bestows
upon us; but that here the only thing meant is, that being supported by
the expiation of Christ, we are able to stand at the tribunal of God,
sound readers perceive without any observation of mine. The word is not
of so much importance, provided Osiander agrees with us in this, that we
are justified by Christ in respect he was made an expiatory victim for
us. This he could not be in his divine nature. For which reason also,
when Christ would seal the righteousness and salvation which he brought
to us, he holds forth the sure pledge of it in his flesh. He indeed
calls himself “living bread,” but, in explanation of the mode, adds, “my
flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p47.2"></span>[John
6:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p47.2"></span>). The same doctrine is clearly seen in the
sacraments; which, though they direct our faith to the whole, not to a
part of Christ, yet, at the same time, declare that the materials of
righteousness and salvation reside in his flesh; not that the mere man
of himself justifies or quickens, but that God was pleased, by means of
a Mediator, to manifest his own hidden and incomprehensible nature.
Hence I often repeat, that Christ has been in a manner set before us as
a fountain, whence we may draw what would otherwise lie without use in
that deep and hidden abyss which streams forth to us in the person of
the Mediator.41  <span id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) In this way,
and in this meaning, I deny not that Christ, as he is God and man,
justifies us; that this work is common also to the Father and the Holy
Spirit; in fine, that the righteousness of which God makes us partakers
is the eternal righteousness of the eternal God, provided effect is
given to the clear and valid reasons to which I have adverted.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p49"></span>10. Moreover, lest by his cavils he
deceive the unwary, I acknowledge that we are devoid of this
incomparable gift until Christ become ours. Therefore, to that union of
the head and members, the residence of Christ in our hearts, in fine,
the mystical union, we assign the highest rank, Christ when he becomes
ours making us partners with him in the gifts with which he was endued.
Hence we do not view him as at a distance and without us, but as we have
put him on, and been ingrafted into his body, he deigns to make us one
with himself, and, therefore, we glory in having a fellowship of
righteousness with him. This disposes of Osiander’s calumny, that we
regard faith as righteousness; as if we were robbing Christ of his
rights when we say, that, destitute in ourselves, we draw near to him by
faith, to make way for his grace, that he alone may fill us. But
Osiander, spurning this spiritual union, insists on a gross mixture of
Christ with believers; and, accordingly, to excite prejudice, gives the
name of Zuinglians41  <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408) to all who
subscribe not to his fanatical heresy of essential righteousness,
because they do not hold that, in the supper, Christ is eaten
substantially. For my part, I count it the highest honor to be thus
assailed by a haughty man, devoted to his own impostures; though he
assails not me only, but writers of known reputation throughout the
world, and whom it became him modestly to venerate. This, however, does
not concern me, as I plead not my own cause, and plead the more
sincerely that I am free from every sinister feeling. In insisting so
vehemently on essential righteousness, and an essential inhabitation of
Christ within us, his meaning is, first, that God by a gross mixture41
 <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) transfuses himself into us, as
he pretends that there is a carnal eating in the supper; And, secondly
that by instilling his own righteousness into us, he makes us really
righteous with himself since, according to him, this righteousness is as
well God himself as the probity, or holiness, or integrity of God. I
will not spend much time in disposing of the passages of Scripture which
he adduces, and which, though used in reference to the heavenly life, he
wrests to our present state. Peter says, that through the knowledge of
Christ “are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by
them ye might be partakers of the divine nature,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p51.1"></span>[2 Pet.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p51.1"></span>);41  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) as if we now were what the gospel
promises we shall be at the final advent of Christ; nay, John reminds
us, that “when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see
him as he is” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p52.1"></span>[1 John
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p52.1"></span>). I only wished to give my readers a
slender specimen of Osiander, it being my intention to decline the
discussion of his frivolities, not because there is any difficulty in
disposing of them, but because I am unwilling to annoy the reader with
superfluous labour.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p53"></span>11. But more poison lurks in the second
branch, when he says that we are righteous together with God. I think I
have already sufficiently proved, that although the dogma were not so
pestiferous, yet because it is frigid and jejune, and falls by its own
vanity, it must justly be disrelished by all sound and pious readers.
But it is impossible to tolerate the impiety which, under the pretence
of a twofold righteousness, undermines our assurance of salvation, and
hurrying us into the clouds, tries to prevent us from embracing the gift
of expiation in faith, and invoking God with quiet minds. Osiander
derides us for teaching, that to be *justified* is a forensic term,
because it behaves us to be in reality just: there is nothing also to
which he is more opposed than the idea of our being justified by a free
imputation. Say, then, if God does not justify us by acquitting and
pardoning, what does Paul mean when he says “God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them”? “He made him to be sin for us who knew no sin; that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p53.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p53.1"></span>). Here I learn, first, that those who are
reconciled to God are regarded as righteous: then the method is stated,
God justifies by pardoning; and hence, in another place, justification
is opposed to accusation (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p53.2"></span>[Rom.
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p53.2"></span>); this antithesis clearly demonstrating
that the mode of expression is derived from forensic use. And, indeed,
no man, moderately verdant in the Hebrew tongue (provided he is also of
sedate brain), is ignorant that this phrase thus took its rise, and
thereafter derived its tendency and force. Now, then, when Paul says
that David “describeth the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputeth
righteousness without works, saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiven,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p53.3"></span>[Rom.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.xii-p53.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.xii-p53.4"></span>[Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p53.4"></span>), let Osiander say whether this is a
complete or only a partial definition. He certainly does not adduce the
Psalmist as a witness that pardon of sins is a part of righteousness, or
concurs with something else in justifying, but he includes the whole of
righteousness in gratuitous forgiveness, declaring those to be blessed
“whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered,” and “to
whom the Lord will not impute sin.” He estimates and judges of his
happiness from this that in this way he is righteous not in reality, but
by imputation.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p54"></span>Osiander objects that it would be
insulting to God, and contrary to his nature, to justify those who still
remain wicked. But it ought to be remembered, as I already observed,
that the gift of justification is not separated from regeneration,
though the two things are distinct. But as it is too well known by
experience, that the remains of sin always exist in the righteous, it is
necessary that justification should be something very different from
reformation to newness of life. This latter God begins in his elect, and
carries on during the whole course of life, gradually and sometimes
slowly, so that if placed at his judgment-seat they would always deserve
sentence of death. He justifies not partially, but freely, so that they
can appear in the heavens as if clothed with the purity of Christ. No
portion of righteousness could pacify the conscience. It must be decided
that we are pleasing to God, as being without exception righteous in his
sight. Hence it follows that the doctrine of justification is perverted
and completely overthrown whenever doubt is instilled into the mind,
confidence in salvation is shaken, and free and intrepid prayer is
retarded; yea, whenever rest and tranquillity with spiritual joy are not
established. Hence Paul argues against objectors, that “if the
inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p54.1"></span>[Gal.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p54.1"></span>). that in this way faith would be made
vain; for if respect be had to works it fails, the holiest of men in
that case finding nothing in which they can confide. This distinction
between justification and regeneration (Osiander confounding the two,
calls them a twofold righteousness) is admirably expressed by Paul.
Speaking of his real righteousness, or the integrity bestowed upon him
(which Osiander terms his essential righteousness), he mournfully
exclaims, “O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body
of this death?” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p54.2"></span>[Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p54.2"></span>); but retaking himself to the
righteousness which is founded solely on the mercy of God, he breaks
forth thus magnificently into the language of triumph: “Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth.” “Who
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?”
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p54.3"></span>[Rom.
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p54.3"></span>). He clearly declares that the only
righteousness for him is that which alone suffices for complete
salvation in the presence of God, so that that miserable bondage, the
consciousness of which made him a little before lament his lot,
derogates not from his confidence, and is no obstacle in his way. This
diversity is well known, and indeed is familiar to all the saints who
groan under the burden of sin, and yet with victorious assurance rise
above all fears. Osiander’s objection as to its being inconsistent with
the nature of God, falls back upon himself; for though he clothes the
saints with a twofold righteousness as with a coat of skins, he is,
however, forced to admit, that without forgiveness no man is pleasing to
God. If this be so, let him at least admit, that with reference to what
is called the proportion of imputation, those are regarded as righteous
who are not so in reality. But how far shall the sinner extend this
gratuitous acceptance, which is substituted in the room of
righteousness? Will it amount to the whole pound, or will it be only an
ounce? He will remain in doubt, vibrating to this side and to that,
because he will be unable to assume to himself as much righteousness as
will be necessary to give confidence. It is well that he who would
prescribe a law to God is not the judge in this cause. But this saying
will ever stand true, “That thou mightest be justified when thou
speakest, and be clear when thou judges,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p54.4"></span>[Ps.
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p54.4"></span>). What arrogance to condemn the Supreme
Judge when he acquits freely, and try to prevent the response from
taking affect: “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy.” And yet
the intercession of Moses, which God calmed by this answer, was not for
pardon to some individual, but to all alike, by wiping away the guilt to
which all were liable. And we, indeed, say, that the lost are justified
before God by the burial of their sins; for (as he hates sin) he can
only love those whom he justifies. But herein is the wondrous method of
justification, that, clothed with the righteousness of Christ, they
dread not the judgment of which they are worthy, and while they justly
condemn themselves, are yet deemed righteous out of themselves.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p55"></span>12. I must admonish the reader
carefully to attend to the mystery which he boasts he is unwilling to
conceal from them. For after contending with great prolixity that we do
not obtain favor with God through the mere imputation of the
righteousness of Christ, because (to use his own words) it were
impossible for God to hold those as righteous who are not so, he at
length concludes that Christ was given to us for righteousness, in
respect not of his human, but of his divine nature; and though this can
only be found in the person of the Mediator, it is, however, the
righteousness not of man, but of God. He does not now twist his rope of
two righteousnesses, but plainly deprives the human nature of Christ of
the office of justifying. It is worth while to understand what the
nature of his argument is. It is said in the same passage that Christ is
made unto us *wisdom* (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p55.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.1"></span>); but this is true only of the eternal
Word, and, therefore, it is not the man Christ that is made
*righteousness*. I answer, that the only begotten Son of God was indeed
his eternal wisdom, but that this title is applied to him by Paul in a
different way—viz. because “in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and righteousness,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p55.2"></span>[Col.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.2"></span>). That, therefore, which he had with the
Father he manifested to us; and thus Paul’s expression refers not to the
essence of the Son of God, but to our use, and is fitly applied to the
human nature of Christ; for although the light shone in darkness before
he was clothed with flesh, yet he was a hidden light until he appeared
in human nature as the *Sun of Righteousness*, and hence he calls
himself the *light of the world*. It is also foolishly objected by
Osiander, that justifying far transcends the power both of men and
angels, since it depends not on the dignity of any creature, but on the
ordination of God. Were angels to attempt to give satisfaction to God,
they could have no success, because they are not appointed for this
purpose, it being the peculiar office of Christ, who “has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.3"></span>[Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.3"></span>). Those who deny that Christ is our
righteousness, in respect of his divine nature, are wickedly charged by
Osiander with leaving only a part of Christ, and (what is worse) with
making two Gods; because, while admitting that God dwells in us, they
still insist that we are not justified by the righteousness of God. For
though we call Christ the author of life, inasmuch as he endured death
that he might destroy him who had the power of death (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.4"></span>[Heb.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.4"></span>), we do not thereby rob him of this honor,
in his whole character as God manifested in the flesh. We only make a
distinction as to the manner in which the righteousness of God comes to
us, and is enjoyed by us,—a matter as to which Osiander shamefully
erred. We deny not that that which was openly exhibited to us in Christ
flowed from the secret grace and power of God; nor do we dispute that
the righteousness which Christ confers upon us is the righteousness of
God, and proceeds from him. What we constantly maintain is, that our
righteousness and life are in the death and resurrection of Christ. I
say nothing of that absurd accumulation of passages with which without
selection or common understanding, he has loaded his readers, in
endeavoring to show, that whenever mention is made of righteousness,
this essential righteousness of his should be understood; as when David
implores help from the righteousness of God. This David does more than a
hundred times, and as often Osiander hesitates not to pervert his
meaning. Not a whit more solid is his objection, that the name of
righteousness is rightly and properly applied to that by which we are
moved to act aright, but that it is God only that worketh in us both to
will and to do (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p55.5"></span>[Phil.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.5"></span>). For we deny not that God by his Spirit
forms us anew to holiness and righteousness of life; but we must first
see whether he does this of himself, immediately, or by the hand of his
Son, with whom he has deposited all the fulness of the Holy Spirit, that
out of his own abundance he may supply the wants of his members. When,
although righteousness comes to us from the secret fountain of the
Godhead, it does not follow that Christ, who sanctified himself in the
flesh on our account, is our righteousness in respect of his divine
nature (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p55.6"></span>[John
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.6"></span>). Not less frivolous is his observation,
that the righteousness with which Christ himself was righteous was
divine; for had not the will of the Father impelled him, he could not
have fulfilled the office assigned him. For although it has been
elsewhere said that all the merits of Christ flow from the mere good
pleasure of God, this gives no countenance to the phantom by which
Osiander fascinates both his own eyes and those of the simple. For who
will allow him to infer, that because God is the source and commencement
of our righteousness, we are essentially righteous, and the essence of
the divine righteousness dwells in us? In redeeming us, says Isaiah, “he
(God) put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of salvation
upon his head,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p55.7"></span>[Isaiah
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.7"></span>), was this to deprive Christ of the armour
which he had given him, and prevent him from being a perfect Redeemer?
All that the Prophet meant was, that God borrowed nothing from an
external quarter, that in redeeming us he received no external aid. The
same thing is briefly expressed by Paul in different terms, when he says
that God set him forth “to declare his righteousness for the remission
of sins.” This is not the least repugnant to his doctrine: in another
place, that “by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p55.8"></span>[Rom.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p55.8"></span>). In short, every one who, by the
entanglement of a twofold righteousness, prevents miserable souls from
resting entirely on the mere mercy of God, mocks Christ by putting on
him a crown of plaited thorns.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p56"></span>13. But since a great part of mankind
imagine a righteousness compounded of faith and works let us here show
that there is so wide a difference between justification by faith and by
works, that the establishment of the one necessarily overthrows the
other. The Apostle says, “Yea doubtless, and I count all things but loss
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I
may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness,
which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p56.1"></span>[Phil.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p56.1"></span>). You here see a comparison of contraries,
and an intimation that every one who would obtain the righteousness of
Christ must renounce his own. Hence he elsewhere declares the cause of
the rejection of the Jews to have been, that “they being ignorant of
God’s righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of
God,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p56.2"></span>[Rom.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p56.2"></span>). If we destroy the righteousness of God
by establishing our own righteousness, then, in order to obtain his
righteousness, our own must be entirely abandoned. This also he shows,
when he declares that boasting is not excluded by the Law, but by faith
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p56.3"></span>[Rom.
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p56.3"></span>). Hence it follows, that so long as the
minutes portion of our own righteousness remains, we have still some
ground for boasting. Now if faith utterly excludes boasting, the
righteousness of works cannot in any way be associated with the
righteousness of faith. This meaning is so clearly expressed in the
fourth chapter to the Romans as to leave no room for cavil or evasion.
“If Abraham were justified by works he has whereof to glory;” and then
it is added, “but not before God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p56.4"></span>[Rom.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p56.4"></span>). The conclusion, therefore, is, that he
was not justified by works. He then employs another argument from
contraries—viz. when *reward* is paid to works, it is done *of debt*,
not *of grace*; but the righteousness of faith is of grace: therefore it
is not of the merit of works. Away, then, with the dream of those who
invent a righteousness compounded of faith and works (see Calvin. ad
Concilium Tridentinum).

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p57"></span>14. The Sophists, who delight in
sporting with Scripture and in empty cavils, think they have a subtle
evasion when they expound *works* to mean, such as unregenerated men do
literally, and by the effect of free will, without the grace of Christ,
and deny that these have any reference to spiritual works.41  <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411) Thus according to them, man is
justified by faith as well as by works, provided these are not his own
works, but gifts of Christ and fruits of regeneration; Paul’s only
object in so expressing himself being to convince the Jews, that in
trusting to their ohm strength they foolishly arrogated righteousness to
themselves, whereas it is bestowed upon us by the Spirit of Christ
alone, and not by studied efforts of our own nature. But they observe
not that in the antithesis between Legal and Gospel righteousness, which
Paul elsewhere introduces, all kinds of works, with whatever name
adorned, are excluded (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p58.1"></span>[Gal.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p58.1"></span>). For he says that the righteousness of
the Law consists in obtaining salvation by doing what the Law requires,
but that the righteousness of faith consists in believing that Christ
died and rose again (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p58.2"></span>[Rom.
10:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p58.2"></span>). Moreover, we shall afterwards see, at
the proper place, that the blessings of sanctification and
justification, which we derive from Christ, are different. Hence it
follows, that not even spiritual works are taken into account when the
power of justifying is ascribed to faith. And, indeed, the passage above
quoted, in which Paul declares that Abraham had no ground of glorying
before God, because he was not justified by works, ought not to be
confined to a literal and external form of virtue, or to the effort of
free will. The meaning is, that though the life of the Patriarch had
been spiritual and almost angelic, yet he could not by the merit of
works have procured justification before God.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p59"></span>15. The Schoolmen treat the matter
somewhat more grossly by mingling their preparations with it; and yet
the others instill into the simple and unwary a no less pernicious
dogma, when, under cover of the Spirit and grace, they hide the divine
mercy, which alone can give peace to the trembling soul. We, indeed,
hold with Paul, that those who fulfill the Law are justified by God, but
because we are all far from observing the Law, we infer that the works
which should be most effectual to justification are of no avail to us,
because we are destitute of them. In regard to vulgar Papists or
Schoolmen, they are here doubly wrong, both in calling faith assurance
of conscience while waiting to receive from God the reward of merits,
and in interpreting divine grace to mean not the imputation of
gratuitous righteousness, but the assistance of the Spirit in the study
of holiness. They quote from an Apostle: “He that comes to God must
believe that he is, and that he is the rewarder of them that diligently
seek him,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p59.1"></span>[Heb.
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p59.1"></span>). But they observe not what the method of
seeking is. Then in regard to the term *grace*, it is plain from their
writings that they labour under a delusion. For Lombard holds that
justification is given to us by Christ in two ways. “First,” says he
(Lombard, Sent. Lib. 3, Dist. 16, c. 11), “the death of Christ justifies
us when by means of it the love by which we are made righteous is
excited in our hearts; and, secondly, when by means of it sin is
extinguished, sin by which the devil held us captive, but by which he
cannot now procure our condemnation.” You see here that the chief office
of divine grace in our justification he considers to be its directing us
to good works by the agency of the Holy Spirit. He intended, no doubt,
to follow the opinion of Augustine, but he follows it at a distance, and
even wanders far from a true imitation of him both obscuring what was
clearly stated by Augustine, and making what in him was less pure more
corrupt. The Schools have always gone from worse to worse, until at
length, in their downward path, they have degenerated into a kind of
Pelagianism. Even the sentiment of Augustine, or at least his mode of
expressing it, cannot be entirely approved of. For although he is
admirable in stripping man of all merit of righteousness, and
transferring the whole praise of it to God, yet he classes the grace by
which we are regenerated to newness of life under the head of
sanctification.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p60"></span>16. Scripture, when it treats of
justification by faith, leads us in a very different direction. Turning
away our view from our own works, it bids us look only to the mercy of
God and the perfection of Christ. The order of justification which it
sets before us is this: first, God of his mere gratuitous goodness is
pleased to embrace the sinner, in whom he sees nothing that can move him
to mercy but wretchedness, because he sees him altogether naked and
destitute of good works. He, therefore, seeks the cause of kindness in
himself, that thus he may affect the sinner by a sense of his goodness,
and induce him, in distrust of his own works, to cast himself entirely
upon his mercy for salvation. This is the meaning of faith by which the
sinner comes into the possession of salvation, when, according to the
doctrine of the Gospel, he perceives that he is reconciled by God; when,
by the intercession of Christ, he obtains the pardon of his sins, and is
justified; and, though renewed by the Spirit of God, considers that,
instead of leaning on his own works, he must look solely to the
righteousness which is treasured up for him in Christ. When these things
are weighed separately, they will clearly explain our view, though they
may be arranged in a better order than that in which they are here
presented. But it is of little consequence, provided they are so
connected with each other as to give us a full exposition and solid
confirmation of the whole subject.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p61"></span>17. Here it is proper to remember the
relation which we previously established between faith and the Gospel;
faith being said to justify because it receives and embraces the
righteousness offered in the Gospel. By the very fact of its being said
to be offered by the Gospel, all consideration of works is excluded.
This Paul repeatedly declares, and in two passages, in particular, most
clearly demonstrates. In the Epistle to the Romans, comparing the Law
and the Gospel, he says, “Moses describeth the righteousness which is of
the law, That the man which does those things shall live by them. But
the righteousness which is of faith speaketh on this wise,—If thou shalt
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart
that God has raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p61.1"></span>[Rom.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p61.1"></span>:9). Do you see how he makes the
distinction between the Law and the Gospel to be, that the former gives
justification to works, whereas the latter bestows it freely without any
help from works? This is a notable passage, and may free us from many
difficulties if we understand that the justification which is given us
by the Gospel is free from any terms of Law. It is for this reason he
more than once places the promise in diametrical opposition to the Law.
“If the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p61.2"></span>[Gal.
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p61.2"></span>). Expressions of similar import occur in
the same chapter. Undoubtedly the Law also has its promises; and,
therefore, between them and the Gospel promises there must be some
distinction and difference, unless we are to hold that the comparison is
inept. And in what can the difference consist unless in this that the
promises of the Gospel are gratuitous, and founded on the mere mercy of
God, whereas the promises of the Law depend on the condition of works?
But let no pester here allege that only the righteousness which men
would obtrude upon God of their own strength and free will is
repudiated; since Paul declares, without exceptions that the Law gained
nothing by its commands, being such as none, not only of mankind in
general, but none even of the most perfect, are able to fulfill. Love
assuredly is the chief commandment in the Law, and since the Spirit of
God trains us to love, it cannot but be a cause of righteousness in us,
though that righteousness even in the saints is defective, and therefore
of no value as a ground of merit.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p62"></span>18. The second passage is, “That no man
is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: for, The
just shall live by faith. And the law is not of faith: but, The man that
does them shall live in them,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p62.1"></span>[Gal.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p62.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xii-p62.2"></span>[Hab.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p62.2"></span>). How could the argument hold unless it be
true that works are not to be taken into account, but are to be
altogether separated? The Law, he says, is different from faith. Why?
Because to obtain justification by it, works are required; and hence it
follows, that to obtain justification by the Gospel they are not
required. From this statement, it appears that those who are justified
by faith are justified independent of, nay, in the absence of, the merit
of works, because faith receives that righteousness which the Gospel
bestows. But the Gospel differs from the Law in this, that it does not
confine justification to works, but places it entirely in the mercy of
God. In like manner, Paul contends, in the Epistle to the Romans, that
Abraham had no ground of glorying, because faith was imputed to him for
righteousness (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p62.3"></span>[Rom.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p62.3"></span>); and he adds in confirmation, that the
proper place for justification by faith is where there are no works to
which reward is due. “To him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of
grace, but of debt.” What is given to faith is gratuitous, this being
the force of the meaning of the words which he there employs. Shortly
after he adds, “Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p62.4"></span>[Rom.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p62.4"></span>); and hence infers that the inheritance is
gratuitous because it is procured by faith. How so but just because
faiths without the aid of works leans entirely on the mercy of God? And
in the same sense, doubtless, he elsewhere teaches, that the
righteousness of God without the Law was manifested, being witnessed by
the Law and the Prophets (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p62.5"></span>[Rom.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p62.5"></span>); for excluding the Law, he declares that
it is not aided by worlds, that we do not obtain it by working, but are
destitute when we draw near to receive it.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p63"></span>19. The reader now perceives with what
fairness the Sophists of the present day cavil at our doctrine, when we
say that a man is justified by faith alone (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p63.1"></span>[Rom.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p63.1"></span>). They dare not deny that *he is justified
by faith*, seeing Scripture so often declares it; but as the word
*alone* is nowhere expressly used they will not tolerate its being
added.41  <span id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412) Is it so? What answer,
then will they give to the words of Paul, when he contends that
righteousness is not of faith unless it be gratuitous? How can it be
gratuitous, and yet by works? By what cavils, moreover, will they evade
his declaration in another place, that in the Gospel the righteousness
of God is manifested? (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p64.1"></span>[Rom.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.1"></span>). If righteousness is manifested in the
Gospel, it is certainly not a partial or mutilated, but a full and
perfect righteousness. The Law, therefore, has no part in its and their
objection to the exclusive word *alone* is not only unfounded, but is
obviously absurd. Does he not plainly enough attribute everything to
faith alone when he disconnects it with works? What I would ask, is
meant by the expressions, “The righteousness of God without the law is
manifested;” “Being justified freely by his grace;” “Justified by faith
without the deeds of the law?” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p64.2"></span>[Rom.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.2"></span>). Here they have an ingenious subterfuge,
one which, though not of their own devising but taken from Origin and
some ancient writers, is most childish. They pretend that the works
excluded are ceremonial, not moral works. Such profit do they make by
their constant wrangling, that they possess not even the first elements
of logic. Do they think the Apostle was raving when he produced, in
proof of his doctrine, these passages? “The man that does them shall
live in them,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p64.3"></span>[Gal.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.3"></span>). “Cursed is every one that continueth not
in all things that are written in the book of the law to do them,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xii-p64.4"></span>[Gal.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.4"></span>). Unless they are themselves raving, they
will not say that life was promised to the observers of ceremonies, and
the curse denounced only against the transgressors of them. If these
passages are to be understood of the Moral Law, there cannot be a doubt
that moral works also are excluded from the power of justifying. To the
same effect are the arguments which he employs. “By the deeds of the law
there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law is the
knowledge of sin,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p64.5"></span>[Rom.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.5"></span>). “The law worketh wrath,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.6"></span>[Rom.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.6"></span>), and therefore not righteousness. “The
law cannot pacify the conscience,” and therefore cannot confer
righteousness. “Faith is imputed for righteousness,” and therefore
righteousness is not the reward of works, but is given without being
due. Because “we are justified by faith,” boasting is excluded. “Had
there been a law given which could have given life, verily righteousness
should have been by the law. But the Scripture has concluded all under
sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that believe,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p64.7"></span>[Gal.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p64.7"></span>). Let them maintain, if they dare, that
these things apply to ceremonies, and not to morals, and the very
children will laugh at their effrontery. The true conclusion, therefore,
is, that the whole Law is spoken of when the power of justifying is
denied to it.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p65"></span>20. Should any one wonder why the
Apostle, not contented with having named works, employs this addition,
the explanation is easy. However highly works may be estimated, they
have their whole value more from the approbation of God than from their
own dignity. For who will presume to plume himself before God on the
righteousness of works, unless in so far as He approves of them? Who
will presume to demand of Him a reward except in so far as He has
promised it? It is owing entirely to the goodness of God that works are
deemed worthy of the honor and reward of righteousness; and, therefore,
their whole value consists in this, that by means of them we endeavor to
manifest obedience to God. Wherefore, in another passage, the Apostle,
to prove that Abraham could not be justified by works, declares, “that
the covenant, that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which
was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should
make the promise of none effect,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p65.1"></span>[Gal.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p65.1"></span>). The unskillful would ridicule the
argument that there could be righteous works before the promulgation of
the Law, but the Apostle, knowing that works could derive this value
solely from the testimony and honor conferred on them by God, takes it
for granted that, previous to the Law, they had no power of justifying.
We see why he expressly terms them works of Law when he would deny the
power of justifying to theme—viz. because it was only with regard to
such works that a question could be raised; although he sometimes,
without addition, excepts all kinds of works whatever, as when on the
testimony of David he speaks of the man to whom the Lord imputeth
righteousness without works (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p65.2"></span>[Rom.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p65.2"></span>). No cavils, therefore, can enable them to
prove that the exclusion of works is not general. In vain do they lay
hold of the frivolous subtilty, that the *faith alone*, by which we are
justified, “*worketh by love*,” and that love, therefore, is the
foundation of justification. We, indeed, acknowledge with Paul, that the
only faith which justifies is that which works by love (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p65.3"></span>[Gal.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p65.3"></span>); but love does not give it its justifying
power. Nay, its only means of justifying consists in its bringing us
into communication with the righteousness of Christ. Otherwise the whole
argument, on which the Apostle insists with so much earnestness, would
fall. “To him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of
debt. But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justifieth
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.” Could he express
more clearly than in this word, that there is justification in faith
only where there are no works to which reward is due, and that faith is
imputed for righteousness only when righteousness is conferred freely
without merit?

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p66"></span>21. Let us now consider the truth of
what was said in the definition—viz. that justification by faith is
reconciliation with God, and that this consists solely in the remission
of sins. We must always return to the axioms that the wrath of God lies
upon all men so long as they continue sinners. This is elegantly
expressed by Isaiah in these words: “Behold, the Lord’s hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot
hear: but your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and
your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p66.1"></span>[Isa.
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p66.1"></span>). We are here told that sin is a
separation between God and man; that His countenance is turned away from
the sinner; and that it cannot be otherwise, since, to have any
intercourse with sin is repugnant to his righteousness. Hence the
Apostle shows that man is at enmity with God until he is restored to
favour by Christ (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p66.2"></span>[Rom.
5:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p66.2"></span>). When the Lord, therefore, admits him to
union, he is said to justify him, because he can neither receive him
into favor, nor unite him to himself, without changing his condition
from that of a sinner into that of a righteous man. We adds that this is
done by remission of sins. For if those whom the Lord has reconciled to
himself are estimated by works, they will still prove to be in reality
sinners, while they ought to be pure and free from sin. It is evident
therefore, that the only way in which those whom God embraces are made
righteous, is by having their pollutions wiped away by the remission of
sins, so that this justification may be termed in one word the remission
of sins.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p67"></span>22. Both of these become perfectly
clear from the words of Paul: “God was in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation.” He then subjoins the sum of his
embassy: “He has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin; that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.1"></span>). He here uses righteousness and
reconciliation indiscriminately, to make us understand that the one
includes the other. The mode of obtaining this righteousness he explains
to be, that our sins are not imputed to us. Wherefore, you cannot
henceforth doubt how God justifies us when you hear that he reconciles
us to himself by not imputing our faults. In the same manner, in the
Epistle to the Romans, he proves, by the testimony of David, that
righteousness is imputed without works, because he declares the man to
be blessed “whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered,” and
“unto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.2"></span>[Rom.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xii-p67.3"></span>[Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.3"></span>). There he undoubtedly uses blessedness
for righteousness; and as he declares that it consists in forgiveness of
sins, there is no reason why we should define it otherwise. Accordingly,
Zacharias, the father of John the Baptist, sings that the knowledge of
salvation consists in the forgiveness of sins (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.4"></span>[Luke
1:77](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#077)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.4"></span>). The same course was followed by Paul
when, in addressing the people of Antioch, he gave them a summary of
salvation. Luke states that he concluded in this way: “Through this man
is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that
believe are justified from all things from which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.5"></span>[Acts
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p67.5"></span>). Thus the Apostle connects forgiveness of
sins with justification in such a way as to show that they are
altogether the same; and hence he properly argues that justification,
which we owe to the indulgence of God, is gratuitous. Nor should it seem
an unusual mode of expression to say that believers are justified before
God not by works, but by gratuitous acceptance, seeing it is frequently
used in Scripture, and sometimes also by ancient writers. Thus Augustine
says: “The righteousness of the saints in this world consists more in
the forgiveness of sins than the perfection of virtue,” (August. de
Civitate Dei, lib. 19, cap. 27). To this corresponds the well-known
sentiment of Bernard: “Not to sin is the righteousness of God, but the
righteousness of man is the indulgence of God,” (Bernard, Serm. 22, 23
in Cant). He previously asserts that Christ is our righteousness in
absolution, and, therefore, that those only are just who have obtained
pardon through mercy.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p68"></span>23. Hence also it is proved, that it is
entirely by the intervention of Christ’s righteousness that we obtain
justification before God. This is equivalent to saying that man is not
just in himself, but that the righteousness of Christ is communicated to
him by imputation, while he is strictly deserving of punishment. Thus
vanishes the absurd dogma, that man is justified by faith, inasmuch as
it brings him under the influence of the Spirit of God by whom he is
rendered righteous. This is so repugnant to the above doctrine that it
never can be reconciled with it. There can be no doubt that he who is
taught to seek righteousness out of himself does not previously possess
it in himself.42  <span id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413) This is most
clearly declared by the Apostle, when he says, that he who knew no sin
was made an expiatory victim for sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p69.1"></span>[2 Cor.
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p69.1"></span>). You see that our righteousness is not in
ourselves, but in Christ; that the only way in which we become possessed
of it is by being made partakers with Christ, since with him we possess
all riches. There is nothing repugnant to this in what he elsewhere
says: “God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for
sin condemned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the law might
be fulfilled in us,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p69.2"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p69.2"></span>). Here the only fulfillment to which he
refers is that which we obtain by imputation. Our Lord Jesus Christ
communicates his righteousness to us, and so by some wondrous ways in so
far as pertains to the justice of Gods transfuses its power into us.
That this was the Apostle’s view is abundantly clear from another
sentiment which he had expressed a little before: “As by one man’s
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many be made righteous,” (<span id="iv.iii.xii-p69.3"></span>[Rom.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p69.3"></span>). To declare that we are deemed righteous,
solely because the obedience of Christ is imputed to us as if it where
our own, is just to place our righteousness in the obedience of Christ.
Wherefore, Ambrose appears to me to have most elegantly adverted to the
blessing of Jacob as an illustration of this righteousness, when he says
that as he who did not merit the birthright in himself personated his
brother, put on his garments which gave forth a most pleasant odour, and
thus introduced himself to his father that he might receive a blessing
to his own advantage, though under the person of another, so we conceal
ourselves under the precious purity42  <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) of Christ, our first-born brother,
that we may obtain an attestation of righteousness from the presence of
God. The words of Ambrose are,—“Isaac’s smelling the odour of his
garments, perhaps means that we are justified not by works, but by
faith, since carnal infirmity is an impediment to works, but errors of
conduct are covered by the brightness of faith, which merits the pardon
of faults,” (Ambrose de Jacobo et Vita Beats, Lib. 2, c. 2). And so
indeed it is; for in order to appear in the presence of God for
salvation, we must send forth that fragrant odour, having our vices
covered and buried by his perfection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_397"></span>[398](inst064.htm#fr_397) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p29"></span>04 404 See Institutes, Book 2 chap. 6
and 7, and Book 3 from the commencement to the present chapter.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[399](inst064.htm#fr_398) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p31.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p32"></span>05 405 Latin, “etiam dum Latine
legitur.”—French, “mesme en Grec et en Latin;” even in Greek and Latin

<span id="fn_399"></span>[400](inst064.htm#fr_399) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p33.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p34"></span>06 406 French, “Dont il appert qu’il
note ces deux choses comme opposites, Estre justifies et Estre tenu
coulpable; à ce que le proces soit fait à l’homme qui aura
failli;”—whence it appears that he sets down as oppopsites the two
things, To be justified, and To be held guilty, in that the process is
brought against man who has failed.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[401](inst064.htm#fr_400) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p36"></span>07 407 French “Que les poures ames ne
sauroyent comprendre en telle obscurité la grace de Christ;”—that poor
souls cannot in such obscurity comprehend the grace of Christ.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[402](inst064.htm#fr_401) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p37"></span>08 408 French, “C’est, que l’ame est de
l’essence de Dieu;”—that is, that the soul is of the essence of God.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[403](inst064.htm#fr_402) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p39"></span>09 409 French, “Mais comme le principe
qu’il prend est comme une seche, laquelle en jettant son sang qui est
noir comme encre, trougle l’eau d’alentour pour cacher une grande
multitude de queuse;”—But as the principle which he adopts is like a
cuttlefish, which, casting out its blood, which is black as ink,
troubles the water all around, to hide a great multitude of tails.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[404](inst064.htm#fr_403) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p41"></span>10 410 French, “Quant à d’autres folies
extravangantes d’Osiander, tout homme de sain jugement les rejettera;
comme quand il dit que la foy est Jesus Christ, autant que s’il disoit,
qu’un pot de terre est le thresor qui est caché dedans;”—As to the other
extravagant follies of Osiander, every man of sound judgment will reject
them; for instance, when he says that faith is Jesus Christ, as much as
if he said, that an earthen pot is the treasure which is hidden in it.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](inst064.htm#fr_404) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p43"></span>11 411 French, “Faisant samblant de les
rauir à la divinité d’icelui;”—under pretence of leading them to his
divinity.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](inst064.htm#fr_405) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p46"></span>12 412 French, “Il magnifie la justice
de Dieu tant et plus; mais c’est pour triompher comme s’il auoit gagné
ce poinct, que la justice de Dieu nous est essencielle;”—He magnifies
the righteousness of God above measure; but it is to triumph, as if he
had gained this point, that the righteousness of God is essential to us.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](inst064.htm#fr_406) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p47"></span>13 413 The French adds “signifiant, que
ceux desquels il parle ont nagé entre deux eaux; pource qu’ils aimoyent
mieux garder leur bonne reputation au monde, qu d’etre priser devant
Dieu;”—meaning, that those of whom he speaks were swimming between two
streams; that they preferred keeping their good reputation in the world,
to being prized in the sight of God.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[408](inst064.htm#fr_407) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p47.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p48"></span>14 414 French, “Pour ceste cause j’ay
accoustume de dire que Christ nous est comme une fontaine, dont chacun
peut puiser et boire à son aise et à souhait; et que par son moyen les
biens celestes sourdent et decoulent à nous, lesquels ne nous
profiteroyent rien demeurans en la majesté de Dieu, qui est comme une
source profonde;”—For this cause I am accustomed to say, that Christ is
to us like a fountain, of which every man may draw and drink at his
ease, and to the fill; and that by his means heavenly blessings rise and
flow to us, which blessings would profit us nothing, remaining in the
majesty of God, which is, as it were, a profound abyss.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[409](inst064.htm#fr_408) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p50"></span>15 415 The Latin, “ideo Zuinglianos
odiose nominat;” is in the French simply, “condamne
furieusement;”—furiously condemns.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](inst064.htm#fr_409) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p51"></span>16 416 Latin, “crassa mixtura;”—French,
“mixtion telle que les viandes qu nous mangeons;”—mixture such as the
victuals we eat.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](inst064.htm#fr_410) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p52"></span>17 417 The French adds, “Osiander tire
de la que Dieu a meslée son essence avec la nostre;”—Osiander implies
from this that God has mingled his essence with ours.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[412](inst064.htm#fr_411) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p58"></span>18 418 French, “Ainsi ils disent que
cela n’appartient de rien aux bonnes œuvres des fideles qui se font par
la vertu du Sainct Esprit;”—Thus they say that has no reference at all
to the good works of believers, which are done by the power of the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[413](inst064.htm#fr_412) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p64"></span>19 419 French, “Mais pource que ce mot
Seule, n’y est point exprimé, ils nous reprochent qu’il est adjousté du
notre;”—but because this word Alone is not expressed, they upbraid us
with having it added of our own accord.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](inst064.htm#fr_413) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p69"></span>20 420 French, “Ceci est fort contraire
a la doctrine ci dessus mise: car il n’y a nulle doute que celui qui
doit cercher justice hors de soy-mesme, ne soit desnué de la sienne
propre;”—This is quite contrary to the doctrine above laid down; for
there is no doubt, that he who is to seek righteousness out of himself,
is devoid of righteousness in himself.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](inst064.htm#fr_414) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p69.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p70"></span>21 421 French, “Sous la robbe;”—under
the robe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 12. - NECESSITY OF CONTEMPLATING THE JUDGMENT-SEAT OF
GOD, IN ORDER TO BE SERIOUSLY CONVINCED OF THE DOCTRINE OF GRATUITOUS
JUSTIFICATION.](inst065)
