[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst041)  [Next](inst043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.ix"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 8.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p1"></span>EXPOSITION OF THE MORAL LAW.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p2"></span>This chapter consists of four parts. I.
Some general observations necessary for the understanding of the subject
are made by way of preface, sec. 1–5. II. Three things always to be
attended to in ascertaining and expounding the meaning of the Moral Law,
sec. 6–12. III. Exposition of the Moral Law, or the Ten Commandments,
sec. 13–15. IV. The end for which the whole Law is intended—viz. to
teach not only elementary principles, but perfection, sec. 51, to the
end of the chapter.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p4"></span>1. The Law was committed to writing, in
order that it might teach more fully and perfectly that knowledge, both
of God and of ourselves, which the law of nature teaches meagrely and
obscurely. Proof of this, from an enumeration of the principal parts of
the Moral Law; and also from the dictate of natural law, written on the
hearts of all, and, in a manner, effaced by sin.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p5"></span>2. Certain general maxims. 1. From the
knowledge of God, furnished by the Law, we learn that God is our Father
and Ruler. Righteousness is pleasing, iniquity is an abomination in his
sight. Hence, how weak soever we may be, our duty is to cultivate the
one, and shun the other.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p6"></span>3. From the knowledge of ourselves,
furnished by the Law, we learn to discern our own utter powerlessness,
we are ashamed; and seeing it is in vain to seek for righteousness in
ourselves, are induced to seek it elsewhere.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p7"></span>4. Hence, God has annexed promises and
threatening to his promises. These not limited to the present life, but
embrace things heavenly and eternal. They, moreover, attest the spotless
purity of God, his love of righteousness, and also his kindness towards
us.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p8"></span>5. The Law shows, moreover, that there is
nothing more acceptable to God than obedience. Hence, all superstitious
and hypocritical modes of worship are condemned. A remedy against
superstitious worship and human presumption.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p9"></span>6. The second part of the chapter,
containing three observations or rules. First rule, Our life must be
formed by the Law, not only to external honesty, but to inward and
spiritual righteousness. In this respect, the Law of God differs from
civil laws, he being a spiritual Lawgiver, man not. This rule of great
extent, and not sufficiently attended to.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p10"></span>7. This first rule confirmed by the
authority of Christ, and vindicated from the false dogma of Sophists,
who say that Christ is only another Moses.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p11"></span>8. Second observation or rule to be
carefully attended to—viz. that the end of the command must be inquired
into, until it is ascertained what the Lawgiver approves or disapproves.
Example. Where the Law approves, its opposite is condemned, and *vice
versa*.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p12"></span>9. Full explanation of this latter point.
Example.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p13"></span>10. The Law states what is most impious
in each transgression, in order to show how heinous the transgression
is. Example.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p14"></span>11. Third observation or rule regards the
division of the Law into Two Tables: the former comprehending our duty
to God; the latter, our duty to our neighbour. The connection between
these necessary and inseparable. Their invariable order. Sum of the Law.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p15"></span>12. Division of the Law into Ten
Commandments. Various distinctions made with regard to them, but the
best distinction that which divides them into Two Tables. Four
commandments belong to the First, and six to the Second Table.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p16"></span>13. The third part of the chapter,
containing an exposition of the Decalogue. The preface vindicates the
authority of the Law. This it does in three ways. First, by a
declaration of its majesty.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p17"></span>14. The preface to the Law vindicates its
authority. Secondly, by calling to mind God’s paternal kindness.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p18"></span>15. Thirdly, by calling to mind the
deliverance out of the land of Egypt. Why God distinguishes himself by
certain epithets. Why mention is made of the deliverance from Egypt. In
what way, and how far, the remembrance of this deliverance should still
affect us.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p19"></span>16. Exposition of the First Commandment.
Its end. What it is to have God, and to have strange gods. Adoration due
to God, trust, invocation, thanksgiving, and also true religion,
required by the Commandment. Superstition, Polytheism, and Atheism,
forbidden. What meant by the words, “before me.”

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p20"></span>17. Exposition of the Second Commandment.
The end and sum of it. Two parts. Short enumeration of forbidden shapes.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p21"></span>18. Why a threatening is added. Four
titles applied to God, to make a deeper impression. He is called Mighty,
Jealous, an Avenger, Merciful. Why said to be jealous. Reason drawn from
analogy.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p22"></span>19. Exposition of the threatening which
is added. First, as to visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children. A misinterpretation on this head refuted, and the genuine
meaning of the threatening explained.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p23"></span>20. Whether this visiting of the sins of
parents inconsistent with the divine justice. Apparently conflicting
passages reconciled.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p24"></span>21. Exposition of the latter part—viz.
the showing mercy to thousands. The use of this promise. Consideration
of an exception of frequent occurrence. The extent of this blessing.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p25"></span>22. Exposition of the Third Commandment.
The end and sum of it. Three parts. These considered. What it is to use
the name of God in vain. Swearing. Distinction between this commandment
and the Ninth.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p26"></span>23. An oath defined. It is a species of
divine worship. This explained.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p27"></span>24. Many modes in which this commandment
is violated. 1. By taking God to witness what we know is false. The
insult thus offered.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p28"></span>25. Modes of violation continued. 2.
Taking God to witness in trivial matters. Contempt thus shown. When and
how an oath should be used. 3. Substituting the servants of God instead
of himself when taking an oath.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p29"></span>26. The Anabaptists, who condemn all
oaths, refuted. 1. By the authority of Christ, who cannot be opposed in
anything to the Father. A passage perverted by the Anabaptists
explained. The design of our Saviour in the passage. What meant by his
there prohibiting oaths.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p30"></span>27. The lawfulness of oaths confirmed by
Christ and the apostles. Some approve of public, but not of private
oaths. The lawfulness of the latter proved both by reason and example.
Instances from Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p31"></span>28. Exposition of the Fourth Commandment.
Its end. Three purposes.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p32"></span>29. Explanation of the first purpose—viz.
a shadowing forth of spiritual rest. This the primary object of the
precept. God is therein set forth as our sanctifier; and hence we must
abstain from work, that the work of God in us may not be hindered.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p33"></span>30. The number seven denoting perfection
in Scripture, this commandment may, in that respect, denote the
perpetuity of the Sabbath, and its completion at the last day.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p34"></span>31. Taking a simpler view of the
commandment, the number is of no consequence, provided we maintain the
doctrine of a perpetual rest from all our works, and, at the same time,
avoid a superstitious observance of days. The ceremonial part of the
commandment abolished by the advent of Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p35"></span>32. The second and third purposes of the
Commandment explained. These twofold and perpetual. This confirmed. Of
religious assemblies.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p36"></span>33. Of the observance of the Lord’s day,
in answer to those who complain that the Christian people are thus
trained to Judaism. Objection.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p37"></span>34. Ground of this institution. There is
no kind of superstitious necessity. The sum of the Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p38"></span>35. The Fifth Commandment (the first of
the Second Table), expounded. Its end and substance. How far honour due
to parents. To whom the term *father* applies.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p39"></span>36. It makes no difference whether those
to whom this honour is required are worthy or unworthy. The honour is
claimed especially for parents. It consists of three parts. 1.
Reverence.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p40"></span>37. Honour due to parents continued. 2.
Obedience. 3. Gratitude. Why a promise added. In what sense it is to be
taken. The present life a testimony of divine blessing. The reservation
considered and explained.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p41"></span>38. Conversely a curse denounced on
disobedient children. How far obedience due to parents, and those in the
place of parents.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p42"></span>39. Sixth Commandment expounded. Its end
and substance. God, as a spiritual Lawgiver, forbids the murder of the
heart, and requires a sincere desire to preserve the life of our
neighbour.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p43"></span>40. A twofold ground for this
Commandment. 1. Man is the image of God. 2. He is our flesh.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p44"></span>41. Exposition of the Seventh Command.
The end and substance of it. Remedy against fornication.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p45"></span>42. Continence an excellent gift, when
under the control of God only. Altogether denied to some; granted only
for a time to others. Argument in favour of celibacy refuted.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p46"></span>43. Each individual may refrain from
marriage so long as he is fit to observe celibacy. True celibacy, and
the proper use of it. Any man not gifted with continence wars with God
and with nature, as constituted by him, in remaining unmarried. Chastity
defined.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p47"></span>44. Precautions to be observed in married
life. Everything repugnant to chastity here condemned.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p48"></span>45. Exposition of the Eighth Commandment.
Its end and substance. Four kinds of theft. The bad acts condemned by
this Commandment. Other peculiar kinds of theft.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p49"></span>46. Proper observance of this
Commandment. Four heads. Application. 1. To the people and the
magistrate. 2. To the pastors of the Church and their flocks. 3. To
parents and children. 4. To the old and the young. 5. To servants and
masters. 6. To individuals.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p50"></span>47. Exposition of the ninth Commandment.
Its end and substance. The essence of the Commandment—detestation of
falsehood, and the pursuit of truth. Two kinds of falsehood. Public and
private testimony. The equity of this Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p51"></span>48. How numerous the violations of this
Commandment. 1. By detraction. 2. By evil speaking—a thing contrary to
the offices of Christian charity. 3. By scurrility or irony. 4. By
prying curiosity, and proneness to harsh judgments.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p52"></span>49. Exposition of the Tenth Commandment.
Its end and substance. What meant by the term *Covetousness*.
Distinction between counsel and the covetousness here condemned.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p53"></span>50. Why God requires so much purity.
Objection. Answer. Charity toward our neighbour here principally
commended. Why house, wife, man-servant, maid-servant, ox, and ass, &c.,
are mentioned. Improper division of this Commandment into two.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p54"></span>51. The last part of the chapter. The end
of the Law. Proof. A summary of the Ten Commandments. The Law delivers
not merely rudiments and first principles, but a perfect standard of
righteousness, modelled on the divine purity.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p55"></span>52. Why, in the Gospels and Epistles, the
latter table only mentioned, and not the first. The same thing occurs in
the Prophets.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p56"></span>53. An objection to what is said in the
former section removed.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p57"></span>54. A conduct duly regulated by the
divine Law, characterised by charity toward our neighbour. This
subverted by those who give the first place to self-love. Refutation of
their opinion.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p58"></span>55. Who our neighbour. Double error of
the Schoolmen on this point.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p59"></span>56. This error consists, I. In converting
precepts into counsels to be observed by monks.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p60"></span>57. Refutation of this error from
Scripture and the ancient Theologians. Sophistical objection obviated.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p61"></span>58. Error of the Schoolmen consists, II.
In calling hidden impiety and covetousness venial sins. Refutation
drawn, 1. From a consideration of the whole Decalogue. 2. The testimony
of an Apostle. 3. The authority of Christ. 4. The nature and majesty of
God. 5. The sentence pronounced against sin. Conclusion.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p62"></span>59. Refutation drawn, 1. From a
consideration of the whole Decalogue. 2. The testimony of an Apostle. 3.
The authority of Christ. 4. The nature and majesty of God. 5. The
sentence pronounced against sin. Conclusion.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p63"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p64"></span>1. I believe it will not be out of place
here to introduce the Ten Commandments of the Law, and give a brief
exposition of them. In this way it will be made more clear, that the
worship which God originally prescribed is still in force (a point to
which I have already adverted); and then a second point will be
confirmed—viz. that the Jews not only learned from the law wherein true
piety consisted, but from feeling their inability to observe it were
overawed by the fear of judgments and so drawn, even against their will,
towards the Mediator. In giving a summary of what constitutes the true
knowledge of God,19  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) we showed
that we cannot form any just conception of the character of God, without
feeling overawed by his majesty, and bound to do him service. In regard
to the knowledge of ourselves, we showed that it principally consists in
renouncing all idea of our own strength, and divesting ourselves of all
confidence in our own righteousness, while, on the other hand, under a
full consciousness of our wants, we learn true humility and
self-abasement. Both of these the Lord accomplishes by his Law, first,
when, in assertion of the right which he has to our obedience, he calls
us to reverence his majesty, and prescribes the conduct by which this
reverence is manifested; and, secondly, when, by promulgating the rule
of his justice (a rule, to the rectitude of which our nature, from being
depraved and perverted, is continually opposed, and to the perfection of
which our ability, from its infirmity and nervelessness for good, is far
from being able to attain), he charges us both with impotence and
unrighteousness. Moreover, the very things contained in the two tables
are, in a manner, dictated to us by that internal law, which, as has
been already said, is in a manner written and stamped on every heart.
For conscience, instead of allowing us to stifle our perceptions, and
sleep on without interruption, acts as an inward witness and monitor,
reminds us of what we owe to God, points out the distinction between
good and evil, and thereby convicts us of departure from duty. But man,
being immured in the darkness of error, is scarcely able, by means of
that natural law, to form any tolerable idea of the worship which is
acceptable to God. At all events, he is very far from forming any
correct knowledge of it. In addition to this, he is so swollen with
arrogance and ambition, and so blinded with self-love, that he is unable
to survey, and, as it were, descend into himself, that he may so learn
to humble and abase himself, and confess his misery. Therefore, as a
necessary remedy, both for our dullness and our contumacy, the Lord has
given us his written Law, which, by its sure attestations, removes the
obscurity of the law of nature, and also, by shaking off our lethargy,
makes a more lively and permanent impression on our minds.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p66"></span>2. It is now easy to understand the
doctrine of the law—viz. that God, as our Creator, is entitled to be
regarded by us as a Father and Master, and should, accordingly, receive
from us fear, love, reverence, and glory; nay, that we are not our own,
to follow whatever course passion dictates, but are bound to obey him
implicitly, and to acquiesce entirely in his good pleasure. Again, the
Law teaches, that justice and rectitude are a delight, injustice an
abomination to him, and, therefore, as we would not with impious
ingratitude revolt from our Maker, our whole life must be spent in the
cultivation of righteousness. For if we manifest becoming reverence only
when we prefer his will to our own, it follows, that the only legitimate
service to him is the practice of justice, purity, and holiness. Nor can
we plead as an excuse, that we want the power, and, like debtors, whose
means are exhausted, are unable to pay. We cannot be permitted to
measure the glory of God by our ability; whatever we may be, he ever
remains like himself, the friend of righteousness, the enemy of
unrighteousness, and whatever his demands from us may be, as he can only
require what is right, we are necessarily under a natural obligation to
obey. Our inability to do so is our own fault. If lust, in which sin has
its dominion, so enthrals us, that we are not free to obey our Father,
there is no ground for pleading necessity as a defence, since this evil
necessity is within, and must be imputed to ourselves.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p67"></span>3. When, under the guidance of the Law,
we have advanced thus far, we must, under the same guidance, proceed to
descend into ourselves. In this way, we at length arrive at two results:
First, contrasting our conduct with the righteousness of the Law, we see
how very far it is from being in accordance with the will of God, and,
therefore, how unworthy we are of holding our place among his creatures,
far less of being accounted his sons; and, secondly, taking a survey of
our powers, we see that they are not only unequal to fulfil the Law, but
are altogether null. The necessary consequence must be, to produce
distrust of our own ability, and also anxiety and trepidation of mind.
Conscience cannot feel the burden of its guilt, without forthwith
turning to the judgment of God, while the view of this judgment cannot
fail to excite a dread of death. In like manner, the proofs of our utter
powerlessness must instantly beget despair of our own strength. Both
feelings are productive of humility and abasement, and hence the sinner,
terrified at the prospect of eternal death (which he sees justly
impending over him for his iniquities), turns to the mercy of God as the
only haven of safety. Feeling his utter inability to pay what he owes to
the Law, and thus despairing of himself, he rethinks him of applying and
looking to some other quarter for help.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p68"></span>4. But the Lord does not count it enough
to inspire a reverence for his justice. To imbue our hearts with love to
himself, and, at the same time, with hatred to iniquity, he has added
promises and threatening. The eye of our mind being too dim to be
attracted by the mere beauty of goodness, our most merciful Father has
been pleased, in his great indulgence, to allure us to love and long
after it by the hope of reward. He accordingly declares that rewards for
virtue are treasured up with him, that none who yield obedience to his
commands will labour in vain. On the other hand, he proclaims not only
that iniquity is hateful in his sight, but that it will not escape with
impunity, because he will be the avenger of his insulted majesty. That
he may encourage us in every way, he promises present blessings, as well
as eternal felicity, to the obedience of those who shall have kept his
commands, while he threatens transgressors with present suffering, as
well as the punishment of eternal death. The promise, “Ye shall
therefore keep my statutes, and my judgments; which if a man do, he
shall live in them,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p68.1"></span>[Lev.
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p68.1"></span>), and corresponding to this the threatening,
“The souls that sinneth, it shall die,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p68.2"></span>[Ezek.
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p68.2"></span>);
doubtless point to a future life and death, both without end. But though
in every passage where the favour or anger of God is mentioned, the
former comprehends eternity of life and the latter eternal destruction,
the Law, at the same time, enumerates a long catalogue of present
blessings and curses (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p68.3"></span>[Lev.
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p68.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p68.4"></span>[Deut.
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p68.4"></span>). The threatening attest the spotless purity
of God, which cannot bear iniquity, while the promises attest at once
his infinite love of righteousness (which he cannot leave unrewarded),
and his wondrous kindness. Being bound to do him homage with all that we
have, he is perfectly entitled to demand everything which he requires of
us as a debt; and as a debt, the payment is unworthy of reward. He
therefore foregoes his right, when he holds forth reward for services
which are not offered spontaneously, as if they were not due. The amount
of these services, in themselves, has been partly described and will
appear more clearly in its own place. For the present, it is enough to
remember that the promises of the Law are no mean commendation of
righteousness as they show how much God is pleased with the observance
of them, while the threatening denounced are intended to produce a
greater abhorrence of unrighteousness, lest the sinner should indulge in
the blandishments of vice, and forget the judgment which the divine
Lawgiver has prepared for him.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p69"></span>5. The Lord, in delivering a perfect rule
of righteousness, has reduced it in all its parts to his mere will, and
in this way has shown that there is nothing more acceptable to him than
obedience. There is the more necessity for attending to this, because
the human mind, in its wantonness, is ever and anon inventing different
modes of worship as a means of gaining his favour. This irreligious
affectation of religion being innate in the human mind, has betrayed
itself in every age, and is still doing so, men always longing to devise
some method of procuring righteousness without any sanction from the
Word of God.19  <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) Hence in those
observances which are generally regarded as good works, the precepts of
the Law occupy a narrow space, almost the whole being usurped by this
endless host of human inventions. But was not this the very license
which Moses meant to curb, when, after the promulgation of the Law, he
thus addressed the people: “Observe and hear all these words which I
command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after
thee for ever, when thou does that which is good and right in the sight
of the Lord thy God.” “What thing soever I command you, observe to do
it: thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p70.1"></span>[Deut
12:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p70.1"></span>). Previously, after asking “what nation is
there so great, that has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this
law, which I set before you this day?” he had added, “Only take heed to
thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which
thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days
of thy life,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p70.2"></span>[Deut.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p70.2"></span>).
God foreseeing that the Israelites would not rest, but after receiving
the Law, would, unless sternly prohibited give birth to new kinds of
righteousness, declares that the Law comprehended a perfect
righteousness. This ought to have been a most powerful restraint, and
yet they desisted not from the presumptuous course so strongly
prohibited. How do we act? We are certainly under the same obligation as
they were; for there cannot be a doubt that the claim of absolute
perfection which God made for his Law is perpetually in force. Not
contented with it, however, we labour prodigiously in feigning and
coining an endless variety of good works, one after another. The best
cure for this vice would be a constant and deep-seated conviction that
the Law was given from heaven to teach us a perfect righteousness; that
the only righteousness so taught is that which the divine will expressly
enjoins; and that it is, therefore, vain to attempt, by new forms of
worship, to gain the favour of God, whose true worship consists in
obedience alone; or rather, that to go a wandering after good works
which are not prescribed by the Law of God, is an intolerable violation
of true and divine righteousness. Most truly does Augustine say in one
place, that the obedience which is rendered to God is the parent and
guardian; in another, that it is the source of all the virtues.19  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187)

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p72"></span>6. After we shall have expounded the
Divine Law, what has been previously said of its office and use will be
understood more easily, and with greater benefit. But before we proceed
to the consideration of each separate commandment, it will be proper to
take a general survey of the whole. At the outset, it was proved that in
the Law human life is instructed not merely in outward decency but in
inward spiritual righteousness. Though none can deny this, yet very few
duly attend to it, because they do not consider the Lawgiver, by whose
character that of the Law must also be determined. Should a king issue
an edict prohibiting murder, adultery, and theft, the penalty, I admit,
will not be incurred by the man who has only felt a longing in his mind
after these vices, but has not actually committed them. The reason is,
that a human lawgiver does not extend his care beyond outward order,
and, therefore, his injunctions are not violated without outward acts.
But God, whose eye nothing escapes, and who regards not the outward
appearance so much as purity of heart, under the prohibition of murder,
adultery, and thefts includes wrath, hatred, lust, covetousness, and all
other things of a similar nature. Being a spiritual Lawgiver, he speaks
to the soul not less than the body. The murder which the soul commits is
wrath and hatred; the theft, covetousness and avarice; and the adultery,
lust. It may be alleged that human laws have respect to intentions and
wishes, and not fortuitous events. I admit this but then these must
manifest themselves externally. They consider the *animus* with which
the act was done, but do not scrutinise the secret thoughts.
Accordingly, their demand is satisfied when the hand merely refrains
from transgression. On the contrary, the law of heaven being enacted for
our minds, the first thing necessary to a due observance of the Law is
to put them under restraint. But the generality of men, even while they
are most anxious to conceal their disregard of the Law, only frame their
hands and feet and other parts of their body to some kind of observance,
but in the meanwhile keep the heart utterly estranged from everything
like obedience. They think it enough to have carefully concealed from
man what they are doing in the sight of God. Hearing the commandments,
“Thou shalt not kill,” “Thou shalt not commit adultery,” “Thou shalt not
steal,” they do not unsheathe their sword for slaughter, nor defile
their bodies with harlots, nor put forth their hands to other men’s
goods. So far well; but with their whole soul they breathe out
slaughter, boil with lust, cast a greedy eye at their neighbour’s
property, and in wish devour it. Here the principal thing which the Law
requires is wanting. Whence then, this gross stupidity, but just because
they lose sight of the Lawgiver, and form an idea of righteousness in
accordance with their own disposition? Against this Paul strenuously
protests, when he declares that the “*law is spiritual*” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p72.1"></span>[Rom.
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p72.1"></span>); intimating that it not only demands the
homage of the soul, and mind, and will, but requires an angelic purity,
which, purified from all filthiness of the flesh, savours only of the
Spirit.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p73"></span>7. In saying that this is the meaning of
the Law, we are not introducing a new interpretation of our own; we are
following Christ, the best interpreter of the Law (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p73.1"></span>[Matt.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p73.1"></span>).
The Pharisees having instilled into the people the erroneous idea that
the Law was fulfilled by every one who did not in external act do
anything against the Law, he pronounces this a most dangerous delusion,
and declares that an immodest look is adultery, and that hatred of a
brother is murder. “Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause,
shall be in danger of the judgment;” whosoever by whispering or
murmuring gives indication of being offended, “shall be in danger of the
council;” whosoever by reproaches and evil-speaking gives way to open
anger, “shall be in danger of hell-fire.” Those who have not perceived
this, have pretended that Christ was only a second Moses, the giver of
an evangelical, to supply the deficiency of the Mosaic Law. Hence the
common axiom as to the perfection of the Evangelical Law, and its great
superiority to that of Moses. This idea is in many ways most pernicious.
For it will appear from Moses himself, when we come to give a summary of
his precepts, that great indignity is thus done to the Divine Law. It
certainly insinuates, that the holiness of the fathers under the Law was
little else than hypocrisy, and leads us away from that one unvarying
rule of righteousness. It is very easy, however, to confute this error,
which proceeds on the supposition that Christ added to the Law, whereas
he only restored it to its integrity by maintaining and purifying it
when obscured by the falsehood, and defiled by the leaven of the
Pharisees.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p74"></span>8. The next observation we would make is,
that there is always more in the requirements and prohibitions of the
Law than is expressed in words. This, however, must be understood so as
not to convert it into a kind of Lesbian code;19  <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) and thus, by licentiously wresting the
Scriptures, make them assume any meaning that we please. By taking this
excessive liberty with Scripture, its authority is lowered with some,
and all hope of understanding it abandoned by others. We must,
therefore, if possible, discover some path which may conduct us with
direct and firm step to the will of God. We must consider, I say, how
far interpretation can be permitted to go beyond the literal meaning of
the words, still making it apparent that no appending of human glosses
is added to the Divine Law, but that the pure and genuine meaning of the
Lawgiver is faithfully exhibited. It is true that, in almost all the
commandments, there are elliptical expressions, and that, therefore, any
man would make himself ridiculous by attempting to restrict the spirit
of the Law to the strict letter of the words. It is plain that a sober
interpretation of the Law must go beyond these, but how far is doubtful,
unless some rule be adopted. The best rule, in my opinion, would be, to
be guided by the principle of the commandment—viz. to consider in the
case of each what the purpose is for which it was given. For example,
every commandment either requires or prohibits; and the nature of each
is instantly discerned when we look to the principle of the commandment
as its end. Thus, the end of the Fifth Commandment is to render honour
to those on whom God bestows it. The sum of the commandment, therefore,
is, that it is right in itself, and pleasing to God, to honour those on
whom he has conferred some distinction; that to despise and rebel
against such persons is offensive to Him. The principle of the First
Commandment is, that God only is to be worshipped. The sum of the
commandment, therefore is that true piety, in other words, the worship
of the Deity, is acceptable, and impiety is an abomination, to him. So
in each of the commandments we must first look to the matter of which it
treats, and then consider its end, until we discover what it properly is
that the Lawgiver declares to be pleasing or displeasing to him. Only,
we must reason from the precept to its contrary in this way: If this
pleases God, its opposite displeases; if that displeases, its opposite
pleases: if God commands this, he forbids the opposite; if he forbids
that, he commands the opposite.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p76"></span>9. What is now touched on somewhat
obscurely will become perfectly clear as we proceed and get accustomed
to the exposition of the Commandments. It is sufficient thus to have
adverted to the subject; but perhaps our concluding statement will
require to be briefly confirmed, as it might otherwise not be
understood, or, though understood mighty perhaps, at the outset appear
unsound. There is no need of proving, that when good is ordered the evil
which is opposed to it is forbidden. This every one admits. It will also
be admitted, without much difficulty, that when evil is forbidden, its
opposite is enjoined. Indeed, it is a common saying, that censure of
vice is commendation of virtue. We, however, demand somewhat more than
is commonly understood by these expressions. When the particular virtue
opposed to a particular vice is spoken of, all that is usually meant is
abstinence from that vice. We maintain that it goes farther, and means
opposite duties and positive acts. Hence the commandment, “Thou shalt
not kill,” the generality of men will merely consider as an injunction
to abstain from all injury and all wish to inflict injury. I hold that
it moreover means, that we are to aid our neighbour’s life by every
means in our power. And not to assert without giving my reasons I prove
it thus: God forbids us to injure or hurt a brother, because he would
have his life to be dear and precious to us; and, therefore, when he so
forbids, he, at the same time, demands all the offices of charity which
can contribute to his preservation.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p77"></span>10. But why did God thus deliver his
commandments, as it were, by halves, using elliptical expressions with a
larger meaning than that actually expressed? Other reasons are given,
but the following seems to me the best:—As the flesh is always on the
alert to extenuate the heinousness of sin (unless it is made, as it
were, perceptible to the touch), and to cover it with specious pretexts,
the Lord sets forth, by way of example, whatever is foulest and most
iniquitous in each species of transgression, that the delivery of it
might produce a shudder in the hearer, and impress his mind with a
deeper abhorrence of sin. In forming an estimate of sins, we are often
imposed upon by imagining that the more hidden the less heinous they
are. This delusion the Lord dispels by accustoming us to refer the whole
multitude of sins to particular heads, which admirably show how great a
degree of heinousness there is in each. For example, wrath and hatred do
not seem so very bad when they are designated by their own names; but
when they are prohibited under the name of murder, we understand better
how abominable they are in the sight of God, who puts them in the same
class with that horrid crime. Influenced by his judgment, we accustom
ourselves to judge more accurately of the heinousness of offences which
previously seemed trivial.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p78"></span>11. It will now be proper to consider
what is meant by the division of the divine Law into Two Tables. It will
be judged by all men of sense from the formal manner in which these are
sometimes mentioned, that it has not been done at random, or without
reason. Indeed, the reason is so obvious as not to allow us to remain in
doubt with regard to it. God thus divided his Law into two parts,
containing a complete rule of righteousness, that he might assign the
first place to the duties of religion which relate especially to His
worship, and the second to the duties of charity which have respect to
man. The first foundation of righteousness undoubtedly is the worship of
God. When it is subverted, all the other parts of righteousness, like a
building rent asunder, and in ruins, are racked and scattered. What kind
of righteousness do you call it, not to commit theft and rapine, if you,
in the meantime, with impious sacrilege, rob God of his glory? or not to
defile your body with fornication, if you profane his holy name with
blasphemy? or not to take away the life of man, if you strive to cut off
and destroy the remembrance of God? It is vain, therefore, to talk of
righteousness apart from religion. Such righteousness has no more beauty
than the trunk of a body deprived of its head.19  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) Nor is religion the principal part
merely: it is the very soul by which the whole lives and breathes.
Without the fear of God, men do not even observe justice and charity
among themselves. We say, then, that the worship of God is the beginning
and foundation of righteousness; and that wherever it is wanting, any
degree of equity, or continence, or temperance, existing among men
themselves, is empty and frivolous in the sight of God. We call it the
source and soul of righteousness, in as much as men learn to live
together temperately, and without injury, when they revere God as the
judge of right and wrong. In the First Table, accordingly, he teaches us
how to cultivate piety, and the proper duties of religion in which his
worship consists; in the second, he shows how, in the fear of his name,
we are to conduct ourselves towards our fellow-men. Hence, as related by
the Evangelists (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p79.1"></span>[Mt.
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p79.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p79.2"></span>[Luke
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p79.2"></span>), our Saviour summed up the whole Law in two
heads—viz. to love the Lord with all our heart, with all our soul, and
with all our strength, and our neighbour as ourselves. You see how, of
the two parts under which he comprehends the whole Law, he devotes the
one to God, and assigns the other to mankind.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p80"></span>12. But although the whole Law is
contained in two heads, yet, in order to remove every pretext for
excuse, the Lord has been pleased to deliver more fully and explicitly
in Ten Commandments, every thing relating to his own honour, fear, and
love, as well as every thing relating to the charity which, for his
sake, he enjoins us to have towards our fellowmen. Nor is it an
unprofitable study to consider the division of the commandments,
provided we remember that it is one of those matters in which every man
should have full freedom of judgment, and on account of which,
difference of opinion should not lead to contention. We are, indeed,
under the necessity of making this observation, lest the division which
we are to adopt should excite the surprise or derision of the reader, as
novel or of recent invention.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p81"></span>There is no room for controversy as to
the fact, that the Law is divided into ten heads since this is
repeatedly sanctioned by divine authority. The question, therefore, is
not as to the number of the parts, but the method of dividing them.
Those who adopt a division which gives three commandments to the First
Table, and throws the remaining seven into the Second Table, expunge the
commandment concerning images from the list, or at least conceal it
under the first, though there cannot be a doubt that it was distinctly
set down by the Lord as a separate commandment; whereas the tenth, which
prohibits the coveting of what belongs to our neighbour, they absurdly
break down into two. Moreover, it will soon appear, that this method of
dividing was unknown in a purer age. Others count four commandments in
the First Table as we do, but for the first set down the introductory
promise, without adding the precept. But because I must hold, unless I
am convinced by clear evidence to the contrary, that the “ten words”
mentioned by Moses are Ten Commandments and because I see that number
arranged in most admirable order, I must, while I leave them to hold
their own opinion, follow what appears to me better established—viz.
that what they make to be the first commandment is of the nature of a
preface to the whole Law, that thereafter follow four commandments in
the First Table, and six in the Second, in the order in which they will
here be reviewed. This division Origin adopts without discussion, as if
it had been every where received in his day.19  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) It is also adopted by Augustine, in
his book addressed to Boniface, where, in enumerating the commandments,
he follows this order, Let one God be religiously obeyed, let no idol be
worshipped, let the name of God be not used in vain; while previously he
had made separate mention of the typical commandment of the Sabbath.
Elsewhere, indeed, he expresses approbation of the first division, but
on too slight grounds, because, by the number three (making the First
Table consist of three commandments), the mystery of the Trinity would
be better manifested. Even here, however, he does not disguise his
opinion, that in other respects, our division is more to his mind.
Besides these, we are supported by the author of an unfinished work on
Matthew.19  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) Josephus, no doubt
with the general consent of his age, assigns five commandments to each
table. This, while repugnant to reason, inasmuch as it confounds the
distinction between piety and charity, is also refuted by the authority
of our Saviour, who in Matthew places the command to honour parents in
the list of those belonging to the Second Table (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p83.1"></span>[Mt.
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p83.1"></span>). Let us now hear God speaking in his own
words.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p83.2"></span>First Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p84"></span>I AM THE LORD THY GOD, WHICH BROUGHT THEE
OUT OF THE LAND OF EGYPT, OUT OF THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE. THOU SHALT HAVE
NO OTHER GODS BEFORE ME.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p85"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p86"></span>13. Whether you take the former sentence
as a part of the commandment, or read it separately is to me a matter of
indifference, provided you grant that it is a kind of preface to the
whole Law. In enacting laws, the first thing to be guarded against is
their being forthwith abrogated by contempt. The Lord, therefore, takes
care, in the first place, that this shall not happen to the Law about to
be delivered, by introducing it with a triple sanction. He claims to
himself power and authority to command, that he may impress the chosen
people with the necessity of obedience; he holds forth a promise of
favour, as a means of alluring them to the study of holiness; and he
reminds them of his kindness, that he may convict them of ingratitude,
if they fail to make a suitable return. By the name, Lord, are denoted
power and lawful dominion. If all things are from him, and by him
consist, they ought in justice to bear reference to him, as Paul says
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p86.1"></span>[Rom.
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p86.1"></span>). This name, therefore, is in itself
sufficient to bring us under the authority of the divine majesty: for it
were monstrous for us to wish to withdraw from the dominion of him, out
of whom we cannot even exist.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p87"></span>14. After showing that he has a right to
command, and to be obeyed, he next, in order not to seem to drag men by
mere necessity, but to allure them, graciously declares, that he is the
God of the Church. For the mode of expression implies, that there is a
mutual relation included in the promise, “I will be their God, and they
shall be my people,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p87.1"></span>[Jer.
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p87.1"></span>). Hence Christ infers the immortality of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, from the fact that God had declared himself
to be their God (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p87.2"></span>[Mt.
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p87.2"></span>). It is, therefore, the same as if he had
said, I have chosen you to myself, as a people to whom I shall not only
do good in the present life, but also bestow felicity in the life to
come. The end contemplated in this is adverted to in the Law, in various
passages. For when the Lord condescends in mercy to honour us so far as
to admit us to partnership with his chosen people, he chooses us, as
Moses says, “to be a holy people,” “a peculiar people unto himself,” to
“keep all his commandments,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p87.3"></span>[Deut.
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p87.3"></span>;
14:2; 26:18). Hence the exhortation, “Ye shall be holy; for I the Lord
your God am holy,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p87.4"></span>[Lev.
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p87.4"></span>). These two considerations form the ground
of the remonstrance, “A son honoureth his father, and a servant his
master; if then I be a father, where is mine honour? and if I be a
master, where is my fear? saith the Lord of hosts,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p87.5"></span>[Mal.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p87.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p88"></span>15. Next follows a commemoration of his
kindness, which ought to produce upon us an impression strong in
proportion to the detestation in which ingratitude is held even among
men. It is true, indeed, he was reminding Israel of a deliverance then
recent, but one which, on account of its wondrous magnitude, was to be
for ever memorable to the remotest posterity. Moreover, it is most
appropriate to the matter in hand.19  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) For the Lord intimates that they were
delivered from miserable bondage, that they might learn to yield prompt
submission and obedience to him as the author of their freedom. In like
manners to keep us to his true worship, he often describes himself by
certain epithets which distinguish his sacred Deity from all idols and
fictitious gods. For, as I formerly observed, such is our proneness to
vanity and presumption, that as soon as God is named, our minds, unable
to guard against error, immediately fly off to some empty delusion. In
applying a remedy to this disease, God distinguishes his divinity by
certain titles, and thus confines us, as it were, within distinct
boundaries, that we may not wander hither and thither, and feign some
new deity for ourselves, abandoning the living God, and setting up an
idol. For this reason, whenever the Prophets would bring him properly
before us, they invest, and, as it were, surround him with those
characters under which he had manifested himself to the people of
Israel. When he is called the God of Abraham, or the God of Israel, when
he is stationed in the temple of Jerusalem, between the Cherubim, these,
and similar modes of expression,20  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) do not confine him to one place or one
people, but are used merely for the purpose of fixing our thoughts on
that God who so manifested himself in the covenant which he made with
Israel, as to make it unlawful on any account to deviate from the strict
view there given of his character. Let it be understood, then, that
mention is made of deliverance, in order to make the Jews submit with
greater readiness to that God who justly claims them as his own. We
again, instead of supposing that the matter has no reference to us,
should reflect that the bondage of Israel in Egypt was a type of that
spiritual bondage, in the fetters of which we are all bound, until the
heavenly avenger delivers us by the power of his own arm, and transports
us into his free kingdom. Therefore, as in old times, when he would
gather together the scattered Israelites to the worship of his name, he
rescued them from the intolerable tyranny of Pharaoh, so all who profess
him now are delivered from the fatal tyranny of the devil, of which that
of Egypt was only a type. There is no man, therefore, whose mind ought
not to be aroused to give heed to the Law, which, as he is told,
proceeded from the supreme King, from him who, as he gave all their
being, justly destines and directs them to himself as their proper end.
There is no man, I say, who should not hasten to embrace the Lawgiver,
whose commands, he knows, he has been specially appointed to obey, from
whose kindness he anticipates an abundance of all good, and even a
blessed immortality, and to whose wondrous power and mercy he is
indebted for deliverance from the jaws of death.20  <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p92"></span>16. The authority of the Law being
founded and established, God delivers his First Commandment—

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p93"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p94"></span>THOU SHALT HAVE NO OTHER GODS BEFORE ME.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p95"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p96"></span>The purport of this commandment is, that
the Lord will have himself alone to be exalted in his people, and claims
the entire possession of them as his own. That it may be so, he orders
us to abstain from ungodliness and superstition of every kind, by which
the glory of his divinity is diminished or obscured; and, for the same
reason, he requires us to worship and adore him with truly pious zeal.
The simple terms used obviously amount to this. For seeing we cannot
have God without embracing everything which belongs to him, the
prohibition against having strange gods means, that nothing which
belongs to him is to be transferred to any other. The duties which we
owe to God are innumerable, but they seem to admit of being not
improperly reduced to four heads: Adoration, with its accessory
spiritual submission of conscience, Trust, Invocation, Thanksgiving.20
 <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) By Adoration, I mean the
veneration and worship which we render to him when we do homage to his
majesty; and hence I make part of it to consist in bringing our
consciences into subjection to his Law.20  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) Trust, is secure resting in him under
a recognition of his perfections, when, ascribing to him all power,
wisdom, justice, goodness, and truth, we consider ourselves happy in
having been brought into intercourse with him. Invocation, may be
defined the retaking of ourselves to his promised aid as the only
resource in every case of need. Thanksgiving, is the gratitude which
ascribes to him the praise of all our blessings. As the Lord does not
allow these to be derived from any other quarter, so he demands that
they shall be referred entirely to himself. It is not enough to refrain
from other gods. We must, at the same time, devote ourselves wholly to
him, not acting like certain impious despisers, who regard it as the
shortest method, to hold all religious observance in derision. But here
precedence must be given to true religion, which will direct our minds
to the living God. When duly imbued with the knowledge of him, the whole
aim of our lives will be to revere, fear, and worship his majesty, to
enjoy a share in his blessings, to have recourse to him in every
difficulty, to acknowledge, laud, and celebrate the magnificence of his
works, to make him, as it were, the sole aim of all our actions. Next,
we must beware of superstition, by which our minds are turned aside from
the true God, and carried to and fro after a multiplicity of gods.
Therefore, if we are contented with one God, let us call to mind what
was formerly observed, that all fictitious gods are to be driven far
away, and that the worship which he claims for himself is not to be
mutilated. Not a particle of his glory is to be withheld: everything
belonging to him must be reserved to him entire. The words, “before me,”
go to increase the indignity, God being provoked to jealousy whenever we
substitute our fictions in his stead; just as an unfaithful wife stings
her husband’s heart more deeply when her adultery is committed openly
before his eyes. Therefore, God having by his present power and grace
declared that he had respect to the people whom he had chosen, now, in
order to deter them from the wickedness of revolt, warns them that they
cannot adopt strange gods without his being witness and spectator of the
sacrilege. To the audacity of so doing is added the very great impiety
of supposing that they can mock the eye of God with their evasions. Far
from this the Lord proclaims that everything which we design, plan, or
execute, lies open to his sight. Our conscience must, therefore, keep
aloof from the most distant thought of revolt, if we would have our
worship approved by the Lord. The glory of his Godhead must be
maintained entire and incorrupt, not merely by external profession, but
as under his eye, which penetrates the inmost recesses of his heart.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p99"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p99.1"></span>Second Commandment

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p100"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p101"></span>THOU SHALT NOT MAKE UNTO THEE ANY GRAVEN
IMAGE, OR ANY LIKENESS OFANYTHING THAT IS IN HEAVEN ABOVE, OR THAT IS IN
THE EARTH BENEATH, OR THAT IS IN THE WATER UNDER THE EARTH: THOU SHALT
NOT BOW DOWN THYSELF TO THEM, NOR SERVE THEM.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p102"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p103"></span>17. As in the first commandment the Lord
declares that he is one, and that besides him no gods must be either
worshipped or imagined, so he here more plainly declares what his nature
is, and what the kind of worship with which he is to be honoured, in
order that we may not presume to form any carnal idea of him. The
purport of the commandment, therefore, is, that he will not have his
legitimate worship profaned by superstitious rites. Wherefore, in
general, he calls us entirely away from the carnal frivolous observances
which our stupid minds are wont to devise after forming some gross idea
of the divine nature, while, at the same time, he instructs us in the
worship which is legitimate, namely, spiritual worship of his own
appointment. The grossest vice here prohibited is external idolatry.
This commandment consists of two parts. The former curbs the licentious
daring which would subject the incomprehensible God to our senses, or
represent him under any visible shape. The latter forbids the worship of
images on any religious ground. There is, moreover, a brief enumeration
of all the forms by which the Deity was usually represented by heathen
and superstitious nations. By “any thing which is in heaven above” is
meant the sun, the moon, and the stars, perhaps also birds, as in
Deuteronomy, where the meaning is explained, there is mention of birds
as well as stars (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p103.1"></span>[Deut.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p103.1"></span>). I would not have made this observation,
had I not seen that some absurdly apply it to the angels. The other
particulars I pass, as requiring no explanation. We have already shown
clearly enough (Book 1. chap. 11, 12) that every visible shape of Deity
which man devises is diametrically opposed to the divine nature; and,
therefore, that the moment idols appear, true religion is corrupted and
adulterated.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p104"></span>18. The threatening subjoined ought to
have no little effect in shaking off our lethargy. It is in the
following terms:—

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p105"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p106"></span>I THE LORD THY GOD AM A JEALOUS20  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) GOD, VISITING THE INIQUITY OF THE
FATHERS UPON THE CHILDREN UNTO THE THIRD AND FOURTH GENERATION OF THEM
THAT HATE ME; AND SHEWING MERCY UNTO THOUSANDS OF THEM THAT LOVE ME, AND
KEEP MY COMMANDMENTS.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p108"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p109"></span>The meaning here is the same as if he
had said, that our duty is to cleave to him alone. To induce us to this,
he proclaims his authority which he will not permit to be impaired or
despised with impunity. It is true, the word used is *El*, which means
God; but as it is derived from a word meaning *strength*, I have had no
hesitations in order to express the sense more fully, so to render it as
inserted on the margin. Secondly, he calls himself *jealous*, because he
cannot bear a partner. Thirdly, he declares that he will vindicate his
majesty and glory, if any transfer it either to the creatures or to
graven images; and that not by a simple punishment of brief duration,
but one extending to the third and fourth generation of such as imitate
the impiety of their progenitors. In like manner, he declares his
constant mercy and kindness to the remote posterity of those who love
him, and keep his Law. The Lord very frequently addresses us in the
character of a husband;20  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) the
union by which he connects us with himself, when he receives us into the
bosom of the Church, having some resemblance to that of holy wedlock,
because founded on mutual faith. As he performs all the offices of a
true and faithful husband, so he stipulates for love and conjugal
chastity from us; that is, that we do not prostitute our souls to Satan,
to be defiled with foul carnal lusts. Hence, when he rebukes the Jews
for their apostasy, he complains that they have cast off chastity, and
polluted themselves with adultery. Therefore, as the purer and chaster
the husband is, the more grievously is he offended when he sees his wife
inclining to a rival; so the Lord, who has betrothed us to himself in
truth, declares that he burns with the hottest jealousy whenever,
neglecting the purity of his holy marriage, we defile ourselves with
abominable lusts, and especially when the worship of his Deity, which
ought to have been most carefully kept unimpaired, is transferred to
another, or adulterated with some superstition; since, in this way, we
not only violate our plighted troth, but defile the nuptial couch, by
giving access to adulterers.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p111"></span>19. In the threatening we must attend to
what is meant when God declares that he will visit the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. It seems
inconsistent with the equity of the divine procedure to punish the
innocent for another’s fault; and the Lord himself declares, that “the
son shall not bear the iniquity of the father,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.1"></span>[Ezek.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.1"></span>). But still we meet more than once with a
declaration as to the postponing of the punishment of the sins of
fathers to future generations. Thus Moses repeatedly addresses the Lord
as “visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the
third and fourth generation,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p111.2"></span>[Num.
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.2"></span>). In like manner, Jeremiah, “Thou showest
loving-kindness unto thousands, and recompenses the iniquity of the
fathers into the bosom of their children after them,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.3"></span>[Jer.
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.3"></span>). Some feeling sadly perplexed how to solve
this difficulty, think it is to be understood of temporal punishments
only, which it is said sons may properly bear for the sins of their
parents, because they are often inflicted for their own safety. This is
indeed true; for Isaiah declared to Hezekiah, that his children should
be stript of the kingdom, and carried away into captivity, for a sin
which he had committed (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p111.4"></span>[Isa.
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.4"></span>); and the households of Pharaoh and
Abimelech were made to suffer for an injury done to Abraham (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.5"></span>[Gen.
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p111.5"></span>; 20:3–18). But the attempt to solve the
question in this way is an evasion rather than a true interpretation.
For the punishment denounced here and in similar passages is too great
to be confined within the limits of the present life. We must therefore
understand it to mean, that a curse from the Lord righteously falls not
only on the head of the guilty individual, but also on all his lineage.
When it has fallen, what can be anticipated but that the father, being
deprived of the Spirit of God, will live most flagitiously; that the
son, being in like manner forsaken of the Lord, because of his father’s
iniquity, will follow the same road to destruction; and be followed in
his turn by succeeding generations, forming a seed of evil-doers?

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p112"></span>20. First, let us examine whether such
punishment is inconsistent with the divine justice. If human nature is
universally condemned, those on whom the Lord does not bestow the
communication of his grace must be doomed to destruction; nevertheless,
they perish by their own iniquity, not by unjust hatred on the part of
God. There is no room to expostulate, and ask why the grace of God does
not forward their salvation as it does that of others. Therefore, when
God punishes the wicked and flagitious for their crimes, by depriving
their families of his grace for many generations, who will dare to bring
a charge against him for this most righteous vengeance? But it will be
said, the Lord, on the contrary, declares, that the son shall not suffer
for the father’s sin (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p112.1"></span>[Ezek.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p112.1"></span>). Observe the scope of that passage. The
Israelites, after being subjected to a long period of uninterrupted
calamities, had begun to say, as a proverb, that their fathers had eaten
the sour grape, and thus set the children’s teeth on edge; meaning that
they, though in themselves righteous and innocent, were paying the
penalty of sins committed by their parents, and this more from the
implacable anger than the duly tempered severity of God. The prophet
declares it was not so: that they were punished for their own
wickedness; that it was not in accordance with the justice of God that a
righteous son should suffer for the iniquity of a wicked father; and
that nothing of the kind was exemplified in what they suffered. For, if
the visitation of which we now speak is accomplished when God withdraws
from the children of the wicked the light of his truth and the other
helps to salvation, the only way in which they are accursed for their
fathers’ wickedness is in being blinded and abandoned by God, and so
left to walk in their parents’ steps. The misery which they suffer in
time, and the destruction to which they are finally doomed, are thus
punishments inflicted by divine justice, not for the sins of others, but
for their own iniquity.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p113"></span>21. On the other hand, there is a
promise of mercy to thousands—a promise which is frequently mentioned in
Scripture, and forms an article in the solemn covenant made with the
Church—I will be “a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p113.1"></span>[Gen.
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p113.1"></span>). With reference to this, Solomon says,
“The just man walketh in his integrity: his children are blessed after
him,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p113.2"></span>[Prov.
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p113.2"></span>); not only in consequence of a religious
education (though this certainly is by no means unimportant), but in
consequence of the blessing promised in the covenant—viz. that the
divine favour will dwell for ever in the families of the righteous.
Herein is excellent consolation to believers, and great ground of terror
to the wicked; for if, after death, the mere remembrance of
righteousness and iniquity have such an influence on the divine
procedure, that his blessing rests on the posterity of the righteous,
and his curse on the posterity of the wicked, much more must it rest on
the heads of the individuals themselves. Notwithstanding of this,
however, the offspring of the wicked sometimes amends, while that of
believers degenerates; because the Almighty has not here laid down an
inflexible rule which might derogate from his free election. For the
consolation of the righteous, and the dismay of the sinner, it is enough
that the threatening itself is not vain or nugatory, although it does
not always take effect. For, as the temporal punishments inflicted on a
few of the wicked are proofs of the divine wrath against sin, and of the
future judgment that will ultimately overtake all sinners, though many
escape with impunity even to the end of their lives, so, when the Lord
gives one example of blessing a son for his father’s sake, by visiting
him in mercy and kindness, it is a proof of constant and unfailing
favour to his worshipers. On the other hand, when, in any single
instance, he visits the iniquity of the father on the son, he gives
intimation of the judgment which awaits all the reprobate for their own
iniquities. The certainty of this is the principal thing here taught.
Moreover, the Lord, as it were by the way, commends the riches of his
mercy by extending it to thousands, while he limits his vengeance to
four generations.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p113.3"></span>Third Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p114"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p115"></span>THOU SHALT NOT TAKE THE NAME OF THE LORD
THY GOD IN VAIN.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p116"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p117"></span>22. The purport of this Commandment is,
that the majesty of the name of God is to be held sacred. In sum,
therefore, it means, that we must not profane it by using it
irreverently or contemptuously. This prohibition implies a corresponding
precept—viz. that it be our study and care to treat his name with
religious veneration. Wherefore it becomes us to regulate our minds and
our tongues, so as never to think or speak of God and his mysteries
without reverence and great soberness, and never, in estimating his
works, to have any feeling towards him but one of deep veneration. We
must, I say, steadily observe the three following things:—*First*,
Whatever our mind conceives of him, whatever our tongue utters, must
bespeak his excellence, and correspond to the sublimity of his sacred
name; in short, must be fitted to extol its greatness. *Secondly*, We
must not rashly and preposterously pervert his sacred word and adorable
mysteries to purposes of ambition, or avarice, or amusement, but,
according as they bear the impress of his dignity, must always maintain
them in due honour and esteem. *Lastly*, We must not detract from or
throw obloquy upon his works, as miserable men are wont insultingly to
do, but must laud every action which we attribute to him as wise, and
just, and good. This is to sanctify the name of God. When we act
otherwise, his name is profaned with vain and wicked abuse, because it
is applied to a purpose foreign to that to which it is consecrated. Were
there nothing worse, in being deprived of its dignity it is gradually
brought into contempt. But if there is so much evil in the rash and
unseasonable employment of the divine name, there is still more evil in
its being employed for nefarious purposes, as is done by those who use
it in necromancy, cursing, illicit exorcisms, and other impious
incantations. But the Commandment refers especially to the case of
oaths, in which a perverse employment of the divine name is particularly
detestable; and this it does the more effectually to deter us from every
species of profanation. That the thing here commanded relates to the
worship of God, and the reverence due to his name, and not to the equity
which men are to cultivate towards each other, is apparent from this,
that afterwards, in the Second Table, there is a condemnation of the
perjury and false testimony by which human society is injured, and that
the repetition would be superfluous, if, in this Commandment, the duty
of charity were handled. Moreover, this is necessary even for
distinction, because, as was observed, God has, for good reason, divided
his Law into two tables. The inference then is, that God here vindicates
his own right, and defends his sacred name, but does not teach the
duties which men owe to men.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p118"></span>23. In the first place, we must consider
what an oath is. An oath, then, is calling God to witness that what we
say is true. Execrations being manifestly insulting to God, are unworthy
of being classed among oaths. That an oath, when duly taken, is a
species of divine worship, appears from many passages of Scripture, as
when Isaiah prophesies of the admission of the Assyrians and Egyptians
to a participation in the covenant, he says, “In that day shall five
cities in the land of Egypt speak the language of Canaan, and swear to
the Lord of hosts,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p118.1"></span>[Isaiah
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p118.1"></span>). Swearing by the name of the Lord here
means, that they will make a profession of religion. In like manner,
speaking of the extension of the Redeemer’s kingdom, it is said, “He who
blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth:
and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth,”
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p118.2"></span>[Isaiah
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p118.2"></span>). In Jeremiah it is said, “If they will
diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, The Lord
liveth; as they taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they be
built in the midst of my people,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p118.3"></span>[Jer.
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p118.3"></span>). By appealing to the name of the Lord, and
calling him to witness, we are justly said to declare our own religious
veneration of him. For we thus acknowledge that he is eternal and
unchangeable truth, inasmuch as we not only call upon him, in preference
to others, as a fit witness to the truth, but as its only assertor, able
to bring hidden things to light, a discerner of the hearts. When human
testimony fails, we appeal to God as witness, especially when the matter
to be proved lies hid in the conscience. For which reason, the Lord is
grievously offended with those who swear by strange gods, and construes
such swearing as a proof of open revolt, “Thy children have forsaken me,
and sworn by them that are no gods,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p118.4"></span>[Jer.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p118.4"></span>). The heinousness of the offence is
declared by the punishment denounced against it, “I will cut off them
that swear by the Lord, and that swear by Malcham,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p118.5"></span>[Zeph.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p118.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p119"></span>24. Understanding that the Lord would
have our oaths to be a species of divine worship, we must be the more
careful that they do not, instead of worship, contain insult, or
contempt, and vilification. It is no slight insult to swear by him and
do it falsely: hence in the Law this is termed profanation (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p119.1"></span>[Lev.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p119.1"></span>). For if God is robbed of his truth, what
is it that remains? Without truth he could not be God. But assuredly he
is robbed of his truth, when he is made the approver and attester of
what is false. Hence, when Joshua is endeavouring to make Achan confess
the truth, he says, “My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of
Israel,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p119.2"></span>[Joshua
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p119.2"></span>); intimating, that grievous dishonour is
done to God when men swear by him falsely. And no wonder; for, as far as
in them lies, his sacred name is in a manner branded with falsehood.
That this mode of expression was common among the Jews whenever any one
was called upon to take an oath, is evident from a similar obtestation
used by the Pharisees, as given in John (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p119.3"></span>[John
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p119.3"></span>); Scripture reminds us of the caution which
we ought to use by employing such expressions as the following:—“As the
Lord liveth;” “God do so and more also;” “I call God for a record upon
my soul.”20  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) Such expressions
intimate, that we cannot call God to witness our statement, without
imprecating his vengeance for perjury if it is false.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p121"></span>25. The name of God is vulgarised and
vilified when used in oaths, which, though true, are superfluous. This,
too, is to take his name in vain. Wherefore, it is not sufficient to
abstain from perjury, unless we, at the same time, remember that an oath
is not appointed or allowed for passion or pleasure, but for necessity;
and that, therefore, a licentious use is made of it by him who uses it
on any other than necessary occasions. Moreover, no case of necessity
can be pretended, unless where some purpose of religion or charity is to
be served. In this matter, great sin is committed in the present day—sin
the more intolerable in this, that its frequency has made it cease to be
regarded as a fault, though it certainly is not accounted trivial before
the judgment-seat of God. The name of God is everywhere profaned by
introducing it indiscriminately in frivolous discourse; and the evil is
disregarded, because it has been long and audaciously persisted in with
impunity. The commandment of the Lord, however, stands; the penalty also
stands, and will one day receive effect. Special vengeance will be
executed on those who have taken the name of God in vain. Another form
of violation is exhibited, when, with manifest impiety, we, in our
oaths, substitute the holy servants of God for God himself,20  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) thus conferring upon them the glory of
his Godhead. It is not without cause the Lord has, by a special
commandment, required us to swear by his name, and, by a special
prohibition, forbidden us to swear by other gods.20  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) The Apostle gives a clear attestation
to the same effect, when he says, that “men verily swear by the
greater;” but that “when God made promise to Abraham, because he could
swear by no greater, he sware by himself;” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p123.4"></span>[Heb.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p123.4"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p124"></span>26. The Anabaptists, not content with
this moderate use of oaths, condemn all, without exception, on the
ground of our Saviour’s general prohibition, “I say unto you, Swear not
at all:” “Let your speech be Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more
than these cometh of evil,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p124.1"></span>[Mt.
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p124.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p124.2"></span>[James
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p124.2"></span>). In this way, they inconsiderately make a
stumbling-stone of Christ, setting him in opposition to the Father, as
if he had descended into the world to annul his decrees. In the Law, the
Almighty not only permits an oath as a thing that is lawful (this were
amply sufficient), but, in a case of necessity, actually commands it
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p124.3"></span>[Exod.
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p124.3"></span>). Christ again declares, that he and his
Father are one; that he only delivers what was commanded of his Father;
that his doctrine is not his own, but his that sent him (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p124.4"></span>[John
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p124.4"></span>;
7:16). What then? Will they make God contradict himself, by approving
and commanding at one time, what he afterwards prohibits and condemns?
But as there is some difficulty in what our Saviour says on the subject
of swearing, it may be proper to consider it a little. Here, however, we
shall never arrive at the true meaning, unless we attend to the design
of Christ, and the subject of which he is treating. His purpose was,
neither to relax nor to curtail the Law, but to restore the true and
genuine meaning, which had been greatly corrupted by the false glosses
of the Scribes and Pharisees. If we attend to this we shall not suppose
that Christ condemned all oaths but those only which transgressed the
rule of the Law. It is evident, from the oaths themselves, that the
people were accustomed to think it enough if they avoided perjury,
whereas the Law prohibits not perjury merely, but also vain and
superfluous oaths. Therefore our Lord, who is the best interpreter of
the Law, reminds them that there is a sin not only in perjury, but in
swearing. How in swearing? Namely, by swearing vainly. Those oaths,
however, which are authorised by the Law, he leaves safe and free. Those
who condemn oaths think their argument invincible when they fasten on
the expression, *not at all*. The expression applies not to the word
*swear*, but to the subjoined forms of oaths. For part of the error
consisted in their supposing, that when they swore by the heaven and the
earth, they did not touch the name of God. The Lord, therefore, after
cutting off the principal source of prevarication, deprives them of all
subterfuges, warning them against supposing that they escape guilt by
suppressing the name of God, and appealing to heaven and earth. For it
ought here to be observed in passing, that although the name of God is
not expressed, yet men swear by him in using indirect forms, as when
they swear by the light of life, by the bread they eat, by their
baptism, or any other pledges of the divine liberality towards them.
Some erroneously suppose that our Saviour, in that passage, rebukes
superstition, by forbidding men to swear by heaven and earth, and
Jerusalem. He rather refutes the sophistical subtilty of those who
thought it nothing vainly to utter indirect oaths, imagining that they
thus spared the holy name of God, whereas that name is inscribed on each
of his mercies. The case is different, when any mortal living or dead,
or an angel, is substituted in the place of God, as in the vile form
devised by flattery in heathen nations, “*By the life or genius of the
king*”; for, in this case, the false apotheosis obscures and impairs the
glory of the one God. But when nothing else is intended than to confirm
what is said by an appeal to the holy name of God, although it is done
indirectly, yet his majesty is insulted by all frivolous oaths. Christ
strips this abuse of every vain pretext when he says “Swear not at all”.
To the same effect is the passage in which James uses the words of our
Saviour above quoted (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p124.5"></span>[James
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p124.5"></span>). For this rash swearing has always
prevailed in the world, notwithstanding that it is a profanation of the
name of God. If you refer the words, “*not at all*”, to the act itself,
as if every oath, without exception, were unlawful, what will be the use
of the explanation which immediately follows—Neither by heaven, neither
by the earth, &c.? These words make it clear, that the object in view
was to meet the cavils by which the Jews thought they could extenuate
their fault.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p125"></span>27. Every person of sound judgment must
now see that in that passage our Lord merely condemned those oaths which
were forbidden by the Law. For he who in his life exhibited a model of
the perfection which he taught, did not object to oaths whenever the
occasion required them; and the disciples, who doubtless in all things
obeyed their Master, followed the same rule. Who will dare to say that
Paul would have sworn (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p125.1"></span>[Rom.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p125.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p125.2"></span>[2 Cor.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p125.2"></span>) if an oath had been altogether forbidden?
But when the occasion calls for it, he adjures without any scruple, and
sometimes even imprecates. The question, however, is not yet disposed
of. For some think that the only oaths exempted from the prohibition are
public oaths, such as those which are administered to us by the
magistrate, or independent states employ in ratifying treaties, or the
people take when they swear allegiance to their sovereign, or the
soldier in the case of the military oath, and others of a similar
description. To this class they refer (and justly) those protestations
in the writings of Paul, which assert the dignity of the Gospel; since
the Apostles, in discharging their office, were not private individuals,
but the public servants of God. I certainly deny not that such oaths are
the safest because they are most strongly supported by passages of
Scripture. The magistrate is enjoined, in a doubtful matter, to put the
witness upon oath; and he in his turn to answer upon oath; and an
Apostle says, that in this way there is an end of all strife (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p125.3"></span>[Heb.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p125.3"></span>). In this commandment, both parties are
fully approved. Nay, we may observe, that among the ancient heathens a
public and solemn oath was held in great reverence, while those common
oaths which were indiscriminately used were in little or no estimation,
as if they thought that, in regard to them, the Deity did not interpose.
Private oaths used soberly, sacredly, and reverently, on necessary
occasions, it were perilous to condemn, supported as they are by reason
and example. For if private individuals are permitted, in a grave and
serious matter, to appeal to God as a judge, much more may they appeal
to him as a witness. Your brother charges you with perfidy. You, as
bound by the duties of charity, labour to clear yourself from the
charge. He will on no account be satisfied. If, through his obstinate
malice, your good name is brought into jeopardy, you can appeal, without
offence, to the judgment of God, that he may in time manifest your
innocence. If the terms are weighed, it will be found that it is a less
matter to call upon him to be witness; and I therefore see not how it
can be called unlawful to do so. And there is no want of examples. If it
is pretended that the oath which Abraham and Isaac made with Abimelech
was of a public nature, that by which Jacob and Laban bound themselves
in mutual league was private. Boaz, though a private man, confirmed his
promise of marriage to Ruth in the same way. Obadiah, too, a just man,
and one that feared God, though a private individual, in seeking to
persuade Elijah, asseverates with an oath.20  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) I hold, therefore, that there is no
better rule than so to regulate our oaths that they shall neither be
rash, frivolous, promiscuous, nor passionate, but be made to serve a
just necessity; in other words, to vindicate the glory of God, or
promote the edification of a brother. This is the end of the
Commandment.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p126.4"></span>Fourth Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p127"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p128"></span>REMEMBER THE SABBATH DAY TO KEEP IT
HOLY. SIX DAYS SHALT THOU LABOUR AND DO ALL THY WORK: BUT THE SEVENTH
DAY IS THE SABBATH OF THE LORD THY GOD. IN IT THOU SHALT NOT DO ANY
WORK, &C.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p129"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p130"></span>28. The purport of the commandment is,
that being dead to our own affections and works, we meditate on the
kingdom of God, and in order to such meditation, have recourse to the
means which he has appointed. But as this commandment stands in peculiar
circumstances apart from the others, the mode of exposition must be
somewhat different. Early Christian writers are wont to call it typical,
as containing the external observance of a day which was abolished with
the other types on the advent of Christ. This is indeed true; but it
leaves the half of the matter untouched. Wherefore, we must look deeper
for our exposition, and attend to three cases in which it appears to me
that the observance of this commandment consists. First, under the rest
of the seventh days the divine Lawgiver meant to furnish the people of
Israel with a type of the spiritual rest by which believers were to
cease from their own works, and allow God to work in them. Secondly he
meant that there should be a stated day on which they should assemble to
hear the Law, and perform religious rites, or which, at least, they
should specially employ in meditating on his works, and be thereby
trained to piety. Thirdly, he meant that servants, and those who lived
under the authority of others, should be indulged with a day of rest,
and thus have some intermission from labour.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p131"></span>29. We are taught in many passages21
 <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) that this adumbration of
spiritual rest held a primary place in the Sabbath. Indeed, there is no
commandment the observance of which the Almighty more strictly enforces.
When he would intimate by the Prophets that religion was entirely
subverted, he complains that his sabbaths were polluted, violated, not
kept, not hallowed; as if, after it was neglected, there remained
nothing in which he could be honoured. The observance of it he eulogises
in the highest terms, and hence, among other divine privileges, the
faithful set an extraordinary value on the revelation of the Sabbath. In
Nehemiah, the Levites, in the public assembly, thus speak: “Thou madest
known unto them thy holy sabbath, and commandedst them precepts,
statutes, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy servant.” You see the
singular honour which it holds among all the precepts of the Law. All
this tends to celebrate the dignity of the mystery, which is most
admirably expressed by Moses and Ezekiel. Thus in Exodus: “Verily my
sabbaths shall ye keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout
your generations; that ye may know that I am the Lord that does sanctify
you. Ye shall keep my sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you: every
one that defileth it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever does
any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people. Six
days may work be done; but in the seventh is the sabbath of rest, holy
to the Lord: whosoever does any work in the sabbath day, he shall surely
be put to death. Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the
sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a
perpetual covenant. It is a sign between me and the children of Israel
for ever,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p132.5"></span>[Exodus
31:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.5"></span>). Ezekiel is still more full, but the sum
of what he says amounts to this: that the sabbath is a sign by which
Israel might know that God is their sanctifier. If our sanctification
consists in the mortification of our own will, the analogy between the
external sign and the thing signified is most appropriate. We must rest
entirely, in order that God may work in us; we must resign our own will,
yield up our heart, and abandon all the lusts of the flesh. In short, we
must desist from all the acts of our own mind, that God working in us,
we may rest in him, as the Apostle also teaches (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.6"></span>[Heb.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.6"></span>; 4:3, 9).

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p133"></span>30. This complete cessation was
represented to the Jews by the observance of one day in seven, which,
that it might be more religiously attended to, the Lord recommended by
his own example. For it is no small incitement to the zeal of man to
know that he is engaged in imitating his Creator. Should any one expect
some secret meaning in the number seven, this being in Scripture the
number for perfection, it may have been selected, not without cause, to
denote perpetuity. In accordance with this, Moses concludes his
description of the succession of day and night on the same day on which
he relates that the Lord rested from his works. Another probable reason
for the number may be, that the Lord intended that the Sabbath never
should be completed before the arrival of the last day. We here begin
our blessed rest in him, and daily make new progress in it; but because
we must still wage an incessant warfare with the flesh, it shall not be
consummated until the fulfilment of the prophecy of Isaiah: “From one
new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh
come to worship before me, saith the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p133.1"></span>[Isaiah
66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p133.1"></span>); in other words, when God shall be “all in
all,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p133.2"></span>[I Cor.
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p133.2"></span>). It may seem, therefore, that by the
seventh day the Lord delineated to his people the future perfection of
his sabbath on the last day, that by continual meditation on the
sabbath, they might throughout their whole lives aspire to this
perfection.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p134"></span>31. Should these remarks on the number
seem to any somewhat far-fetched, I have no objection to their taking it
more simply: that the Lord appointed a certain day on which his people
might be trained, under the tutelage of the Law, to meditate constantly
on the spiritual rest, and fixed upon the seventh, either because he
foresaw it would be sufficient, or in order that his own example might
operate as a stronger stimulus; or, at least to remind men that the
Sabbath was appointed for no other purpose than to render them
conformable to their Creator. It is of little consequence which of these
be adopted, provided we lose not sight of the principal thing
delineated—viz. the mystery of perpetual resting from our works. To the
contemplation of this, the Jews were every now and then called by the
prophets, lest they should think a carnal cessation from labour
sufficient. Beside the passages already quoted, there is the following:
“If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on
my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord,
honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding
thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: then shalt thou
delight thyself in the Lord,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p134.1"></span>[Isa.
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p134.1"></span>). Still there can be no doubt, that, on the
advent of our Lord Jesus Christ, the ceremonial part of the commandment
was abolished. He is the truth, at whose presence all the emblems
vanish; the body, at the sight of which the shadows disappear. He, I
say, is the true completion of the sabbath: “We are buried with him by
baptism unto death: that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we should walk in newness of life,”
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p134.2"></span>[Rom.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p134.2"></span>). Hence, as the Apostle elsewhere says,
“Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of
an holiday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days; which are a
shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p134.3"></span>[Col.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p134.3"></span>); meaning by body the whole essence of the
truth, as is well explained in that passage. This is not contented with
one day, but requires the whole course of our lives, until being
completely dead to ourselves, we are filled with the life of God.
Christians, therefore, should have nothing to do with a superstitious
observance of days.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p135"></span>32. The two other cases ought not to be
classed with ancient shadows, but are adapted to every age. The sabbath
being abrogated, there is still room among us, first, to assemble on
stated days for the hearing of the Word, the breaking of the mystical
bread, and public prayer; and, secondly, to give our servants and
labourers relaxation from labour. It cannot be doubted that the Lord
provided for both in the commandment of the Sabbath. The former is
abundantly evinced by the mere practice of the Jews. The latter Moses
has expressed in Deuteronomy in the following terms: “The seventh day is
the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy
maid-servant;—that thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest as well
as thou,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p135.1"></span>[Deut.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p135.1"></span>). Likewise in Exodus, “That thine ox and
thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger, may
be refreshed,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p135.2"></span>[Exod.
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p135.2"></span>). Who can deny that both are equally
applicable to us as to the Jews? Religious meetings are enjoined us by
the word of God; their necessity, experience itself sufficiently
demonstrates. But unless these meetings are stated, and have fixed days
allotted to them, how can they be held? We must, as the apostle
expresses it, do all things decently and in orders (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p135.3"></span>[1 Cor.
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#040)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p135.3"></span>). So impossible, however, would it be to
preserve decency and order without this politic arrangements that the
dissolution of it would instantly lead to the disturbance and ruin of
the Church. But if the reason for which the Lord appointed a sabbath to
the Jews is equally applicable to us, no man can assert that it is a
matter with which we have nothing to do. Our most provident and
indulgent Parent has been pleased to provide for our wants not less than
for the wants of the Jews. Why, it may be asked, do we not hold daily
meetings, and thus avoid the distinction of days? Would that we were
privileged to do so! Spiritual wisdom undoubtedly deserves to have some
portion of every day devoted to it. But if, owing to the weakness of
many, daily meetings cannot be held, and charity will not allow us to
exact more of them, why should we not adopt the rule which the will of
God has obviously imposed upon us?

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p136"></span>33. I am obliged to dwell a little
longer on this because some restless spirits are now making an outcry
about the observance of the Lord’s day. They complain that Christian
people are trained in Judaism, because some observance of days is
retained. My reply is, That those days are observed by us without
Judaism, because in this matter we differ widely from the Jews. We do
not celebrate it with most minute formality, as a ceremony by which we
imagine that a spiritual mystery is typified, but we adopt it as a
necessary remedy for preserving order in the Church. Paul informs us
that Christians are not to be judged in respect of its observance,
because it is a shadow of something to come (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p136.1"></span>[Col.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p136.1"></span>); and, accordingly, he expresses a fear
lest his labour among the Galatians should prove in vain, because they
still observed days (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p136.2"></span>[Gal.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p136.2"></span>). And he tells the Romans that it is
superstitious to make one day differ from another (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p136.3"></span>[Rom.
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p136.3"></span>). But who, except those restless men, does
not see what the observance is to which the Apostle refers? Those
persons had no regard to that politic and ecclesiastical arrangement,21
 <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) but by retaining the days as
types of spiritual things, they in so far obscured the glory of Christ,
and the light of the Gospel. They did not desist from manual labour on
the ground of its interfering with sacred study and meditation, but as a
kind of religious observance; because they dreamed that by their
cessation from labour, they were cultivating the mysteries which had of
old been committed to them. It was, I say, against this preposterous
observance of days that the Apostle inveighs, and not against that
legitimate selection which is subservient to the peace of Christian
society. For in the churches established by him, this was the use for
which the Sabbath was retained. He tells the Corinthians to set the
first day apart for collecting contributions for the relief of their
brethren at Jerusalem (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p137.1"></span>[1 Cor.
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p137.1"></span>). If superstition is dreaded, there was
more danger in keeping the Jewish sabbath than the Lord’s day as
Christians now do. It being expedient to overthrow superstition, the
Jewish holy day was abolished; and as a thing necessary to retain
decency, orders and peace, in the Church, another day was appointed for
that purpose.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p138"></span>34. It was not, however, without a
reason that the early Christians substituted what we call the Lord’s day
for the Sabbath. The resurrection of our Lord being the end and
accomplishment of that true rest which the ancient sabbath typified,
this day, by which types were abolished serves to warn Christians
against adhering to a shadowy ceremony. I do not cling so to the number
seven as to bring the Church under bondage to it, nor do I condemn
churches for holding their meetings on other solemn days, provided they
guard against superstition. This they will do if they employ those days
merely for the observance of discipline and regular order. The whole may
be thus summed up: As the truth was delivered typically to the Jews, so
it is imparted to us without figure; first, that during our whole lives
we may aim at a constant rest from our own works, in order that the Lord
may work in us by his Spirit; secondly that every individual, as he has
opportunity, may diligently exercise himself in private, in pious
meditation on the works of God, and, at the same time, that all may
observe the legitimate order appointed by the Church, for the hearing of
the word, the administration of the sacraments, and public prayer: And,
thirdly, that we may avoid oppressing those who are subject to us. In
this way, we get quit of the trifling of the false prophets, who in
later times instilled Jewish ideas into the people, alleging that
nothing was abrogated but what was ceremonial in the commandment,21
 <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) (this they term in their
language the taxation of the seventh day), while the moral part
remains—viz. the observance of one day in seven.21  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) But this is nothing else than to
insult the Jews, by changing the day, and yet mentally attributing to it
the same sanctity; thus retaining the same typical distinction of days
as had place among the Jews. And of a truth, we see what profit they
have made by such a doctrine. Those who cling to their constitutions go
thrice as far as the Jews in the gross and carnal superstition of
sabbatism; so that the rebukes which we read in Isaiah (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p140.1"></span>[Isa.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p140.1"></span>; 58:13) apply as much to those of the
present day,21  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) as to those to
whom the Prophet addressed them. We must be careful, however, to observe
the general doctrine—viz. in order that religion may neither be lost nor
languish among us, we must diligently attend on our religious
assemblies, and duly avail ourselves of those external aids which tend
to promote the worship of God.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p141.1"></span>Fifth Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p142"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p143"></span>HONOUR THY FATHER AND THY MOTHER: THAT
THY DAYS MAY BE LONG UPON THE LAND WHICH THE LORD THY GOD GIVETH THEE.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p144"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p145"></span>35. The end of this commandment is, that
since the Lord takes pleasure in the preservation of his own ordinance,
the degrees of dignity appointed by him must be held inviolable. The sum
of the commandment, therefore, will be, that we are to look up to those
whom the Lord has set over us, yielding them honour, gratitude, and
obedience. Hence it follows, that every thing in the way of contempt,
ingratitude, or disobedience, is forbidden. For the term *honour* has
this extent of meaning in Scripture. Thus when the Apostle says, “Let
the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p145.1"></span>[1 Tim.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p145.1"></span>), he refers not only to the reverence which
is due to them, but to the recompense to which their services are
entitled. But as this command to submit is very repugnant to the
perversity of the human mind (which, puffed up with ambitious longings
will scarcely allow itself to be subject), that superiority which is
most attractive and least invidious is set forth as an example
calculated to soften and bend our minds to habits of submission. From
that subjection which is most easily endured, the Lord gradually
accustoms us to every kind of legitimate subjection, the same principle
regulating all. For to those whom he raises to eminences he communicates
his authority, in so far as necessary to maintain their station. The
titles of Father, God, and Lord, all meet in him alone and hence
whenever any one of them is mentioned, our mind should be impressed with
the same feeling of reverence. Those, therefore, to whom he imparts such
titles, he distinguishes by some small spark of his refulgence, so as to
entitle them to honour, each in his own place. In this way, we must
consider that our earthly father possesses something of a divine nature
in him, because there is some reason for his bearing a divine title, and
that he who is our prince and ruler is admitted to some communion of
honour with God.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p146"></span>36. Wherefore, we ought to have no doubt
that the Lord here lays down this universal rule—viz. that knowing how
every individual is set over us by his appointment, we should pay him
reverence, gratitude, obedience, and every duty in our power. And it
makes no difference whether those on whom the honour is conferred are
deserving or not. Be they what they may, the Almighty, by conferring
their station upon them, shows that he would have them honoured. The
commandment specifies the reverence due to those to whom we owe our
being. This Nature herself should in some measure teach us. For they are
monsters, and not men, who petulantly and contumeliously violate the
paternal authority. Hence, the Lord orders all who rebel against their
parents to be put to death, they being, as it where, unworthy of the
light in paying no deference to those to whom they are indebted for
beholding it. And it is evident, from the various appendices to the Law,
that we were correct in stating, that the honour here referred to
consists of three parts, reverence, obedience, and gratitude. The first
of these the Lord enforces, when he commands that whose curseth his
father or his mother shall be put to death. In this way he avenges
insult and contempt. The second he enforces, when he denounces the
punishment of death on disobedient and rebellious children. To the third
belongs our Saviour’s declaration, that God requires us to do good to
our parents (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p146.1"></span>[Mt.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p146.1"></span>).
And whenever Paul mentions this commandment, he interprets it as
enjoining obedience.21  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208)

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p148"></span>37. A promise is added by way of
recommendation, the better to remind us how pleasing to God is the
submission which is here required. Paul applies that stimulus to rouse
us from our lethargy, when he calls this the first commandment with
promise; the promise contained in the First Table not being specially
appropriated to any one commandment, but extended to the whole law.
Moreover, the sense in which the promise is to be taken is as
follows:—The Lord spoke to the Israelites specially of the land which he
had promised them for an inheritance. If, then, the possession of the
land was an earnest of the divine favour, we cannot wonder if the Lord
was pleased to testify his favour, by bestowing long life, as in this
way they were able long to enjoy his kindness. The meaning therefore is:
Honour thy father and thy mother, that thou may be able, during the
course of a long life, to enjoy the possession of the land which is to
be given thee in testimony of my favour. But, as the whole earth is
blessed to believers, we justly class the present life among the number
of divine blessings. Whence this promise has, in like manner, reference
to us also, inasmuch as the duration of the present life is a proof of
the divine benevolence toward us. It is not promised to us, nor was it
promised to the Jews, as if in itself it constituted happiness, but
because it is an ordinary symbol of the divine favour to the pious.
Wherefore, if any one who is obedient to parents happens to be cut off
before mature age (a thing which not infrequently happens), the Lord
nevertheless adheres to his promise as steadily as when he bestows a
hundred acres of land where he had promised only one. The whole lies in
this: We must consider that long life is promised only in so far as it
is a blessing from God, and that it is a blessing only in so far as it
is a manifestation of divine favour. This, however, he testifies and
truly manifests to his servants more richly and substantially by death.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p149"></span>38. Moreover, while the Lord promises
the blessing of present life to children who show proper respect to
their parents, he, at the same time, intimates that an inevitable curse
is impending over the rebellious and disobedient; and, that it may not
fail of execution, he, in his Law, pronounces sentence of death upon
theme and orders it to be inflicted. If they escape the judgment, he, in
some way or other, will execute vengeance. For we see how great a number
of this description of individuals fall either in battle or in brawls;
others of them are overtaken by unwonted disasters, and almost all are a
proof that the threatening is not used in vain. But if any do escape
till extreme old age, yet, because deprived of the blessing of God in
this life, they only languish on in wickedness, and are reserved for
severer punishment in the world to come, they are far from participating
in the blessing promised to obedient children. It ought to be observed
by the way, that we are ordered to obey parents only in the Lord. This
is clear from the principle already laid down: for the place which they
occupy is one to which the Lord has exalted them, by communicating to
them a portion of his own honour. Therefore the submission yielded to
them should be a step in our ascent to the Supreme Parent, and hence, if
they instigate us to transgress the law, they deserve not to be regarded
as parents, but as strangers attempting to seduce us from obedience to
our true Father. The same holds in the case of rulers, masters, and
superiors of every description. For it were unbecoming and absurd that
the honour of God should be impaired by their exaltation—an exaltation
which, being derived from him, ought to lead us up to him.21  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209)

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p150.1"></span>Sixth Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p151"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p152"></span>THOU SHALT NOT KILL.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p153"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p154"></span>39. The purport of this commandment is
that since the Lord has bound the whole human race by a kind of unity,
the safety of all ought to be considered as entrusted to each. In
general, therefore, all violence and injustice, and every kind of harm
from which our neighbour’s body suffers, is prohibited. Accordingly, we
are required faithfully to do what in us lies to defend the life of our
neighbour; to promote whatever tends to his tranquillity, to be vigilant
in warding off harm, and, when danger comes, to assist in removing it.
Remembering that the Divine Lawgiver thus speaks, consider, moreover,
that he requires you to apply the same rule in regulating your mind. It
were ridiculous, that he, who sees the thoughts of the heart, and has
special regard to them, should train the body only to rectitude. This
commandment, therefore, prohibits the murder of the heart, and requires
a sincere desire to preserve our brother’s life. The hand, indeed,
commits the murder, but the mind, under the influence of wrath and
hatred, conceives it. How can you be angry with your brother, without
passionately longing to do him harm? If you must not be angry with him,
neither must you hate him, hatred being nothing but inveterate anger.
However you may disguise the fact, or endeavour to escape from it by
vain pretexts. Where either wrath or hatred is, there is an inclination
to do mischief. If you still persist in tergiversation, the mouth of the
Spirit has declared, that “whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer,”
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p154.1"></span>[1 John
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p154.1"></span>); and the mouth of our Saviour has
declared, that “whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause
shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his
brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall
say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p154.2"></span>[Mt.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p154.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p155"></span>40. Scripture notes a twofold equity on
which this commandment is founded. Man is both the image of God and our
flesh. Wherefore, if we would not violate the image of God, we must hold
the person of man sacred—if we would not divest ourselves of humanity we
must cherish our own flesh. The practical inference to be drawn from the
redemption and gift of Christ will be elsewhere considered.21  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) The Lord has been pleased to direct
our attention to these two natural considerations as inducements to
watch over our neighbour’s preservation—viz. to revere the divine image
impressed upon him, and embrace our own flesh. To be clear of the crime
of murder, it is not enough to refrain from shedding man’s blood. If in
act you perpetrate, if in endeavour you plot, if in wish and design you
conceive what is adverse to another’s safety, you have the guilt of
murder. On the other hand, if you do not according to your means and
opportunity study to defend his safety, by that inhumanity you violate
the law. But if the safety of the body is so carefully provided for, we
may hence infer how much care and exertion is due to the safety of the
soul, which is of immeasurably higher value in the sight of God.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p156.1"></span>Seventh Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p157"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p158"></span>THOU SHALT NOT COMMIT ADULTERY.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p159"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p160"></span>41. The purport of this commandment is,
that as God loves chastity and purity, we ought to guard against all
uncleanness. The substance of the commandment therefore is, that we must
not defile ourselves with any impurity or libidinous excess. To this
corresponds the affirmative, that we must regulate every part of our
conduct chastely and continently. The thing expressly forbidden is
adultery, to which lust naturally tends, that its filthiness (being of a
grosser and more palpable form, in as much as it casts a stain even on
the body) may dispose us to abominate every form of lust. As the law
under which man was created was not to lead a life of solitude, but
enjoy a help meet for him, and ever since he fell under the curse the
necessity for this mode of life is increased; the Lord made the
requisite provision for us in this respect by the institution of
marriage, which, entered into under his authority, he has also
sanctified with his blessing. Hence, it is evident, that any mode of
cohabitation different from marriage is cursed in his sight, and that
the conjugal relation was ordained as a necessary means of preventing us
from giving way to unbridled lust. Let us beware, therefore, of yielding
to indulgence, seeing we are assured that the curse of God lies on every
man and woman cohabiting without marriage.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p161"></span>42. Now, since natural feeling and the
passions unnamed by the fall make the marriage tie doubly necessary,
save in the case of those whom God has by special grace exempted, let
every individual consider how the case stands with himself. Virginity, I
admit, is a virtue not to be despised; but since it is denied to some,
and to others granted only for a season, those who are assailed by
incontinence, and unable successfully to war against it, should retake
themselves to the remedy of marriage, and thus cultivate chastity in the
way of their calling. Those incapable of self-restraint, if they apply
not to the remedy allowed and provided for intemperance, war with God
and resist his ordinance. And let no man tell me (as many in the present
day do) that he can do all things, God helping! The help of God is
present with those only who walk in his ways (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p161.1"></span>[Ps.
91:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p161.1"></span>), that is, in his callings from which all
withdraw themselves who, omitting the remedies provided by God, vainly
and presumptuously strive to struggle with and surmount their natural
feelings. That continence is a special gift from God, and of the class
of those which are not bestowed indiscriminately on the whole body of
the Church, but only on a few of its members, our Lord affirms (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p161.2"></span>[Mt.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p161.2"></span>). He first describes a certain class of
individuals who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heavenly
sake; that is, in order that they may be able to devote themselves with
more liberty and less restraint to the things of heaven. But lest any
one should suppose that such a sacrifice was in every man’s power, he
had shown a little before that all are not capable, but those only to
whom it is specially given from above. Hence he concludes, “He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it.” Paul asserts the same thing
still more plainly when he says, “Every man has his proper gift of God,
one after this manner, and another after that,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p161.3"></span>[1 Cor.
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p161.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p162"></span>43. Since we are reminded by an express
declaration, that it is not in every man’s power to live chaste in
celibacy although it may be his most strenuous study and aim to do
so—that it is a special grace which the Lord bestows only on certain
individuals, in order that they may be less encumbered in his service,
do we not oppose God, and nature as constituted by him, if we do not
accommodate our mode of life to the measure of our ability? The Lord
prohibits fornication, therefore he requires purity and chastity. The
only method which each has of preserving it is to measure himself by his
capacity. Let no man rashly despise matrimony as a thing useless or
superfluous to him; let no man long for celibacy unless he is able to
dispense with the married state. Nor even here let him consult the
tranquillity or convenience of the flesh, save only that, freed from
this tie, he may be the readier and more prepared for all the offices of
piety. And since there are many on whom this blessing is conferred only
for a time, let every one, in abstaining from marriage, do it so long as
he is fit to endure celibacy. If he has not the power of subduing his
passion, let him understand that the Lord has made it obligatory on him
to marry. The Apostle shows this when he enjoins: “Nevertheless, to
avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife and let every woman
have her own husband.” “If they cannot contain, let them marry.” He
first intimates that the greater part of men are liable to incontinence;
and then of those so liable, he orders all, without exception, to have
recourse to the only remedy by which unchastity may be obviated. The
incontinent, therefore, neglecting to cure their infirmity by this
means, sin by the very circumstance of disobeying the Apostle’s command.
And let not a man flatter himself, that because he abstains from the
outward act he cannot be accused of unchastity. His mind may in the
meantime be inwardly inflamed with lust. For Paul’s definition of
chastity is purity of mind, combined with purity of body. “The unmarried
woman careth for the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in
body and spirit,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p162.1"></span>[1 Cor.
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p162.1"></span>). Therefore when he gives a reason for the
former precept, he not only says that it is better to marry than to live
in fornication, but that it is better to marry than to burn.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p163"></span>44. Moreover, when spouses are made
aware that their union is blessed by the Lord, they are thereby reminded
that they must not give way to intemperate and unrestrained indulgence.
For though honourable wedlock veils the turpitude of incontinence, it
does not follow that it ought forthwith to become a stimulus to it.
Wherefore, let spouses consider that all things are not lawful for them.
Let there be sobriety in the behaviour of the husband toward the wife,
and of the wife in her turn toward the husband; each so acting as not to
do any thing unbecoming the dignity and temperance of married life.
Marriage contracted in the Lord ought to exhibit measure and modesty—not
run to the extreme of wantonness. This excess Ambrose censured gravely,
but not undeservedly, when he described the man who shows no modesty or
comeliness in conjugal intercourse, as committing adultery with his
wife.21  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) Lastly let us consider
who the Lawgiver is that thus condemns fornication: even He who, as he
is entitled to possess us entirely, requires integrity of body, soul,
and spirit. Therefore, while he forbids fornication, he at the same time
forbids us to lay snares for our neighbour’s chastity by lascivious
attire, obscene gestures, and impure conversation. There was reason in
the remark made by Archelaus to a youth clothed effeminately and
over-luxuriously, that it mattered not in what part his wantonness
appeared. We must have respect to God, who abhors all contaminations
whatever be the part of soul or body in which it appears. And that there
may be no doubt about it, let us remember, that what the Lord here
commends is chastity. If he requires chastity, he condemns every thing
which is opposed to it. Therefore, if you aspire to obedience, let not
your mind burn within with evil concupiscence, your eyes wanton after
corrupting objects, nor your body be decked for allurement; let neither
your tongue by filthy speeches, nor your appetite by intemperance,
entice the mind to corresponding thoughts. All vices of this description
are a kind of stains which despoil chastity of its purity.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p164.1"></span>Eighth Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p165"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p166"></span>THOU SHALT NOT STEAL.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p167"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p168"></span>45. The purport is, that injustice being
an abomination to God, we must render to every man his due. In
substance, then, the commandment forbids us to long after other men’s
goods, and, accordingly, requires every man to exert himself honestly in
preserving his own. For we must consider, that what each individual
possesses has not fallen to him by chance, but by the distribution of
the sovereign Lord of all, that no one can pervert his means to bad
purposes without committing a fraud on a divine dispensation. There are
very many kinds of theft. One consists in violence, as when a man’s
goods are forcibly plundered and carried off; another in malicious
imposture, as when they are fraudulently intercepted; a third in the
more hidden craft which takes possession of them with a semblance of
justice; and a fourth in sycophancy, which wiles them away under the
pretence of donation. But not to dwell too long in enumerating the
different classes, we know that all the arts by which we obtain
possession of the goods and money of our neighbours, for sincere
affection substituting an eagerness to deceive or injure them in any
way, are to be regarded as thefts. Though they may be obtained by an
action at law, a different decision is given by God. He sees the long
train of deception by which the man of craft begins to lay nets for his
more simple neighbour, until he entangles him in its meshes—sees the
harsh and cruel laws by which the more powerful oppresses and crushes
the feeble—sees the enticements by which the more wily baits the hook
for the less wary, though all these escape the judgment of man, and no
cognisance is taken of them. Nor is the violation of this commandment
confined to money, or merchandise, or lands, but extends to every kind
of right; for we defraud our neighbours to their hurt if we decline any
of the duties which we are bound to perform towards them. If an agent or
an indolent steward wastes the substance of his employer, or does not
give due heed to the management of his property; if he unjustly
squanders or luxuriously wastes the means entrusted to him; if a servant
holds his master in derision, divulges his secrets, or in any way is
treacherous to his life or his goods; if, on the other hand, a master
cruelly torments his household, he is guilty of theft before God; since
every one who, in the exercise of his calling, performs not what he owes
to others, keeps back, or makes away with what does not belong to him.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p169"></span>46. This commandment, therefore, we
shall duly obey, if, contented with our own lot, we study to acquire
nothing but honest and lawful gain; if we long not to grow rich by
injustice, nor to plunder our neighbour of his goods, that our own may
thereby be increased; if we hasten not to heap up wealth cruelly wrung
from the blood of others; if we do not, by means lawful and unlawful,
with excessive eagerness scrape together whatever may glut our avarice
or meet our prodigality. On the other hand, let it be our constant aim
faithfully to lend our counsel and aid to all so as to assist them in
retaining their property; or if we have to do with the perfidious or
crafty, let us rather be prepared to yield somewhat of our right than to
contend with them. And not only so, but let us contribute to the relief
of those whom we see under the pressure of difficulties, assisting their
want out of our abundance. Lastly, let each of us consider how far he is
bound in duty to others, and in good faith pay what we owe. In the same
way, let the people pay all due honour to their rulers, submit patiently
to their authority, obey their laws and orders, and decline nothing
which they can bear without sacrificing the favour of God. Let rulers,
again, take due charge of their people, preserve the public peace,
protect the good, curb the bad, and conduct themselves throughout as
those who must render an account of their office to God, the Judge of
all. Let the ministers of churches faithfully give heed to the ministry
of the word, and not corrupt the doctrine of salvation, but deliver it
purely and sincerely to the people of God. Let them teach not merely by
doctrine, but by example; in short, let them act the part of good
shepherds towards their flocks. Let the people, in their turn, receive
them as the messengers and apostles of God, render them the honour which
their Supreme Master has bestowed on them, and supply them with such
things as are necessary for their livelihood. Let parents be careful to
bring up, guide, and teach their children as a trust committed to them
by God. Let them not exasperate or alienate them by cruelty, but cherish
and embrace them with the levity and indulgence which becomes their
character. The regard due to parents from their children has already
been adverted to. Let the young respect those advanced in years as the
Lord has been pleased to make that age honourable. Let the aged also, by
their prudence and their experience (in which they are far superior),
guide the feebleness of youth, not assailing them with harsh and
clamorous invectives but tempering strictness with ease and affability.
Let servants show themselves diligent and respectful in obeying their
masters, and this not with eye-service, but from the heart, as the
servants of God. Let masters also not be stern and disobliging to their
servants, nor harass them with excessive asperity, nor treat them with
insult, but rather let them acknowledge them as brethren and
fellow-servants of our heavenly Master, whom, therefore, they are bound
to treat with mutual love and kindness. Let every one, I say, thus
consider what in his own place and order he owes to his neighbours, and
pay what he owes. Moreover, we must always have a reference to the
Lawgiver, and so remember that the law requiring us to promote and
defend the interest and convenience of our fellow-men, applies equally
to our minds and our hands.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p169.1"></span>Ninth Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p170"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p171"></span>THOU SHALT NOT BEAR FALSE WITNESS
AGAINST THY NEIGHBOUR.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p172"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p173"></span>47. The purport of the commandment is,
since God, who is truth, abhors falsehood, we must cultivate unfeigned
truth towards each other. The sum, therefore, will be, that we must not
by calumnies and false accusations injure our neighbour’s name, or by
falsehood impair his fortunes; in fine, that we must not injure any one
from petulance, or a love of evil-speaking. To this prohibition
corresponds the command, that we must faithfully assist every one, as
far as in us lies, in asserting the truth, for the maintenance of his
good name and his estate. The Lord seems to have intended to explain the
commandment in these words: “Thou shalt not raise a false report: put
not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.” “Keep thee
far from a false matter,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p173.1"></span>[Exod.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#001),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p173.1"></span>).
In another passage, he not only prohibits that species of falsehood
which consists in acting the part of tale-bearers among the people, but
says, “Neither shalt thou stand against the blood of thy neighbour,”
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p173.2"></span>[Lev.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p173.2"></span>). Both transgressions are distinctly
prohibited. Indeed, there can be no doubt, that as in the previous
commandment he prohibited cruelty unchastity, and avarice, so here he
prohibits falsehood, which consists of the two parts to which we have
adverted. By malignant or vicious detraction, we sin against our
neighbour’s good name: by lying, sometimes even by casting a slur upon
him, we injure him in his estate. It makes no difference whether you
suppose that formal and judicial testimony is here intended, or the
ordinary testimony which is given in private conversation. For we must
always recur to the consideration, that for each kind of transgression
one species is set forth by way of example, that to it the others may be
referred, and that the species chiefly selected, is that in which the
turpitude of the transgression is most apparent. It seems proper,
however, to extend it more generally to calumny and sinister
insinuations by which our neighbours are unjustly aggrieved. For
falsehood in a court of justice is always accompanied with perjury. But
against perjury, in so far as it profanes and violates the name of God,
there is a sufficient provision in the third commandment. Hence the
legitimate observance of this precept consists in employing the tongue
in the maintenance of truth, so as to promote both the good name and the
prosperity of our neighbour. The equity of this is perfectly clear. For
if a good name is more precious than riches, a man, in being robbed of
his good name, is no less injured than if he were robbed of his goods;
while, in the latter case, false testimony is sometimes not less
injurious than rapine committed by the hand.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p174"></span>48. And yet it is strange, with what
supine security men everywhere sin in this respect. Indeed, very few are
found who do not notoriously labour under this disease: such is the
envenomed delight we take both in prying into and exposing our
neighbour’s faults. Let us not imagine it is a sufficient excuse to say
that on many occasions our statements are not false. He who forbids us
to defame our neighbour’s reputation by falsehood, desires us to keep it
untarnished in so far as truth will permit. Though the commandment is
only directed against falsehood, it intimates that the preservation of
our neighbour’s good name is recommended. It ought to be a sufficient
inducement to us to guard our neighbour’s good name, that God takes an
interest in it. Wherefore, evil-speaking in general is undoubtedly
condemned. Moreover, by evil-speaking, we understand not the rebuke
which is administered with a view of correcting; not accusation or
judicial decision, by which evil is sought to be remedied; not public
censure, which tends to strike terror into other offenders; not the
disclosure made to those whose safety depends on being forewarned, lest
unawares they should be brought into danger, but the odious crimination
which springs from a malicious and petulant love of slander. Nay, the
commandment extends so far as to include that scurrilous affected
urbanity, instinct with invective, by which the failings of others,
under an appearance of sportiveness, are bitterly assailed, as some are
wont to do, who court the praise of wit, though it should call forth a
blush, or inflict a bitter pang. By petulance of this description, our
brethren are sometimes grievously wounded.21  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) But if we turn our eye to the
Lawgiver, whose just authority extends over the ears and the mind, as
well as the tongue, we cannot fail to perceive that eagerness to listen
to slander, and an unbecoming proneness to censorious judgments are here
forbidden. It were absurd to suppose that God hates the disease of
evil-speaking in the tongue, and yet disapproves not of its malignity in
the mind. Wherefore, if the true fear and love of God dwell in us, we
must endeavour, as far as is lawful and expedient, and as far as charity
admits, neither to listen nor give utterance to bitter and acrimonious
charges, nor rashly entertain sinister suspicions. As just interpreters
of the words and the actions of other men, let us candidly maintain the
honour due to them by our judgment, our ear, and our tongue.

### <span id="iv.ii.ix-p175.1"></span>Tenth Commandment.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p176"></span>THOU SHALT NOT COVET THY NEIGHBOUR’S
HOUSE, THOU SHALT NOT COVET THY NEIGHBOUR’S WIFE NOR HIS MAN-SERVANT,
NOR HIS MAID-SERVANT, NOR HIS OX NOR HIS ASS, NOR ANYTHING THAT IS THY
NEIGHBOUR’S.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p177"></span>49. The purport is: Since the Lord would
have the whole soul pervaded with love, any feeling of an adverse nature
must be banished from our minds. The sum, therefore, will be, that no
thought be permitted to insinuate itself into our minds, and inhale them
with a noxious concupiscence tending to our neighbour’s loss. To this
corresponds the contrary precept, that every thing which we conceive,
deliberate, will, or design, be conjoined with the good and advantage of
our neighbour. But here it seems we are met with a great and perplexing
difficulty. For if it was correctly said above, that under the words
adultery and theft, lust and an intention to injure and deceive are
prohibited, it may seem superfluous afterwards to employ a separate
commandment to prohibit a covetous desire of our neighbour’s goods. The
difficulty will easily be removed by distinguishing between *design* and
*covetousness*.22  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) Design, such
as we have spoken of in the previous commandments, is a deliberate
consent of the will, after passion has taken possession of the mind.
Covetousness may exist without such deliberation and assent, when the
mind is only stimulated and tickled by vain and perverse objects. As,
therefore, the Lord previously ordered that charity should regulate our
wishes, studies, and actions, so he now orders us to regulate the
thoughts of the mind in the same way, that none of them may be depraved
and distorted, so as to give the mind a contrary bent. Having forbidden
us to turn and incline our mind to wrath, hatred, adultery, theft, and
falsehood, he now forbids us to give our thoughts the same direction.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p179"></span>50. Nor is such rectitude demanded
without reason. For who can deny the propriety of occupying all the
powers of the mind with charity? If it ceases to have charity for its
aim, who can question that it is diseased? How comes it that so many
desires of a nature hurtful to your brother enter your mind, but just
because, disregarding him, you think only of yourself? Were your mind
wholly imbued with charity, no portion of it would remain for the
entrance of such thoughts. In so far, therefore, as the mind is devoid
of charity, it must be under the influence of concupiscence. Some one
will object that those fancies which casually rise up in the mind, and
forthwith vanish away, cannot properly be condemned as concupiscences,
which have their seat in the heart. I answer, That the question here
relates to a description of fancies which while they present themselves
to our thoughts, at the same time impress and stimulate the mind with
cupidity, since the mind never thinks of making some choice, but the
heart is excited and tends towards it. God therefore commands a strong
and ardent affection, an affection not to be impeded by any portion,
however minute, of concupiscence. He requires a mind so admirably
arranged as not to be prompted in the slightest degree contrary to the
law of love. Lest you should imagine that this view is not supported by
any grave authority, I may mention that it was first suggested to me by
Augustine.22  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) But although it
was the intention of God to prohibit every kind of perverse desire, he,
by way of example, sets before us those objects which are generally
regarded as most attractive: thus leaving no room for cupidity of any
kind, by the interdiction of those things in which it especially
delights and loves to revel.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p181"></span>Such, then, is the Second Table of the
Law, in which we are sufficiently instructed in the duties which we owe
to man for the sake of God, on a consideration of whose nature the whole
system of love is founded. It were vain, therefore, to inculcate the
various duties taught in this table, without placing your instructions
on the fear and reverence to God as their proper foundation. I need not
tell the considerate reader, that those who make two precepts out of the
prohibition of covetousness, perversely split one thing into two. There
is nothing in the repetition of the words, “Thou shalt not covet.” The
“house” being first put down, its different parts are afterwards
enumerated, beginning with the “wife;” and hence it is clear, that the
whole ought to be read consecutively, as is properly done by the Jews.
The sum of the whole commandment, therefore, is, that whatever each
individual possesses remain entire and secure, not only from injury, or
the wish to injure, but also from the slightest feeling of covetousness
which can spring up in the mind.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p182"></span>51. It will not now be difficult to
ascertain the general end contemplated by the whole Law—viz. the
fulfilment of righteousness, that man may form his life on the model of
the divine purity. For therein God has so delineated his own character,
that any one exhibiting in action what is commanded, would in some
measure exhibit a living image of God. Wherefore Moses, when he wished
to fix a summary of the whole in the memory of the Israelites, thus
addressed them, “And now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of
thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love
him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy
soul, to keep the commandments of the Lord and his statutes which I
command thee this day for thy good?” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p182.1"></span>[Deut.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p182.1"></span>). And he ceased not to reiterate the same
thing, whenever he had occasion to mention the end of the Law. To this
the doctrine of the Law pays so much regard, that it connects man, by
holiness of life, with his God; and, as Moses elsewhere expresses it
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p182.2"></span>[Deut.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p182.2"></span>;
11:13), and makes him cleave to him. Moreover, this holiness of life is
comprehended under the two heads above mentioned. “Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind, and with all thy strength, and thy neighbour as thyself.” First,
our mind must be completely filled with love to God, and then this love
must forthwith flow out toward our neighbour. This the Apostle shows
when he says, “The end of the commandment is charity out of a pure
heart, and a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p182.3"></span>[1 Tim.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p182.3"></span>). You see that conscience and faith
unfeigned are placed at the head, in other words, true piety; and that
from this charity is derived. It is a mistake then to suppose, that
merely the rudiments and first principles of righteousness are delivered
in the Law, to form, as it were, a kind of introduction to good works,
and not to guide to the perfect performance of them. For complete
perfection, nothing more can be required than is expressed in these
passages of Moses and Paul. How far, pray, would he wish to go, who is
not satisfied with the instruction which directs man to the fear of God,
to spiritual worship, practical obedience; in fine, purity of
conscience, faith unfeigned, and charity? This confirms that
interpretation of the Law which searches out, and finds in its precepts,
all the duties of piety and charity. Those who merely search for dry and
meagre elements, as if it taught the will of God only by halves, by no
means understand its end, the Apostle being witness.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p183"></span>52. As, in giving a summary of the Law,
Christ and the Apostles sometimes omit the First Table, very many fall
into the mistake of supposing that their words apply to both tables. In
Matthew, Christ calls “judgment, mercy, and faith,” the “weightier
matters of the Law.” I think it clear, that by *faith* is here meant
veracity towards men. But in order to extend the words to the whole Law,
some take it for piety towards God. This is surely to no purpose. For
Christ is speaking of those works by which a man ought to approve
himself as just. If we attend to this, we will cease to wonder why,
elsewhere, when asked by the young man, “What good thing shall I do,
that I may have eternal life?” he simply answers, that he must keep the
commandments, “Thou shalt do no murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery,
Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear false witness, Honour thy
father and thy mother: and, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,”
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p183.1"></span>[Matt.
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p183.1"></span>). For the obedience of the First Table
consisted almost entirely either in the internal affection of the heart,
or in ceremonies. The affection of the heart was not visible, and
hypocrites were diligent in the observance of ceremonies; but the works
of charity were of such a nature as to be a solid attestation of
righteousness. The same thing occurs so frequently in the Prophets, that
it must be familiar to every one who has any tolerable acquaintance with
them.22  <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) For, almost on every
occasion, when they exhort men to repentance, omitting the First Table,
they insist on faith, judgment, mercy, and equity. Nor do they, in this
way, omit the fear of God. They only require a serious proof of it from
its signs. It is well known, indeed, that when they treat of the Law,
they generally insist on the Second Table, because therein the
cultivation of righteousness and integrity is best manifested. There is
no occasion to quote passages. Every one can easily for himself perceive
the truth of my observation.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p185"></span>53. Is it then true, you will ask, that
it is a more complete summary of righteousness to live innocently with
men, than piously towards God? By no means; but because no man, as a
matter of course, observes charity in all respects, unless he seriously
fear God, such observance is a proof of piety also. To this we may add,
that the Lord, well knowing that none of our good deeds can reach him
(as the Psalmist declares, <span id="iv.ii.ix-p185.1"></span>[Psalm
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p185.1"></span>), does not demand from us duties towards
himself, but exercises us in good works towards our neighbour. Hence the
Apostle, not without cause, makes the whole perfection of the saints to
consist in charity (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p185.2"></span>[Eph.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p185.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p185.3"></span>[Col.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p185.3"></span>). And in another passage, he not improperly
calls it the “fulfilling of the law,” adding, that “he that loveth
another has fulfilled the law,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p185.4"></span>[Rom.
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p185.4"></span>). And again, “All the law is fulfilled in
this: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p185.5"></span>[Gal.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p185.5"></span>). For this is the very thing which Christ
himself teaches when he says, “All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the law and the
prophets,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p185.6"></span>[Mt.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p185.6"></span>). It is certain that, in the law and the
prophets, faith, and whatever pertains to the due worship of God, holds
the first place, and that to this charity is made subordinate; but our
Lord means, that in the Law the observance of justice and equity towards
men is prescribed as the means which we are to employ in testifying a
pious fear of God, if we truly possess it.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p186"></span>54. Let us therefore hold, that our life
will be framed in best accordance with the will of God, and the
requirements of his Law, when it is, in every respect, most advantageous
to our brethren. But in the whole Law, there is not one syllable which
lays down a rule as to what man is to do or avoid for the advantage of
his own carnal nature. And, indeed, since men are naturally prone to
excessive self-love, which they always retain, how great soever their
departure from the truth may be, there was no need of a law to inflame a
love already existing in excess. Hence it is perfectly plain,22  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) that the observance of the
Commandments consists not in the love of ourselves, but in the love of
God and our neighbour; and that he leads the best and holiest life who
as little as may be studies and lives for himself; and that none lives
worse and more unrighteously than he who studies and lives only for
himself, and seeks and thinks only of his own. Nay, the better to
express how strongly we should be inclined to love our neighbour, the
Lord has made self-love as it were the standard, there being no feeling
in our nature of greater strength and vehemence. The force of the
expression ought to be carefully weighed. For he does not (as some
sophists have stupidly dreamed) assign the first place to self-love, and
the second to charity. He rather transfers to others the love which we
naturally feel for ourselves. Hence the Apostle declares, that charity
“seeketh not her own,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p187.1"></span>[1 Cor.
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p187.1"></span>). Nor is the argument worth a straw, That
the thing regulated must always be inferior to the rule. The Lord did
not make self-love the rule, as if love towards others was subordinate
to it; but whereas, through natural gravity, the feeling of love usually
rests on ourselves, he shows that it ought to diffuse itself in another
direction—that we should be prepared to do good to our neighbour with no
less alacrity, ardour, and solicitude, than to ourselves.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p188"></span>55. Our Saviour having shown, in the
parable of the Samaritan (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p188.1"></span>[Luke
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p188.1"></span>), that the term *neighbour* comprehends the
most remote stranger, there is no reason for limiting the precept of
love to our own connections. I deny not that the closer the relation the
more frequent our offices of kindness should be. For the condition of
humanity requires that there be more duties in common between those who
are more nearly connected by the ties of relationship, or friendship, or
neighbourhood. And this is done without any offence to God, by whose
providence we are in a manner impelled to do it. But I say that the
whole human race, without exception, are to be embraced with one feeling
of charity: that here there is no distinction of Greek or Barbarian,
worthy or unworthy, friend or foe, since all are to be viewed not in
themselves, but in God. If we turn aside from this view, there is no
wonder that we entangle ourselves in error. Wherefore, if we would hold
the true course in love, our first step must be to turn our eyes not to
man, the sight of whom might oftener produce hatred than love, but to
God, who requires that the love which we bear to him be diffused among
all mankind, so that our fundamental principle must ever be, Let a man
be what he may, he is still to be loved, because God is loved.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p189"></span>56. Wherefore, nothing could be more
pestilential than the ignorance or wickedness of the Schoolmen in
converting the precepts respecting revenge and the love of enemies
(precepts which had formerly been delivered to all the Jews, and were
then delivered universally to all Christians) into counsels which it was
free to obey or disobey, confining the necessary observance of them to
the monks, who were made more righteous than ordinary Christians, by the
simple circumstance of voluntarily binding themselves to obey counsels.
The reason they assign for not receiving them as laws is, that they seem
too heavy and burdensome, especially to Christians, who are under the
law of grace. Have they, indeed, the hardihood to remodel the eternal
law of God concerning the love of our neighbour? Is there a page of the
Law in which any such distinction exists; or rather do we not meet in
every page with commands which, in the strictest terms, require us to
love our enemies? What is meant by commanding us to feed our enemy if he
is hungry, to bring back his ox or his ass if we meet it going astray,
or help it up if we see it lying under its burden? (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p189.1"></span>[Prov.
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p189.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p189.2"></span>[Exod.
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p189.2"></span>). Shall we show kindness to cattle for
man’s sake, and have no feeling of good will to himself? What? Is not
the word of the Lord eternally true: “Vengeance is mine, I will repay?”
(<span id="iv.ii.ix-p189.3"></span>[Deut.
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p189.3"></span>). This is elsewhere more explicitly stated:
“Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children of thy
people,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p189.4"></span>[Lev.
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p189.4"></span>). Let them either erase these passages from
the Law, or let them acknowledge the Lord as a Lawgiver, not falsely
feign him to be merely a counsellor.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p190"></span>57. And what, pray, is meant by the
following passage, which they have dared to insult with this absurd
gloss? “Love yourenemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and
persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in
heaven,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p190.1"></span>[Matt.
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p190.1"></span>). Who does not here concur in the reasoning
of Chrysostom (lib. de Compunctione Cordis, et ad <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p190.2"></span>[Rom.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p190.2"></span>),
that the nature of the motive makes it plain that these are not
exhortations, but precepts? For what is left to us if we are excluded
from the number of the children of God? According to the Schoolmen,
monks alone will be the children of our Father in heaven—monks alone
will dare to invoke God as their Father. And in the meantime, how will
it fare with the Church? By the same rule, she will be confined to
heathens and publicans. For our Saviour says, “If ye love them which
love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?” It
will truly be well with us if we are left only the name of Christians,
while we are deprived of the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven! Nor
is the argument of Augustine less forcible: “When the Lord forbids
adultery, he forbids it in regard to the wife of a foe not less than the
wife of a friend; when he forbids theft, he does not allow stealing of
any description, whether from a friend or an enemy,” (August. Lib. de
Doctr. Christ). Now, these two commandments, “Thou shalt not steal, Thou
shalt not commit adultery,” Paul brings under the rule of love; nay, he
says that they are briefly comprehended in this saying, “Thou shalt love
thy neighbour as thyself,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p190.3"></span>[Rom.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p190.3"></span>). Therefore, Paul must either be a false
interpreter of the Law, or we must necessarily conclude, that under this
precept we are bound to love our enemies just as our friends. Those,
then, show themselves to be in truth the children of Satan who thus
licentiously shake off a yoke common to the children of God. It may be
doubted whether, in promulgating this dogma, they have displayed greater
stupidity or impudence. There is no ancient writer who does not hold it
as certain that these are pure precepts. It was not even doubted in the
age of Gregory, as is plain from his decided assertion; for he holds it
to be incontrovertible that they are precepts. And how stupidly they
argue! The burden, say they, were too difficult for Christians to hear!
As if any thing could be imagined more difficult than to love the Lord
with all the heart, and soul, and strength. Compared with this Law,
there is none which may not seem easy, whether it be to love our enemy,
or to banish every feeling of revenge from our minds. To our weakness,
indeed, every thing, even to the minutest tittle of the Law, is arduous
and difficult. In the Lord we have strength. It is his to give what he
orders, and to order what he wills. That Christians are under the law of
grace, means not that they are to wander unrestrained without law, but
that they are engrafted into Christ, by whose grace they are freed from
the curse of the Law, and by whose Spirit they have the Law written in
their hearts. This grace Paul has termed, but not in the proper sense of
the term, a law, alluding to the Law of God, with which he was
contrasting it. The Schoolmen, laying hold of the term *Law*, make it
the ground-work of their vain speculations.22  <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217)

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p192"></span>58. The same must be said of their
application of the term, venial sin, both to the hidden impiety which
violates the First Table, and the direct transgression of the last
commandment of the Second Table.22  <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) They define venial sin to be, desire
unaccompanied with deliberate assent, and not remaining long in the
heart. But I maintain that it cannot even enter the heart unless through
a want of those things which are required in the Law. We are forbidden
to have strange gods. When the mind, under the influence of distrust,
looks elsewhere or is seized with some sudden desire to transfer its
blessedness to some other quarter, whence are these movements, however
evanescent, but just because there is some empty corner in the soul to
receive such temptations? And, not to lengthen out the discussion, there
is a precept to love God with the whole heart, and mind, and soul; and,
therefore, if all the powers of the soul are not directed to the love of
God, there is a departure from the obedience of the Law; because those
internal enemies which rise up against the dominion of God, and
countermand his edicts prove that his throne is not well established in
our consciences. It has been shown that the last commandment goes to
this extent. Has some undue longing sprung up in our mind? Then we are
chargeable with covetousness, and stand convicted as transgressors of
the Law. For the Law forbids us not only to meditate and plan our
neighbour’s loss, but to be stimulated and inflamed with covetousness.
But every transgression of the Law lays us under the curse, and
therefore even the slightest desires cannot be exempted from the fatal
sentence. “In weighing our sins,” says Augustine, “let us not use a
deceitful balance, weighing at our own discretion what we will, and how
we will, calling this heavy and that light: but let us use the divine
balance of the Holy Scriptures, as taken from the treasury of the Lord,
and by it weigh every offence, nay, not weigh, but rather recognise what
has been already weighed by the Lord,” (August. De Bapt. cont. Donatist.
Lib. 2 chap. 6). And what saith the Scripture? Certainly when Paul says,
that “the wages of sin is death,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p193.1"></span>[Rom.
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p193.1"></span>), he shows that he knew nothing of this
vile distinction. As we are but too prone to hypocrisy, there was very
little occasion for this sop to soothe our torpid consciences.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p194"></span>59. I wish they would consider what our
Saviour meant when he said, “Whosoever shall break one of these least
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in
the kingdom of heaven,” (<span id="iv.ii.ix-p194.1"></span>[Mt.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p194.1"></span>). Are they not of this number when they
presume to extenuate the transgression of the Law, as if it were
unworthy of death? The proper course had been to consider not simply
what is commanded, but who it is that commands, because every least
transgression of his Law derogates from his authority. Do they count it
a small matter to insult the majesty of God in any one respect? Again,
since God has explained his will in the Law, every thing contrary to the
Law is displeasing to him. Will they feign that the wrath of God is so
disarmed that the punishment of death will not forthwith follow upon it?
He has declared plainly (if they could be induced to listen to his
voice, instead of darkening his clear truth by their insipid
subtleties), “The soul that sinneth it shall die,” (<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p194.2"></span>[Ezek.
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p194.2"></span>). Again, in the passage lately quoted, “The
wages of sin is death.” What these men acknowledge to be sin, because
they are unable to deny it, they contend is not mortal. Having already
indulged this madness too long, let them learn to repent; or, if they
persist in their infatuation, taking no further notice of them, let the
children of God remember that all sin is mortal, because it is rebellion
against the will of God, and necessarily provokes his anger; and because
it is a violation of the Law, against every violation of which, without
exception, the judgment of God has been pronounced. The faults of the
saints are indeed venial, not, however, in their own nature, but
because, through the mercy of God, they obtain pardon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](inst042.htm#fr_185) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p64.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p65"></span>92 192 This chapter is connected with
Book 1., chap. 1 and 2, and with Book 2, chap. 1—6. See also Book 2,
chap. 2 sec. 22.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](inst042.htm#fr_186) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p70"></span>93 193 See Calvin, De Vera Ecclesiæ
Reformandæ Ratione.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](inst042.htm#fr_187) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p70.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p71"></span>94 194 See Augustin. De Civitate Dei,
Lib. 4 c. 12, and Lib. 12 c. 20, and Lib. 14 c. 12. See also Lib. De
Bono Conjugali, and Lib. Contra Adversarios Legis et Prophetarum, Lib. 1
c. 14.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](inst042.htm#fr_188) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p75"></span>95 195 “Ne sit nobis Lesbiæ regulæ,”
omitted in the French.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](inst042.htm#fr_189) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p79"></span>96 196 The French is “Tout ainsi comme si
quelcun vouloit faire une belle monstre d’un corps sans teste;” just as
if one were to try to make a beautiful monster of a body without a head.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](inst042.htm#fr_190) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p82"></span>97 197 Origen in Exod. cap. 20 Homil. 8;
Augustin. contra duas Epist. Pelagii, Lib. 3 cap. 4; Quæst. in Vet.
Test. Lib. 2 cap. 74; Epist cxix ad Januarium, cap. 11. The opinion of
Josephus, and the last-mentioned opinion of Augustine, are briefly
refuted by Calvin in Exod. cap. 20, in expounding the Fifth Commandment.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](inst042.htm#fr_191) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p83"></span>98 198 The French is, “Nous avous aussi
un autre ancien Pere qui accorde a nostre opinion, celui que a ecrit les
Commentaires imparfaits sur Sainct Matthiue.” We have also another
ancient Father who agrees with us in our opinion, he who wrote the
unfinished Commentaries on St Matthew.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](inst042.htm#fr_192) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p88.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p89"></span>99 199 “Præsenti causæ.”—The French is,
“du temps que la loi devoit estre publiée;” to the time when the Law was
to be published.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](inst042.htm#fr_193) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90"></span>00 200 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p90.1"></span>[Exod.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.2"></span>[Amos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.3"></span>[Hab.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.4"></span>[Psalm
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.4"></span>;
99:1; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p90.5"></span>[Isaiah
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p90.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](inst042.htm#fr_194) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p90.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p91"></span>01 201 “E faucibus mortis.”—French, “du
gouffre d’enfer;” from the gulf of hell.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](inst042.htm#fr_195) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p97"></span>02 202 Calvin. in Catechismo; De
Necessitate Reformandæ Ecclesiæ Ratio.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](inst042.htm#fr_196) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p97.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p98"></span>03 203 The French adds, “Car c’est un
hommage spirituel qui se rend a lui comme souverain Roy, et ayant toute
superiorité sur nos ames.” For this is a spiritual homage which is
rendered to him as sovereign King, having full supremacy over our souls.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](inst042.htm#fr_197) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p107"></span>04 204 Or “Strong,” this name being
derived from a word denoting strength.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](inst042.htm#fr_198) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p109.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p110"></span>05 205 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p110.1"></span>[2 Cor.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p110.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.2"></span>[Eph.
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#030)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p110.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.3"></span>Jer.
62:5<span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.3"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p110.4"></span>[Hos.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.5"></span>[Jer.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.5"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.6"></span>[Hos.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p110.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](inst042.htm#fr_199) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p119.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p120"></span>06 206 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p120.1"></span>[1 Sam.
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#044)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p120.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p120.2"></span>[2 Kings
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#031)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p120.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p120.3"></span>[2 Cor.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p120.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](inst042.htm#fr_200) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p121.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p122"></span>07 207 The French adds, “jurans par S.
Jaques ou S. Antoine;”—swearing by St James or St Anthony.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](inst042.htm#fr_201) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p123"></span>08 208 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p123.1"></span>[Exod.
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p123.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p123.2"></span>[Deut.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p123.2"></span>; 10:20; <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p123.3"></span>[Heb.
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p123.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](inst042.htm#fr_202) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p125.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p126"></span>09 209 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p126.1"></span>[Gen.
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p126.1"></span>; 26:31; 31:53; <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p126.2"></span>[Ruth
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p126.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p126.3"></span>[1 Kings
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p126.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](inst042.htm#fr_203) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p132"></span>10 210 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.1"></span>[Num.
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p132.2"></span>[Ezek.
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.2"></span>; 22:8; 23:38; <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.3"></span>[Jer.
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#022),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#027)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p132.3"></span>;
Isiah 55:2; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p132.4"></span>[Neh.
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p132.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](inst042.htm#fr_204) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p136.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p137"></span>11 211 N“Finem istum politicum et
ecclesiasticum ordinem.”P—French, “la police et ordre en l’Eglise;”
policy and order in the Church.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](inst042.htm#fr_205) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p138.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p139"></span>12 212 As to this liberty, See Socrates,
Hist. Trip. Lib. 9 c. 38.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](inst042.htm#fr_206) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p139.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p140"></span>13 213 French, “ne discernans entre le
Dimanche et le Sabbath autrement, sinon que le septiéme jour estoit
abrogé qu’on gardoit pour lors, mais qu’il on faloit, neantmoins garder
un;”—making no other distinction between the Sunday and the Sabbath,
save that the seventh day, which was kept till then, was abrogated, but
that it was nevertheless necessary to keep some one day.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](inst042.htm#fr_207) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p140.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p141"></span>14 214 French, “leur conviendroyent
mieux;”—whould be more applicable to them.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](inst042.htm#fr_208) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p146.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p147"></span>15 215 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p147.1"></span>[Exod.
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p147.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p147.2"></span>[Lev.
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p147.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p147.3"></span>[Prov.
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p147.3"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p147.4"></span>[Deut.
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p147.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p147.5"></span>[Mt.
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p147.5"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.ix-p147.6"></span>[Eph.
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p147.6"></span>;
Colloss. 3:20.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](inst042.htm#fr_209) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p149.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p150"></span>16 216 The French adds, “et la doit
plustost augmenter, qu’amoindrir confirmer que viloer;”—and ought to
augment rather than diminish, to confirm rather than violate it.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](inst042.htm#fr_210) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p155.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p156"></span>17 217 Book 3, Chap. 7 sec 4—7; Chap. 20
sec. 38, 45; Book 4 Chap. 1 sec 13—19; Chap. 17 sec. 38, 40.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](inst042.htm#fr_211) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p163.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p164"></span>18 218 See Ambros. Lib. de Philosoph.,
quoted by Augustine in his book, Contra Julian, Lib. 2.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](inst042.htm#fr_212) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p174.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p175"></span>19 219 The French is “D’avantage ce
precepte s’estend jusques lˆ, que nous n’affections point une
plaisanterie d’honnesteté et une grace de brocarder et mordre en riant
les uns et les autres, comme sont aucuns, qui se bagnent quand ils
peuvent faire vergogne ˆ quelqu’un: car par telle intemperance souventes
fois quelque marque demeure sur l’homme qu’on a ainsi noté.”—Moreover,
the commandment extends thus far: we must not affect a good-humoured
pleasantry and grace in nicknaming, and with a smile say cutting things
of others, as some persons do, who are delighted when they can make
another blush: by such intemperance a stigma is often fastened on the
individual thus attacked.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](inst042.htm#fr_213) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p177.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p178"></span>20 220 See supra, chap. 2, end of sec.
24; and Book 3 chap 3 sec. 11, 12, 13; and Book 4 chap. 15 sec. 11, 12.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](inst042.htm#fr_214) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p179.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p180"></span>21 221 See August. <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p180.1"></span>Ep. 200<span id="iv.ii.ix-p180.1"></span>,
ad Asellicum, et Quæstio, Lib. 88, sub fin. Quæst. 66; but especially
Conscio. 8, in <span id="iv.ii.ix-p180.2"></span>[Ps.
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p180.2"></span>.
The subject is also touched on in <span id="iv.ii.ix-p180.3"></span>[Ps.
142](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p180.3"></span>
and De Temp. Serm. 45, and Retract. Lib. 1 cap. 5, and De Continentia,
cap. 8.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](inst042.htm#fr_215) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p183.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184"></span>22 222 <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p184.1"></span>[Is.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p184.1"></span>; 57:6; <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p184.2"></span>[Jer. 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184.3"></span>[Ezek.
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184.4"></span>[Hosea
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184.5"></span>[Zech.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#010)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p184.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](inst042.htm#fr_216) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p186.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p187"></span>23 223 See Book 3 chap. 7 sec. 4. Also
August. de Doctrina Christiana, Lib. 1 chap. 23 et seq.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](inst042.htm#fr_217) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p190.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p191"></span>24 224 The French is “Ces folastres sans
propos prennent un grand mystére en ce mot de Loy;” these foolish
fellows absurdly find a great mystery in this term Law.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](inst042.htm#fr_218) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p192.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p193"></span>25 225 See Book 3 chap. 4 sec. 28, where
it is also shown that this is not the dogma of the Stoics—that all sins
are equal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 9. - CHRIST, THOUGH KNOWN TO THE JEWS UNDER THE LAW, YET
ONLY MANIFESTED UNDER THE GOSPEL.](inst043)
