[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst023)  [Next](inst025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xi"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.xi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 10.

<span id="iv.i.xi-p1"></span>IN SCRIPTURE, THE TRUE GOD OPPOSED,
EXCLUSIVELY, TO ALL THE GODS OF THE HEATHEN.

<span id="iv.i.xi-p2"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.xi-p3"></span>1. Explanation of the knowledge of God
resumed. God as manifested in Scripture, the same as delineated in his
works.

<span id="iv.i.xi-p4"></span>2. The attributes of God as described by
Moses, David, and Jeremiah. Explanation of the attributes. Summary. Uses
of this knowledge.

<span id="iv.i.xi-p5"></span>3. Scripture, in directing us to the true
God, excludes the gods of the heathen, who, however, in some sense, held
the unity of God.

<span id="iv.i.xi-p6"></span>1. We formerly observed that the knowledge
of God, which, in other respects, is not obscurely exhibited in the
frame of the world, and in all the creatures, is more clearly and
familiarly explained by the word. It may now be proper to show, that in
Scripture the Lord represents himself in the same character in which we
have already seen that he is delineated in his works. A full discussion
of this subject would occupy a large space. But it will here be
sufficient to furnish a kind of index, by attending to which the pious
reader may be enabled to understand what knowledge of God he ought
chiefly to search for in Scripture, and be directed as to the mode of
conducting the search. I am not now adverting to the peculiar covenant
by which God distinguished the race of Abraham from the rest of the
nations. For when by gratuitous adoption he admitted those who were
enemies to the rank of sons, he even then acted in the character of a
Redeemer. At present, however, we are employed in considering that
knowledge which stops short at the creation of the world, without
ascending to Christ the Mediator. But though it will soon be necessary
to quote certain passages from the New Testament (proofs being there
given both of the power of God the Creator, and of his providence in the
preservation of what he originally created), I wish the reader to
remember what my present purpose is, that he may not wander from the
proper subject. Briefly, then, it will be sufficient for him at present
to understand how God, the Creator of heaven and earth, governs the
world which was made by him. In every part of Scripture we meet with
descriptions of his paternal kindness and readiness to do good, and we
also meet with examples of severity which show that he is the just
punisher of the wicked, especially when they continue obstinate
notwithstanding of all his forbearance.

<span id="iv.i.xi-p7"></span>2. There are certain passages which contain
more vivid descriptions of the divine character, setting it before us as
if his genuine countenance were visibly portrayed. Moses, indeed, seems
to have intended briefly to comprehend whatever may be known of God by
man, when he said, “The Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious,
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and that will
by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children, and upon the children’s children, unto the third and to
the fourth generation,” (<span id="iv.i.xi-p7.1"></span>[Exod.
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.xi-p7.1"></span>).
Here we may observe, *first*, that his eternity and selfexistence are
declared by his magnificent name twice repeated; and, *secondly*, that
in the enumeration of his perfections, he is described not as he is in
himself, but in relation to us, in order that our acknowledgement of him
may be more a vivid actual impression than empty visionary speculation.
Moreover, the perfections thus enumerated are just those which we saw
shining in the heavens, and on the earth—compassion, goodness, mercy,
justice, Judgment, and truth. For power and energy are comprehended
under the name Jehovah. Similar epithets are employed by the prophets
when they would fully declare his sacred name. Not to collect a great
number of passages, it may suffice at present to refer to one Psalm
(145) in which a summary of the divine perfections is so carefully given
that not one seems to have been omitted. Still, however, every
perfection there set down may be contemplated in creation; and, hence,
such as we feel him to be when experience is our guide, such he declares
himself to be by his word. In Jeremiah, where God proclaims the
character in which he would have us to acknowledge him, though the
description is not so full, it is substantially the same. “Let him that
glorieth,” says he, “glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth
me, that I am the Lord which exercise loving-kindness, Judgment, and
righteousness, in the earth,” (<span id="iv.i.xi-p7.2"></span>[Jer.
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span id="iv.i.xi-p7.2"></span>).
Assuredly, the attributes which it is most necessary for us to know are
these three: Loving-kindness, on which alone our entire safety depends:
Judgment, which is daily exercised on the wicked, and awaits them in a
severer form, even for eternal destruction: Righteousness, by which the
faithful are preserved, and most benignly cherished. The prophet
declares, that when you understand these, you are amply furnished with
the means of glorying in God. Nor is there here any omission of his
truth, or power, or holiness, or goodness. For how could this knowledge
of his loving-kindness, Judgment, and righteousness, exist, if it were
not founded on his inviolable truth? How, again, could it be believed
that he governs the earth with Judgment and righteousness, without
presupposing his mighty power? Whence, too, his loving-kindness, but
from his goodness? In fine, if all his ways are loving-kindness,
Judgment, and righteousness, his holiness also is thereby conspicuous.
Moreover, the knowledge of God, which is set before us in the
Scriptures, is designed for the same purpose as that which shines in
creation—viz. that we may thereby learn to worship him with perfect
integrity of heart and unfeigned obedience, and also to depend entirely
on his goodness.

<span id="iv.i.xi-p8"></span>3. Here it may be proper to give a summary
of the general doctrine. First, then, let the reader observe that the
Scripture, in order to direct us to the true God, distinctly excludes
and rejects all the gods of the heathen, because religion was
universally adulterated in almost every age. It is true, indeed, that
the name of one God was everywhere known and celebrated. For those who
worshipped a multitude of gods, whenever they spoke the genuine language
of nature, simply used the name god, as if they had thought one god
sufficient. And this is shrewdly noticed by Justin Martyr, who, to the
same effect, wrote a treatise, entitled, On the Monarchy of God, in
which he shows, by a great variety of evidence, that the unity of God is
engraven on the hearts of all. Tertullian also proves the same thing
from the common forms of speech.7  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72)
But as all, without exception, have in the vanity of their minds rushed
or been dragged into lying fictions, these impressions, as to the unity
of God, whatever they may have naturally been, have had no further
effect than to render men inexcusable. The wisest plainly discover the
vague wanderings of their minds when they express a wish for any kind of
Deity, and thus offer up their prayers to unknown gods. And then, in
imagining a manifold nature in God, though their ideas concerning
Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, Minerva, and others, were not so absurd as
those of the rude vulgar, they were by no means free from the delusions
of the devil. We have elsewhere observed, that however subtle the
evasions devised by philosophers, they cannot do away with the charge of
rebellion, in that all of them have corrupted the truth of God. For this
reason, Habakkuk (2:20), after condemning all idols, orders men to seek
God in his temple, that the faithful may acknowledge none but Him, who
has manifested himself in his word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](inst024.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iv.i.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xi-p9"></span>9 79 In his book, De Idolatria. See also in
Augustine, a letter by one Maximus, a grammarian of Medaura, jesting at
his gods, and scoffing at the true religion. See, at the same time,
Augustine’s grave and admirable reply. <span
id="iv.i.xi-p9.1"></span>Ep. 42<span id="iv.i.xi-p9.1"></span>. 43.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 11. - IMPIETY OF ATTRIBUTING A VISIBLE FORM TO GOD.THE
SETTING UP OF IDOLS A DEFECTION FROM THE TRUE GOD.](inst025)
