[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst043)  [Next](inst045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xi"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 10.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p1"></span>THE RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE OLD TESTAMENT
AND THE NEW.  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220)

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3"></span>This chapter consists of four parts. I.
The sum, utility, and necessity of this discussion, sec. 1. II. A proof
that, generally speaking, the old and new dispensations are in reality
one, although differently administered. Three points in which the two
dispensations entirely agree, sec. 2–4. III. The Old Testament, as well
as the New, had regard to the hope of immortality and a future life,
whence two other resemblances or points of agreement follow—viz. that
both were established by the free mercy of God, and confirmed by the
intercession of Christ. This proved by many arguments, passages of
Scripture, and examples, see. 5–23. IV. Conclusion of the whole chapter,
where, for fuller confirmation, certain passages of Scripture are
produced. Refutation of the cavils of the Sadducees and other Jews.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p4"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p5"></span>1. Introduction, showing the necessity of
proving the similarity of both dispensations in opposition to Servetus
and the Anabaptists.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p6"></span>2. This similarity in general. Both
covenants truly one, though differently administered. Three things in
which they entirely agree.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p7"></span>3. First general similarity, or
agreement—viz. that the Old Testament, equally with the New, extended
its promises beyond the present life, and held out a sure hope of
immortality. Reason for this resemblance. Objection answered.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p8"></span>4. The other two points of
resemblance—viz. that both covenants were established in the mercy of
God, and confirmed by the mediation of Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p9"></span>5. The first of these points of
resemblance being the foundation of the other two, a lengthened proof is
given of it. The first argument taken from a passage, in which Paul,
showing that the sacraments of both dispensations had the same meaning,
proves that the condition of the ancient church was similar to ours.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p10"></span>6. An objection from <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>[John
6:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p10.1"></span>—viz. that the Israelites ate manna in the
wilderness, and are dead, whereas Christians eat the flesh of Christ,
and die not. Answer reconciling this passage of the Evangelist with that
of the Apostle.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p11"></span>7. Another proof from the Law and the
Prophets—viz. the power of the divine word in quickening souls before
Christ was manifested. Hence the believing Jews were raised to the hope
of eternal life.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p12"></span>8. Third proof from the form of the
covenant, which shows that it was in reality one both before and after
the manifestation of Christ in the flesh.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p13"></span>9. Confirmation of the former proof from
the clear terms in which the form is expressed. Another confirmation
derived from the former and from the nature of God.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p14"></span>10. Fourth proof from examples. Adam,
Abel, and Noah, when tried with various temptations, neglecting the
present, aspired with living faith and invincible hope to a better life.
They, therefore, had the same aim as believers under the Gospel.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p15"></span>11. Continuation of the fourth proof from
the example of Abraham, whose call and whole course of life shows that
he ardently aspired to eternal felicity. Objection disposed of.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p16"></span>12. Continuation of the fourth proof from
the examples of Isaac and Jacob.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p17"></span>13. Conclusion of the fourth proof. Adam,
Abel, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and others under the Law, looked for
the fulfilment of the divine promises not on the earth, but in heaven.
Hence they termed this life an earthly pilgrimage, and desired to be
buried in the land of Canaan, which was a figure of eternal happiness.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p18"></span>14. A fifth proof from Jacob’s
earnestness to obtain the birth-right. This shows a prevailing desire of
future life. This perceived in some degree by Balaam.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p19"></span>15. A sixth proof from David, who expects
such great things from the Lord, and yet declares the present life to be
mere vanity.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p20"></span>16. A seventh proof also from David. His
descriptions of the happiness of believers could only be realised in a
future state.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p21"></span>17. An eighth proof from the common
feeling and confession of all the pious who sought by faith and hope to
obtain in heaven what they did not see in the present shadowy life.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p22"></span>18. A continuation and confirmation of
the former proof from the exultation of the righteous, even amid the
destruction of the world.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p23"></span>19. A ninth proof from Job, who spoke
most distinctly of this hope. Two objections disposed of.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p24"></span>20. A tenth proof from the later
Prophets, who taught that the happiness of the righteous was placed
beyond the limits of the present life.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p25"></span>21. This clearly established by Ezekiel’s
vision of the dry bones, and a passage in Isaiah.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p26"></span>22. Last proof from certain passages in
the Prophets, which clearly show the future immortality of the righteous
in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p27"></span>23. Conclusion of the whole discussion
concerning the similarity of both dispensations. For fuller
confirmation, four passages of Scripture produced. Refutation of the
error of the Sadducees and other Jews, who denied eternal salvation and
the sure hope of the Church.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p28"></span>1. From what has been said above, it must
now be clear, that all whom, from the beginning of the world, God
adopted as his peculiar people, were taken into covenant with him on the
same conditions, and under the same bond of doctrine, as ourselves; but
as it is of no small importance to establish this point, I will here add
it by way of appendix, and show, since the Fathers were partakers with
us in the same inheritance, and hoped for a common salvation through the
grace of the same Mediator, how far their condition in this respect was
different from our own. For although the passages which we have
collected from the Law and the Prophets for the purpose of proof, make
it plain that there never was any other rule of piety and religion among
the people of God; yet as many things are written on the subject of the
difference between the Old and New Testaments in a manner which may
perplex ordinary readers, it will be proper here to devote a special
place to the better and more exact discussion of this subject. This
discussion, which would have been most useful at any rate, has been
rendered necessary by that monstrous miscreant, Servetus, and some
madmen of the sect of the Anabaptists, who think of the people of Israel
just as they would do of some herd of swine, absurdly imagining that the
Lord gorged them with temporal blessings here, and gave them no hope of
a blessed immortality.22  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) Let us
guard pious minds against this pestilential error, while we at the same
time remove all the difficulties which are wont to start up when mention
is made of the difference between the Old and the New Testaments. By the
way also, let us consider what resemblance and what difference there is
between the covenant which the Lord made with the Israelites before the
advent of Christ, and that which he has made with us now that Christ is
manifested.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p30"></span>2. It is possible, indeed, to explain
both in one word. The covenant made with all the fathers is so far from
differing from ours in reality and substance, that it is altogether one
and the same: still the administration differs. But because this brief
summary is insufficient to give any one a full understanding of the
subject, our explanation to be useful must extend to greater length. It
were superfluous, however, in showing the similarity, or rather
identity, of the two dispensations, again to treat of the particulars
which have already been discussed, as it were unseasonable to introduce
those which are still to be considered elsewhere. What we propose to
insist upon here may be reduced to three heads:—*First*, That temporal
opulence and felicity was not the goal to which the Jews were invited to
aspire, but that they were admitted to the hope of immortality, and that
assurance of this adoption was given by immediate communications, by the
Law and by the Prophets. *Secondly*, That the covenant by which they
were reconciled to the Lord was founded on no merits of their own, but
solely on the mercy of God, who called them; and, *thirdly*, That they
both had and knew Christ the Mediator, by whom they were united to God,
and made capable of receiving his promises. The second of these, as it
is not yet perhaps sufficiently understood, will be fully considered in
its own place (Book 3 chap. 15–18). For we will prove by many clear
passages in the Prophets, that all which the Lord has ever given or
promised to his people is of mere goodness and indulgence. The third
also has, in various places, been not obscurely demonstrated. Even the
first has not been left unnoticed.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31"></span>3. As the first is most pertinent to the
present subject, and is most controverted, we shall enter more fully
into the consideration of it, taking care, at the same time, where any
of the others requires explanations to supply it by the way, or
afterwards add it in its proper place. The Apostle, indeed, removes all
doubt when he says that the Gospel which God gave concerning his Son,
Jesus Christ, “he had promised aforetime by his prophets in the holy
Scriptures,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31.1"></span>[Rom.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31.1"></span>).
And again, that “the righteousness of God without the law is manifested,
being witnessed by the law and the prophets,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p31.2"></span>[Rom.
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p31.2"></span>). For the Gospel does not confine the hearts
of men to the enjoyment of the present life, but raises them to the hope
of immortality; does not fix them down to earthly delights, but
announcing that there is a treasure laid up in heaven, carries the heart
thither also. For in another place he thus explains, “After that ye
believed \[the Gospel,\] ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance unto the redemption of
the purchased possession,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31.3"></span>[Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31.3"></span>).
Again, “Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love
which ye have to all the saints, for the hope which is laid up for you
in heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the
Gospel,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31.4"></span>[Col.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31.4"></span>).
Again, “Whereunto he called you by our Gospel to the obtaining of the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p31.5"></span>[2
Thess. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p31.5"></span>). Whence also it is called the word of
salvation and the power of God, with salvation to every one that
believes, and the kingdom of heaven.22  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) But if the doctrine of the Gospel is
spiritual, and gives access to the possession of incorruptible life, let
us not suppose that those to whom it was promised and declared
altogether neglected the care of the soul, and lived stupidly like
cattle in the enjoyment of bodily pleasures. Let no one here quibble and
say, that the promises concerning the Gospel, which are contained in the
Law and the Prophets, were designed for a new people.23  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) For Paul, shortly after making that
statement concerning the Gospel promised in the Law, adds, that
“whatsoever things the law saith, it saith to those who are under the
law.” I admit, indeed, he is there treating of a different subject, but
when he said that every thing contained in the Law was directed to the
Jews, he was not so oblivious as not to remember what he had said a few
verses before of the Gospel promised in the Law. Most clearly,
therefore, does the Apostle demonstrate that the Old Testament had
special reference to the future life, when he says that the promises of
the Gospel were comprehended under it.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p34"></span>4. In the same way we infer that the Old
Testament was both established by the free mercy of God and confirmed by
the intercession of Christ. For the preaching of the Gospel declares
nothing more than that sinners, without any merit of their own, are
justified by the paternal indulgence of God. It is wholly summed up in
Christ. Who, then, will presume to represent the Jews as destitute of
Christ, when we know that they were parties to the Gospel covenant,
which has its only foundation in Christ? Who will presume to make them
aliens to the benefit of gratuitous salvation, when we know that they
were instructed in the doctrine of justification by faith? And not to
dwell on a point which is clear, we have the remarkable saying of our
Lord, “Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was
glad,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p34.1"></span>[John
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p34.1"></span>). What Christ here declares of Abraham, an
apostle shows to be applicable to all believers, when he says that Jesus
Christ is the “same yesterday, to-day, and for ever,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p34.2"></span>[Heb.
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p34.2"></span>). For he is not there speaking merely of the
eternal divinity of Christ, but of his power, of which believers had
always full proof. Hence both the blessed Virgin23  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) and Zachariah, in their hymns, say
that the salvation revealed in Christ was a fulfilment of the mercy
promised “to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p35.1"></span>[Luke 1:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#055),
[72](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#072)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p35.1"></span>).
If, by manifesting Christ, the Lord fulfilled his ancient oath, it
cannot be denied that the subject of that oath23  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) must ever have been Christ and eternal
life.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p37"></span>5. Nay, the Apostle makes the Israelites
our equals, not only in the grace of the covenant, but also in the
signification of the Sacraments. For employing the example of those
punishments, which the Scripture states to have been of old inflicted on
the Jews, in order to deter the Corinthians from falling into similar
wickedness, he begins with premising that they have no ground to claim
for themselves any privilege which can exempt them from the divine
vengeance which overtook the Jews, since the Lord not only visited them
with the same mercies, but also distinguished his grace among them by
the same symbols: as if he had said, If you think you are out of danger,
because the Baptism which you received, and the Supper of which you
daily partake, have excellent promises, and if, in the meantime,
despising the goodness of God, you indulge in licentiousness, know that
the Jews, on whom the Lord inflicted his severest judgments, possessed
similar symbols. They were baptised in passing through the sea, and in
the cloud which protected them from the burning heat of the sun. It is
said, that this passage was a carnal baptism, corresponding in some
degree to our spiritual baptism. But if so, there would be a want of
conclusiveness in the argument of the Apostle, whose object is to
prevent Christians from imagining that they excelled the Jews in the
matter of baptism. Besides, the cavil cannot apply to what immediately
follows—viz. that they did “all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all
drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of that spiritual Rock
that followed them: and that Rock was Christ,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p37.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p37.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p38"></span>6. To take off the force of this passage
of Paul, an objection is founded on the words of our Saviour, “Your
fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.” “If any man eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p38.1"></span>[John 6:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p38.1"></span>).
There is no difficulty in reconciling the two passages. The Lord, as he
was addressing hearers who only desired to be filled with earthly food,
while they cared not for the true food of the soul, in some degree
adapts his speech to their capacity, and, in particular, to meet their
carnal view, draws a comparison between manna and his own body. They
called upon him to prove his authority by performing some miracle, such
as Moses performed in the wilderness when he obtained manna from heaven.
In this manna they saw nothing but a relief of the bodily hunger from
which the people were then suffering; they did not penetrate to the
sublimer mystery to which Paul refers. Christ, therefore, to demonstrate
that the blessing which they ought to expect from him was more excellent
than the lauded one which Moses had bestowed upon their fathers, draws
this comparison: If, in your opinion, it was a great and memorable
miracle when the Lord, by Moses, supplied his people with heavenly food
that they might be supported for a season, and not perish in the
wilderness from famine; from this infer how much more excellent is the
food which bestows immortality. We see why our Lord omitted to mention
what was of principal virtue in the manna, and mentioned only its
meanest use. Since the Jews had, as it were by way of upbraiding, cast
up Moses to him as one who had relieved the necessity of the people by
means of manna, he answers, that he was the minister of a much larger
grace, one compared with which the bodily nourishment of the people, on
which they set so high a value, ought to be held worthless. Paul, again,
knowing that the Lords when he rained manna from heaven, had not merely
supplied their bodies with food, but had also dispensed it as containing
a spiritual mystery to typify the spiritual quickening which is obtained
in Christ, does not overlook that quality which was most deserving of
consideration. Wherefore it is surely and clearly proved, that the same
promises of celestial and eternal life, which the Lord now gives to us,
were not only communicated to the Jews, but also sealed by truly
spiritual sacraments. This subject is copiously discussed by Augustine
in his work against Faustus the Manichee.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p39"></span>7. But if my readers would rather have
passages quoted from the Law and the Prophets, from which they may see,
as we have already done from Christ and the Apostles, that the spiritual
covenant was common also to the Fathers, I will yield to the wish, and
the more willingly, because opponents will thus be more surely
convinced, that henceforth there will be no room for evasion. And I will
begin with a proof which, though I know it will seem futile and almost
ridiculous to supercilious Anabaptists, will have very great weight with
the docile and sober-minded. I take it for granted that the word of God
has such an inherent efficacy, that it quickens the souls of all whom he
is pleased to favour with the communication of it. Peter’s statement has
ever been true, that it is an incorruptible seed, “which liveth and
abideth for ever,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p39.1"></span>[1 Peter
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p39.1"></span>), as he infers from the words of Isaiah
(<span id="iv.ii.xi-p39.2"></span>[Is.
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p39.2"></span>). Now when God, in ancient times, bound the
Jews to him by this sacred bond, there cannot be a doubt that he
separated them unto the hope of eternal life. When I say that they
embraced the word which brought them nearer to God, I refer not to that
general method of communication which is diffused through heaven and
earth, and all the creatures of the world, and which, though it quickens
all things, each according to its nature, rescues none from the bondage
of corruption. I refer to that special mode of communication by which
the minds of the pious are both enlightened in the knowledge of God,
and, in a manner, linked to him. Adam, Abel, Noah, Abraham, and the
other patriarchs, having been united to God by this illumination of the
word, I say there cannot be the least doubt that entrance was given them
into the immortal kingdom of God. They had that solid participation in
God which cannot exist without the blessing of everlasting life.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40"></span>8. If the point still seems somewhat
involved, let us pass to the form of the covenant, which will not only
satisfy calm thinkers, but sufficiently establish the ignorance of
gainsayers. The covenant which God always made with his servants was
this, “I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my
people,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.1"></span>[Lev.
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p40.1"></span>). These words, even as the prophets are wont
to expound them, comprehend life and salvation, and the whole sum of
blessedness. For David repeatedly declares, and with good reason, “Happy
is that people whose God is the Lord.” “Blessed is the nation whose God
is the Lord; and the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.2"></span>[Psalm
144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p40.2"></span>; 33:12); and this not merely in respect of
earthly happiness, but because he rescues from death, constantly
preserves, and, with eternal mercy, visits those whom he has adopted for
his people. As is said in other prophets, “Art not thou from
everlasting, O Lord my God, mine Holy One? we shall not die.” “The Lord
is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver, the Lord is our king; he will
save us” “Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people
saved by the Lord?” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.3"></span>[Hab.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.4"></span>[Isaiah
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p40.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.5"></span>[Deut.
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p40.5"></span>). But not to labour superfluously, the
prophets are constantly reminding us that no good thing and,
consequently, no assurance of salvation, is wanting, provided the Lord
is our God. And justly. For if his face, the moment it hath shone upon
us, is a perfect pledge of salvation, how can he manifest himself to any
one as his God, without opening to him the treasures of salvation? The
terms on which God makes himself ours is to dwell in the midst of us, as
he declared by Moses (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.6"></span>[Lev.
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p40.6"></span>). But such presence cannot be enjoyed
without life being, at the same time, possessed along with it. And
though nothing more had been expressed, they had a sufficiently clear
promise of spiritual life in these words, “I am your God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p40.7"></span>[Exod.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p40.7"></span>).
For he declared that he would be a God not to their bodies only, but
specially to their souls. Souls, however, if not united to God by
righteousness, remain estranged from him in death. On the other hand,
that union, wherever it exists, will bring perpetual salvation with it.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p41"></span>9. To this we may add, that he not only
declared he was, but also promised that he would be, their God. By this
their hope was extended beyond present good, and stretched forward into
eternity. Moreover, that this observance of the future had the effect,
appears from the many passages in which the faithful console themselves
not only in their present evils, but also for the future, by calling to
mind that God was never to desert them. Moreover, in regard to the
second part of the promise—viz. the blessing of God, its extending
beyond the limits of the present life was still more clearly confirmed
by the words, I will be the God of your seed after you (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.1"></span>[Gen.
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.1"></span>). If he was to manifest his favour to the
dead by doing good to their posterity, much less would he deny his
favour to themselves. God is not like men, who transfer their love to
the children of their friends, because the opportunity of bestowing kind
offices as they wished upon themselves is interrupted by death. But God,
whose kindness is not impeded by death, does not deprive the dead of the
benefit of his mercy, which, on their account, he continues to a
thousand generations. God, therefore, was pleased to give a striking
proof of the abundance and greatness of his goodness which they were to
enjoy after death, when he described it as overflowing to all their
posterity (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p41.2"></span>[Exod.
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.2"></span>). The truth of this promise was sealed, and
in a manner completed, when, long after the death of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, he called himself their God (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.3"></span>[Exod.
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.3"></span>). And why? Was not the name absurd if they
had perished? It would have been just the same as if he had said, I am
the God of men who exist not. Accordingly, the Evangelists relate that,
by this very argument, our Saviour refuted the Sadducees (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.4"></span>[Mt.
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xi-p41.5"></span>[Luke
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.5"></span>), who were, therefore, unable to deny that
the resurrection of the dead was attested by Moses, inasmuch as he had
taught them that all the saints are in his hand (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.6"></span>[Deut.
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p41.6"></span>). Whence it is easy to infer that death is
not the extinction of those who are taken under the tutelage,
guardianship, and protection of him who is the disposer of life and
death.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p42"></span>10. Let us now see (and on this the
controversy principally turns) whether or not believers themselves were
so instructed by the Lord, as to feel that they had elsewhere a better
life, and to aspire to it while disregarding the present. First, the
mode of life which heaven had imposed upon them made it a constant
exercise, by which they were reminded, that if in this world only they
had hope, they were of all men the most miserable. Adam, most unhappy
even in the mere remembrance of his lost felicity, with difficulty
supplies his wants by anxious labours; and that the divine curse might
not be restricted to bodily labour, his only remaining solace becomes a
source of the deepest grief: Of two sons, the one is torn from him by
the parricidal hand of his brother; while the other, who survives,
causes detestation and horror by his very look. Abel, cruelly murdered
in the very flower of his days, is an example of the calamity which had
come upon man. While the whole world are securely living in luxury,
Noah, with much fatigue, spends a great part of his life in building an
ark. He escapes death, but by greater troubles than a hundred deaths
could have given. Besides his ten months’ residence in the ark, as in a
kind of sepulchre, nothing could have been more unpleasant than to have
remained so long pent up among the filth of beasts. After escaping these
difficulties he falls into a new cause of sorrow. He sees himself mocked
by his own son, and is forced, with his own mouth, to curse one whom, by
the great kindness of God, he had received safe from the deluge.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p43"></span>11. Abraham alone ought to be to us equal
to tens of thousands if we consider his faith, which is set before us as
the best model of believing, to whose race also we must be held to
belong in order that we may be the children of God.23  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) What could be more absurd than that
Abraham should be the father of all the faithful, and not even occupy
the meanest corner among them? He cannot be denied a place in the list;
nay, he cannot be denied one of the most honourable places in it,
without the destruction of the whole Church. Now, as regards his
experience in life, the moment he is called by the command of God, he is
torn away from friends, parents, and country, objects in which the chief
happiness of life is deemed to consist, as if it had been the fixed
purpose of the Lord to deprive him of all the sources of enjoyment. No
sooner does he enter the land in which he was ordered to dwell, than he
is driven from it by famine. In the country to which he retires to
obtain relief, he is obliged, for his personal safety, to expose his
wife to prostitution. This must have been more bitter than many deaths.
After returning to the land of his habitation, he is again expelled by
famine. What is the happiness of inhabiting a land where you must so
often suffer from hunger, nay, perish from famine, unless you flee from
it? Then, again, with Abimelech, he is reduced to the same necessity of
saving his head by the loss of his wife (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p44.1"></span>[Gen.
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p44.1"></span>). While he wanders up and down uncertain for
many years, he is compelled, by the constant quarrelling of servants to
part with his nephew, who was to him as a son. This departure must
doubtless have cost him a pang something like the cutting off of a limb.
Shortly after, he learns that his nephew is carried off captive by the
enemy. Wherever he goes, he meets with savage-hearted neighbours, who
will not even allow him to drink of the wells which he has dug with
great labour. For he would not have purchased the use from the king of
Gerar if he had not been previously prohibited. After he had reached the
verge of life, he sees himself childless (the bitterest and most
unpleasant feeling to old age), until, beyond expectation, Ishmael is
born; and yet he pays dearly for his birth in the reproaches of Sarah,
as if he was the cause of domestic disturbance by encouraging the
contumacy of a female slave. At length Isaac is born, but in return, the
first-born Ishmael is displaced, and almost hostilely driven forth and
abandoned. Isaac remains alone, and the good man, now worn out with age,
has his heart upon him, when shortly after he is ordered to offer him up
in sacrifice. What can the human mind conceive more dreadful than for
the father to be the murderer of his son? Had he been carried off by
disease, who would not have thought the old man much to be pitied in
having a son given to him in mockery, and in having his grief for being
childless doubled to him? Had he been slain by some stranger, this
would, indeed, have been much worse than natural death. But all these
calamities are little compared with the murder of him by his father’s
hand. Thus, in fine, during the whole course of his life, he was
harassed and tossed in such a way, that any one desirous to give a
picture of a calamitous life could not find one more appropriate. Let it
not be said that he was not so very distressed, because he at length
escaped from all these tempests. He is not said to lead a happy life
who, after infinite difficulties during a long period, at last
laboriously works out his escape, but he who calmly enjoys present
blessings without any alloy of suffering.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p45"></span>12. Isaac is less afflicted, but he
enjoys very few of the sweets of life. He also meets with those
vexations which do not permit a man to be happy on the earth. Famine
drives him from the land of Canaan; his wife is torn from his bosom; his
neighbours are ever and anon annoying and vexing him in all kinds of
ways, so that he is even obliged to fight for water. At home, he suffers
great annoyance from his daughters-in-law; he is stung by the dissension
of his sons, and has no other cure for this great evil than to send the
son whom he had blessed into exile (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.1"></span>[Gen.
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.1"></span>); Jacob, again, is nothing but a striking
example of the greatest wretchedness. His boyhood is passed most
uncomfortably at home amidst the threats and alarms of his elder
brother, and to these he is at length forced to give way (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.2"></span>[Gen.
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.2"></span>); A fugitive from his parents and his native
soil, in addition to the hardships of exile, the treatment he receives
from his uncle Laban is in no respect milder and more humane (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.3"></span>[Gen.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p45.3"></span>).
As if it had been little to spend seven years of hard and rigorous
servitude, he is cheated in the matter of a wife. For the sake of
another wife, he must undergo a new servitude, during which, as he
himself complains, the heat of the sun scorches him by day, while in
frost and cold he spends the sleepless night (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.4"></span>[Gen.
31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040),
[41](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p45.4"></span>).
For twenty years he spends this bitter life, and daily suffers new
injuries from his father-in-law. Nor is he quiet at home, which he sees
disturbed and almost broken up by the hatreds, quarrels, and jealousies
of his wives. When he is ordered to return to his native land, he is
obliged to take his departure in a manner resembling an ignominious
flight. Even then he is unable to escape the injustice of his
father-in-law, but in the midst of his journey is assailed by him with
contumely and reproach (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p45.5"></span>[Gen.
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.5"></span>.23  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227)
) By and bye a much greater difficulty befalls him (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.1"></span>[Gen. 32:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#000),
[Gen. 33:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.1"></span>). For as he approaches his brother, he has
as many forms of death in prospect as a cruel foe could invent. Hence,
while waiting for his arrival, he is distracted and excruciated by
direful terrors; and when he comes into his sight, he falls at his feet
like one half dead, until he perceives him to be more placable than he
had ventured to hope. Moreover, when he first enters the land, he is
bereaved of Rachel his only beloved wife. Afterwards he hears that the
son whom she had borne him, and whom he loved more than all his other
children, is devoured by a wild beast (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.2"></span>[Gen.
37:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#033)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.2"></span>). How deep the sorrow caused by his death he
himself evinces, when, after long tears, he obstinately refuses to be
comforted, declaring that he will go down to the grave to his son
mourning. In the meantime, what vexation, anxiety, and grief, must he
have received from the carrying off and dishonour of his daughter, and
the cruel revenge of his sons, which not only brought him into bad odour
with all the inhabitants of the country, but exposed him to the greatest
danger of extermination? (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p46.3"></span>[Gen.
34](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p46.3"></span>)
Then follows the horrid wickedness of Reuben his first-born, wickedness
than which none could be committed more grievous (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.4"></span>[Gen.
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.4"></span>). The dishonour of a wife being one of the
greatest of calamities, what must be said when the atrocity is
perpetrated by a son? Some time after, the family is again polluted with
incest (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p46.5"></span>[Gen.
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.5"></span>). All these disgraces might have crushed a
mind otherwise the most firm and unbroken by misfortune. Towards the end
of his life, when he seeks relief for himself and his family from
famine, he is struck by the announcement of a new misfortune, that one
of his sons is detained in prison, and that to recover him he must
entrust to others his dearly beloved Benjamin (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.6"></span>[Gen. 42:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#000),
[Gen. 43:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.6"></span>). Who can think that in such a series of
misfortunes, one moment was given him in which he could breathe secure?
Accordingly, his own best witness, he declares to Pharaoh, “Few and evil
have the days of the years of my life been,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.7"></span>[Gen.
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p46.7"></span>). In declaring that he had spent his life in
constant wretchedness, he denies that he had experienced the prosperity
which had been promised him by the Lord. Jacob, therefore, either formed
a malignant and ungrateful estimate of the Lord’s favour, or he truly
declared that he had lived miserable on the earth. If so, it follows
that his hope could not have been fixed on earthly objects.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p47"></span>13. If these holy Patriarchs expected a
happy life from the hand of God (and it is indubitable that they did),
they viewed and contemplated a different happiness from that of a
terrestrial life. This is admirably shown by an Apostle, “By faith he
\[Abraham\] sojourned in the land of promise, as in a strange country,
dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the
same promise: for he looked for a city which has foundations, whose
builder and maker is God.” “These all died in faith, not having received
the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them,
and embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims
on the earth. For they that say such things declare plainly that they
seek a country. And truly, if they had been mindful of that country from
whence they came out, they might have had opportunity to have returned.
But now they desire a better country, that is, an heavenly: wherefore
God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he has prepared for them
a city,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p47.1"></span>[Heb.
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#010),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p47.1"></span>–16). They had been duller than blocks in so
pertinaciously pursuing promises, no hope of which appeared upon the
earth, if they had not expected their completion elsewhere. The thing
which the Apostle specially urges, and not without reason, is, that they
called this world a pilgrimage, as Moses also relates (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p47.2"></span>[Gen.
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p47.2"></span>). If they were pilgrims and strangers in the
land of Canaan, where is the promise of the Lord which appointed them
heirs of it? It is clear, therefore, that the promise of possession
which they had received looked farther. Hence, they did not acquire a
foot breadth in the land of Canaan, except for sepulture; thus
testifying that they hoped not to receive the benefit of the promise
till after death. And this is the reason why Jacob set so much value on
being buried there, that he took Joseph bound by oath to see it done;
and why Joseph wished that his bones should some ages later, long after
they had mouldered into dust, be carried thither (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p47.3"></span>[Gen.
47:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#030)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p47.3"></span>;
50:25).

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p48"></span>14. In short, it is manifest, that in the
whole course of their lives, they had an eye to future blessedness. Why
should Jacob have aspired so earnestly to primogeniture, and intrigued
for it at so much risk, if it was to bring him only exile and
destitution, and no good at all, unless he looked to some higher
blessing? And that this was his feeling, he declared in one of the last
sentences he uttered, “I have waited for thy salvation, O God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p48.1"></span>[Gen.
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p48.1"></span>). What salvation could he have waited for,
when he felt himself breathing his last, if he did not see in death the
beginning of a new life? And why talk of saints and the children of God,
when even one, who otherwise strove to resist the truth, was not devoid
of some similar impression? For what did Balaam mean when he said, “Let
me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xi-p48.2"></span>[Num.
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p48.2"></span>), unless he felt convinced of what David
afterward declares, “Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his saints?” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p48.3"></span>[Ps.
116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p48.3"></span>; 34:12). If death were the goal and ultimate
limit, no distinction could be observed between the righteous and the
wicked. The true distinction is the different lot which awaits them
after death.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p49"></span>15. We have not yet come farther down
than the books of Moses, whose only office, according to our opponents,
was to induce the people to worship God, by setting before them the
fertility of the land, and its general abundance; and yet to every one
who does not voluntarily shun the light, there is clear evidence of a
spiritual covenant. But if we come down to the Prophets, the kingdom of
Christ and eternal life are there exhibited in the fullest splendour.
First, David, as earlier in time, in accordance with the order of the
Divine procedure, spoke of heavenly mysteries more obscurely than they,
and yet with what clearness and certainty does he point to it in all he
says. The value he put upon his earthly habitation is attested by these
words, “I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers
were. Verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Surely
every man walketh in a vain show. And now, Lord, what wait I for? my
hope is in thee,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p49.1"></span>[Ps.
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p49.1"></span>).
He who confesses that there is nothing solid or stable on the earth, and
yet firmly retains his hope in God, undoubtedly contemplates a happiness
reserved for him elsewhere. To this contemplation he is wont to invite
believers whenever he would have them to be truly comforted. For, in
another passages after speaking of human life as a fleeting and
evanescent show, he adds, “The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting upon them that fear him,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p49.2"></span>[Ps.
103:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p49.2"></span>). To this there is a corresponding passage
in another psalm, “Of old thou hast laid the foundation of the earth;
and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou
shalt endure; yea, all of them shall wax old like a garment; as a
vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed; but thou art
the same, and thy years shall have no end. The children of thy servants
shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p49.3"></span>[Ps.
102:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p49.3"></span>). If, notwithstanding of the destruction of
the heavens and the earth, the godly cease not to be established before
God, it follows, that their salvation is connected with his eternity.
But this hope could have no existence, if it did not lean upon the
promise as expounded by Isaiah, “The heavens shall vanish away like
smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell
therein shall die in like manner; but my salvation shall be for ever,
and my righteousness shall not be abolished,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p49.4"></span>[Isa.
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p49.4"></span>). Perpetuity is here attributed to
righteousness and salvation, not as they reside in God, but as they are
experienced by men.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p50"></span>16. Nor can those things which are
everywhere said as to the prosperous success of believers be understood
in any other sense than as referring to the manifestation of celestial
glory. Of this nature are the following passages: “He preserveth the
souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.”
“His righteousness endureth for ever; his horn shall be exalted with
honour—the desire of the wicked shall perish.” “Surely the righteous
shall give thanks unto thy name; the upright shall dwell in thy
presence.” “The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance.” “The
Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants.”23  <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) But the Lord often leaves his
servants, not only to be annoyed by the violence of the wicked, but to
be lacerated and destroyed; allows the good to languish in obscurity and
squalid poverty, while the ungodly shine forth, as it were, among the
stars; and even by withdrawing the light of his countenance does not
leave them lasting joy. Wherefore, David by no means disguises the fact,
that if believers fix their eyes on the present condition of the world,
they will be grievously tempted to believe that with God integrity has
neither favour nor reward; so much does impiety prosper and flourish,
while the godly are oppressed with ignominy, poverty, contempt, and
every kind of cross. The Psalmist says, “But as for me, my feet were
almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped. For I was envious of the
foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.” At length, after a
statement of the case, he concludes, “When I thought to know this, it
was too painful for me: until I went into the sanctuary of God; then
understood I their end,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p51.2"></span>[Ps.
73:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#003),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p51.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p52"></span>17. Therefore, even from this confession
of David, let us learn that the holy fathers under the Old Testament
were not ignorant that in this world God seldom or never gives his
servants the fulfilment of what is promised them, and therefore has
directed their minds to his sanctuary, where the blessings not exhibited
in the present shadowy life are treasured up for them. This sanctuary
was the final judgment of God, which, as they could not at all discern
it by the eye, they were contented to apprehend by faith. Inspired with
this confidence, they doubted not that whatever might happen in the
world, a time would at length arrive when the divine promises would be
fulfilled. This is attested by such expressions as these: “As for me, I
will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I
awake, with thy likeness,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p52.1"></span>[Psalm
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p52.1"></span>). “I am like a green olive tree in the house
of God,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p52.2"></span>[Psalm
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p52.2"></span>). Again, “The righteous shall flourish like
the palm tree: he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon. Those that be
planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our
God. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat
and flourishing,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p52.3"></span>[Psalm
92:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p52.3"></span>). He had exclaimed a little before “O Lord,
how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.” “When the
wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do
flourish: it is that they shall be destroyed for ever.” Where was this
splendour and beauty of the righteous, unless when the appearance of
this world was changed by the manifestation of the heavenly kingdom?
Lifting their eyes to the eternal world, they despised the momentary
hardships and calamities of the present life, and confidently broke out
into these exclamations: “He shall never suffer the righteous to be
moved. But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into the pit of
destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their
days,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p52.4"></span>[Ps.
55:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p52.4"></span>).
Where in this world is there a pit of eternal destruction to swallow up
the wicked, of whose happiness it is elsewhere said, “They spend their
days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave?” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p52.5"></span>[Job
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p52.5"></span>). Where, on the other hand, is the great
stability of the saints, who, as David complains, are not only
disturbed, but everywhere utterly bruised and oppressed? It is here. He
set before his eyes not merely the unstable vicissitudes of the world,
tossed like a troubled sea, but what the Lord is to do when he shall one
day sit to fix the eternal constitution of heaven and earth, as he in
another place elegantly describes: “They that trust in their wealth, and
boast themselves in the multitude of their riches; none of them can by
any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him.” “For he
sees that wise men die, likewise the fool and the brutish person perish,
and leave their wealth to others. Their inward thought is, that their
houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling-places to all
generations; they call their lands after their own names. Nevertheless,
man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish. This
their way is their folly: yet their posterity approve their sayings.
Like sheep they are laid in the grave; death shall feed on them; and the
upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; and their beauty
shall consume in the grave from their dwelling,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p52.6"></span>[Ps. 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p52.6"></span>–14). By this derision of the foolish for
resting satisfied with the slippery and fickle pleasures, of the world,
he shows that the wise must seek for a very different felicity. But he
more clearly unfolds the hidden doctrine of the resurrection when he
sets up a kingdom to the righteous after the wicked are cast down and
destroyed. For what, pray, are we to understand by the “morning,” unless
it be the revelation of a new life, commencing when the present comes to
an end?

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p53"></span>18. Hence the consideration which
believers employed as a solace for their sufferings, and a remedy for
their patience: “His anger endureth but a moment: in his favour is
life,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p53.1"></span>[Psalm
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.1"></span>). How did their afflictions, which continued
almost throughout the whole course of life, terminate in a moment? Where
did they see the long duration of the divine benignity, of which they
had only the slightest taste? Had they clung to earth, they could have
found nothing of the kind; but looking to heaven, they saw that the
period during which the Lord afflicted his saints was but a moment, and
that the mercies with which he gathers them are everlasting: on the
other hand, they foresaw that for the wicked, who only dreamed of
happiness for a day, there was reserved an eternal and never-ending
destruction. Hence those expressions: “The memory of the just is
blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.2"></span>[Prov.
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.2"></span>). “Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his saints,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p53.3"></span>[Psalm
116:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.3"></span>). Again in Samuel: “The Lord will keep the
feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.4"></span>[1 Sam.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p53.4"></span>);
showing they knew well, that however much the righteous might be tossed
about, their latter end was life and peace; that how pleasant soever the
delights of the wicked, they gradually lead down to the chambers of
death. They accordingly designated the death of such persons as the
death “of the uncircumcised,” that is, persons cut off from the hope of
resurrection (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p53.5"></span>[Ezek.
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.5"></span>; 31:18). Hence David could not imagine a
greater curse than this: “Let them be blotted out of the book of the
living, and not be written with the righteous,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.6"></span>[Psalm
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p53.6"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p54"></span>19. The most remarkable passage of all is
that of Job: “I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for myself,
and mine eyes shall behold, and not another,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p54.1"></span>[Job
19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p54.1"></span>). Those who would make a display of their
acuteness, pretend that these words are to be understood not of the last
resurrection, but of the day when Job expected that God would deal more
gently with him. Granting that this is partly meant, we shall, however,
compel them, whether they will or not, to admit that Job never could
have attained to such fulness of hope if his thoughts had risen no
higher than the earth. It must, therefore, be confessed, that he who saw
that the Redeemer would be present with him when lying in the grave,
must have raised his eyes to a future immortality. To those who think
only of the present life, death is the extremity of despair; but it
could not destroy the hope of Job. “Though he slay me,” said he, “yet
will I trust in him,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p54.2"></span>[Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p54.2"></span>). Let no trifler here burst in with the
objection that these are the sayings of a few, and do not by any means
prove that there was such a doctrine among the Jews. To this my instant
answer is, that these few did not in such passages give utterance to
some hidden wisdom, to which only distinguished individuals were
admitted privately and apart from others, but that having been appointed
by the Holy Spirit to be the teachers of the people, they openly
promulgated the mysteries of God, which all in common behaved to learn
as the principles of public religion. When, therefore, we hear that
those passages in which the Holy Spirit spoke so distinctly and clearly
of the spiritual life were public oracles in the Jewish Church, it were
intolerably perverse to confine them entirely to a carnal covenant
relating merely to the earth and earthly riches.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p55"></span>20. When we descend to the later
prophets, we have it in our power to expatiate freely as in our own
field. If, when David, Job, and Samuel, were in question, the victory
was not difficult, much easier is it here; for the method and economy
which God observed in administering the covenant of his mercy was, that
the nearer the period of its full exhibition approached, the greater the
additions which were daily made to the light of revelation. Accordingly,
at the beginning, when the first promise of salvation was given to Adam
(<span id="iv.ii.xi-p55.1"></span>[Gen.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p55.1"></span>), only a few slender sparks beamed forth:
additions being afterwards made, a greater degree of light began to be
displayed, and continued gradually to increase and shine with greater
brightness, until at length all the clouds being dispersed, Christ the
Sun of righteousness arose, and with full refulgence illumined all the
earth (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p55.2"></span>[Mal.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p55.2"></span>).
In appealing to the Prophets, therefore, we can have no fear of any
deficiency of proof; but as I see an immense mass of materials, which
would occupy us much longer than compatible with the nature of our
present work (the subject, indeed, would require a large volume), and as
I trust, that by what has already been said, I have paved the way, so
that every reader of the very least discernment may proceed without
stumbling, I will avoid a prolixity, for which at present there is
little necessity; only reminding my readers to facilitate the entrance
by means of the key which was formerly put into their hands (*supra*,
Chap. 4 sec. 3, 4); namely, that whenever the Prophets make mention of
the happiness of believers (a happiness of which scarcely any vestiges
are discernible in the present life), they must have recourse to this
distinction: that the better to commend the Divine goodness to the
people, they used temporal blessings as a kind of lineaments to shadow
it forth, and yet gave such a portrait as might lift their minds above
the earth, the elements of this world, and all that will perish, and
compel them to think of the blessedness of a future and spiritual life.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p56"></span>21. One example will suffice. When the
Israelites were carried away to Babylon, their dispersion seemed to be
the next thing to death, and they could scarcely be dissuaded from
thinking that Ezekiel’s prophecy of their restoration (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p56.1"></span>[Ezek.
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p56.1"></span>)
was a mere fable, because it seemed to them the same thing as if he had
prophesied that putrid caresses would be raised to life. The Lord, in
order to show that, even in that case, there was nothing to prevent him
from making room for his kindness, set before the prophet in vision a
field covered with dry bones, to which, by the mere power of his word,
he in one moment restored life and strength. The vision served, indeed,
to correct the unbelief of the Jews at the time, but it also reminded
them how much farther the power of the Lord extended than to the
bringing back of the people, since by a single nod it could so easily
give life to dry scattered bones. Wherefore, the passage may be fitly
compared with one in Isaiah, “Thy dead men shall live, together with my
dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for
thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors about
thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until the indignation
be overpast. For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall
disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p56.2"></span>[Isa.
26:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p56.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p57"></span>22. It were absurd however to interpret
all the passages on a similar principle; for there are several which
point without any veil to the future immortality which awaits believers
in the kingdom of heaven. Some of them we have already quoted, and there
are many others, but especially the following two. The one is in Isaiah,
“As the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain
before me, saith the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain. And
it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one
sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the
Lord. And they shall go forth, and look upon the caresses of the men
that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring unto all
flesh,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p57.1"></span>[Isa.
66:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p57.1"></span>). The other passage is in Daniel. “At that
time shall Michael stand up, the great prince which standeth for the
children of thy people: and there shall be a time of trouble, such as
there never was since there was a nation even to that same time: and at
that time thy people shall be delivered, every one shall be found
written in the book. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt,” (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p57.2"></span>[Dan.
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p57.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p58"></span>23. In proving the two remaining
points—viz. that the Patriarchs had Christ as the pledge of their
covenant, and placed all their hope of blessing in him, as they are
clearer, and not so much controverted, I will be less particular. Let us
then lay it down confidently as a truth which no engines of the devil
can destroy—that the Old Testament or covenant which the Lord made with
the people of Israel was not confined to earthly objects, but contained
a promise of spiritual and eternal life, the expectation of which
behaved to be impressed on the minds of all who truly consented to the
covenant. Let us put far from us the senseless and pernicious notion,
that the Lord proposed nothing to the Jews, or that they sought nothing
but full supplies of food, carnal delights, abundance of wealth,
external influence, a numerous offspring, and all those things which our
animal nature deems valuable. For, even now, the only kingdom of heaven
which our Lord Jesus Christ promises to his followers, is one in which
they may sit down with Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.1"></span>[Mt.
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.1"></span>); and Peter declared of the Jews of his day,
that they were heirs of gospel grace because they were the sons of the
prophets, and comprehended in the covenant which the Lord of old made
with his people (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p58.2"></span>[Acts
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.2"></span>). And that this might not be attested by
words merely, our Lord also approved it by act (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.3"></span>[Mt.
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.3"></span>). At the moment when he rose again, he
deigned to make many of the saints partakers of his resurrection, and
allowed them to be seen in the city; thus giving a sure earnest, that
every thing which he did and suffered in the purchase of eternal
salvation belonged to believers under the Old Testament, just as much as
to us. Indeed, as Peter testifies, they were endued with the same spirit
of faith by which we are regenerated to life (<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.4"></span>[Acts
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.4"></span>). When we hear that that spirit, which is,
as it were, a kind of spark of immortality in us (whence it is called
the “earnest” of our inheritance, <span id="iv.ii.xi-p58.5"></span>[Eph.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.5"></span>), dwelt in like manner in them, how can we
presume to deny them the inheritance? Hence, it is the more wonderful
how the Sadducees of old fell into such a degree of sottishness as to
deny both the resurrection and the substantive existence23  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) of spirits, both of which where
attested to them by so many striking passages of Scripture. Nor would
the stupidity of the whole nation in the present day, in expecting an
earthly reign of the Messiah, be less wonderful, had not the Scriptures
foretold this long before as the punishment which they were to suffer
for rejecting the Gospel, God, by a just judgment, blinding minds which
voluntarily invite darkness, by rejecting the offered light of heaven.
They read, and are constantly turning over the pages of Moses, but a
veil prevents them from seeing the light which beams forth in his
countenance (<span id="iv.ii.xi-p59.1"></span>[2 Cor.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p59.1"></span>); and thus to them he will remain covered
and veiled until they are converted to Christ, between whom and Moses
they now study, as much as in them lies, to maintain a separation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](inst044.htm#fr_220) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p2"></span>27 227 As to the agreement of both
dispensations, see August. Lib. de Moribus Eccles. Lat., especially cap.
28.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](inst044.htm#fr_221) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p29"></span>28 228 The French is, “Veu qu’ils pensent
qu notre Seigneur l’ait voulu seulement engraisser enterre comme en une
auge, sans seperance aucune de l’immortalité celeste;”—seeing they think
that our Lord only wished to fatten them on the earth as in a sty,
without any hope of heavenly immortality.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](inst044.htm#fr_222) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p31.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p32"></span>29 229 <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p32.1"></span>[Acts
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p32.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xi-p32.2"></span>[Rom.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p32.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xi-p32.3"></span>[1 Cor.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p32.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xi-p32.4"></span>[Matt.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p32.4"></span>,
&c., especially 13.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](inst044.htm#fr_223) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p32.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p33"></span>30 230 “Novo populo.” French, “au peuple
du Nouveau Testament”—the people of the New Dispensation;

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](inst044.htm#fr_224) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p34.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p35"></span>31 231 “Beata Virgo.” French, “la Vierge
Marie;”—the Virgin Mary.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](inst044.htm#fr_225) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p36"></span>32 232 “Ejus finis.” French, “la fin du
Vieil Testament;”—the end of the Old Testament.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](inst044.htm#fr_226) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p44"></span>33 233 Calv. in Genes. cap. 12:11—15.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](inst044.htm#fr_227) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p45.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p46"></span>34 234 The French is, “Et encore ne peut
il pas ainsi eviter l’iniquité de son beau père, qu’il ne soit de lui
persecuté, et atteint au milieu du chemin; et pourceque Dieu ne
permettoit point qu’il lui advint pis, il est vexé de beaucoup
d’opprobres et contumelies, par eclui du quel il avoit bonne matiere de
se plaindre.”—Even thus he cannot escape the injustice of his
father-in-law, but is persecuted by him, and attacked in the midst of
his journey; and because God did not allow worse to happen, he is
assailed with much contumely and reproach by one of whom he had good
cause to complain.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](inst044.htm#fr_228) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p51"></span>35 235 <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p51.1"></span>[Ps. 97:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#011)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p51.1"></span>;
112:9, 10; 140:13; 112:6; 34:22.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](inst044.htm#fr_229) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p58.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p59"></span>36 236 “Animarum substantiam.” French,
“immortalité des ames;”—immortality of souls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 11. - THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE TWO
TESTAMENTS.](inst045)
