[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst040)  [Next](inst042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.viii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.viii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 7.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p1"></span>THE LAW GIVEN, NOT TO RETAIN A PEOPLE
FOR ITSELF, BUT TO KEEP ALIVE THE HOPE OF SALVATION IN CHRIST UNTIL HIS
ADVENT.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are, I.
The Moral and Ceremonial Law a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, sec.
1, 2. II. This true of the Moral Law, especially its conditional
promises. These given for the best reasons. In what respect the
observance of the Moral Law is said to be impossible, sec. 3–5. III. Of
the threefold office and use of the Moral Law, sec. 6–12. Antinomians
refuted, sec. 13. IV. What the abrogation of the Law, Moral and
Ceremonial, sec. 14–17.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p4"></span>1. The whole system of religion
delivered by the hand of Moses, in many ways pointed to Christ. This
exemplified in the case of sacrifices, ablutions, and an endless series
of ceremonies. This proved, 1. By the declared purpose of God; 2. By the
nature of the ceremonies themselves; 3. From the nature of God; 4. From
the grace offered to the Jews; 5. From the consecration of the priests.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p5"></span>2. Proof continued. 6. From a
consideration of the kingdom erected in the family of David. 7. From the
end of the ceremonies. 8. From the end of the Moral Law.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p6"></span>3. A more ample exposition of the last
proof. The Moral Law leads believers to Christ. Showing the perfect
righteousness required by God, it convinces us of our inability to
fulfil it. It thus denies us life, adjudges us to death, and so urges us
to seek deliverance in Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p7"></span>4. The promises of the Law, though
conditional, founded on the best reason. This reason explained.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p8"></span>5. No inconsistency in giving a law, the
observance of which is impossible. This proved from reason, and
confirmed by Scripture. Another confirmation from Augustine.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p9"></span>6. A consideration of the office and use
of the Moral Law shows that it leads to Christ. The Law, while it
describes the righteousness which is acceptable to God, proves that
every man is unrighteous.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p10"></span>7. The Law fitly compared to a mirror,
which shows us our wretchedness. This derogates not in any degree from
its excellence.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p11"></span>8. When the Law discloses our guilt, we
should not despond, but flee to the mercy of God. How this may be done.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p12"></span>9. Confirmation of the first use of the
Moral Law from various passages in Augustine.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p13"></span>10. A second use of the Law is to curb
sinners. This most necessary for the good of the community at large; and
this in respect not only of the reprobate, but also of the elect,
previous to regeneration. This confirmed by the authority of an Apostle.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p14"></span>11. The Law showing our wretchedness,
disposes us to admit the remedy. It also tends to keep us in our duty.
Confirmation from general experience.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p15"></span>12. The third and most appropriate use
of the Law respects the elect. 1. It instructs and teaches them to make
daily progress in doing the will of God. 2. Urges them by exhortation to
obedience. Testimony of David. How he is to be reconciled with the
Apostle.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p16"></span>13. The profane heresy of the
Antinomians must be exploded. Argument founded on a passage in David,
and another in Moses.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p17"></span>14. Last part of the chapter treating
of the abrogation of the Law. In what respect any part of the Moral Law
abrogated.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p18"></span>15. The curse of the Law how abrogated.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p19"></span>16. Of the abrogation of the Ceremonial
Law in regard to the observance only.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p20"></span>17. The reason assigned by the Apostle
applicable not to the Moral Law, but to ceremonial observances only.
These abrogated, not only because they separated the Jews from the
Gentiles, but still more because they were a kind of formal instruments
to attest our guilt and impunity. Christ, by destroying these, is justly
said to have taken away the handwriting that was against us, and nailed
it to his cross.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p21"></span>1. From the whole course of the
observations now made, we may infer, that the Law was not superadded
about four hundred years after the death of Abraham in order that it
might lead the chosen people away from Christ, but, on the contrary, to
keep them in suspense until his advent; to inflame their desire, and
confirm their expectation, that they might not become dispirited by the
long delay. By the Law, I understand not only the Ten Commandments,
which contain a complete rule of life, but the whole system of religion
delivered by the hand of Moses. Moses was not appointed as a Lawgiver,
to do away with the blessing promised to the race of Abraham; nay, we
see that he is constantly reminding the Jews of the free covenant which
had been made with their fathers, and of which they were heirs; as if he
had been sent for the purpose of renewing it. This is most clearly
manifested by the ceremonies. For what could be more vain or frivolous
than for men to reconcile themselves to God, by offering him the foul
odour produced by burning the fat of beasts? or to wipe away their own
impurities by be sprinkling themselves with water or blood? In short,
the whole legal worship (if considered by itself apart from the types
and shadows of corresponding truth) is a mere mockery. Wherefore, both
in Stephen’s address (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p21.1"></span>[Acts
7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p21.1"></span>), and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, great
weight is justly given to the passage in which God says to Moses, “Look
that thou make them after the pattern which was showed thee in the
mount,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p21.2"></span>[Exod.
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p21.2"></span>). Had there not been some spiritual end to
which they were directed, the Jews, in the observance of them, would
have deluded themselves as much as the Gentiles in their vanities.
Profane men, who have never made religion their serious study, cannot
bear without disgust to hear of such a multiplicity of rites. They not
merely wonder why God fatigued his ancient people with such a mass of
ceremonies, but they despise and ridicule them as childish toys. This
they do, because they attend not to the end; from which, if the legal
figures are separated, they cannot escape the charge of vanity. But the
type shows that God did not enjoin sacrifice, in order that he might
occupy his worshippers with earthly exercises, but rather that he might
raise their minds to something higher. This is clear even from His own
nature. Being a spirit, he is delighted only with spiritual worship. The
same thing is testified by the many passages in which the Prophets
accuse the Jews of stupidity, for imagining that mere sacrifices have
any value in the sight of God. Did they by this mean to derogate in any
respect from the Law? By no means; but as interpreters of its true
meaning, they wished in this way to turn the attention of the people to
the end which they ought to have had in view, but from which they
generally wandered. From the grace offered to the Jews we may certainly
infer, that the law was not a stranger to Christ. Moses declared the end
of the adoption of the Israelites to be, that they should be “a kingdom
of priests, and an holy nation,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p21.3"></span>[Exod.
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p21.3"></span>). This they could not attain, without a
greater and more excellent atonement than the blood of beasts. For what
could be less in accordance with reason, than that the sons of Adams
who, from hereditary taint, are all born the slaves of sin, should be
raised to royal dignity, and in this way made partakers of the glory of
God, if the noble distinction were not derived from some other source?
How, moreover, could the priestly office exist in vigour among those
whose vices rendered them abominable in the sight of God, if they were
not consecrated in a holy head? Wherefore, Peter elegantly transposes
the words of Moses, teaching that the fulness of grace, of which the
Jews had a foretaste under the Law, is exhibited in Christ, “Ye are a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p21.4"></span>[1 Pet.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p21.4"></span>). The transposition of the words intimates
that those to whom Christ has appeared in the Gospel, have obtained more
than their fathers, inasmuch as they are all endued with priestly and
royal honour, and can, therefore, trusting to their Mediator, appear
with boldness in the presence of God.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p22"></span>2. And it is to be observed, by the
way, that the kingdom, which was at length erected in the family of
David, is part of the Law, and is comprehended under the dispensation of
Moses; whence it follows, that, as well in the whole tribe of Levi as in
the posterity of David, Christ was exhibited to the eyes of the
Israelites as in a double mirror. For, as I lately observed (sec. 1), in
no other way could those who were the slaves of sin and death, and
defiled with corruption, be either kings or priests. Hence appears the
perfect truth of Paul’s statement, “The law was our schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ,” “till the seed should come to whom the promise
was made” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p22.1"></span>[Gal.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.1"></span>). For Christ not yet having been made
familiarly known to the Jews, they were like children whose weakness
could not bear a full knowledge of heavenly things. How they were led to
Christ by the ceremonial law has already been adverted to, and may be
made more intelligible by several passages in the Prophets. Although
they were required, in order to appease God, to approach him daily with
new sacrifices, yet Isaiah promises, that all their sins would be
expiated by one single sacrifice, and with this Daniel concurs (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.2"></span>[Isa.
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.viii-p22.3"></span>[Dan.
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.3"></span>). The priests appointed from the tribe of
Levi entered the sanctuary, but it was once said of a single priest,
“The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever,
after the order of Melchizedek,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.4"></span>[Ps.
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.4"></span>). The unction of oil was then visible, but
Daniel in vision declares that there will be another unction. Not to
dwell on this, the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews proves clearly,
and at length, from the fourth to the eleventh chapter, that ceremonies
were vain, and of no value, unless as bringing us to Christ. In regard
to the Ten Commandments, we must, in like manner, attend to the
statement of Paul, that “Christ is the end of the law for righteousness
to every one that believeth,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p22.5"></span>[Rom.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.5"></span>); and, again, that ministers of the new
testament were “not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter
killeth, but the split giveth life,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.6"></span>[2 Cor.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.6"></span>). The former passage intimates, that it is
in vain to teach righteousness by precept, until Christ bestow it by
free imputation, and the regeneration of the Spirit. Hence he properly
calls Christ the end or fulfilling of the Law, because it would avail us
nothing to know what God demands did not Christ come to the succour of
those who are labouring, and oppressed under an intolerable yoke and
burden. In another place, he says that the Law “was added because of
transgressions,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p22.7"></span>[Gal.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p22.7"></span>), that it might humble men under a sense
of their condemnation. Moreover, inasmuch as this is the only true
preparation for Christ, the statements, though made in different words,
perfectly agree with each other. But because he had to dispute with
perverse teachers, who pretended that men merited justification by the
works of the Law, he was sometimes obliged, in refuting their error, to
speak of the Law in a more restricted sense, merely as law, though, in
other respects, the covenant of free adoption is comprehended under it.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p23"></span>3. But in order that a sense of guilt
may urge us to seek for pardon, it is of importance to know how our
being instructed in the Moral Law renders us more inexcusable. If it is
true, that a perfect righteousness is set before us in the Law, it
follows, that the complete observance of it is perfect righteousness in
the sight of God; that is, a righteousness by which a man may be deemed
and pronounced righteous at the divine tribunal. Wherefore Moses, after
promulgating the Law, hesitates not to call heaven and earth to witness,
that he had set life and death, good and evil, before the people. Nor
can it be denied, that the reward of eternal salvation, as promised by
the Lord, awaits the perfect obedience of the Law (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p23.1"></span>[Deut.
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p23.1"></span>). Again, however, it is of importance to
understand in what way we perform that obedience for which we justly
entertain the hope of that reward. For of what use is it to see that the
reward of eternal life depends on the observance of the Law, unless it
moreover appears whether it be in our power in that way to attain to
eternal life? Herein, then, the weakness of the Law is manifested; for,
in none of us is that righteousness of the Law manifested, and,
therefore, being excluded from the promises of life, we again fall under
the curse. I state not only what happens, but what must necessarily
happen. The doctrine of the Law transcending our capacity, a man may
indeed look from a distance at the promises held forth, but he cannot
derive any benefit from them. The only thing, therefore, remaining for
him is, from their excellence to form a better estimate of his own
misery, while he considers that the hope of salvation is cut off, and he
is threatened with certain death. On the other hand, those fearful
denunciations which strike not at a few individuals, but at every
individual without exceptions rise up; rise up, I say, and, with
inexorable severity, pursue us; so that nothing but instant death is
presented by the Law.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p24"></span> 4. Therefore, if we look merely to the
Law, the result must be despondency, confusion, and despair, seeing that
by it we are all cursed and condemned, while we are kept far away from
the blessedness which it holds forth to its observers. Is the Lord,
then, you will ask, only sporting with us? Is it not the next thing to
mockery, to hold out the hope of happiness, to invite and exhort us to
it, to declare that it is set before us, while all the while the
entrance to it is precluded and quite shut up? I answer, Although the
promises, in so far as they are conditional, depend on a perfect
obedience of the Law, which is nowhere to be found, they have not,
however, been given in vain. For when we have learned, that the promises
would be fruitless and unavailing, did not God accept us of his free
goodness, without any view to our works, and when, having so learned,
we, by faith, embrace the goodness thus offered in the gospel, the
promises, with all their annexed conditions, are fully accomplished. For
God, while bestowing all things upon us freely, crowns his goodness by
not disdaining our imperfect obedience; forgiving its deficiencies,
accepting it as if it were complete, and so bestowing upon us the full
amount of what the Law has promised. But as this point will be more
fully discussed in treating of justification by faith, we shall not
follow it further at present.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p25"></span>5. What has been said as to the
impossible observance of the Law, it will be proper briefly to explain
and confirm, the general opinion being, that nothing can be more absurd.
Hence Jerome has not hesitated to denounce anathema against it.18  <span
id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) What Jerome thought, I care not; let
us inquire what is the truth. I will not here enter into a long and
intricate discussion on the various kinds of possibility. By impossible,
I mean, that which never was, and, being prevented by the ordination and
decree of God, never will be. I say, that if we go back to the remotest
period, we shall not find a single saint who, clothed with a mortal
body, ever attained to such perfection as to love the Lord with all his
heart, and soul, and mind, and strength; and, on the other hand, not one
who has not felt the power of concupiscence. Who can deny this? I am
aware, indeed of a kind of saints whom a foolish superstition imagines,
and whose purity the angels of heaven scarcely equal. This, however, is
repugnant both to Scripture and experience. But I say further, that no
saint ever will attain to perfection, so long as he is in the body.
Scripture bears clear testimony to this effect: “There is no man that
sinneth not,” saith Solomon (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p26.1"></span>[1 Kings
8:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.1"></span>). David says, “In thy sight shall no man
living be justified,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p26.2"></span>[Psalm
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.2"></span>). Job also, in numerous passages, affirms
the same thing. But the clearest of all is Paul, who declares that “the
flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh,”
(<span id="iv.ii.viii-p26.3"></span>[Gal.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.3"></span>). And he proves, that “as many as are of
the works of the law are under the curse,” for the simple reason, that
it is written, “Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things
which are written in the book of the law to do them,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.4"></span>[Gal.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.viii-p26.5"></span>[Deut.
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.5"></span>); intimating, or rather assuming it as
confessed, that none can so continue. But whatever has been declared by
Scripture must be regarded as perpetual, and hence necessary. The
Pelagians annoyed Augustine with the sophism, that it was insulting to
God to hold, that he orders more than believers are able, by his grace,
to perform; and he, in order to evade it, acknowledged that the Lord was
able, if he chose, to raise a mortal man to angelic purity; but that he
had never done, and never would do it, because so the Scripture had
declared (Augustine, lib. de Nat. et Grat). This I deny not: but I add,
that there is no use in absurdly disputing concerning the power of God
in opposition to his truth; and therefore there is no ground for
cavilling, when it is said that that thing cannot be, which the
Scriptures declare will never be. But if it is the word that is objected
to, I refer to the answer which our Saviour gave to his disciples when
they asked, “Who then can be saved?” “With men,” said he, “this is
impossible; but with God all things are possible” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.6"></span>[Mt.
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.6"></span>). Augustine argues in the most convincing
manner, that while in the flesh, we never can give God the love which we
owe him. “Love so follows knowledge, that no man can perfectly love God
who has not previously a full comprehension of his goodness,” (Augustin.
de Spiritu et Litera, towards the end, and elsewhere). So long as we are
pilgrims in the world, we see through a glass darkly, and therefore our
love is imperfect. Let it therefore be held incontrovertible, that, in
consequence of the feebleness of our nature, it is impossible for us, so
long as we are in the flesh, to fulfil the law. This will also be proved
elsewhere from the writings of Paul (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.7"></span>[Rom.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.7"></span>).18  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182)

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p28"></span>6. That the whole matter may be made
clearer, let us take a succinct view of the office and use of the Moral
Law. Now this office and use seems to me to consist of three parts.
First, by exhibiting the righteousness of God,—in other words, the
righteousness which alone is acceptable to God,—it admonishes every one
of his own unrighteousness, certiorates, convicts, and finally condemns
him. This is necessary, in order that man, who is blind and intoxicated
with self-love, may be brought at once to know and to confess his
weakness and impurity. For until his vanity is made perfectly manifest,
he is puffed up with infatuated confidence in his own powers, and never
can be brought to feel their feebleness so long as he measures them by a
standard of his own choice. So soon, however, as he begins to compare
them with the requirements of the Law, he has something to tame his
presumption. How high soever his opinion of his own powers may be, he
immediately feels that they pant under the heavy load, then totter and
stumble, and finally fall and give way. He, then, who is schooled by the
Law, lays aside the arrogance which formerly blinded him. In like manner
must he be cured of pride, the other disease under which we have said
that he labours. So long as he is permitted to appeal to his own
judgment, he substitutes a hypocritical for a real righteousness, and,
contented with this, sets up certain factitious observances in
opposition to the grace of God. But after he is forced to weigh his
conduct in the balance of the Law, renouncing all dependence on this
fancied righteousness, he sees that he is at an infinite distance from
holiness, and, on the other hand, that he teems with innumerable vices
of which he formerly seemed free. The recesses in which concupiscence
lies hid are so deep and tortuous that they easily elude our view; and
hence the Apostle had good reason for saying, “I had not known lust,
except the law had said, Thou shalt not covet.” For, if it be not
brought forth from its lurkingplaces, it miserably destroys in secret
before its fatal sting is discerned.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p29"></span>7. Thus the Law is a kind of mirror. As
in a mirror we discover any stains upon our face, so in the Law we
behold, first, our impotence; then, in consequence of it, our iniquity;
and, finally, the curse, as the consequence of both. He who has no power
of following righteousness is necessarily plunged in the mire of
iniquity, and this iniquity is immediately followed by the curse.
Accordingly, the greater the transgression of which the Law convicts us,
the severer the judgment to which we are exposed. To this effect is the
Apostle’s declaration, that “by the law is the knowledge of sin,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p29.1"></span>[Rom.
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p29.1"></span>). By these words, he only points out the
first office of the Law as experienced by sinners not yet regenerated.
In conformity to this, it is said, “the law entered that the offence
might abound;” and, accordingly, that it is “the ministration of death;”
that it “worketh wrath” and kills (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p29.2"></span>[Rom.
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p29.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.viii-p29.3"></span>[2
Cor. 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p29.3"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.viii-p29.4"></span>[Rom.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p29.4"></span>). For there cannot be a doubt that the
clearer the consciousness of guilt, the greater the increase of sin;
because then to transgression a rebellious feeling against the Lawgiver
is added. All that remains for the Law, is to arm the wrath of God for
the destruction of the sinner; for by itself it can do nothing but
accuse, condemn, and destroy him. Thus Augustine says, “If the Spirit of
grace be absent, the law is present only to convict and slay us.”19
 <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) But to say this neither insults
the law, nor derogates in any degree from its excellence. Assuredly, if
our whole will were formed and disposed to obedience, the mere knowledge
of the law would be sufficient for salvation; but since our carnal and
corrupt nature is at enmity with the Divine law, and is in no degree
amended by its discipline, the consequence is, that the law which, if it
had been properly attended to, would have given life, becomes the
occasion of sin and death. When all are convicted of transgression, the
more it declares the righteousness of God, the more, on the other hand,
it discloses our iniquity; the more certainly it assures us that life
and salvation are treasured up as the reward of righteousness, the more
certainly it assures us that the unrighteous will perish. So far,
however are these qualities from throwing disgrace on the Law, that
their chief tendency is to give a brighter display of the divine
goodness. For they show that it is only our weakness and depravity that
prevents us from enjoying the blessedness which the law openly sets
before us. Hence additional sweetness is given to divine grace, which
comes to our aid without the law, and additional loveliness to the mercy
which confers it, because they proclaim that God is never weary in doing
good, and in loading us with new gifts.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p31"></span>8. But while the unrighteousness and
condemnation of all are attested by the law, it does not follow (if we
make the proper use of it) that we are immediately to give up all hope
and rush headlong on despair. No doubt, it has some such effect upon the
reprobate, but this is owing to their obstinacy. With the children of
God the effect is different. The Apostle testifies that the law
pronounces its sentence of condemnation in order “that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p31.1"></span>[Rom.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p31.1"></span>). In another place, however, the same
Apostle declares, that “God has concluded them all in unbelief;” not
that he might destroy all, or allow all to perish, but that “he might
have mercy upon all,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p31.2"></span>[Rom.
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p31.2"></span>); in other words, that divesting
themselves of an absurd opinion of their own virtue, they may perceive
how they are wholly dependent on the hand of God; that feeling how naked
and destitute they are, they may take refuge in his mercy, rely upon it,
and cover themselves up entirely with it; renouncing all righteousness
and merit, and clinging to mercy alone, as offered in Christ to all who
long and look for it in true faith. In the precepts of the law, God is
seen as the rewarder only of perfect righteousness (a righteousness of
which all are destitute), and, on the other hand, as the stern avenger
of wickedness. But in Christ his countenance beams forth full of grace
and gentleness towards poor unworthy sinners.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p32"></span>9. There are many passages in
Augustine, as to the utility of the law in leading us to implore Divine
assistance. Thus he writes to Hilary,19  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) “The law orders, that we, after
attempting to do what is ordered and so feeling our weakness under the
law, may learn to implore the help of grace.” In like manner, he writes
to Asellius, “The utility of the law is, that it convinces man of his
weakness, and compels him to apply for the medicine of grace, which is
in Christ.” In like manner, he says to Innocentius Romanus, “The law
orders; grace supplies the power of acting.” Again, to Valentinus, “God
enjoins what we cannot do, in order that we may know what we have to ask
of him.” Again, “The law was given, that it might make you guilty—being
made guilty might fear; fearing, might ask indulgence, not presume on
your own strength.” Again, “The law was given, in order to convert a
great into a little man—to show that you have no power of your own for
righteousness; and might thus, poor, needy, and destitute, flee to
grace.” He afterwards thus addresses the Almighty, “So do, O Lord, so
do, O merciful Lord; command what cannot be fulfilled; nay, command what
cannot be fulfilled, unless by thy own grace: so that when men feel they
have no strength in themselves to fulfil it, every mouth may be stopped,
and no man seem great in his own eyes. Let all be little ones; let the
whole world become guilty before God.” But I am forgetting myself in
producing so many passages, since this holy man wrote a distinct
treatise, which he entitled *De Spiritu et Litera*. The other branch of
this first use he does not describe so distinctly, either because he
knew that it depended on the former, or because he was not so well aware
of it, or because he wanted words in which he might distinctly and
clearly explain its proper meaning. But even in the reprobate
themselves, this first office of the law is not altogether wanting. They
do not, indeed, proceed so far with the children of God as, after the
flesh is cast down, to be renewed in the inner man, and revive again,
but stunned by the first terror, give way to despair. Still it tends to
manifest the equity of the Divine judgment, when their consciences are
thus heaved upon the waves. They would always willingly carp at the
judgment of God; but now, though that judgment is not manifested, still
the alarm produced by the testimony of the law and of their conscience
bespeaks their deserts.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p34"></span>10. The second office of the Law is, by
means of its fearful denunciations and the consequent dread of
punishment, to curb those who, unless forced, have no regard for
rectitude and justice. Such persons are curbed not because their mind is
inwardly moved and affected, but because, as if a bridle were laid upon
them, they refrain their hands from external acts, and internally check
the depravity which would otherwise petulantly burst forth. It is true,
they are not on this account either better or more righteous in the
sight of God. For although restrained by terror or shame, they dare not
proceed to what their mind has conceived, nor give full license to their
raging lust, their heart is by no means trained to fear and obedience.
Nay, the more they restrain themselves, the more they are inflamed, the
more they rage and boil, prepared for any act or outbreak whatsoever
were it not for the terror of the law. And not only so, but they
thoroughly detest the law itself, and execrate the Lawgiver; so that if
they could, they would most willingly annihilate him, because they
cannot bear either his ordering what is right, or his avenging the
despisers of his Majesty. The feeling of all who are not yet regenerate,
though in some more, in others less lively, is, that in regard to the
observance of the law, they are not led by voluntary submission, but
dragged by the force of fear. Nevertheless, this forced and extorted
righteousness is necessary for the good of society, its peace being
secured by a provision but for which all things would be thrown into
tumult and confusion. Nay, this tuition is not without its use, even to
the children of God, who, previous to their effectual calling, being
destitute of the Spirit of holiness, freely indulge the lusts of the
flesh. When, by the fear of Divine vengeance, they are deterred from
open outbreakings, though, from not being subdued in mind, they profit
little at present, still they are in some measure trained to bear the
yoke of righteousness, so that when they are called, they are not like
mere novices, studying a discipline of which previously they had no
knowledge. This office seems to be especially in the view of the
Apostle, when he says, “That the law is not made for a righteous man,
but for the lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners,
for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of
mothers, for manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile
themselves with mankind, for men-stealers, for liars, for perjured
persons, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound
doctrine,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p34.1"></span>[1 Tim.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p34.1"></span>). He thus indicates that it is a restraint
on unruly lusts that would otherwise burst all bonds.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p35"></span>11. To both may be applied the
declaration of the Apostle in another place, that “The law was our
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p35.1"></span>[Gal.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p35.1"></span>); since there are two classes of persons,
whom by its training it leads to Christ. Some (of whom we spoke in the
first place), from excessive confidence in their own virtue or
righteousness, are unfit to receive the grace of Christ, until they are
completely humbled. This the law does by making them sensible of their
misery, and so disposing them to long for what they previously imagined
they did not want. Others have need of a bridle to restrain them from
giving full scope to their passions, and thereby utterly losing all
desire after righteousness. For where the Spirit of God rules not, the
lusts sometimes so burst forth, as to threaten to drown the soul
subjected to them in forgetfulness and contempt of God; and so they
would, did not God interpose with this remedy. Those, therefore, whom he
has destined to the inheritance of his kingdom, if he does not
immediately regenerate, he, through the works of the law, preserves in
fear, against the time of his visitation, not, indeed, that pure and
chaste fear which his children ought to have, but a fear useful to the
extent of instructing them in true piety according to their capacity. Of
this we have so many proofs, that there is not the least need of an
example. For all who have remained for some time in ignorance of God
will confess, as the result of their own experience, that the law had
the effect of keeping them in some degree in the fear and reverence of
God, till, being regenerated by his Spirit, they began to love him from
the heart.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p36"></span>12. The third use of the Law (being
also the principal use, and more closely connected with its proper end)
has respect to believers in whose hearts the Spirit of God already
flourishes and reigns. For although the Law is written and engraven on
their hearts by the finger of God, that is, although they are so
influenced and actuated by the Spirit, that they desire to obey God,
there are two ways in which they still profit in the Law. For it is the
best instrument for enabling them daily to learn with greater truth and
certainty what that will of the Lord is which they aspire to follow, and
to confirm them in this knowledge; just as a servant who desires with
all his soul to approve himself to his master, must still observe, and
be careful to ascertain his master’s dispositions, that he may comport
himself in accommodation to them. Let none of us deem ourselves exempt
from this necessity, for none have as yet attained to such a degree of
wisdom, as that they may not, by the daily instruction of the Law,
advance to a purer knowledge of the Divine will. Then, because we need
not doctrine merely, but exhortation also, the servant of God will
derive this further advantage from the Law: by frequently meditating
upon it, he will be excited to obedience, and confirmed in it, and so
drawn away from the slippery paths of sin. In this way must the saints
press onward, since, however great the alacrity with which, under the
Spirit, they hasten toward righteousness, they are retarded by the
sluggishness of the flesh, and make less progress than they ought. The
Law acts like a whip to the flesh, urging it on as men do a lazy
sluggish ass. Even in the case of a spiritual man, inasmuch as he is
still burdened with the weight of the flesh, the Law is a constant
stimulus, pricking him forward when he would indulge in sloth. David had
this use in view when he pronounced this high eulogium on the Law, “The
law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes of the Lord are
right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p36.1"></span>[Ps.
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p36.1"></span>). Again, “Thy word is a lamp unto my feet,
and a light unto my path,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p36.2"></span>[Ps.
119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p36.2"></span>). The whole psalm abounds in passages to
the same effect. Such passages are not inconsistent with those of Paul,
which show not the utility of the law to the regenerate, but what it is
able of itself to bestow. The object of the Psalmist is to celebrate the
advantages which the Lord, by means of his law, bestows on those whom he
inwardly inspires with a love of obedience. And he adverts not to the
mere precepts, but also to the promise annexed to them, which alone
makes that sweet which in itself is bitter. For what is less attractive
than the law, when, by its demands and threatening, it overawes the
soul, and fills it with terror? David specially shows that in the law he
saw the Mediator, without whom it gives no pleasure or delight.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p37"></span>13. Some unskilful persons, from not
attending to this, boldly discard the whole law of Moses, and do away
with both its Tables, imagining it unchristian to adhere to a doctrine
which contains the ministration of death. Far from our thoughts be this
profane notion. Moses has admirably shown that the Law, which can
produce nothing but death in sinners, ought to have a better and more
excellent effect upon the righteous. When about to die, he thus
addressed the people, “Set your hearts unto all the words which I
testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
observe to do, all the words of this law. For it is not a vain thing for
you; because it is your life,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p37.1"></span>[Deut.
32:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#046),
[47](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#047)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p37.1"></span>). If it cannot be denied that it contains
a perfect pattern of righteousness, then, unless we ought not to have
any proper rule of life, it must be impious to discard it. There are not
various rules of life, but one perpetual and inflexible rule; and,
therefore, when David describes the righteous as spending their whole
lives in meditating on the Law (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p37.2"></span>[Psalm
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p37.2"></span>), we must not confine to a single age, an
employment which is most appropriate to all ages, even to the end of the
world. Nor are we to be deterred or to shun its instructions, because
the holiness which it prescribes is stricter than we are able to render,
so long as we bear about the prison of the body. It does not now perform
toward us the part of a hard taskmaster, who will not be satisfied
without full payment; but, in the perfection to which it exhorts us,
points out the goal at which, during the whole course of our lives, it
is not less our interest than our duty to aim. It is well if we thus
press onward. Our whole life is a race, and after we have finished our
course, the Lord will enable us to reach that goal to which, at present,
we can only aspire in wish.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p38"></span>14. Since, in regard to believers, the
law has the force of exhortation, not to bind their consciences with a
curse, but by urging them, from time to time, to shake off sluggishness
and chastise imperfection,—many, when they would express this exemption
from the curse, say, that in regard to believers the Law (I still mean
the Moral Law) is abrogated: not that the things which it enjoins are no
longer right to be observed, but only that it is not to believers what
it formerly was; in other words, that it does not, by terrifying and
confounding their consciences, condemn and destroy. It is certainly true
that Paul shows, in clear terms, that there is such an abrogation of the
Law. And that the same was preached by our Lord appears from this, that
he would not have refuted the opinion of his destroying the Law, if it
had not been prevalent among the Jews. Since such an opinion could not
have arisen at random without some pretext, there is reason to presume
that it originated in a false interpretation of his doctrine, in the
same way in which all errors generally arise from a perversion of the
truth. But lest we should stumble against the same stone, let us
distinguish accurately between what has been abrogated in the Law, and
what still remains in force. When the Lord declares, that he came not to
destroy the Law, but to fulfil (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p38.1"></span>[Mt.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p38.1"></span>); that until heaven and earth pass away,
not one jot or little shall remain unfulfilled; he shows that his advent
was not to derogate, in any degree, from the observance of the Law. And
justly, since the very end of his coming was to remedy the transgression
of the Law. Therefore, the doctrine of the Law has not been infringed by
Christ, but remains, that, by teaching, admonishing, rebuking, and
correcting, it may fit and prepare us for every good work.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p39"></span>15. What Paul says, as to the
abrogation of the Law, evidently applies not to the Law itself, but
merely to its power of constraining the conscience. For the Law not only
teaches, but also imperiously demands. If obedience is not yielded, nay,
if it is omitted in any degree, it thunders forth its curse. For this
reason, the Apostle says, that “as many as are of the works of the law
are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the law to
do them,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p39.1"></span>[Gal.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p39.1"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.viii-p39.2"></span>[Deut.
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p39.2"></span>). Those he describes as under the works of
the Law, who do not place righteousness in that forgiveness of sins by
which we are freed from the rigour of the Law. He therefore shows, that
we must be freed from the fetters of the Law, if we would not perish
miserably under them. But what fetters? Those of rigid and austere
exaction, which remits not one iota of the demand, and leaves no
transgression unpunished. To redeem us from this curse, Christ was made
a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a
tree (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p39.3"></span>[Deut.
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p39.3"></span>, compared with <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p39.4"></span>[Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p39.4"></span>:4). In the following chapter, indeed, he
says, that “Christ was made under the law, in order that he might redeem
those who are under the law;” but the meaning is the same. For he
immediately adds, “That we might receive the adoption of sons.” What
does this mean? That we might not be, all our lifetime, subject to
bondage, having our consciences oppressed with the fear of death.
Meanwhile, it must ever remain an indubitable truth, that the Law has
lost none of its authority, but must always receive from us the same
respect and obedience.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p40"></span>16. The case of ceremonies is
different, these having been abrogated not in effect but in use only.
Though Christ by his advent put an end to their use, so far is this from
derogating from their sacredness, that it rather commends and
illustrates it. For as these ceremonies would have given nothing to
God’s ancient people but empty show, if the power of Christ’s death and
resurrection had not been prefigured by them,—so, if the use of them had
not ceased, it would, in the present day, be impossible to understand
for what purpose they were instituted. Accordingly, Paul, in order to
prove that the observance of them was not only superfluous, but
pernicious also, says that they “are a shadow of things to come; but the
body is of Christ,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p40.1"></span>[Col.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p40.1"></span>). We see, therefore, that the truth is
made clearer by their abolition than if Christ, who has been openly
manifested, were still figured by them as at a distance, and as under a
veil. By the death of Christ, the veil of the temple was rent in vain,
the living and express image of heavenly things, which had begun to be
dimly shadowed forth, being now brought fully into view, as is described
by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p40.2"></span>[Heb.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p40.2"></span>). To the same effect, our Saviour
declares, that “the law and the prophets were until John: since that
time the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it,”
(<span id="iv.ii.viii-p40.3"></span>[Luke
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p40.3"></span>); not that the holy fathers were left
without the preaching of the hope of salvation and eternal life, but
because they only saw at a distance, and under a shadow, what we now
behold in full light. Why it behaved the Church to ascend higher than
these elements, is explained by John the Baptist, when he says, “The law
was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,” (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p40.4"></span>[John
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p40.4"></span>). For though it is true that expiation was
promised in the ancient sacrifices, and the ark of the covenant was a
sure pledge of the paternal favour of God, the whole would have been
delusory had it not been founded on the grace of Christ, wherein true
and eternal stability is found. It must be held as a fixed point, that
though legal rites ceased to be observed, their end serves to show more
clearly how great their utility was before the advent of Christ, who,
while he abolished the use, sealed their force and effect by his death.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p41"></span>17. There is a little more difficulty
in the following passage of Paul: “You, being dead in your sins and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, having
forgiven you all trespasses; blotting out the handwriting of ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the
way, nailing it to his cross,” &c. (<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p41.1"></span>[Col.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p41.1"></span>). He seems to extend the abolition of the
Law considerably farther, as if we had nothing to do with its
injunctions. Some err in interpreting this simply of the Moral Law, as
implying the abolition not of its injunctions, but of its inexorable
rigour. Others examining Paul’s words more carefully, see that they
properly apply to the Ceremonial Law, and show that Paul repeatedly uses
the term *ordinance* in this sense. He thus writes to the Ephesians: “He
is our peace, who has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall
of partition between us; having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even
the law of commandments contained in ordinances; for to make in himself
of twain one new man,” (<span id="iv.ii.viii-p41.2"></span>[Eph.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p41.2"></span>). There can be no doubt that he is there
treating of ceremonies, as he speaks of “the middle wall of partition”
which separated Jews and Gentiles. I therefore hold that the former view
is erroneous; but, at the same time, it does not appear to me that the
latter comes fully up to the Apostle’s meaning. For I cannot admit that
the two passages are perfectly parallel. As his object was to assure the
Ephesians that they were admitted to fellowship with the Jews, he tells
them that the obstacle which formerly stood in the way was removed. This
obstacle was in the ceremonies. For the rites of ablution and sacrifice,
by which the Jews were consecrated to the Lord, separated them from the
Gentiles. But who sees not that, in the Epistle to the Colossians, a
sublimer mystery is adverted to? No doubt, a question is raised there as
to the Mosaic observances, to which false apostles were endeavouring to
bind the Christian people. But as in the Epistle to the Galatians he
takes a higher view of this controversy, and in a manner traces it to
its fountain, so he does in this passage also. For if the only thing
considered in rites is the necessity of observing them, of what use was
it to call it a handwriting which was contrary to us? Besides, how could
the bringing in of it be set down as almost the whole sum of redemption?
Wherefore, the very nature of the case clearly shows that reference is
here made to something more internal. I cannot doubt that I have
ascertained the genuine interpretation, provided I am permitted to
assume what Augustine has somewhere most truly affirmed, nay, derived
from the very words of the Apostle—viz. that in the Jewish ceremonies
there was more a confession than an expiation of sins. For what more was
done in sacrifice by those who substituted purifications instead of
themselves, than to confess that they were conscious of deserving death?
What did these purifications testify but that they themselves were
impure? By these means, therefore, the handwriting both of their guilt
and impurity was ever and anon renewed. But the attestation of these
things was not the removal of them. Wherefore, the Apostle says that
Christ is “the mediator of the new testament,—by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament,”
(<span id="iv.ii.viii-p41.3"></span>[Heb.
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p41.3"></span>). Justly, therefore, does the Apostle
describe these handwritings as against the worshipers, and contrary to
them, since by means of them their impurity and condemnation were openly
sealed. There is nothing contrary to this in the fact that they were
partakers of the same grace with ourselves. This they obtained through
Christ, and not through the ceremonies which the Apostle there contrasts
with Christ, showing that by the continued use of them the glory of
Christ was obscured. We perceive how ceremonies, considered in
themselves, are elegantly and appositely termed handwritings, and
contrary to the salvation of man, in as much as they were a kind of
formal instruments which attested his liability. On the other hand, when
false apostles wished to bind them on the Christian Church, Paul,
entering more deeply into their signification, with good reason warned
the Colossians how seriously they would relapse if they allowed a yoke
to be in that way imposed upon them. By so doing, they, at the same
time, deprived themselves of all benefit from Christ, who, by his
eternal sacrifice once offered, had abolished those daily sacrifices,
which were indeed powerful to attest sin, but could do nothing to
destroy it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](inst041.htm#fr_181) <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p26"></span>88 188 See among the works of Justin.
Quæst. 103; and Hieronymus ad Ctesiphont adv. Pelegianos, where he seems
to admit and deny the same proposition.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](inst041.htm#fr_182) <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p26.8"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p27"></span>89 189 Book 2. chap. 12 sec. 4; and
Book 3, chap. 4 sec. 27; and chap. 11 sec 23.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](inst041.htm#fr_183) <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p29.5"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p30"></span>90 190 August. de Corrept. et Gratia.
Ambros. Lib. 1 de Jac. et cap. 6 de Vita Beat.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](inst041.htm#fr_184) <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p33"></span>91 191 August. <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p33.1"></span>Ep. 89<span id="iv.ii.viii-p33.1"></span>,
Quæst. 2; ad Assell. <span id="iv.ii.viii-p33.2"></span>Ep. 200<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p33.2"></span>; ad Innocent. <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p33.3"></span>Ep. 95<span id="iv.ii.viii-p33.3"></span>;
Lib. de Corrept. et Gratia ad Valent.; in <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p33.4"></span>[Ps.
70](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.viii-p33.4"></span>
et 117; Item, Concio. 27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 8. - EXPOSITION OF THE MORAL LAW.](inst042)
