[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst010)  [Next](inst012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span>

# <span id="iii-p0.1"></span>GENERAL INDEX OF CHAPTERS.

### <span id="iii-p0.2"></span>BOOK FIRST.

<span id="iii-p1"></span>OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD THE CREATOR.

<span id="iii-p2"></span>Eighteen Chapters

<span id="iii-p3"></span>1. Connection between the Knowledge of God and
the Knowledge of Ourselves. Nature of the connection.

<span id="iii-p4"></span>2. What it is to Know God. Tendency of this
Knowledge.

<span id="iii-p5"></span>3. The Human Mind naturally imbued with the
Knowledge of God.

<span id="iii-p6"></span>4. This Knowledge stifled or corrupted,
ignorantly or maliciously.

<span id="iii-p7"></span>5. The Knowledge of God displayed in the fabric
and constant Government of the Universe.

<span id="iii-p8"></span>6. The need of Scripture as a Guide and Teacher
in coming to God as a Creator.

<span id="iii-p9"></span>7. The Testimony of the Spirit necessary to
give full authority to Scripture. The impiety of pretending that the
Credibility of Scripture depends on the Judgment of the Church.

<span id="iii-p10"></span>8. The Credibility of Scripture sufficiently
proved, in so far as Natural Reason admits.

<span id="iii-p11"></span>9. All the principles of piety subverted by
fanatics who substitute revelations for Scripture.

<span id="iii-p12"></span>10. In Scripture, the true God opposed,
exclusively, to all the gods of the Heathen.

<span id="iii-p13"></span>11. Impiety of attributing a visible form to
God. The setting up of Idols a revolt against the True God.

<span id="iii-p14"></span>12. God distinguished from Idols, that He may
be the exclusive object of Worship.

<span id="iii-p15"></span>13. The Unity of the Divine Essence in Three
Persons taught in Scripture, from the foundation of the World.

<span id="iii-p16"></span>14. In the Creation of the World, and all
things in it, the True God distinguished by certain marks from
fictitious gods.

<span id="iii-p17"></span>15. State in which man was created. The
Faculties of the Soul—The Image of God—Free Will—Original Righteousness.

<span id="iii-p18"></span>16. The World, created by God, still cherished
and protected by Him. Each and all of its parts governed by His
Providence.

<span id="iii-p19"></span>17. Use to be made of this Doctrine.

<span id="iii-p20"></span>18. The instrumentality of the wicked employed
by God, while He continues free from every taint.

### <span id="iii-p20.1"></span>BOOK SECOND

<span id="iii-p21"></span>OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD THE REDEEMER, IN
CHRIST,

<span id="iii-p22"></span>AS FIRST MANIFESTED TO THE FATHERS UNDER THE
LAW,

<span id="iii-p23"></span>AND THEREAFTER TO US UNDER THE GOSPEL

<span id="iii-p24"></span>Seventeen Chapters

<span id="iii-p25"></span>1. Through the Fall and revolt of Adam the
whole Human race made accursed and degenerate. Of Original Sin.

<span id="iii-p26"></span>2. Man now deprived of Freedom of Will, and
miserably enslaved.

<span id="iii-p27"></span>3. Every thing proceeding from the corrupt
Nature of Man damnable.

<span id="iii-p28"></span>4. How God works in the hearts of men.

<span id="iii-p29"></span>5. The Arguments usually alleged in support of
Free Will refuted.

<span id="iii-p30"></span>6. Redemption for lost man to be sought in
Christ.

<span id="iii-p31"></span>7. The Law given, not to retain a people for
itself, but to keep alive the Hope of Salvation in Christ until his
Advent.

<span id="iii-p32"></span>8. Exposition of the Moral Law.

<span id="iii-p33"></span>9. Christ, though known to the Jews under the
Law, yet only manifested under the Gospel.

<span id="iii-p34"></span>10. The resemblance between the Old Testament
and the New.

<span id="iii-p35"></span>11. The difference between the two Testaments.

<span id="iii-p36"></span>12. Christ, to perform the Office of Mediator,
behoved to become man.

<span id="iii-p37"></span>13. Christ clothed with the true substance of
Human Nature.

<span id="iii-p38"></span>14. How two natures constitute the Person of
the Mediator.

<span id="iii-p39"></span>15. Three things chiefly to be regarded in
Christ—viz. his Offices of Prophet, King, and Priest.

<span id="iii-p40"></span>16. How Christ performed the Office of
Redeemer in procuring our salvation. The Death, Resurrection, and
Ascension of Christ.

<span id="iii-p41"></span>17. Christ rightly and properly said to have
merited Grace and Salvation for us.

### <span id="iii-p41.1"></span>BOOK THIRD

<span id="iii-p42"></span>THE MODE OF OBTAINING THE GRACE OF CHRIST.

<span id="iii-p43"></span>THE BENEFITS IT CONFERS, AND THE EFFECTS
RESULTING FROM IT.

<span id="iii-p44"></span>Twenty-Five Chapters

<span id="iii-p45"></span>1. The Benefits of Christ made available to us
by the Secret Operation of the Spirit.

<span id="iii-p46"></span>2. Of Faith. The Definition of it. Its
peculiar properties.

<span id="iii-p47"></span>3. Regeneration by Faith. Of Repentance.

<span id="iii-p48"></span>4. Penitence, as explained in the sophistical
jargon of the Schoolmen, widely different from the purity required by
the Gospel. Of Confession and Satisfactions.

<span id="iii-p49"></span>5. Of the modes of Supplementing
Satisfactions—viz. Indulgences and Purgatory.

<span id="iii-p50"></span>6. The Life of a Christian Man. Scriptural
Arguments exhorting to it.

<span id="iii-p51"></span>7. A Summary of the Christian Life. Of
Self-Denial.

<span id="iii-p52"></span>8. Of Bearing the Cross—one branch of
Self-Denial.

<span id="iii-p53"></span>9. Of Meditating on the Future Life.

<span id="iii-p54"></span>10. How to use the Present Life, and the
comforts of it.

<span id="iii-p55"></span>11. Of Justification by Faith. Both the name
and the reality defined.

<span id="iii-p56"></span>12. Necessity of contemplating the
Judgment-seat of God, in order to be seriously convinced of the Doctrine
of Gratuitous Justification.

<span id="iii-p57"></span>13. Two things to be observed in Gratuitous
Justification.

<span id="iii-p58"></span>14. The beginning of Justification. In what
sense progressive.

<span id="iii-p59"></span>15. The boasted merit of Works subversive both
of the Glory of God, in bestowing Righteousness, and of the certainty of
Salvation.

<span id="iii-p60"></span>16. Refutation of the Calumnies by which it is
attempted to throw odium on this doctrine.

<span id="iii-p61"></span>17. The Promises of the Law and the Gospel
reconciled.

<span id="iii-p62"></span>18. The Righteousness of Works improperly
inferred from Rewards.

<span id="iii-p63"></span>19. Of Christian Liberty.

<span id="iii-p64"></span>20. Of Prayer—a perpetual exercise of Faith.
The daily benefits derived from it.

<span id="iii-p65"></span>21. Of the Eternal Election, by which God has
predestinated some to Salvation and others to Destruction.

<span id="iii-p66"></span>22. This Doctrine confirmed by Proofs from
Scripture.

<span id="iii-p67"></span>23. Refutation of the Calumnies by which this
Doctrine is always unjustly assailed.

<span id="iii-p68"></span>24. Election confirmed by the Calling of God.
The Reprobate bring upon themselves the righteous destruction to which
they are doomed.

<span id="iii-p69"></span>25. Of the Last Resurrection.

### <span id="iii-p69.1"></span>BOOK FOURTH

<span id="iii-p70"></span>OF THE EXTERNAL MEANS OR HELPS BY WHICH GOD
ALLURES US INTO

<span id="iii-p71"></span>FELLOWSHIP WITH CHRIST, AND KEEPS US IN IT.

<span id="iii-p72"></span>Twenty Chapters

<span id="iii-p73"></span>1. Of the True Church. Duty of cultivating
Unity with her, as the mother of all the godly.

<span id="iii-p74"></span>2. Comparison between the False Church and the
True.

<span id="iii-p75"></span>3. Of the Teachers and Ministers of the
Church. Their Election and Office.

<span id="iii-p76"></span>4. Of the State of the Primitive Church, and
the Mode of Government in use before the Papacy.

<span id="iii-p77"></span>5. The Ancient Form of Government utterly
corrupted by the tyranny of the Papacy.

<span id="iii-p78"></span>6. Of the Primacy of the Romish See.

<span id="iii-p79"></span>7. Of the Beginning and Rise of the Romish
Papacy, till it attained a height by which the Liberty of the Church was
destroyed, and all true Rule overthrown.

<span id="iii-p80"></span>8. Of the Power of the Church in Articles of
Faith. The unbridled license of the Papal Church in destroying Purity of
Doctrine.

<span id="iii-p81"></span>9. Of Councils and their Authority.

<span id="iii-p82"></span>10. Of the Power of making Laws. The cruelty
of the Pope and his adherents, in this respect, in tyrannically
oppressing and destroying Souls.

<span id="iii-p83"></span>11. Of the Jurisdiction of the Church and the
Abuses of it, as exemplified in the Papacy.

<span id="iii-p84"></span>12. Of the Discipline of the Church, and its
principal use in Censures and Excommunication.

<span id="iii-p85"></span>13. Of Vows. The miserable entanglements
caused by Vowing rashly.

<span id="iii-p86"></span>14. Of the Sacraments.

<span id="iii-p87"></span>15. Of Baptism.

<span id="iii-p88"></span>16. Paedobaptism. Its accordance with the
Institution of Christ, and the nature of the sign.

<span id="iii-p89"></span>17. Of the Lord’s Supper, and the benefits
conferred by it.

<span id="iii-p90"></span>18. Of the Popish Mass. How it not only
profanes, but annihilates the Lord’s Supper.

<span id="iii-p91"></span>19. Of the Five Sacraments, falsely so called.
Their spuriousness proved, and their true character explained.

<span id="iii-p92"></span>20. Of Civil Government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: INSTITUTES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION](inst012)
