[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst094)  [Next](inst096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.xvi"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.xvi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 15.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p1"></span>OF BAPTISM.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p2"></span>There are two parts of this chapter,—I.
Dissertation on the two ends of Baptism, sec. 1-13. II. The second part
may be reduced to four heads. Of the use of Baptism, sec. 14, 15. Of the
worthiness or unworthiness of the minister, sec. 16-18. Of the
corruptions by which this sacrament was polluted, sec. 19. To whom
reference is had in the dispensation, sec. 20-22.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p4"></span>1. Baptism defined. Its primary object.
This consists of three things. 1. To attest the forgiveness of sins.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p5"></span>2. Passages of Scripture proving the
forgiveness of sins.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p6"></span>3. Forgiveness not only of past but also
of future sins. This no encouragement to license in sin.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p7"></span>4 Refutation of those who share
forgiveness between Baptism and Repentance.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p8"></span>5 Second thing in Baptism—viz. to teach
that we are ingrafted into Christ for mortification and newness of life.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p9"></span>6. Third thing in Baptism—viz. to teach
us that we are united to Christ so as to be partakers of all his
blessings. Second and third things conspicuous in the baptism both of
John and the apostles.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p10"></span>7. Identity of the baptism of John and
the apostles.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p11"></span>8. An objection to this refuted.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p12"></span>9. The benefits of baptism typified to
the Israelites by the passage of the Red Sea and the pillar of cloud.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p13"></span>10. Objection of those who imagine that
there is some kind of perfect renovation after baptism. Original
depravity remains after baptism. Its existence in infants. The elect
after baptism are righteous in this life only by imputation.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p14"></span>11. Original corruption trying to the
pious during the whole course of their lives. They do not, on this
account, seek a licence for sin. They rather walk more cautiously and
safely in the ways of the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p15"></span>12. The trouble occasioned by
corruption, shown by the example and testimony of the Apostle Paul.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p16"></span>13. Another end of baptism is to serve
as our confession to men.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p17"></span>14. Second part of the chapter. Of
baptism as a confirmation of our faith.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p18"></span>15. This illustrated by the examples of
Cornelius and Paul. Of the use of baptism as a confession of faith.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p19"></span>16. Baptism not affected by the
worthiness or unworthiness of the minister. Hence no necessity to
rebaptise those who were baptised under the Papacy.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p20"></span>17. Nothing in the argument that those
so baptised remained some years blind and unbelieving. The promise of
God remains firm. God, in inviting the Jews to repentance, does not
enjoin them to be again circumcised.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p21"></span>18. No ground to allege that Paul
rebaptised certain of John’s disciples. The baptism of John. What it is
to be baptised in the name of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p22"></span>19. The corruptions introduced into
baptism. The form of pure Christian baptism. Immersion or sprinkling
should be left free.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p23"></span>20. To whom the dispensation of baptism
belongs. Not to private individuals or women, but to the ministers of
the Church. Origin of the baptism of private individuals and women. An
argument in favour of it refuted.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p24"></span>21. Exploded also by Tertullian and
Epiphanius.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p25"></span>22. Objection founded on the case of
Zipporah. Answer. Children dying before baptism not excluded from
heaven, provided the want of it was not caused by negligence or
contempt.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p26"></span>1. Baptism is the initiatory sign by
which we are admitted to the fellowship of the Church, that being
ingrafted into Christ we may be accounted children of God. Moreover, the
end for which God has given it (this I have shown to be common to all
mysteries) is, first, that it may be conducive to our faith in him; and,
secondly, that it may serve the purpose of a confession among men. The
nature of both institutions we shall explain in order. Baptism
contributes to our faith three things, which require to be treated
separately. The first object, therefore, for which it is appointed by
the Lord, is to be a sign and evidence of our purification, or (better
to explain my meaning) it is a kind of sealed instrument by which he
assures us that all our sins are so deleted, covered, and effaced, that
they will never come into his sight, never be mentioned, never imputed.
For it is his will that all who have believed, be baptised for the
remission of sins. Hence those who have thought that baptism is nothing
else than the badge and mark by which we profess our religion before
men, in the same way as soldiers attest their profession by bearing the
insignia of their commander, having not attended to what was the
principal thing in baptism; and this is, that we are to receive it in
connection with the promise, “He that believeth and is baptised shall be
saved” (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p26.1"></span>[Mark
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p26.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p27"></span>2. In this sense is to be understood the
statement of Paul, that “Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by
the word” (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p27.1"></span>[Eph.
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p27.1"></span>); and again, “not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the
washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost” (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p27.2"></span>[Titus
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p27.2"></span>). Peter also says that “baptism also doth
now save us” (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p27.3"></span>[1 Peter
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p27.3"></span>). For he did not mean to intimate that our
ablution and salvation are perfected by water, or that water possesses
in itself the virtue of purifying, regenerating, and renewing; nor does
he mean that it is the cause of salvation, but only that the knowledge
and certainty of such gifts are perceived in this sacrament. This the
words themselves evidently show. For Paul connects together the word of
life and baptism of water, as if he had said, by the gospel the message
of our ablution and sanctification is announced; by baptism this message
is sealed. And Peter immediately subjoins, that that baptism is “not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good
conscience toward God, which is of faith.” Nay, the only purification
which baptism promises is by means of the sprinkling of the blood of
Christ, who is figured by water from the resemblance to cleansing and
washing. Who, then, can say that we are cleansed by that water which
certainly attests that the blood of Christ is our true and only laver?
So that we cannot have a better argument to refute the hallucination of
those who ascribe the whole to the virtue of water than we derive from
the very meaning of baptism, which leads us away as well from the
visible element which is presented to our eye, as from all other means,
that it may fix our minds on Christ alone.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p28"></span>3. Nor is it to be supposed that baptism
is bestowed only with reference to the past, so that, in regard to new
lapses into which we fall after baptism, we must seek new remedies of
expiation in other so-called sacraments, just as if the power of baptism
had become obsolete. To this error, in ancient times, it was owing that
some refused to be initiated by baptism until their life was in extreme
danger, and they were drawing their last breath, that they might thus
obtain pardon for all the past. Against this preposterous precaution
ancient bishops frequently inveigh in their writings. We ought to
consider that at whatever time we are baptised, we are washed and
purified once for the whole of life. Wherefore, as often as we fall, we
must recall the remembrance of our baptism, and thus fortify our minds,
so as to feel certain and secure of the remission of sins. For though,
when once administered, it seems to have passed, it is not abolished by
subsequent sins. For the purity of Christ was therein offered to us,
always is in force, and is not destroyed by any stain: it wipes and
washes away all our defilements. Nor must we hence assume a licence of
sinning for the future (there is certainly nothing in it to countenance
such audacity), but this doctrine is intended only for those who, when
they have sinned, groan under their sins burdened and oppressed, that
they may have wherewith to support and console themselves, and not rush
headlong into despair. Thus Paul says that Christ was made a
propitiation for us for the remission of sins that are past (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p28.1"></span>[Rom.
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p28.1"></span>). By this he denies not that constant and
perpetual forgiveness of sins is thereby obtained even till death: he
only intimates that it is designed by the Father for those poor sinners
who, wounded by remorse of conscience, sigh for the physician. To these
the mercy of God is offered. Those who, from hopes of impunity, seek a
licence for sin, only provoke the wrath and justice of God.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p29"></span>4. I know it is a common belief that
forgiveness, which at our first regeneration we receive by baptism
alone, is after baptism procured by means of penitence and the keys (see
chap. 19 sec. 17). But those who entertain this fiction err from not
considering that the power of the keys, of which they speak, so depends
on baptism, that it ought not on any account to be separated from it.
The sinner receives forgiveness by the ministry of the Church; in other
words, not without the preaching of the gospel. And of what nature is
this preaching? That we are washed from our sins by the blood of Christ.
And what is the sign and evidence of that washing if it be not baptism?
We see, then, that that forgiveness has reference to baptism. This error
had its origin in the fictitious sacrament of penance, on which I have
already touched. What remains will be said at the proper place. There is
no wonder if men who, from the grossness of their minds, are excessively
attached to external things, have here also betrayed the defect,—if not
contented with the pure institution of God, they have introduced new
helps devised by themselves, as if baptism were not itself a sacrament
of penance. But if repentance is recommended during the whole of life,
the power of baptism ought to have the same extent. Wherefore, there can
be no doubt that all the godly may, during the whole course of their
lives, whenever they are vexed by a consciousness of their sins, recall
the remembrance of their baptism, that they may thereby assure
themselves of that sole and perpetual ablution which we have in the
blood of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p30"></span>5. Another benefit of baptism is, that
it shows us our mortification in Christ and new life in him. “Know ye
not,” says the apostle, “that as many of us as were baptised into Jesus
Christ, were baptised into his death? Therefore we are buried with him
by baptism into death,” that we “should walk in newness of life” (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p30.1"></span>[Rom. 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p30.1"></span>).
By these words, he not only exhorts us to imitation of Christ, as if he
had said, that we are admonished by baptism, in like manner as Christ
died, to die to our lusts, and as he rose, to rise to righteousness; but
he traces the matter much higher, that Christ by baptism has made us
partakers of his death, ingrafting us into it. And as the twig derives
substance and nourishment from the root to which it is attached, so
those who receive baptism with true faith truly feel the efficacy of
Christ’s death in the mortification of their flesh, and the efficacy of
his resurrection in the quickening of the Spirit. On this he founds his
exhortation, that if we are Christians we should be dead unto sin, and
alive unto righteousness. He elsewhere uses the same argument—viz. that
we are circumcised, and put off the old man, after we are buried in
Christ by baptism (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p30.2"></span>[Col.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p30.2"></span>). And in this sense, in the passage which
we formerly quoted, he calls it “the washing of regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost” (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p30.3"></span>[Tit.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p30.3"></span>). We are promised, first, the free pardon
of sins and imputation of righteousness; and, secondly, the grace of the
Holy Spirit, to form us again to newness of life.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p31"></span>6. The last advantage which our faith
receives from baptism is its assuring us not only that we are ingrafted
into the death and life of Christ, but so united to Christ himself as to
be partakers of all his blessings. For he consecrated and sanctified
baptism in his own body, that he might have it in common with us as the
firmest bond of union and fellowship which he deigned to form with us;
and hence Paul proves us to be the sons of God, from the fact that we
put on Christ in baptism (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p31.1"></span>[Gal.
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p31.1"></span>). Thus we see the fulfilment of our baptism
in Christ, whom for this reason we call the proper object of baptism.
Hence it is not strange that the apostles are said to have baptised in
the name of Christ, though they were enjoined to baptise in the name of
the Father and Spirit also (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p31.2"></span>[Acts
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p31.2"></span>; 19:5; <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p31.3"></span>[Mt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p31.3"></span>). For all the divine gifts held forth in
baptism are found in Christ alone. And yet he who baptises into Christ
cannot but at the same time invoke the name of the Father and the
Spirit. For we are cleansed by his blood, just because our gracious
Father, of his incomparable mercy, willing to receive us into favour,
appointed him Mediator to effect our reconciliation with himself.
Regeneration we obtain from his death and resurrection only, when
sanctified by his Spirit we are imbued with a new and spiritual nature.
Wherefore we obtain, and in a manner distinctly perceive, in the Father
the cause, in the Son the matter, and in the Spirit the effect of our
purification and regeneration. Thus first John baptised, and thus
afterwards the apostles by the baptism of repentance for the remission
of sins, understanding by the term *repentance*, regeneration, and by
the *remission* of sins, ablution.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p32"></span>7. This makes it perfectly certain that
the ministry of John was the very same as that which was afterwards
delegated to the apostles. For the different hands by which baptism is
administered do not make it a different baptism, but sameness of
doctrine proves it to be the same. John and the apostles agreed in one
doctrine. Both baptised unto repentance, both for remission of sins,
both in the name of Christ, from whom repentance and remission of sins
proceed. John pointed to him as the Lamb of God who taketh away the sins
of the world (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.1"></span>[John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.1"></span>), thus describing him as the victim
accepted of the Father, the propitiation of righteousness, and the
author of salvation. What could the apostles add to this confession?
Wherefore, let no one be perplexed because ancient writers labour to
distinguish the one from the other. Their views ought not to be in such
esteem with us as to shake the certainty of Scripture. For who would
listen to Chrysostom denying that remission of sins was included in the
baptism of John (Hom. in <span id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.2"></span>[Mt.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.2"></span>), rather than to Luke asserting, on the
contrary, that John preached “the baptism of repentance for the
remission of sins?” (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.3"></span>[Luke
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.3"></span>). Nor can we admit Augustine’s subtlety,
that by the baptism of John sins were forgiven in hope, but by the
baptism of Christ are forgiven in reality. For seeing the Evangelist
clearly declares that John in his baptism promised the remission of
sins, why detract from this eulogium when no necessity compels it?
Should any one ask what difference the word of God makes, he will find
it to be nothing more than that John baptised in the name of him who was
to come, the apostles in the name of him who was already manifested
(<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.4"></span>[Luke
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.5"></span>[Acts
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p32.5"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p33"></span>8. This fact, that the gifts of the
Spirit were more liberally poured out after the resurrection of Christ,
does not go to establish a diversity of baptisms. For baptism,
administered by the apostles while he was still on the earth, was called
his baptism, and yet the Spirit was not poured out in larger abundance
on it than on the baptism of John. Nay, not even after the ascension did
the Samaritans receive the Spirit above the ordinary measure of former
believers, till Peter and John were sent to lay hands on them (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p33.1"></span>[Acts
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p33.1"></span>). I imagine that the thing which imposed on
ancient writers, and made them say that the one baptism was only a
preparative to the other, was, because they read that those who had
received the baptism of John were again baptised by Paul (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p33.2"></span>[Acts
19:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p33.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.xvi-p33.3"></span>[Mt.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p33.3"></span>). How greatly they are mistaken in this
will be most clearly explained in its own place. Why, then, did John say
that he baptised with water, but there was one coming who would baptise
with the Holy Ghost and with fire? This may be explained in a few words.
He did not mean to distinguish the one baptism from the other, but he
contrasted his own person with the person of Christ, saying, that while
he was a minister of water, Christ was the giver of the Holy Spirit, and
would declare this virtue by a visible miracle on the day on which he
would send the Holy Spirit on the apostles, under the form of tongues of
fire. What greater boast could the apostles make, and what greater those
who baptise in the present day? For they are only ministers of the
external sign, whereas Christ is the Author of internal grace, as those
same ancient writers uniformly teach, and, in particular, Augustine,
who, in his refutation of the Donatists, founds chiefly on this axiom,
Whoever it is that baptises, Christ alone presides.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p34"></span>9. The things which we have said, both
of mortification and ablution, were adumbrated among the people of
Israel, who, for that reason, are described by the apostle as having
been baptised in the cloud and in the sea (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p34.1"></span>[1 Cor.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p34.1"></span>). Mortification was figured when the Lord,
vindicating them from the hand of Pharaoh and from cruel bondage, paved
a way for them through the Red Sea, and drowned Pharaoh himself and
their Egyptian foes, who were pressing close behind, and threatening
them with destruction. For in this way also he promises us in baptism,
and shows by a given sign that we are led by his might, and delivered
from the captivity of Egypt, that is, from the bondage of sin, that our
Pharaoh is drowned; in other words, the devil, although he ceases not to
try and harass us. But as that Egyptian was not plunged into the depth
of the sea, but cast out upon the shore, still alarmed the Israelites by
the terror of his look, though he could not hurt them, so our enemy
still threatens, shows his arms and is felt, but cannot conquer. The
cloud was a symbol of purification (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p34.2"></span>[Num.
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p34.2"></span>). For as the Lord then covered them by an
opposite cloud, and kept them cool, that they might not faint or pine
away under the burning rays of the sun; so in baptism we perceive that
we are covered and protected by the blood of Christ, lest the wrath of
God, which is truly an intolerable flame, should lie upon us. Although
the mystery was then obscure, and known to few, yet as there is no other
method of obtaining salvation than in those two graces, God was pleased
that the ancient fathers, whom he had adopted as heirs, should be
furnished with both badges.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p35"></span>10. It is now clear how false the
doctrine is which some long ago taught, and others still persist in,
that by baptism we are exempted and set free from original sin, and from
the corruption which was propagated by Adam to all his posterity, and
that we are restored to the same righteousness and purity of nature
which Adam would have had if he had maintained the integrity in which he
was created. This class of teachers never understand what is meant by
original sin, original righteousness, or the grace of baptism. Now, it
has been previously shown (Book 2 chap. 1 sec. 8), that original sin is
the depravity and corruption of our nature, which first makes us liable
to the wrath of God, and then produces in us works which Scripture terms
*the works of the flesh* (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p35.1"></span>[Gal.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p35.1"></span>). The two things, therefore, must be
distinctly observed—viz. that we are vitiated and perverted in all parts
of our nature, and then, on account of this corruption, are justly held
to be condemned and convicted before God, to whom nothing is acceptable
but purity, innocence, and righteousness. And hence, even infants bring
their condemnation with them from their mother’s womb; for although they
have not yet brought forth the fruits of their unrighteousness, they
have its seed included in them. Nay, their whole nature is, as it were,
a seed of sin, and, therefore, cannot but be odious and abominable to
God. Believers become assured by baptism, that this condemnation is
entirely withdrawn from them, since (as has been said) the Lord by this
sign promises that a full and entire remission has been made, both of
the guilt which was imputed to us, and the penalty incurred by the
guilt. They also apprehend righteousness, but such righteousness as the
people of God can obtain in this life—viz. by imputation only, God, in
his mercy, regarding them as righteous and innocent.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p36"></span>11. Another point is, that this
corruption never ceases in us, but constantly produces new fruits—viz.
those works of the flesh which we previously described, just as a
burning furnace perpetually sends forth flame and sparks, or a fountain
is ever pouring out water. For concupiscence never wholly dies or is
extinguished in men, until, freed by death from the body of death, they
have altogether laid aside their own nature (Book 3 chap. 3 sec. 10-13).
Baptism, indeed, tells us that our Pharaoh is drowned and sin mortified;
not so, however, as no longer to exist, or give no trouble, but only so
as not to have dominion. For as long as we live shut up in this prison
of the body, the remains of sin dwell in us, but if we faithfully hold
the promise which God has given us in baptism, they will neither rule
nor reign. But let no man deceive himself, let no man look complacently
on his disease, when he hears that sin always dwells in us. When we say
so, it is not in order that those who are otherwise too prone to sin may
sleep securely in their sins, but only that those who are tried and
stung by the flesh may not faint and despond. Let them rather reflect
that they are still on the way, and think that they have made great
progress when they feel that their concupiscence is somewhat diminished
from day to day, until they shall have reached the point at which they
aim—viz. the final death of the flesh; a death which shall be completed
at the termination of this mortal life. Meanwhile, let them cease not to
contend strenuously, and animate themselves to further progress, and
press on to complete victory. Their efforts should be stimulated by the
consideration, that after a lengthened struggle much still remains to be
done. We ought to hold that we are baptised for the mortification of our
flesh, which is begun in baptism, is prosecuted every day, and will be
finished when we depart from this life to go to the Lord.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p37"></span>12. Here we say nothing more than the
apostle Paul expounds most clearly in the sixth and seventh chapters of
the Epistle to the Romans. He had discoursed of free justification, but
as some wicked men thence inferred that they were to live as they
listed, because their acceptance with God was not procured by the merit
of works, he adds, that all who are clothed with the righteousness of
Christ are at the same time regenerated by the Spirit, and that we have
an earnest of this regeneration in baptism. Hence he exhorts believers
not to allow sin to reign in their members. And because he knew that
there is always some infirmity in believers, lest they should be cast
down on this account, he adds, for their consolation, that they are not
under the law. Again, as there may seem a danger that Christians might
grow presumptuous because they were not under the yoke of the law, he
shows what the nature of the abrogation is, and at the same time what
the use of the law is. This question he had already postponed a second
time. The substance is, that we are freed from the rigour of the law in
order that we may adhere to Christ, and that the office of the law is to
convince us of our depravity, and make us confess our impotence and
wretchedness. Moreover, as this malignity of nature is not so easily
apparent in a profane man who, without fear of God, indulges his
passions, he gives an example in the regenerate man, in other words, in
himself. He therefore says that he had a constant struggle with the
remains of his flesh, and was kept in miserable bondage, so as to be
unable to devote himself entirely to the obedience of the divine law.
Hence he is forced to groan and exclaim, “O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?” (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p37.1"></span>[Rom.
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p37.1"></span>). But if the children of God are kept
captive in prison as long as they live, they must necessarily feel very
anxious at the thought of their danger, unless their fears are allayed.
For this single purpose, then, he subjoins the consolation, that there
is “now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus” (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p37.2"></span>[Rom.
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p37.2"></span>). Hence he teaches that those whom the Lord
has once admitted into favour, and ingrafted into communion with Christ,
and received into the fellowship of the Church by baptism, are freed
from guilt and condemnation while they persevere in the faith of Christ,
though they may be beset by sin and thus bear sin about with them. If
this is the simple and genuine interpretation of Paul’s meaning, we
cannot think that there is anything strange in the doctrine which he
here delivers.59  <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617)

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p39"></span>13. Baptism serves as our confession
before men, inasmuch as it is a mark by which we openly declare that we
wish to be ranked among the people of God, by which we testify that we
concur with all Christians in the worship of one God, and in one
religion; by which, in short, we publicly assert our faith, so that not
only do our hearts breathe, but our tongues also, and all the members of
our body, in every way they can, proclaim the praise of God. In this
way, as is meet, everything we have is made subservient to the glory of
God, which ought everywhere to be displayed, and others are stimulated
by our example to the same course. To this Paul referred when he asked
the Corinthians whether or not they had been baptised in the name of
Christ (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p39.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p39.1"></span>); intimating, that by the very circumstance
of having been baptised in his name, they had devoted themselves to him,
had sworn and bound themselves in allegiance to him before men, so that
they could no longer confess any other than Christ alone, unless they
would abjure the confession which they had made in baptism.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p40"></span>14. Now that the end to which the Lord
had regard in the institution of baptism has been explained, it is easy
to judge in what way we ought to use and receive it. For inasmuch as it
is appointed to elevate, nourish, and confirm our faith, we are to
receive it as from the hand of its author, being firmly persuaded that
it is himself who speaks to us by means of the sign; that it is himself
who washes and purifies us, and effaces the remembrance of our faults;
that it is himself who makes us the partakers of his death, destroys the
kingdom of Satan, subdues the power of concupiscence, nay, makes us one
with himself, that being clothed with him we may be accounted the
children of God. These things, I say, we ought to feel as truly and
certainly in our mind as we see our body washed, immersed, and
surrounded with water. For this analogy or similitude furnishes the
surest rule in the sacraments—viz. that in corporeal things we are to
see spiritual, just as if they were actually exhibited to our eye, since
the Lord has been pleased to represent them by such figures; not that
such graces are included and bound in the sacrament, so as to be
conferred by its efficacy, but only that by this badge the Lord declares
to us that he is pleased to bestow all these things upon us. Nor does he
merely feed our eyes with bare show; he leads us to the actual object,
and effectually performs what he figures.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p41"></span>15. We have a proof of this in Cornelius
the centurion, who, after he had been previously endued with the graces
of the Holy Spirit, was baptised for the remission of sins, not seeking
a fuller forgiveness from baptism, but a surer exercise of faith; nay,
an argument for assurance from a pledge. It will, perhaps, be objected,
Why did Ananias say to Paul that he washed away his sins by baptism
(<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p41.1"></span>[Acts
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p41.1"></span>), if sins are not washed away by the power
of baptism? I answer, we are said to receive, procure, and obtain,
whatever according to the perception of our faith is exhibited to us by
the Lord, whether he then attests it for the first time, or gives
additional confirmation to what he had previously attested. All then
that Ananias meant to say was, Be baptised, Paul, that you may be
assured that your sins are forgiven you. In baptism, the Lord promises
forgiveness of sins: receive it, and be secure. I have no intention,
however, to detract from the power of baptism. I would only add to the
sign the substance and reality, inasmuch as God works by external means.
But from this sacrament, as from all others, we gain nothing, unless in
so far as we receive in faith. If faith is wanting, it will be an
evidence of our ingratitude, by which we are proved guilty before God,
for not believing the promise there given. In so far as it is a sign of
our confession, we ought thereby to testify that we confide in the mercy
of God, and are pure, through the forgiveness of sins which Christ Jesus
has procured for us; that we have entered into the Church of God, that
with one consent of faith and love we may live in concord with all
believers. This last was Paul’s meaning, when he said that “by one
Spirit are we all baptised into one body” (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p41.2"></span>[1 Cor.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p41.2"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p42"></span>16. Moreover, if we have rightly
determined that a sacrament is not to be estimated by the hand of him by
whom it is administered, but is to be received as from the hand of God
himself, from whom it undoubtedly proceeded, we may hence infer that its
dignity neither gains nor loses by the administrator. And, just as among
men, when a letter has been sent, if the hand and seal is recognised, it
is not of the least consequence who or what the messenger was; so it
ought to be sufficient for us to recognise the hand and seal of our Lord
in his sacraments, let the administrator be who he may. This confutes
the error of the Donatists, who measured the efficacy and worth of the
sacrament by the dignity of the minister. Such in the present day are
our Catabaptists, who deny that we are duly baptised, because we were
baptised in the Papacy by wicked men and idolaters; hence they furiously
insist on anabaptism. Against these absurdities we shall be sufficiently
fortified if we reflect that by baptism we were initiated not into the
name of any man, but into the name of the Father, and the Son, and the
Holy Spirit; and, therefore, that baptism is not of man, but of God, by
whomsoever it may have been administered. Be it that those who baptised
us were most ignorant of God and all piety, or were despisers, still
they did not baptise us into a fellowship with their ignorance or
sacrilege, but into the faith of Jesus Christ, because the name which
they invoked was not their own but God’s, nor did they baptise into any
other name. But if baptism was of God, it certainly included in it the
promise of forgiveness of sin, mortification of the flesh, quickening of
the Spirit, and communion with Christ. Thus it did not harm the Jews
that they were circumcised by impure and apostate priests. It did not
nullify the symbol so as to make it necessary to repeat it. It was
enough to return to its genuine origin. The objection that baptism ought
to be celebrated in the assembly of the godly, does not prove that it
loses its whole efficacy because it is partly defective. When we show
what ought to be done to keep baptism pure and free from every taint, we
do not abolish the institution of God though idolaters may corrupt it.
Circumcision was anciently vitiated by many superstitions, and yet
ceased not to be regarded as a symbol of grace; nor did Josiah and
Hezekiah, when they assembled out of all Israel those who had revolted
from God, call them to be circumcised anew.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p43"></span>17. Then, again, when they ask us what
faith for several years followed our baptism, that they may thereby
prove that our baptism was in vain, since it is not sanctified unless
the word of the promise is received with faith, our answer is, that
being blind and unbelieving, we for a long time did not hold the promise
which was given us in baptism, but that still the promise, as it was of
God, always remained fixed, and firm, and true. Although all men should
be false and perfidious, yet God ceases not to be true (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p43.1"></span>[Rom. 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p43.1"></span>);
though all were lost, Christ remains safe. We acknowledge, therefore,
that at that time baptism profited us nothing, since in us the offered
promise, without which baptism is nothing, lay neglected. Now, when by
the grace of God we begin to repent, we accuse our blindness and
hardness of heart in having been so long ungrateful for his great
goodness. But we do not believe that the promise itself has vanished, we
rather reflect thus: God in baptism promises the remission of sins, and
will undoubtedly perform what he has promised to all believers. That
promise was offered to us in baptism, let us therefore embrace it in
faith. In regard to us, indeed, it was long buried on account of
unbelief; now, therefore, let us with faith receive it. Wherefore, when
the Lord invites the Jewish people to repentance, he gives no injunction
concerning another circumcision, though (as we have said) they were
circumcised by a wicked and sacrilegious hand, and had long lived in the
same impiety. All he urges is conversion of heart. For how much soever
the covenant might have been violated by them, the symbol of the
covenant always remained, according to the appointment of the Lord, firm
and inviolable. Solely, therefore, on the condition of repentance, were
they restored to the covenant which God had once made with them in
circumcision, though this which they had received at the hand of a
covenant-breaking priest, they had themselves as much as in them lay
polluted and extinguished.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p44"></span>18. But they seem to think the weapon
which they brandish irresistible, when they allege that Paul rebaptised
those who had been baptised with the baptism of John (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p44.1"></span>[Acts
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#003),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p44.1"></span>).
For if, by our confession, the baptism of John was the same as ours,
then, in like manner as those who had been improperly trained, when they
learned the true faith, were rebaptised into it, ought that baptism
which was without true doctrine to be accounted as nothing, and hence we
ought to be baptised anew into the true religion with which we are now,
for the first time, imbued? It seems to some that it was a foolish
imitator of John, who, by a former baptism, had initiated them into vain
superstition. This, it is thought, may be conjectured from the fact,
that they acknowledge their entire ignorance of the Holy Spirit, an
ignorance in which John never would have left his disciples. But it is
not probable that the Jews, even though they had not been baptised at
all, would have been destitute of all knowledge of the Spirit, who is
celebrated in so many passages of Scripture. Their answer, therefore,
that they knew not whether there was a Spirit, must be understood as if
they had said, that they had not yet heard whether or not the gifts of
the Spirit, as to which Paul questioned them, were given to the
disciples of Christ. I grant that John’s was a true baptism, and one and
the same with the baptism of Christ. But I deny that they were
rebaptised (see Calv. Instruct. adv. Anabapt.). What then is meant by
the words, “They were baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus”? Some
interpret that they were only instructed in sound doctrine by Paul; but
I would rather interpret more simply, that the baptism of the Holy
Spirit, in other words, the visible gifts of the Holy Spirit, were given
by the laying on of hands. These are sometimes designated under the name
of baptism. Thus, on the day of Pentecost, the apostles are said to have
remembered the words of the Lord concerning the baptism of the Spirit
and of fire. And Peter relates that the same words occurred to him when
he saw these gifts poured out on Cornelius and his family and kindred.
There is nothing repugnant to this interpretation in its being
afterwards added, “When Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy
Ghost came on them” (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p44.2"></span>[Acts
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p44.2"></span>). For Luke does not narrate two different
things, but follows the form of narrative common to the Hebrews, who
first give the substance, and then explain more fully. This any one may
perceive from the mere context. For he says, “When they heard this they
were baptised in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul laid his
hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them.” In this last sentence is
described what the nature of the baptism was. But if ignorance vitiates
a former, and requires to be corrected by a second baptism, the apostles
should first of all have been rebaptised, since for more than three full
years after their baptism they had scarcely received any slender portion
of purer doctrine. Then so numerous being the acts of ignorance which by
the mercy of God are daily corrected in us, what rivers would suffice
for so many repeated baptisms?

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p45"></span>19. The force, dignity, utility, and end
of the sacrament must now, if I mistake not, be sufficiently clear. In
regard to the external symbol, I wish the genuine institution of Christ
had been maintained as fit to repress the audacity of men. As if to be
baptised with water, according to the precept of Christ, had been a
contemptible thing, a benedicion, or rather incantation, was devised to
pollute the true consecration of water. There was afterwards added the
taper and chrism, while exorcism59  <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618) was thought to open the door for
baptism. Though I am not unaware how ancient the origin of this
adventitious farrago is, still it is lawful for me and all the godly to
reject whatever men have presumed to add to the institution of Christ.
When Satan saw that by the foolish credulity of the world his impostures
were received almost without objection at the commencement of the
gospel, he proceeded to grosser mockery: hence spittle and other
follies, to the open disgrace of baptism, were introduced with unbridled
licence.60  <span id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) From our experience
of them, let us learn that there is nothing holier, or better, or safer,
than to be contented with the authority of Christ alone. How much
better, therefore, is it to lay aside all theatrical pomp, which dazzles
the eyes of the simple, and dulls their minds, and when any one is to be
baptised to bring him forward and present him to God, the whole Church
looking on as witnesses, and praying over him; to recite the Confession
of Faith, in which the catechumen has been instructed, explain the
promises which are given in baptism, then baptise in the name of the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and conclude with prayer and
thanksgiving. In this way, nothing which is appropriate would be
omitted, and the one ceremony, which proceeded from its divine Author,
would shine forth most brightly, not being buried or polluted by
extraneous observances. Whether the person baptised is to be wholly
immersed, and that whether once or thrice, or whether he is only to be
sprinkled with water, is not of the least consequence: churches should
be at liberty to adopt either, according to the diversity of climates,
although it is evident that the term *baptise* means to immerse, and
that this was the form used by the primitive Church.60  <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620)  <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621)

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p50"></span>20. It is here also pertinent to
observe, that it is improper for private individuals to take upon
themselves the administration of baptism; for it, as well as the
dispensation of the Supper, is part of the ministerial office. For
Christ did not give command to any men or women whatever to baptise, but
to those whom he had appointed apostles. And when, in the administration
of the Supper, he ordered his disciples to do what they had seen him do
(he having done the part of a legitimate dispenser), he doubtless meant
that in this they should imitate his example. The practice which has
been in use for many ages, and even almost from the very commencement of
the Church, for laics to baptise, in danger of death, when a minister
could not be present in time, cannot, it appears to me, be defended on
sufficient grounds. Even the early Christians who observed or tolerated
this practice were not clear whether it were rightly done. This doubt is
expressed by Augustine when he says, “Although a laic have given baptism
when compelled by necessity, I know not whether any one can piously say
that it ought to be repeated. For if it is done without any necessity
compelling it, it is usurpation of another’s office; but if necessity
urges, it is either no fault, or a venial one” (August. Cont. Epist.
Parmen. Lib. 2 c. 13). With regard to women, it was decreed, without
exception, in the Council of Carthage (cap. 100), that they were not to
presume to baptise at all. But there is a danger that he who is sick may
be deprived of the gift of regeneration if he decease without baptism!
By no means. Our children, before they are born, God declares that he
adopts for his own when he promises that he will be a God to us, and to
our seed after us. In this promise their salvation is included. None
will dare to offer such an insult to God as to deny that he is able to
give effect to his promise. How much evil has been caused by the dogma,
ill expounded, that baptism is necessary to salvation, few perceive, and
therefore think caution the less necessary. For when the opinion
prevails that all are lost who happen not to be dipped in water, our
condition becomes worse than that of God’s ancient people, as if his
grace were more restrained than under the Law. In that case, Christ will
be thought to have come not to fulfil, but to abolish the promises,
since the promise, which was then effectual in itself to confer
salvation before the eighth day, would not now be effectual without the
help of a sign.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p51"></span>21. What the custom was before
Augustine’s day is gathered, first, from Tertullian, who says, that a
woman is not permitted to speak in the Church, nor yet to teach, or
baptise, or offer, that she may not claim to herself any office of the
man, not to say of the priest (Tertull. Cont. Hæres. Lib. 1). Of the
same thing we have a sufficient witness in Epiphanius, when he upbraids
Marcian with giving permission to women to baptise. I am not unaware of
the answer given by those who take an opposite view—viz. that common use
is very different from an extraordinary remedy used under the pressure
of extreme necessity—but since he declares it mockery to allow women to
baptise, and makes no exception, it is sufficiently plain that the
corruption is condemned as inexcusable on any pretext. In his Third
Book, also, when he says that it was not even permitted to the holy
mother of Christ, he makes no reservation.

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p52"></span>22. The example of Zipporah (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p52.1"></span>[Exod.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p52.1"></span>) is irrelevantly quoted. Because the angel
of God was appeased after she took a stone and circumcised her son, it
is erroneously inferred that her act was approved by God. Were it so, we
must say that God was pleased with a worship which Gentiles brought from
Assyria, and set up in Samaria.60  <span
id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622) But other valid reasons prove, that
what a foolish woman did is ignorantly drawn into a precedent. Were I to
say that there was something special in the case, making it unfit for a
precedent—and especially as we nowhere read that the command to
circumcise was specially given to priests, the cases of baptism and
circumcision are different—I should give a sufficient refutation. For
the words of Christ are plain: “Go ye, therefore, and teach all nations,
baptising them” (<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p53.1"></span>[Mt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p53.1"></span>). Since he appointed the same persons to be
preachers of the Gospel, and dispensers of baptism—and in the Church,
“no man taketh this honour unto himself,” as the apostle declares (<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p53.2"></span>[Heb.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p53.2"></span>), “but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron”—any one who baptises without a lawful call usurps another’s
office. Paul declares, that whatever we attempt with a dubious
conscience, even in the minutest matters, as in meat and drink, is sin
(<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p53.3"></span>[Rom.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p53.3"></span>). Therefore, in baptism by women, the sin
is the greater, when it is plain that the rule delivered by Christ is
violated, seeing we know it to be unlawful to put asunder what God has
joined. But all this I pass; only I would have my readers to observe,
that the last thing intended by Zipporah was to perform a service to
God. Seeing her son in danger, she frets and murmurs, and, not without
indignation, throws down the foreskin on the ground; thus upbraiding her
husband, and taking offence at God. In short, it is plain that her whole
procedure is dictated by passion: she complains both against her husband
and against God, because she is forced to spill the blood of her son. We
may add, that however well she might have conducted herself in all other
respects, yet her presumption is inexcusable in this, in circumcising
her son while her husband is present, and that husband not a mere
private individual, but Moses, the chief prophet of God, than whom no
greater ever arose in Israel. This was no more allowable in her, than it
would be for women in the present day under the eye of a bishop. But
this controversy will at once be disposed of when we maintain, that
children who happen to depart this life before an opportunity of
immersing them in water, are not excluded from the kingdom of heaven.
Now, it has been seen, that unless we admit this position, great injury
is done to the covenant of God, as if in itself it were weak, whereas
its effect depends not either on baptism, or on any accessaries. The
sacrament is afterwards added as a kind of seal, not to give efficacy to
the promise, as if in itself invalid, but merely to confirm it to us.
Hence it follows, that the children of believers are not baptised, in
order that though formerly aliens from the Church, they may then, for
the first time, become children of God, but rather are received into the
Church by a formal sign, because, in virtue of the promise, they
previously belonged to the body of Christ. Hence if, in omitting the
sign, their is neither sloth, nor contempt, nor negligence, we are safe
from all danger. By far the better course, therefore, is to pay such
respect to the ordinance of God as not to seek the sacraments in any
other quarter than where the Lord has deposited them. When we cannot
receive them from the Church, the grace of God is not so inseparably
annexed to them that we cannot obtain it by faith, according to his
word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_617"></span>[618](inst095.htm#fr_617) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p38"></span>98 598 French, “Nous suivons donc de mot
à mot la doctrine de Sainct Paul, en ce que nous disons que le peché est
remis au Baptesme, quant à la coulpe, mais qu’il demeure toujours quant
à la matière, en tous Chretiens jusques à la mort.”—We therefore follow
the doctrine of St Paul, word for word, when we say that in Baptism, sin
is forgiven as to the guilt, but that it always remains as to the matter
in all Christians until death.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[619](inst095.htm#fr_618) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p46"></span>99 599 Latin, “Exsufflatio.”—French, “Le
souffle pour conjurer le diable.”

<span id="fn_619"></span>[620](inst095.htm#fr_619) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p47"></span>00 600 Vid. Calv. in Epist. de Fugiendis
illicitis sacris. Item, Vera Ecclesia Reformandæ Ratio. See also infra,
chap. 17 sec. 43. As to the form of baptism, see Cyprian, Lib. 4 <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p47.1"></span>Ep. 7<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[621](inst095.htm#fr_620) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p48"></span>01 601 French, “Au reste, c’est une
chose de nulle importance, si on baptise en plongeant du tout dans l’eau
celui qui est baptisé, ou en repandant seulement de l’eau sur lui: mais
selon la diversité des regions cela doit demeura en la liberté des
Eglises. Car le signe est representé en l’un et en l’autre. Combien que
le mot mesme de Baptiser signifie du tout plonger et qu’il soit certain
que la coustume d’ainsi totalement plonger ait eté anciennement observée
en 1’Eglise.”—Moreover, it is a matter of no importance whether we
baptise by entirely immersing the person baptised in the water, or only
by sprinkling water upon him, but, according to the diversity of
countries, this should remain free to the churches. For the sign is
represented in either. Although the mere term Baptise means to immerse
entirely, and it is certain that the custom of thus entirely immersing
was anciently observed in the Church.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[622](inst095.htm#fr_621) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p49"></span>126 D126 In this sentence Calvin makes
three assertions: (1) that the mode of baptism is a matter of complete
indifference (“not of the least consequence”). (2) that it is evident
that the term “baptize” means to immerse. (3) that immersion was the
mode used by the primitive Church. These assertions deserve thoughtful
consideration. Perhaps the following observations will be helpful: (1)
Behind Calvin’s complete infifference to mode lies an important
distinction - the distinction between the substance or matter of the
sacraments, and the mode or form of the sacraments; or to put it another
way, the distinction between the essentials and the accidentals of the
sacraments. For Calvin, the essential elements of the proper
administration of baptism include: (a) a proper consecration, which
includes the words of institution, the promises and obligations
connected with the sacrament, and prayer; (b) a proper distribution,
which involves the application of water in the name of the Trinity; and
(c) a proper reception, which consists of faith, repentance, and an
obedient spirit on the part of the recipient (or , in the case of
infants, on the part of the parents). Beyond these, other aspects of the
sacrament are “not of the least consequence,” but are purely matters of
expediency (such as differences of national or local custom, or
diversity or climate). (2) The contention that the word translate
“baptize” means to immerse is true in many instances of its usage in the
Greek classics, so many of which had been rediscovered in the
Renaissance which preceded the Reformation period. It was no doubt in
these works that Calvin found the word “baptize” to mean “immerse”.
However, from a study of its usage in the Septuagient (the Greek
translation of the Hebrew Old Testament, made about 250-200 B.C.); and
from a careful examination of its usage in the New Testament; we
discover that this word, during the history of its usage, enlarged its
scope of meaning to include, along with its classical definition of “to
submerge, to immerse, and to dip,” the further meanings of “to bathe in
or with water, to wash.” It should be noted that two of the most highly
regarded Greek lexicons—Thayer’s and Arndt and Gingrich’s—bear witness
to this enlarged scope of meaning. As far as the New Testament meaning
of the word “baptize” is concerned, it must be decided by a study, in
each instance, of its usage in context. Such a study reveals that the
word “baptize” does not mean immersion (although immersion could have
been used in a number of cases). On the other hand, the same study
reveals that “baptize” does not mean pouring or sprinkling either! The
word, as used in the New Testament, does not mean a particular mode.
Whenever it is used to refer to Christian water baptism, it means “to
perform the Christian ceremony of initiation, with its essential
elements of consecration, distribution, and reception.” (3) The
contention that immersion was the mode used by the primitive Church has
more recently been questioned, in the light of a comparison between the
writings of the Church Fathers and the archaeological evidence that in
any way relates to mode. Such a comparison appears to favor pouring the
prevailing mode, with other modes also in use. Excellent studies of this
question can be found in Clement F. Rogers’ work, Baptism and Christian
Archaeology (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1903), and J.G. Davies’ work,
The Architectural Setting of Baptism (London, Barrie and Rockliff,
1962).

<span id="fn_622"></span>[623](inst095.htm#fr_622) <span
id="iv.iv.xvi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.xvi-p53"></span>02 602 French, “Car par une mesme raison
il faudroit dire, le service meslé que dresserent en Samarie ceux qui
etoient la envoyés d’Orient, eut eté agreable a Dieu, veu que depuis ils
ne furent plus molestes des betes sauvages.”—For the same reason it
would be necessary to say, that the mongrel worship set up in Samaria by
those who came from the East was agreeable to God, seeing that
thereafter they were not molested by wild beasts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 16. - PÆDOBAPTISM. ITS ACCORDANCE WITH THE INSTITUTION OF
CHRIST, AND THE NATURE OF THE SIGN.](inst096)
