[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst050)  [Next](inst052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.xviii"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.xviii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 17.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p1"></span>CHRIST RIGHTLY AND PROPERLY SAID TO
HAVE MERITED GRACE AND SALVATION FOR US.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p2"></span>The three leading divisions of this
chapter are,—I. A proof from reason and from Scripture that the grace of
God and the merit of Christ (the prince and author of our salvation) are
perfectly compatible, sec. 1 and 2. II. Christ, by his obedience, even
to the death of the cross (which was the price of our redemption),
merited divine favour for us, sec. 3–5. III. The presumptuous rashness
of the Schoolmen in treating this branch of doctrine.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p4"></span>1. Christ not only the minister, but
also the author and prince of salvation. Divine grace not obscured by
this mode of expression. The merit of Christ not opposed to the mercy of
God, but depends upon it.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p5"></span>2. The compatibility of the two proved
by various passages of Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p6"></span>3. Christ by his obedience truly
merited divine grace for us.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p7"></span>4. This grace obtained by the shedding
of Christ’s blood, and his obedience even unto death.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p8"></span>5. In this way he paid our ransom.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p9"></span>6. The presumptuous manner in which the
Schoolmen handle this subject.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p10"></span>1. A question must here be considered
by way of supplement. Some men too much given to subtilty, while they
admit that we obtain salvation through Christ, will not hear of the name
of merit, by which they imagine that the grace of God is obscured; and
therefore insist that Christ was only the instrument or minister, not
the author or leader, or prince of life, as he is designated by Peter
(<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p10.1"></span>[Acts
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p10.1"></span>). I admit that were Christ opposed
simply, and by himself, to the justice of God, there could be no room
for merit, because there cannot be found in man a worth which could make
God a debtor; nay, as Augustine says most truly,27  <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) “The Saviour, the man Christ Jesus, is
himself the brightest illustration of predestination and grace: his
character as such was not procured by any antecedent merit of works or
faith in his human nature. Tell me, I pray, how that man, when assumed
into unity of person by the Word, co-eternal with the Father, as the
only begotten Son at God, could merit this.”—“Let the very fountain of
grace, therefore, appear in our head, whence, according to the measure
of each, it is diffused through all his members. Every man, from the
commencement of his faith, becomes a Christian, by the same grace by
which that man from his formation became Christ.” Again, in another
passage, “There is not a more striking example of predestination than
the mediator himself. He who made him (without any antecedent merit in
his will) of the seed of David a righteous man never to be unrighteous,
also converts those who are members of his head from unrighteous into
righteous” and so forth. Therefore when we treat of the merit of Christ,
we do not place the beginning in him, but we ascend to the ordination of
God as the primary cause, because of his mere good pleasure he appointed
a Mediator to purchase salvation for us. Hence the merit of Christ is
inconsiderately opposed to the mercy of God. It is a well known rule,
that principal and accessory are not incompatible, and therefore there
is nothing to prevent the justification of man from being the gratuitous
result of the mere mercy of God, and, at the same time, to prevent the
merit of Christ from intervening in subordination to this mercy. The
free favour of God is as fitly opposed to our works as is the obedience
of Christ, both in their order: for Christ could not merit anything save
by the good pleasure of God, but only inasmuch as he was destined to
appease the wrath of God by his sacrifice, and wipe away our
transgressions by his obedience: in one word, since the merit of Christ
depends entirely on the grace of God (which provided this mode of
salvation for us), the latter is no less appropriately opposed to all
righteousness of men than is the former.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p12"></span>2. This distinction is found in
numerous passages of Scripture: “God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him might not
perish,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>[John
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>). We see that the first place is assigned
to the love of God as the chief cause or origin, and that faith in
Christ follows as the second and more proximate cause. Should any one
object that Christ is only the formal cause,27  <span
id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) he lessens his energy more than the
words justify. For if we obtain justification by a faith which leans on
him, the groundwork of our salvation must be sought in him. This is
clearly proved by several passages: “Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for
our sins,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p13.1"></span>[1 John
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p13.1"></span>). These words clearly demonstrate that
God, in order to remove any obstacle to his love towards us, appointed
the method of reconciliation in Christ. There is great force in this
word “*propitiation*”; for in a manner which cannot be expressed, God,
at the very time when he loved us, was hostile to us until reconciled in
Christ. To this effect are all the following passages: “He is the
propitiation for our sins;” “It pleased the Father that in him should
all fulness dwell, and having made peace by the blood of his cross, by
him to reconcile all things unto himself;” “God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them;” “He has made us accepted in the Beloved,” “That he might
reconcile both into one body by the cross.”27  <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266) The nature of this mystery is to be
learned from the first chapter to the Ephesians, where Paul, teaching
that we were chosen in Christ, at the same time adds, that we obtained
grace in him. How did God begin to embrace with his favour those whom he
had loved before the foundation of the world, unless in displaying his
love when he was reconciled by the blood of Christ? As God is the
fountain of all righteousness, he must necessarily be the enemy and
judge of man so long as he is a sinner. Wherefore, the commencement of
love is the bestowing of righteousness, as described by Paul: “He has
made him to be sin for us who knew no sin; that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.5"></span>[2
Cor. 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.5"></span>). He intimates, that by the sacrifice of
Christ we obtain free justification, and become pleasing to God, though
we are by nature the children of wrath, and by sin estranged from him.
This distinction is also noted whenever the grace of Christ is connected
with the love of God (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.6"></span>[2 Cor.
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.6"></span>); whence it follows, that he bestows upon
us of his own which he acquired by purchase. For otherwise there would
be no ground for the praise ascribed to him by the Father, that grace is
his, and proceeds from him.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p15"></span>3. That Christ, by his obedience,
truly purchased and merited grace for us with the Father, is accurately
inferred from several passages of Scripture. I take it for granted, that
if Christ satisfied for our sins, if he paid the penalty due by us, if
he appeased God by his obedience; in fine, if he suffered the just for
the unjust, salvation was obtained for us by his righteousness; which is
just equivalent to meriting. Now, Paul’s testimony is, that we were
reconciled, and received reconciliation through his death (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p15.1"></span>[Rom.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p15.1"></span>). But there is no room for reconciliation
unless where offence27  <span id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267) has
preceded. The meaning, therefore, is, that God, to whom we were hateful
through sin, was appeased by the death of his Son, and made propitious
to us. And the antithesis which immediately follows is carefully to be
observed, “As by one man’s disobedience many were made sinners, so by
the obedience of one shall many be made righteous,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p16.1"></span>[Rom.
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p16.1"></span>). For the meaning is—As by the sin of
Adam we were alienated from God and doomed to destruction, so by the
obedience of Christ we are restored to his favour as if we were
righteous. The future tense of the verb does not exclude present
righteousness, as is apparent from the context. For he had previously
said, “the free gift *is* of many offences unto justification.”

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17"></span>4. When we say, that grace was
obtained for us by the merit of Christ, our meaning is, that we were
cleansed by his blood, that his death was an expiation for sin, “His
blood cleanses us from all sin.” “This is my blood, which is shed for
the remission of sins,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.1"></span>[1 John
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.2"></span>[Luke
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.2"></span>). If the effect of his shed blood is,
that our sins are not imputed to us, it follows, that by that price the
justice of God was satisfied. To the same effect are the Baptist’s
words, “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.3"></span>[John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.3"></span>). For he contrasts Christ with all the
sacrifices of the Law, showing that in him alone was fulfilled what
these figures typified. But we know the common expression in
Moses—Iniquity shall be expiated, sin shall be wiped away and forgiven.
In short, we are admirably taught by the ancient figures what power and
efficacy there is in Christ’s death. And the Apostle, skilfully
proceeding from this principle, explains the whole matter in the Epistle
to the Hebrews, showing that without shedding of blood there is no
remission (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.4"></span>[Heb.
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.4"></span>). From this he infers, that Christ
appeared once for all to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
Again, that he was offered to bear the sins of many (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.5"></span>[Heb.
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.5"></span>). He had previously said, that not by the
blood of goats or of heifers, but by his own blood, he had once entered
into the holy of holies, having obtained eternal redemption for us. Now,
when he reasons thus, “If the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes
of an heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth to the purifying of the
flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself to God, purge your consciences from dead works to
serve the living God?” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.6"></span>[Heb.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.6"></span>), it is obvious that too little effect is
given to the grace of Christ, unless we concede to his sacrifice the
power of expiating, appeasing, and satisfying: as he shortly after adds,
“For this cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means
of his death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were under
the first testament, they which are called might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.7"></span>[Heb.
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.7"></span>). But it is especially necessary to
attend to the analogy which is drawn by Paul as to his having been made
a curse for us (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.8"></span>[Gal.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.8"></span>). It had been superfluous and therefore
absurd, that Christ should have been burdened with a curse, had it not
been in order that, by paying what others owed, he might acquire
righteousness for them. There is no ambiguity in Isaiah’s testimony, “He
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities:
the chastisement of our peace was laid upon him; and with his stripes we
are healed,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.9"></span>[Is.
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.9"></span>). For had not Christ satisfied for our
sins, he could not be said to have appeased God by taking upon himself
the penalty which we had incurred. To this corresponds what follows in
the same place, “for the transgression of my people was he stricken,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.10"></span>[Is.
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.10"></span>). We may add the interpretation of
Peter, who unequivocally declares, that he “bare our sins in his own
body on the tree,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.11"></span>[1 Pet.
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p17.11"></span>), that the whole burden of condemnation,
of which we were relieved, was laid upon him.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18"></span>5. The Apostles also plainly declare
that he paid a price to ransom us from death: “Being justified freely by
his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.1"></span>[Rom.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.1"></span>). Paul commends the grace of God, in that
he gave the price of redemption in the death of Christ; and he exhorts
us to flee to his blood, that having obtained righteousness, we may
appear boldly before the judgment-seat of God. To the same effect are
the words of Peter: “Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold,” “but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.2"></span>[1 Pet.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.2"></span>). The antithesis would be incongruous if
he had not by this price made satisfaction for sins. For which reason,
Paul says, “Ye are bought with a price.” Nor could it be elsewhere said,
there is “one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who
gave himself a ransom for all,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.3"></span>[1
Tim. 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.3"></span>), had not the punishment which we
deserved been laid upon him. Accordingly, the same Apostle declares,
that “we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of
sins,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.4"></span>[Col.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.4"></span>); as if he had said, that we are
justified or acquitted before God, because that blood serves the purpose
of satisfaction. With this another passage agrees—viz. that he blotted
out “the handwriting of ordinances which was against us, which was
contrary to us,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.5"></span>[Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.5"></span>). These words denote the payment or
compensation which acquits us from guilt. There is great weight also in
these words of Paul: “If righteousness come by the law, then Christ is
dead in vain,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.6"></span>[Gal.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.6"></span>). For we hence infer, that it is from
Christ we must seek what the Law would confer on any one who fulfilled
it; or, which is the same thing, that by the grace of Christ we obtain
what God promised in the Law to our works: “If a man do, he shall live
in them,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.7"></span>[Lev.
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.7"></span>). This is no less clearly taught in the
discourse at Antioch, when Paul declares, “That through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins; and by him all that believe
are justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by
the law of Moses,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.8"></span>[Acts
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#039)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.8"></span>). For if the observance of the Law is
righteousness, who can deny that Christ, by taking this burden upon
himself, and reconciling us to God, as if we were the observers of the
Law, merited favour for us? Of the same nature is what he afterwards
says to the Galatians: “God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made
under the law, to redeem them that were under the law,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.9"></span>[Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.9"></span>). For to what end that subjection, unless
that he obtained justification for us by undertaking to perform what we
were unable to pay? Hence that imputation of righteousness without
works, of which Paul treats (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.10"></span>[Rom.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.10"></span>), the righteousness found in Christ
alone being accepted as if it were ours. And certainly the only reason
why Christ is called our “meat,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.11"></span>[John
6:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.11"></span>), is because we find in him the
substance of life. And the source of this efficacy is just that the Son
of God was crucified as the price of our justification; as Paul says,
Christ “has given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for
a sweet-smelling savour,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.12"></span>[Eph.
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.12"></span>); and elsewhere, he “was delivered for
our offences, and was raised again for our justification,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.13"></span>[Rom.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.13"></span>). Hence it is proved not only that
salvation was given us by Christ, but that on account of him the Father
is now propitious to us. For it cannot be doubted that in him is
completely fulfilled what God declares by Isaiah under a figure, “I will
defend this city to save it for mine own sakes and for my servant
David’s sake,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.14"></span>[Isaiah
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#035)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.14"></span>). Of this the Apostle is the best
witness when he says “Your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.15"></span>[1 John
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.15"></span>). For although the name of Christ is not
expressed, John, in his usual manner, designates him by the pronoun
“He,” (aujtov"). In the same sense also our Lord declares, “As the
living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth
me, even he shall live by me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.16"></span>[John
6:57](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#057)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.16"></span>). To this corresponds the passage of
Paul, “Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe
in him, but also to suffer for his sake,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.17"></span>[Phil.
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#029)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p18.17"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p19"></span>6. To inquire, as Lombard and the
Schoolmen do (Sent. Lib. 3 Dist. 18), whether he merited for himself, is
foolish curiosity. Equally rash is their decision when they answer in
the affirmative. How could it be necessary for the only Son of God to
come down in order to acquire some new quality for himself? The
exposition which God gives of his own purpose removes all doubt. The
Father is not said to have consulted the advantage of his Son in his
services, but to have given him up to death, and not spared him, because
he loved the world (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.1"></span>[Rom.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.1"></span>). The prophetical expressions should be
observed: “To us a Son is born;” “Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion:
shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.2"></span>[Isaiah
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.2"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.3"></span>[Zech.
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.3"></span>). It would otherwise be a cold
commendation of love which Paul describes, when he says, “God commendeth
his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for
us,” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.4"></span>[Rom.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.4"></span>). Hence, again, we infer that Christ had
no regard to himself; and this he distinctly affirms, when he says, “For
their sakes I sanctify myself,” (<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.5"></span>[John
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.5"></span>). He who transfers the benefit of his
holiness to others, testifies that he acquires nothing for himself. And
surely it is most worthy of remark, that Christ, in devoting himself
entirely to our salvation, in a manner forgot himself. It is absurd to
wrest the testimony of Paul to a different effect: “Wherefore God has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name,”
(<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.6"></span>[Phil.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.6"></span>).27  <span
id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268) By what services could a man merit to
become the judge of the world, the head of angels, to obtain the supreme
government of God, and become the residence of that majesty of which all
the virtues of men and angels cannot attain one thousandth part? The
solution is easy and complete. Paul is not speaking of the cause of
Christ’s exaltation, but only pointing out a consequence of it by way of
example to us. The meaning is not much different from that of another
passage: “Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter
into his glory?” (<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p20.1"></span>[Luke
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#026)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p20.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p21"></span>END OF THE SECOND BOOK.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[265](inst051.htm#fr_264) <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p11"></span>71 271 August. de Prædest. Sanct. Lib.
1 c. 15; De Bono Perseverantia, cap. ult. See supra, chapter 14 sec. 7.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[266](inst051.htm#fr_265) <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p13"></span>72 272 The French adds, “C’est a dire,
qui n’emporte en soy vrai effect;”—that is to say, which in itself
produces no true effect.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[267](inst051.htm#fr_266) <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p14"></span>73 273 <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.1"></span>[1 John
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.2"></span>[Col.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.2"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.3"></span>[2
Cor. 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.3"></span>; <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.4"></span>[Eph.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p14.4"></span>; 2:16.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[268](inst051.htm#fr_267) <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p16"></span>74 274 French, “Offense, haine,
divorce;”—offence, hatred, divorce.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](inst051.htm#fr_268) <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p19.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p20"></span>75 275 The sentence stands thus in the
French:—“Les Sorbonnistes pervertissent le passage de S. Paul,
l’appliquans a ce propos c’est que pource que Jesus Christ s’est
humilié, le Pere l’a exalté et lui donné un nom souverain:”—The
Sorbonnists pervert the passage of St Paul, and apply it in this
way—that because Christ humbled himself, the Father exalted him, and
gave him a sovereign name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: BOOK THIRD. - THE MODE OF OBTAINING THE GRACE OF CHRIST. THE
BENEFITS IT CONFERS, AND THE EFFECTS RESULTING FROM IT.](inst052)
