[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst069)  [Next](inst071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xviii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xviii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 17.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p1"></span>THE PROMISES OF THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL
RECONCILED.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p2"></span>In the following chapter, the
arguments of Sophists, who would destroy or impair the doctrine of
Justification by Faith, are reduced to two classes. The former is
general, the latter special, and contains some arguments peculiar to
itself. I. The first class, which is general, and in a manner contains
the foundation of all the arguments, draws an argument from the promises
of the law. This is considered from sec. 1-3. II. The second class
following from the former, and containing special proofs. An argument
drawn from the history of Cornelius explained, sec. 4, 5. III. A full
exposition of those passages of Scripture which represent God as showing
mercy and favor to the cultivators of righteousness, sec. 6. IV. A third
argument from the passages which distinguish good works by the name of
righteousness, and declare that men are justified by them, sec. 7, 8. V.
The adversaries of justification by faith placed in a dilemma. Their
partial righteousness refuted, sec. 9, 10. VI. A fourth argument,
setting the Apostle James in opposition to Paul, considered, sec. 11,
12. VII. Answer to a fifth argument, that, according to Paul, not the
hearers but the doors of the law are justified, sec. 13. VIII.
Consideration of a sixth argument, drawn from those passages in which
believers boldly submit their righteousness to the judgment of God, and
ask him to decide according to it, sec. 14. IX. Examination of the last
argument, drawn from passages which ascribe righteousness and life to
the ways of believers, sec. 15.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p4"></span>1. Brief summary of Chapters 15 and
16. Why justification is denied to works. Argument of opponents founded
on the promises of the law. The substance of this argument. Answer.
Those who would be justified before God must be exempted from the power
of the law. How this is done.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p5"></span>2. Confirmation of the answer *ab
impossibili*, and from the testimony of an Apostle and of David.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p6"></span>3. Answer to the objection, by showing
why these promises were given. Refutation of the sophistical distinction
between the *intrinsic* value of works, and their value *er parts*.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p7"></span>4. Argument from the history of
Cornelius. Answer, by distinguishing between two kinds of acceptance.
Former kind. Sophistical objection refuted.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p8"></span>5. Latter kind. Plain from this
distinction that Cornelius was accepted freely before his good works
could be accepted. Similar explanations to be given of the passage in
which God is represented as merciful and propitious to the cultivators
of righteousness.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p9"></span>6. Exposition of these passages.
Necessary to observe whether the promise is legal or evangelical. The
legal promise always made under the condition that we “do,” the
evangelical under the condition that we “believe.”

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p10"></span>7. Argument from the passages which
distinguish good works by the name of righteousness, and declare that
man is justified by them. Answer to the former part of the argument
respecting the name. Why the works of the saints called works of
righteousness. Distinction to be observed.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p11"></span>8. Answer to the second part of the
argument—viz. that man is justified by works. Works of no avail by
themselves; we are justified by faith only. This kind of righteousness
defined. Whence the value set on good works.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p12"></span>9. Answer confirmed and fortified by
a dilemma.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p13"></span>10. In what sense the partial
imperfect righteousness of believers accepted. Conclusion of the
refutation.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p14"></span>11. Argument founded on the Epistle
of James. First answer. One Apostle cannot be opposed to another. Second
answer. Third answer, from the scope of James. A double paralogism in
the term Faith. In James the faith said not to justify is a mere empty
opinion; in Paul it is the instrument by which we apprehend Christ our
righteousness.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p15"></span>12. Another paralogism on the word
*justify*. Paul speaks of the cause, James of the effects, of
justification. Sum of the discussion.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p16"></span>13. Argument founded on <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p16.1"></span>[Rom.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p16.1"></span>. Answer, explaining the Apostles
meaning. Another argument, containing a *reduction ad impossibili*. Why
Paul used the argument.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p17"></span>14. An argument founded on the
passages in which believers confidently appeal to their righteousness.
Answer, founded on a consideration of two circumstances. 1. They refer
only to a special cause. 2. They claim righteousness in comparison with
the wicked.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p18"></span>15. Last argument from those passages
which ascribe righteousness and life to the ways of believers. Answer.
This proceeds from the paternal kindness of God. What meant by the
perfection of saints.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p19"></span>1. Let us now consider the other
arguments which Satan by his satellites invents to destroy or impair the
doctrine of Justification by Faith. I think we have already put it out
of the power of our calumniators to treat us as if we were the enemies
of good works—justification being denied to works not in order that no
good works may be done or that those which are done may be denied to be
good; but only that we may not trust or glory in them, or ascribe
salvation to them. Our only confidence and boasting, our only anchor of
salvation is, that Christ the Son of God is ours, and that we are in him
sons of God and heirs of the heavenly kingdom, being called, not by our
worth, but the kindness of God, to the hope of eternal blessedness. But
since, as has been said, they assail us with other engines, let us now
proceed to demolish them also. First, they recur to the legal promises
which the Lord proclaimed to the observers of the law, and they ask us
whether we hold them to be null or effectual. Since it were absurd and
ridiculous to say they are null, they take it for granted that they have
some efficacy. Hence they infer that we are not justified by faith only.
For the Lord thus speaks: “Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye
hearken to these judgments, and keep and do them, that the Lord thy God
shall keep unto thee the covenant and the mercy which he sware unto thy
fathers; and he will love thee, and bless thee and multiply thee,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p19.1"></span>[Deut.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p19.1"></span>). Again, “If ye thoroughly amend your
ways and your doings; if ye thoroughly execute judgment between a man
and his neighbor; if ye oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and
the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, neither walk after
other gods to your hurt: then will I cause you to dwell in this place,
in the land that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p19.2"></span>[Jer.
7:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p19.2"></span>). It were to no purpose to quote a
thousand similar passages, which, as they are not different in meaning,
are to be explained on the same principle. In substance, Moses declares
that in the law is set down “a blessing and a curse,” life and death
(<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p19.3"></span>[Deut.
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p19.3"></span>); and hence they argue, either that that
blessing is become inactive and unfruitful, or that justification is not
by faith only. We have already shown,44  <span
id="fr_436"></span>[437](#fn_436) that if we cleave to the law we are
devoid of every blessing, and have nothing but the curse denounced on
all transgressors. The Lord does not promise any thing except to the
perfect observers of the law; and none such are any where to be found.
The results therefore is that the whole human race is convicted by the
law, and exposed to the wrath and curse of God: to be saved from this
they must escape from the power of the law, and be as it were brought
out of bondage into freedom,—not that carnal freedom which indisposes us
for the observance of the law, tends to licentiousness, and allows our
passions to wanton unrestrained with loosened reins; but that spiritual
freedom which consoles and raises up the alarmed and smitten conscience,
proclaiming its freedom from the curse and condemnation under which it
was formerly held bound. This freedom from subjection to the law, this
manumission, if I may so express it, we obtain when by faith we
apprehend the mercy of God in Christ, and are thereby assured of the
pardon of sins, with a consciousness of which the law stung and tortured
us.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p21"></span>2. For this reason, the promises
offered in the law would all be null and ineffectual, did not God in his
goodness send the gospel to our aid, since the condition on which they
depend, and under which only they are to be performed—viz. the
fulfillment of the law, will never be accomplished. Still, however the
aid which the Lord gives consists not in leaving part of justification
to be obtained by works, and in supplying part out of his indulgence,
but in giving us Christ as in himself alone the fulfillment of
righteousness. For the Apostle, after premising that he and the other
Jews, aware that “a man is not justified by the works of the law,” had
“believed in Jesus Christ,” adds as the reason, not that they might be
assisted to make up the sum of righteousness by faith in Christ, but
that they “might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the
works of the law,” (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.1"></span>[Gal.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.1"></span>). If believers withdraw from the law to
faith, that in the latter they may find the justification which they see
is not in the former, they certainly disclaim justification by the law.
Therefore, whose will, let him amplify the rewards which are said to
await the observer of the law, provided he at the same time understand,
that owing to our depravity, we derive no benefit from them until we
have obtained another righteousness by faith. Thus David after making
mention of the reward which the Lord has prepared for his servants
(<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.2"></span>[Ps.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.2"></span> almost throughout), immediately descends
to an acknowledgment of sins, by which the reward is made void. In <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.3"></span>[Psalm
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.3"></span>, also, he loudly extols the benefits of
the law; but immediately exclaims, “Who can understand his errors?
cleanse thou me from secret faults,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.4"></span>[Ps.
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.4"></span>). This passage perfectly accords with
the former, when, after saying, “the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies,” he adds, “For
thy name’s sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity: for it is great,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.5"></span>[Ps.
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p21.5"></span>). Thus, too, we ought to acknowledge
that the favor of God is offered to us in the law, provided by our works
we can deserve it; but that it never actually reaches us through any
such desert.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p22"></span>3. What then? Were the promises given
that they might vanish away without fruit? I lately declared that this
is not my opinion. I say, indeed, that their efficacy does not extend to
us so long as they have respect to the merit of works, and, therefore,
that, considered in themselves, they are in some sense abolished. Hence
the Apostle shows, that the celebrated promise, “Ye shall therefore keep
my statutes and my judgments: which if a man do, he shall live in them,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p22.1"></span>[Lev.
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p22.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p22.2"></span>[Ezek.
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p22.2"></span>), will, if we stop at it, be of no
avail, and will profit us not a whit more than if it were not given,
being inaccessible even to the holiest servants of God, who are all far
from fulfilling the law, being encompassed with many infirmities. But
when the gospel promises are substituted, promises which announce the
free pardon of sins, the result is not only that our persons are
accepted of God, but his favor also is shown to our works, and that not
only in respect that the Lord is pleased with them, but also because he
visits them with the blessings which were due by agreement to the
observance of his law. I admit, therefore, that the works of the
faithful are rewarded with the promises which God gave in his law to the
cultivators of righteousness and holiness; but in this reward we should
always attend to the cause which procures favor to works. This cause,
then, appears to be threefold. First, God turning his eye away from the
works of his servants which merit reproach more than praise, embraces
them in Christ, and by the intervention of faith alone reconciles them
to himself without the aid of works. Secondly the works not being
estimated by their own worth, he, by his fatherly kindness and
indulgence, honors so far as to give them some degree of value. Thirdly,
he extends his pardon to them, not imputing the imperfection by which
they are all polluted, and would deserve to be regarded as vices rather
than virtues. Hence it appears how much Sophists44  <span
id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437) were deluded in thinking they
admirably escaped all absurdities when they said, that works are able to
merit salvation, not from their intrinsic worth, but according to
agreement, the Lord having, in his liberality, set this high value upon
them. But, meanwhile, they observed not how far the works which they
insisted on regarding as meritorious must be from fulfilling the
condition of the promises, were they not preceded by a justification
founded on faith alone, and on forgiveness of sins—a forgiveness
necessary to cleanse even good works from their stains. Accordingly, of
the three causes of divine liberality to which it is owing that good
works are accepted, they attended only to one: the other two, though the
principal causes, they suppressed.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p24"></span>4. They quote the saying of Peter as
given by Luke in the Acts, “Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons: but in every nation he that feareth him, and
worketh righteousness, is accepted with him” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p24.1"></span>[Acts
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p24.1"></span>). And hence they infer, as a thing which
seems to them beyond a doubt, that if man by right conduct procures the
favor of God, his obtaining salvation is not entirely the gift of God.
Nay, that when God in his mercy assists the sinner, he is inclined to
mercy by works. There is no way of reconciling the passages of
Scripture, unless you observe that man’s acceptance with God is twofold.
As man is by nature, God finds nothing in him which can incline him to
mercy, except merely big wretchedness. If it is clear then that man,
when God first interposes for him, is naked and destitute of all good,
and, on the other hand, loaded and filled with all kinds of evil,—for
what quality, pray, shall we say that he is worthy of the heavenly
kingdom? Where God thus clearly displays free mercy, have done with that
empty imagination of merit. Another passage in the same book—viz. where
Cornelius hears from the lips of an angel, “Thy prayer and thine alms
are come up for a memorial before God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p24.2"></span>[Acts
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p24.2"></span>), is miserably wrested to prove that man
is prepared by the study of good works to receive the favor of God.
Cornelius being endued with true wisdom, in other words, with the fear
of God, must have been enlightened by the Spirit of wisdom, and being an
observer of righteousness, must have been sanctified by the same Spirit;
righteousness being, as the Apostle testifies, one of the most certain
fruits of the Spirit (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p24.3"></span>[Gal.
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p24.3"></span>). Therefore, all those qualities by
which he is said to have pleased God he owed to divine grace: so far was
he from preparing himself by his own strength to receive it. Indeed, not
a syllable of Scripture can be produced which does not accord with the
doctrine, that the only reason why God receives man into his favor is,
because he sees that he is in every respect lost when left to himself;
lost, if he does not display his mercy in delivering him. We now see
that in thus accepting, God looks not to the righteousness of the
individual, but merely manifests the divine goodness towards miserable
sinners, who are altogether undeserving of this great mercy.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p25"></span>5. But after the Lord has withdrawn
the sinner from the abyss of perdition, and set him apart for himself by
means of adoption, having begotten him again and formed him to newness
of life, he embraces him as a new creature, and bestows the gifts of his
Spirit. This is the acceptance to which Peter refers, and by which
believers after their calling are approved by God even in respect of
works; for the Lord cannot but love and delight in the good qualities
which he produces in them by means of his Spirit. But we must always
bear in mind, that the only way in which men are accepted of God in
respect of works is, that whatever good works he has conferred upon
those whom he admits to favor, he by an increase of liberality honors
with his acceptance. For whence their good works, but just that the Lord
having chosen them as vessels of honor, is pleased to adorn them with
true purity? And how are their actions deemed good as if there was no
deficiency in them, but just that their merciful Father indulgently
pardons the spots and blemishes which adhere to them? In one word, the
only meaning of acceptance in this passage is, that God accepts and
takes pleasure in his children, in whom he sees the traces and
lineaments of his own countenance. We have else here said, that
regeneration is a renewal of the divine image in us. Since God,
therefore, whenever he beholds his own face, justly loves it and holds
it in honor, the life of believers, when formed to holiness and justice,
is said, not without cause, to be pleasing to him. But because
believers, while encompassed with mortal flesh, are still sinners, and
their good works only begun savor of the corruption of the flesh, God
cannot be propitious either to their persons or their works, unless he
embraces them more in Christ than in themselves. In this way are we to
understand the passages in which God declares that he is clement and
merciful to the cultivators of righteousness. Moses said to the
Israelites, “Know, therefore, that the Lord thy God, he is God, the
faithful God, which keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love him
and keep his commandments, to a thousand generations.” These words
afterwards became a common form of expression among the people. Thus
Solomon in his prayer at the dedication says, “Lord God of Israel, there
is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keepest
covenant and mercy with thy servants that walk before thee with all
their heart,” (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.1"></span>[1 Kings
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.1"></span>). The same words are repeated by
Nehemiah (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.2"></span>[Neh.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.2"></span>). As the Lord in all covenants of mercy
stipulates on his part for integrity and holiness of life in his
servants (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.3"></span>[Deut.
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.3"></span>), lest his goodness might be held in
derision, or any one, puffed up with exultation in it, might speak
flatteringly to his soul while walking in the depravity of his heart, so
he is pleased that in this way those whom he admits to communion in the
covenant should be kept to their duty. Still, however, the covenant was
gratuitous at first, and such it ever remains. Accordingly, while David
declares, “according to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed
me,” yet does he not omit the fountain to which I have referred; “he
delivered me, because he delighted in me,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.4"></span>[2 Sam.
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p25.4"></span>). In commending the goodness of his
cause, he derogates in no respect from the free mercy which takes
precedence of all the gifts of which it is the origin.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p26"></span>6. Here, by the way, it is of
importance to observe how those forms of expression differ from legal
promises. By legal promises, I mean not those which lie scattered in the
books of Moses (for there many Evangelical promises occur), but those
which properly belong to the legal dispensation. All such promises, by
whatever name they may be called, are made under the condition that the
reward is to be paid on the things commanded being done. But when it is
said that the Lord keeps a covenant of mercy with those who love him,
the words rather demonstrate what kind of servants those are who have
sincerely entered into the covenant, than express the reason why the
Lord blesses them. The nature of the demonstration is this: As the end
for which God bestows upon us the gift of eternal life is, that he may
be loved, feared, and worshipped by us, so the end of all the promises
of mercy contained in Scripture justly is that we may reverence and
serve their author. Therefore, whenever we hear that he does good to
those that observe his law, let us remember that the sons of God are
designated by the duty which they ought perpetually to observe, that his
reason for adopting us is, that we may reverence him as a father. Hence,
if we would not deprive ourselves of the privilege of adoption, we must
always strive in the direction of our calling. On the other hand,
however, let us remember, that the completion of the Divine mercy
depends not on the works of believers, but that God himself fulfill the
promise of salvation to those who by right conduct correspond to their
calling, because he recognizes the true badges of sons in those only who
are directed to good by his Spirit. To this we may refer what is said of
the members of the Church, “Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? who
shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that walketh uprightly, and worketh
righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart,” &c. (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p26.1"></span>[Ps.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p26.1"></span>). Again, in Isaiah, “Who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting
burnings? He that walketh righteously,” &c. (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p26.2"></span>[Isa.
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p26.2"></span>). For the thing described is not the
strength with which believers can stand before the Lord, but the manner
in which our most merciful Father introduces them into his fellowship,
and defends and confirms them therein. For as he detests sin and loves
righteousness, so those whom he unites to himself he purifies by his
Spirit, that he may render them conformable to himself and to his
kingdom. Therefore, if it be asked, What is the first cause which gives
the saints free access to the kingdom of God, and a firm and permanent
footing in it? the answer is easy. The Lord in his mercy once adopted
and ever defends them. But if the question relates to the manner, we
must descend to regeneration, and the fruits of it, as enumerated in the
fifteenth Psalm.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p27"></span>7. There seems much more difficulty
in those passages which distinguish good works by the name of
righteousness, and declare that man is justified by them. The passages
of the former class are very numerous, as when the observance of the
commandments is termed justification or righteousness. Of the other
classes we have a description in the words of Moses, “It shall be our
righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p27.1"></span>[Deut.
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p27.1"></span>). But if you object, that it is a legal
promise, which, having an impossible condition annexed to it, proves
nothing, there are other passages to which the same answer cannot be
made; for instance, “If the man be poor,” “thou shalt deliver him the
pledge again when the sun goes down:” “and it shall be righteousness
unto thee before the Lord thy God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p27.2"></span>[Deut.
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p27.2"></span>). Likewise the words of the prophet,
“Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was
stayed. And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all
generations for evermore,” (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p27.3"></span>[Ps.
106:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p27.3"></span>). Accordingly the Pharisees of our day
think they have here full scope for exultation.44  <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438) For, as we say, that when
justification by faith is established, justification by works falls;
they argue on the same principle, If there is a justification by works,
it is false to say that we are justified by faith only. When I grant
that the precepts of the law are termed righteousness, I do nothing
strange: for they are so in reality. I must, however, inform the reader,
that the Hebrew word !yqj

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p29"></span> has been rendered by the Septuagint,
not very appropriately, δικαιώματα, *justifications*, instead of
*edicts*.44  <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439) But I readily give
up any dispute as to the word. Nor do I deny that the Law of God
contains a perfect righteousness. For although we are debtors to do all
the things which it enjoins, and, therefore, even after a full
obedience, are unprofitable servants; yet, as the Lord has deigned to
give it the name of righteousness, it is not ours to take from it what
he has given. We readily admit, therefore, that the perfect obedience of
the law is righteousness, and the observance of any precept a part of
righteousness, the whole substance of righteousness being contained in
the remaining parts. But we deny that any such righteousness ever
exists. Hence we discard the righteousness of the law, not as being in
itself maimed and defective, but because of the weakness of our flesh it
nowhere appears. But then Scripture does not merely call the precepts of
the law righteousness, it also gives this name to the works of the
saints: as when it states that Zacharias and his wife “were both
righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of
the Lord blameless,” (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p30.1"></span>[Luke
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p30.1"></span>). Surely when it thus speaks, it
estimates works more according to the nature of the law than their own
proper character. And here, again, I must repeat the observation which I
lately made, that the law is not to be ascertained from a careless
translation of the Greek interpreter. Still, as Luke chose not to make
any change on the received version, I will not contend for this. The
things contained in the law God enjoined upon man for righteousness but
that righteousness we attain not unless by observing the whole law:
every transgression whatever destroys it. While, therefore, the law
commands nothing but righteousness, if we look to itself, every one of
its precepts is righteousness: if we look to the men by whom they are
performed, being transgressors in many things, they by no means merit
the praise of righteousness for one work, and that a work which, through
the imperfection adhering to it, is always in some respect vicious.44
 <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440)

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p32"></span>8. I come to the second class (sec.
1, 7, ad init.), in which the chief difficulty lies. Paul finds nothing
stronger to prove justification by faith than that which is written of
Abraham, he “believed God, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness,” (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p32.1"></span>[Rom.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p32.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p32.2"></span>[Gal.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p32.2"></span>). Therefore, when it is said that the
achievement of Phinehas “was counted unto him for righteousness,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p32.3"></span>[Ps.
106:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p32.3"></span>), we may argue that what Paul contends
for respecting faith applies also to works. Our opponents, accordingly,
as if the point were proved, set it down that though we are not
justified without faith, it is not by faith only; that our justification
is completed by works. Here I beseech believers, as they know that the
true standard of righteousness must be derived from Scripture alone, to
consider with me seriously and religiously, how Scripture can be fairly
reconciled with that view. Paul, knowing that justification by faith was
the refuge of those who wanted righteousness of their own, confidently
infers, that all who are justified by faith are excluded from the
righteousness of works. But as it is clear that this justification is
common to all believers, he with equal confidence infers that no man is
justified by works; nay, more, that justification is without any help
from works. But it is one thing to determine what power works have in
themselves, and another to determine what place they are to hold after
justification by faith has been established. If a price is to be put
upon works according to their own worth, we hold that they are unfit to
appear in the presence of God: that man, accordingly, has no works in
which he can glory before God, and that hence, deprived of all aid from
works, he is justified by faith alone. Justification, moreover, we thus
define: The sinner being admitted into communion with Christ is, for his
sake, reconciled to God; when purged by his blood he obtains the
remission of sins, and clothed with righteousness, just as if it were
his own, stands secure before the judgment-seat of heaven. Forgiveness
of sins being previously given, the good works which follow have a value
different from their merit, because whatever is imperfect in them is
covered by the perfection of Christ, and all their blemishes and
pollutions are wiped away by his purity, so as never to come under the
cognizance of the divine tribunal. The guilt of all transgressions, by
which men are prevented from offering God an acceptable service, being
thus effaced, and the imperfection which is wont to sully even good
works being buried, the good works which are done by believers are
deemed righteous, or; which is the same thing, are imputed for
righteousness.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p33"></span>9. Now, should any one state this to
me as an objection to justification by faith, I would first ask him,
Whether a man is deemed righteous for one holy work or two, while in all
the other acts of his life lie is a transgressor of the law? This were,
indeed, more than absurd. I would next ask, Whether he is deemed
righteous on account of many good works if he is guilty of transgression
in some one part? Even this he will not venture to maintain in
opposition to the authority of the law, which pronounces, “Cursed be he
that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p33.1"></span>[Deut.
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p33.1"></span>). I would go still farther and ask,
Whether there be any work which may not justly be convicted of impurity
or imperfection? How, then, will it appear to that eye before which even
the heavens are not clean, and angels are chargeable with folly? (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p33.2"></span>[Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p33.2"></span>). Thus he will be forced to confess that
no good work exists that is not defiled, both by contrary transgression
and also by its own corruption, so that it cannot be honored as
righteousness. But if it is certainly owing to justification by faith
that works, otherwise impure, unclean, defective, unworthy of the sight,
not to say of the love of God, are imputed for righteousness, why do
they by boasting of this imputation aim at the destruction of that
justification, but for which the boast were vain? Are they desirous of
having a viper’s birth?44  <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441) To
this their ungodly language tends. They cannot deny that justification
by faith is the beginning, the foundation, the cause, the subject, the
substance, of works of righteousness, and yet they conclude that
justification is not by faith, because good works are counted for
righteousness. Let us have done then with this frivolity, and confess
the fact as it stands; if any righteousness which works are supposed to
possess depends on justification by faith, this doctrine is not only not
impaired, but on the contrary confirmed, its power being thereby more
brightly displayed. Nor let us suppose, that after free justification
works are commended, as if they afterwards succeeded to the office of
justifying, or shared the office with faith. For did not justification
by faith always remain entire, the impurity of works would be disclosed.
There is nothing absurd in the doctrine, that though man is justified by
faith, he is himself not only not righteous, but the righteousness
attributed to his works is beyond their own deserts.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p35"></span>10. In this way we can admit not only
that there is a partial righteousness in works (as our adversaries
maintain), but that they are approved by God as if they were absolutely
perfect. If we remember on what foundation this is rested, every
difficulty will be solved. The first time when a work begins to be
acceptable is when it is received with pardon. And whence pardon, but
just because God looks upon us and all that belongs to us as in Christ?
Therefore, as we ourselves when ingrafted into Christ appear righteous
before God, because our iniquities are covered with his innocence; so
our works are, and are deemed righteous, because every thing otherwise
defective in them being buried by the purity of Christ is not imputed.
Thus we may justly say, that not only ourselves, but our works also, are
justified by faith alone. Now, if that righteousness of works, whatever
it be, depends on faith and free justification, and is produced by it,
it ought to be included under it and, so to speak, made subordinate to
it, as the effect to its cause; so far is it from being entitled to be
set up to impair or destroy the doctrine of justification.44  <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442) Thus Paul, to prove that our
blessedness depends not on our works, but on the mercy of God, makes
special use of the words of David, “Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, whose sin is covered;” “Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord
imputeth not iniquity.” Should any one here obtrude the numberless
passages in which blessedness seems to be attributed to works, as,
“Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord;” “He that has mercy on the
poor, happy is he;” “Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel
of the ungodly,” and “that endureth temptation;” “Blessed are they that
keep judgment,” that are “pure in heart,” “meek,” “merciful,” &c.,45
 <span id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443) they cannot make out that
Paul’s doctrine is not true. For seeing that the qualities thus extolled
never all so exist in man as to obtain for him the approbation of God,
it follows, that man is always miserable until he is exempted from
misery by the pardon of his sins. Since, then, all the kinds of
blessedness extolled in the Scripture are vain so that man derives no
benefit from them until he obtains blessedness by the forgiveness of
sins, a forgiveness which makes way for them, it follows that this is
not only the chief and highest, but the only blessedness, unless you are
prepared to maintain that it is impaired by things which owe their
entire existence to it. There is much less to trouble us in the name of
*righteous* which is usually given to believers. I admit that they are
so called from the holiness of their lives, but as they rather exert
themselves in the study of righteousness than fulfill righteousness
itself, any degree of it which they possess must yield to justification
by faith, to which it is owing that it is what it is.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p38"></span>11. But they say that we have a still
more serious business with James, who in express terms opposes us. For
he asks, “Was not Abraham our father justified by works?” and adds “You
see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p38.1"></span>[Jas.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p38.1"></span>). What then? Will they engage Paul in a
quarrel with James? If they hold James to be a servant of Christ, his
sentiments must be understood as not dissenting from Christ speaking by
the mouth of Paul. By the mouth of Paul the Spirit declares that Abraham
obtained justification by faith, not by works; we also teach that all
are justified by faith without the works of the law. By James the same
Spirit declares that both Abraham’s justification and ours consists of
works, and not of faith only. It is certain that the Spirit cannot be at
variance with himself. Where, then, will be the agreement? It is enough
for our opponents, provided they can tear up that justification by faith
which we regard as fixed by the deepest roots:45  <span
id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444) to restore peace to the conscience is
to them a matter of no great concern. Hence you may see, that though
they indeed carp at the doctrine of justification by faith, they
meanwhile point out no goal of righteousness at which the conscience may
rest. Let them triumph then as they will, so long as the only victory
they can boast of is, that they have deprived righteousness of all its
certainty. This miserable victory they will indeed obtain when the light
of truth is extinguished, and the Lord permits them to darken it with
their lies. But wherever the truth of God stands they cannot prevail. I
deny, then, that the passage of James which they are constantly holding
up before us as if it were the shield of Achilles, gives them the
slightest countenance. To make this plain, let us first attend to the
scope of the Apostle, and then show wherein their hallucination
consists. As at that time (and the evil has existed in the Church ever
since) there were many who, while they gave manifest proof of their
infidelity, by neglecting and omitting all the works peculiar to
believers, ceased not falsely to glory in the name of faith, James here
dissipates their vain confidence. His intention therefore is, not to
derogate in any degree from the power of true faith, but to show how
absurdly these triflers laid claim only to the empty name, and resting
satisfied with it, felt secure in unrestrained indulgence in vice. This
state of matters being understood, it will be easy to see where the
error of our opponents lies. They fall into a double paralogism, the one
in the term *faith*, the other in the term *justifying*. The Apostle, in
giving the name of *faith* to an empty opinion altogether differing from
true faith, makes a concession which derogates in no respect from his
case. This he demonstrates at the outset by the words, “What does it
profit, my brethren, though a man say he has faith, and have not works?”
(<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p39.1"></span>[James
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p39.1"></span>). He says not, “If a man *have* faith
without works,” but “if he say that he has.” This becomes still clearer
when a little after he derides this faith as worse than that of devils,
and at last when he calls it “dead.” You may easily ascertain his
meaning by the explanation, “Thou believest that there is one God.”
Surely if all which is contained in that faith is a belief in the
existence of God, there is no wonder that it does not justify. The
denial of such a power to it cannot be supposed to derogate in any
degree from Christian faith, which is of a very different description.
For how does true faith justify unless by uniting us to Christ, so that
being made one with him, we may be admitted to a participation in his
righteousness? It does not justify because it forms an idea of the
divine existence, but because it reclines with confidence on the divine
mercy.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p40"></span>12. We have not made good our point
until we dispose of the other paralogism: since James places a part of
justification in works. If you would make James consistent with the
other Scriptures and with himself, you must give the word *justify*, as
used by him, a different meaning from what it has with Paul. In the
sense of Paul we are said to be justified when the remembrance of our
unrighteousness is obliterated and we are counted righteous. Had James
had the same meaning it would have been absurd for him to quote the
words of Moses, “Abraham believed God,” &c. The context runs thus: “Was
not Abraham our father justified by works when he had offered Isaac his
son upon the altar? Seest thou how faith wrought with his works, and by
works was faith made perfect? And the Scripture was fulfilled which
saith, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness.” If it is absurd to say that the effect was prior to its
cause, either Moses falsely declares in that passage that Abraham’s
faith was imputed for righteousness or Abraham, by his obedience in
offering up Isaac, did not merit righteousness. Before the existence of
Ishmael, who was a grown youth at the birth of Isaac, Abraham was
justified by his faith. How thee can we say that he obtained
justification by an obedience which followed long after? Wherefore,
either James erroneously inverts the proper order (this it were impious
to suppose), or he meant not to say that he was justified, as if he
deserved to be deemed just. What then? It appears certain that he is
speaking of the manifestation, not of the imputation of righteousness,
as if he had said, Those who are justified by true faith prove their
justification by obedience and good works, not by a bare and imaginary
semblance of faith. In one word, he is not discussing the mode of
justification, but requiring that the justification of believers shall
be operative. And as Paul contends that men are justified without the
aid of works, so James will not allow any to be regarded as justified
who are destitute of good works. Due attention to the scope will thus
disentangle every doubt; for the error of our opponents lies chiefly in
this, that they think James is defining the mode of justification,
whereas his only object is to destroy the depraved security of those who
vainly pretended faith as an excuse for their contempt of good works.
Therefore, let them twist the words of James as they may, they will
never extract out of them more than the two propositions: That an empty
phantom of faith does not justify, and that the believer, not contented
with such an imagination, manifests his justification by good works.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p41"></span>13. They gain nothing by quoting from
Paul to the same effect, that “not the hearers of the law are just
before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p41.1"></span>[Rom.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p41.1"></span>). I am unwilling to evade the difficulty
by the solution of Ambrose, that Paul spoke thus because faith in Christ
is the fulfillment of the law. This I regard as a mere subterfuge, and
one too for which there is no occasion, as the explanation is perfectly
obvious. The Apostle’s object is to suppress the absurd confidence of
the Jews who gave out that they alone had a knowledge of the law, though
at the very time they where its greatest despisers. That they might not
plume themselves so much on a bare acquaintance with the law, he reminds
them that when justification is sought by the law, the thing required is
not the knowledge but the observance of it. We certainly mean not to
dispute that the righteousness of the law consists in works, and not
only so, but that justification consists in the dignity and merits of
works. But this proves not that we are justified by works unless they
can produce some one who has fulfilled the law. That Paul had no other
meaning is abundantly obvious from the context. After charging Jews and
Gentiles in common with unrighteousness, he descends to particulars and
says, that “as many as have sinned without law shall also perish without
law,” referring to the Gentiles, and that “as many as have sinned in the
law shall be judged by the law,” referring to the Jews. Moreover, as
they, winking at their transgressions, boasted merely of the law, he
adds most appropriately, that the law was passed with the view of
justifying not those who only heard it, but those only who obeyed it; as
if he had said, Do you seek righteousness in the law? do not bring
forward the mere hearing of it, which is in itself of little weight, but
bring works by which you may show that the law has not been given to you
in vain. Since in these they were all deficient, it followed that they
had no ground of boasting in the law. Paul’s meaning, therefore, rather
leads to an opposite argument. The righteousness of the law consists in
the perfection of works; but no man can boast of fulfilling the law by
works, and, therefore, there is no righteousness by the law.

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p42"></span>14. They now betake themselves to
those passages in which believers boldly submit their righteousness to
the judgment of God, and wish to be judged accordingly; as in the
following passages: “Judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness,
and according to mine integrity that is in me.” Again, “Hear the right,
O Lord;” “Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the
night; thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing.” Again “The Lord
regarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of
my hands has he recompensed me. For I have kept the ways of the Lord,
and have not wickedly departed from my God.” “I was also upright before
him, and I kept myself from mine iniquity.” Again, “Judge me, O Lord;
for I have walked in mine integrity;” “I have not sat with vain persons;
neither will I go in with dissemblers;” “Gather not my soul with
sinners, nor my life with bloody men; in whose hands is mischief, and
their right hand is full of bribes. But as for me, I will walk in mine
integrity.”45  <span id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445) I have already
spoken of the confidence which the saints seem to derive simply from
works. The passages now quoted will not occasion much difficulty, if we
attend to their περίστασις, their connection, or (as it is commonly
called) special circumstances. These are of two kinds; for those who use
them have no wish that their whole life should be brought to trial, so
that they may be acquitted or condemned according to its tenor; all they
wish is, that a decision should be given on the particular case; and
even here the righteousness which they claim is not with reference to
the divine perfection, but only by comparison with the wicked and
profane. When the question relates to justification, the thing required
is not that the individual have a good ground of acquittal in regard to
some particular matter, but that his whole life be in accordance with
righteousness. But when the saints implore the divine justice in
vindication of their innocence, they do not present themselves as free
from fault, and in every respect blameless but while placing their
confidence of salvation in the divine goodness only, and trusting that
he will vindicate his poor when they are afflicted contrary to justice
and equity, they truly commit to him the cause in which the innocent are
oppressed. And when they sist themselves with their adversaries at the
tribunal of God, they pretend not to an innocence corresponding to the
divine purity were inquiry strictly made, but knowing that in comparison
of the malice, dishonesty, craft, and iniquity of their enemies, their
sincerity justice, simplicity, and purity, are ascertained and approved
by God, they dread not to call upon him to judge between them. Thus when
David said to Saul, “The Lord render to every man his righteousness and
his faithfulness,” (<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.2"></span>[1 Sam.
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.2"></span>), he meant not that the Lord should
examine and reward every one according to his deserts, but he took the
Lord to witness how great his innocence was in comparison of Saul’s
injustice. Paul, too, when he indulges in the boast, “Our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had
our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-ward,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.3"></span>[2 Cor.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.3"></span>), means not to call for the scrutiny of
God, but compelled by the calumnies of the wicked he appeals, in
contradiction of all their slanders, to his faith and probity, which he
knew that God had indulgently accepted. For we see how he elsewhere
says, “I know nothing by myself; yet am I not hereby justified,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.4"></span>[1 Cor.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.4"></span>); in other words, he was aware that the
divine judgment far transcended the blind estimate of man. Therefore,
however believers may, in defending their integrity against the
hypocrisy of the ungodly, appeal to God as their witness and judge,
still when the question is with God alone, they all with one mouth
exclaim, “If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand?” Again, “Enter not into judgment with thy servant; for in thy
sight shall no man living be justified.” Distrusting their own words,
they gladly exclaim, “Thy loving-kindness is better than life,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.5"></span>[Ps.
130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.5"></span>; 143:2; 63:3).

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p44"></span>15. There are other passages not
unlike those quoted above, at which some may still demur. Solomon says,
“The just man walketh in his integrity,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.1"></span>[Prov.
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.1"></span>). Again, “In the way of righteousness is
life; and in the pathway thereof there is no death,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.2"></span>[Prov.
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.2"></span>). For this reason Ezekiel says, He that
“has walked in my statutes, and has kept my judgments, to deal truly; he
is just, he shall surely live,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.3"></span>[Ezek.
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#009),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.3"></span>; 23:15). None of these declarations do
we deny or obscure. But let one of the sons of Adam come forward with
such integrity. If there is none, they must perish from the presence of
God, or retake themselves to the asylum of mercy. Still we deny not that
the integrity of believers, though partial and imperfect, is a step to
immortality. How so, but just that the works of those whom the Lord has
assumed into the covenant of grace, he tries not by their merit, but
embraces with paternal indulgence. By this we understand not with the
Schoolmen, that works derive their value from accepting grace. For their
meaning is, that works otherwise unfit to obtain salvation in terms of
law, are made fit for such a purpose by the divine acceptance. On the
other hand, I maintain that these works being sullied both by other
transgressions and by their own deficiencies, have no other value than
this, that the Lord indulgently pardons them; in other words, that the
righteousness which he bestows on man is gratuitous. Here they
unseasonably obtrude those passages in which the Apostle prays for all
perfection to believers, “To the end he may establish your hearts
unblamable in holiness before God, even our Father,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.4"></span>[1 Thess.
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p44.4"></span>, and elsewhere). These words were
strongly urged by the Celestines of old, in maintaining the perfection
of holiness in the present life. To this we deem it sufficient briefly
to reply with Augustine, that the goal to which all the pious ought to
aspire is, to appear in the presence of God without spot and blemish;
but as the course of the present life is at best nothing more than
progress, we shall never reach the goal until we have laid aside the
body of sin, and been completely united to the Lord. If any one choose
to give the name of perfection to the saints, I shall not obstinately
quarrel with him, provided he defines this perfection in the words of
Augustine, “When we speak of the perfect virtue of the saints, part of
this perfection consists in the recognition of our imperfection both in
truth and in humility,” (August. ad Bonif. lib. 3, c. 7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_436"></span>[437](inst070.htm#fr_436) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p19.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p20"></span>43 443 See Book 2 chap. 7: sec. 2-8,
15; chap. 8 sec 3; chap 11 sec. 8; Book 3 chap 19. sec 2.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[438](inst070.htm#fr_437) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p23"></span>44 444 French, “Les Sophistes de
Sorbonne;”—the Sophists of Sorbonne.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[439](inst070.htm#fr_438) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p28"></span>45 445 French, “de crier contre nous
en cest endroit;”—here to raise an outcry against us.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[440](inst070.htm#fr_439) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p30"></span>46 446 French, “Edits ou
Statuts;”—Edicts or Statutes.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[441](inst070.htm#fr_440) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p31"></span>47 447 The French here adds the two
following sentences:—“Nostre response done est, merites: mais entant
qu’elles tendent à la justice que Dieu nous a commandee, laquelle est
nulle, si elle n’est parfaite. Or elle ne se trouve parfaite en nul
homme de monde; pourtant faut conclure, q’une bonne œuvre de soy ne
merite pas le nom de justice.”—Our reply then is, that when the works of
the saints are called righteousness, it is not owing to their merits,
but is in so far as they tend to the righteousness which God has
commanded, and which is null if it be not perfect. Now it is not found
perfect in any man in the world. Hence we must conclude, that no good
work merits in itself the name of righteousness.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[442](inst070.htm#fr_441) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p34"></span>48 448 French “Voudrions nous faire
une lignee serpentine, que les enfans meutrissent leur mere?”—Would we
have a viperish progeny, where the children murder the parent?

<span id="fn_442"></span>[443](inst070.htm#fr_442) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p36"></span>49 449 The whole sentence in French
stnads thus:—“Or si cette justice des œvres telle quelle procede de la
foy et de la justification gratuite, il ne faut pas qu’on la prenne pour
destruire ou obscurcir la grace dont elle depend; mais plustost doit
estre enclose en icelle, comme le fruict à arbre.”—Now, if this
righteousness of works, such as it is, proceeds from faith and free
justification, it must not be employed to destroy or obscure the grace
on which it depends, but should rather be included in it, like the fruit
in the tree.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[444](inst070.htm#fr_443) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p37"></span>50 450 <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.1"></span>[Rom.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.1"></span>; <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.2"></span>[Ps.
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.2"></span>; 112:1; <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.3"></span>[Prov.
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.3"></span>; <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.4"></span>[Ps.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.4"></span>; 106:3; 119:11; <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.5"></span>[Mt.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p37.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[445](inst070.htm#fr_444) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p39"></span>51 451 French, “Il suffit à nos
adversaires s’ils peuvent deraciner la justice de foy, laquelle nous
voulons estre plantee au profond du cœur.”—It is enough for our
opponents if they can root up justification by faith, which we desire to
be planted at the bottom of the heart.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[446](inst070.htm#fr_445) <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xviii-p43"></span>52 452 <span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.1"></span>[Ps.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xviii-p43.1"></span>; 17:1; 18:20; 26:1, 9, 10. Farther on ,
see Chap 14 s18; Chap. 20 s10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 18. - THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF WORKS IMPROPERLY INFERRED FROM
REWARDS.](inst071)
