[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst018)  [Next](inst020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.vi"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.vi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 5.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p1"></span>THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD CONSPICUOUS IN THE
CREATION, AND CONTINUAL GOVERNMENT OF THE WORLD.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p2"></span>This chapter consists of two parts: 1. The
former, which occupies the first ten sections, divides all the works of
God into two great classes, and elucidates the knowledge of God as
displayed in each class. The one class is treated of in the first six,
and the other in the four following sections: 2. The latter part of the
chapter shows, that, in consequence of the extreme stupidity of men,
those manifestations of God, however perspicuous, lead to no useful
result. This latter part, which commences at the eleventh section, is
continued to the end of the chapter.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.vi-p4"></span>1. The invisible and incomprehensible
essence of God, to a certain extent, made visible in his works.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p5"></span>2. This declared by the first class of
works—viz. the admirable motions of the heavens and the earth, the
symmetry of the human body, and the connection of its parts; in short,
the various objects which are presented to every eye.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p6"></span>3. This more especially manifested in the
structure of the human body.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p7"></span>4. The shameful ingratitude of disregarding
God, who, in such a variety of ways, is manifested within us. The still
more shameful ingratitude of contemplating the endowments of the soul,
without ascending to Him who gave them. No objection can be founded on
any supposed organism in the soul.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p8"></span>5. The powers and actions of the soul, a
proof of its separate existence from the body. Proofs of the soul’s
immortality. Objection that the whole world is quickened by one soul.
Reply to the objection. Its impiety.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p9"></span>6. Conclusion from what has been said—viz.
that the omnipotence, eternity, and goodness of God, may be learned from
the first class of works, *i.e.*, those which are in accordance with the
ordinary course of nature.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p10"></span>7. The second class of works—viz. those
above the ordinary course of nature, afford clear evidence of the
perfections of God, especially his goodness, justice, and mercy.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p11"></span>8. Also his providence, power, and wisdom.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p12"></span>9. Proofs and illustrations of the divine
Majesty. The use of them—viz. the acquisition of divine knowledge in
combination with true piety.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p13"></span>10. The tendency of the knowledge of God
to inspire the righteous with the hope of future life, and remind the
wicked of the punishments reserved for them. Its tendency, moreover, to
keep alive in the hearts of the righteous a sense of the divine
goodness.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p14"></span>11. The second part of the chapter, which
describes the stupidity both of learned and unlearned, in ascribing the
whole order of things, and the admirable arrangements of divine
Providence, to fortune.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p15"></span>12. Hence Polytheism, with all its
abominations, and the endless and irreconcilable opinions of the
philosophers concerning God.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p16"></span>13. All guilty of revolt from God,
corrupting pure religion, either by following general custom, or the
impious consent of antiquity.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p17"></span>14. Though irradiated by the wondrous
glories of creation, we cease not to follow our own ways.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p18"></span>15. Our conduct altogether inexcusable,
the dullness of perception being attributable to ourselves, while we are
fully reminded of the true path, both by the structure and the
government of the world.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p19"></span>1. Since the perfection of blessedness
consists in the knowledge of God, he has been pleased, in order that
none might be excluded from the means of obtaining felicity, not only to
deposit in our minds that seed of religion of which we have already
spoken, but so to manifest his perfections in the whole structure of the
universe, and daily place himself in our view, that we cannot open our
eyes without being compelled to behold him. His essence, indeed, is
incomprehensible, utterly transcending all human thought; but on each of
his works his glory is engraven in characters so bright, so distinct,
and so illustrious, that none, however dull and illiterate, can plead
ignorance as their excuse. Hence, with perfect truth, the Psalmist
exclaims, “He covereth himself with light as with a garment,” (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p19.1"></span>[Psalm
104:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.vi-p19.1"></span>); as if he had said, that God for the first
time was arrayed in visible attire when, in the creation of the world,
he displayed those glorious banners, on which, to whatever side we turn,
we behold his perfections visibly portrayed. In the same place, the
Psalmist aptly compares the expanded heavens to his royal tent, and
says, “He layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters, maketh the
clouds his chariot, and walketh upon the wings of the wind,” sending
forth the winds and lightnings as his swift messengers. And because the
glory of his power and wisdom is more refulgent in the firmament, it is
frequently designated as his palace. And, first, wherever you turn your
eyes, there is no portion of the world, however minute, that does not
exhibit at least some sparks of beauty; while it is impossible to
contemplate the vast and beautiful fabric as it extends around, without
being overwhelmed by the immense weight of glory. Hence, the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews elegantly describes the visible worlds as
images of the invisible (<span id="iv.i.vi-p19.2"></span>[Heb.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.vi-p19.2"></span>),
the elegant structure of the world serving us as a kind of mirror, in
which we may behold God, though otherwise invisible. For the same
reason, the Psalmist attributes language to celestial objects, a
language which all nations understand (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p19.3"></span>[Psalm
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.vi-p19.3"></span>),
the manifestation of the Godhead being too clear to escape the notice of
any people, however obtuse. The apostle Paul, stating this still more
clearly, says, “That which may be known of God is manifest in them, for
God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the
creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead,” (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p19.4"></span>[Rom.
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.vi-p19.4"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.vi-p20"></span>2. In attestation of his wondrous wisdom,
both the heavens and the earth present us with innumerable proofs not
only those more recondite proofs which astronomy, medicine, and all the
natural sciences, are designed to illustrate, but proofs which force
themselves on the notice of the most illiterate peasant, who cannot open
his eyes without beholding them. It is true, indeed, that those who are
more or less intimately acquainted with those liberal studies are
thereby assisted and enabled to obtain a deeper insight into the secret
workings of divine wisdom. No man, however, though he be ignorant of
these, is incapacitated for discerning such proofs of creative wisdom as
may well cause him to break forth in admiration of the Creator. To
investigate the motions of the heavenly bodies, to determine their
positions, measure their distances, and ascertain their properties,
demands skill, and a more careful examination; and where these are so
employed, as the Providence of God is thereby more fully unfolded, so it
is reasonable to suppose that the mind takes a loftier flight, and
obtains brighter views of his glory.5  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) Still, none who have the use of their
eyes can be ignorant of the divine skill manifested so conspicuously in
the endless variety, yet distinct and well ordered array, of the
heavenly host; and, therefore, it is plain that the Lord has furnished
every man with abundant proofs of his wisdom. The same is true in regard
to the structure of the human frame. To determine the connection of its
parts, its symmetry and beauty, with the skill of a Galen (Lib. De Usu
Partium), requires singular acuteness; and yet all men acknowledge that
the human body bears on its face such proofs of ingenious contrivance as
are sufficient to proclaim the admirable wisdom of its Maker.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p22"></span>3. Hence certain of the philosophers5
 <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) have not improperly called man a
*microcosm* (*miniature world*), as being a rare specimen of divine
power, wisdom, and goodness, and containing within himself wonders
sufficient to occupy our minds, if we are willing so to employ them.
Paul, accordingly, after reminding the Athenians that they “might feel
after God and find him,” immediately adds, that “he is not far from
every one of us,” (<span id="iv.i.vi-p23.1"></span>[Acts
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.vi-p23.1"></span>); every man having within himself undoubted
evidence of the heavenly grace by which he lives, and moves, and has his
being. But if, in order to apprehend God, it is unnecessary to go
farther than ourselves, what excuse can there be for the sloth of any
man who will not take the trouble of descending into himself that he may
find Him? For the same reason, too, David, after briefly celebrating the
wonderful name and glory of God, as everywhere displayed, immediately
exclaims, “What is man, that thou art mindful of him?” and again, “Out
of the mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast ordained strength,”
(<span id="iv.i.vi-p23.2"></span>[Ps.
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.vi-p23.2"></span>).
Thus he declares not only that the human race are a bright mirror of the
Creator’s works, but that infants hanging on their mothers’ breasts have
tongues eloquent enough to proclaim his glory without the aid of other
orators. Accordingly, he hesitates not to bring them forward as fully
instructed to refute the madness of those who, from devilish pride,
would fain extinguish the name of God. Hence, too, the passage which
Paul quotes from Aratus, “We are his offspring,” (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p23.3"></span>[Acts
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.vi-p23.3"></span>), the excellent gifts with which he has
endued us attesting that he is our Father. In the same way also, from
natural instinct, and, as it were, at the dictation of experience,
heathen poets called him the father of men. No one, indeed, will
voluntarily and willingly devote himself to the service of God unless he
has previously tasted his paternal love, and been thereby allured to
love and reverence Him.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p24"></span>4. But herein appears the shameful
ingratitude of men. Though they have in their own persons a factory
where innumerable operations of God are carried on, and a magazine
stored with treasures of inestimable value—instead of bursting forth in
his praise, as they are bound to do, they, on the contrary, are the more
inflated and swelled with pride. They feel how wonderfully God is
working in them, and their own experience tells them of the vast variety
of gifts which they owe to his liberality. Whether they will or not,
they cannot but know that these are proofs of his Godhead, and yet they
inwardly suppress them. They have no occasion to go farther than
themselves, provided they do not, by appropriating as their own that
which has been given them from heaven, put out the light intended to
exhibit God clearly to their minds. At this day, however, the earth
sustains on her bosom many monster minds—minds which are not afraid to
employ the seed of Deity deposited in human nature as a means of
suppressing the name of God. Can any thing be more detestable than this
madness in man, who, finding God a hundred times both in his body and
his soul, makes his excellence in this respect a pretext for denying
that there is a God? He will not say that chance has made him differ
from the brutes that perish; but, substituting nature as the architect
of the universe, he suppresses the name of God. The swift motions of the
soul, its noble faculties and rare endowments, bespeak the agency of God
in a manner which would make the suppression of it impossible, did not
the Epicureans, like so many Cyclops, use it as a vantage-ground, from
which to wage more audacious war with God. Are so many treasures of
heavenly wisdom employed in the guidance of such a worm as man, and
shall the whole universe be denied the same privilege? To hold that
there are organs in the soul corresponding to each of its faculties, is
so far from obscuring the glory of God, that it rather illustrates it.
Let Epicurus tell what concourse of atoms, cooking meat and drink, can
form one portion into refuse and another portion into blood, and make
all the members separately perform their office as carefully as if they
were so many souls acting with common consent in the superintendence of
one body.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p25"></span>5. But my business at present is not with
that stye: I wish rather to deal with those who, led away by absurd
subtleties, are inclined, by giving an indirect turn to the frigid
doctrine of Aristotle, to employ it for the purpose both of disproving
the immortality of the soul, and robbing God of his rights. Under the
pretext that the faculties of the soul are organised, they chain it to
the body as if it were incapable of a separate existence, while they
endeavour as much as in them lies, by pronouncing eulogiums on nature,
to suppress the name of God. But there is no ground for maintaining that
the powers of the soul are confined to the performance of bodily
functions. What has the body to do with your measuring the heavens,
counting the number of the stars, ascertaining their magnitudes, their
relative distances, the rate at which they move, and the orbits which
they describe? I deny not that Astronomy has its use; all I mean to show
is, that these lofty investigations are not conducted by organised
symmetry, but by the faculties of the soul itself apart altogether from
the body. The single example I have given will suggest many others to
the reader. The swift and versatile movements of the soul in glancing
from heaven to earth, connecting the future with the past, retaining the
remembrance of former years, nay, forming creations of its own—its
skill, moreover, in making astonishing discoveries, and inventing so
many wonderful arts, are sure indications of the agency of God in man.
What shall we say of its activity when the body is asleep, its many
revolving thoughts, its many useful suggestions, its many solid
arguments, nay, its presentiment of things yet to come? What shall we
say but that man bears about with him a stamp of immortality which can
never be effaced? But how is it possible for man to be divine, and yet
not acknowledge his Creator? Shall we, by means of a power of judging
implanted in our breast, distinguish between justice and injustice, and
yet there be no judge in heaven? Shall some remains of intelligence
continue with us in sleep, and yet no God keep watch in heaven? Shall we
be deemed the inventors of so many arts and useful properties that God
may be defrauded of his praise, though experience tells us plainly
enough, that whatever we possess is dispensed to us in unequal measures
by another hand? The talk of certain persons concerning a secret
inspiration quickening the whole world, is not only silly, but
altogether profane. Such persons are delighted with the following
celebrated passage of Virgil:6  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) —

<span id="iv.i.vi-p27"></span>“Know, first, that heaven, and earth’s
compacted frame,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p28"></span>And flowing waters, and the starry flame,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p29"></span>And both the radiant lights, one common
soul

<span id="iv.i.vi-p30"></span>Inspires and feeds—and animates the whole.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p31"></span>This active mind, infused through all the
space,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p32"></span>Unites and mingles with the mighty mass:

<span id="iv.i.vi-p33"></span>Hence, men and beasts the breath of life
obtain,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p34"></span>And birds of air, and monsters of the
main.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p35"></span>Th’ ethereal vigour is in all the same,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p36"></span>And every soul is filled with equal
flame.”6  <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)

<span id="iv.i.vi-p38"></span>The meaning of all this is, that the
world, which was made to display the glory of God, is its own creator.
For the same poet has, in another place,6  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) adopted a view common to both Greeks and
Latins:—

<span id="iv.i.vi-p40"></span>“Hence to the bee some sages have assigned

<span id="iv.i.vi-p41"></span>A portion of the God, and heavenly mind;

<span id="iv.i.vi-p42"></span>For God goes forth, and spreads throughout
the whole,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p43"></span>Heaven, earth, and sea, the universal
soul;

<span id="iv.i.vi-p44"></span>Each, at its birth, from him all beings
share,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p45"></span>Both man and brute, the breath of vital
air;

<span id="iv.i.vi-p46"></span>To him return, and, loosed from earthly
chain,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p47"></span>Fly whence they sprung, and rest in God
again;

<span id="iv.i.vi-p48"></span>Spurn at the grave, and, fearless of
decay,

<span id="iv.i.vi-p49"></span>Dwell in high heaven, art star th’
ethereal way.”6  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)

<span id="iv.i.vi-p51"></span>Here we see how far that jejune
speculation, of a universal mind animating and invigorating the world,
is fitted to beget and foster piety in our minds. We have a still
clearer proof of this in the profane verses which the licentious
Lucretius has written as a deduction from the same principle.6  <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) The plain object is to form an
unsubstantial deity, and thereby banish the true God whom we ought to
fear and worship. I admit, indeed that the expressions “Nature is God,”
may be piously used, if dictated by a pious mind; but as it is
inaccurate and harsh (Nature being more properly the order which has
been established by God), in matters which are so very important, and in
regard to which special reverence is due, it does harm to confound the
Deity with the inferior operations of his hands.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p53"></span>6. Let each of us, therefore, in
contemplating his own nature, remember that there is one God who governs
all natures, and, in governing, wishes us to have respect to himself, to
make him the object of our faith, worship, and adoration. Nothing,
indeed, can be more preposterous than to enjoy those noble endowments
which bespeak the divine presence within us, and to neglect him who, of
his own good pleasure, bestows them upon us. In regard to his power, how
glorious the manifestations by which he urges us to the contemplation of
himself; unless, indeed, we pretend not to know whose energy it is that
by a word sustains the boundless fabric of the universe—at one time
making heaven reverberate with thunder, sending forth the scorching
lightning, and setting the whole atmosphere in a blaze; at another,
causing the raging tempests to blow, and forthwith, in one moment, when
it so pleases him, making a perfect calm; keeping the sea, which seems
constantly threatening the earth with devastation, suspended as it were
in air; at one time, lashing it into fury by the impetuosity of the
winds; at another, appeasing its rage, and stilling all its waves. Here
we might refer to those glowing descriptions of divine power, as
illustrated by natural events, which occur throughout Scripture; but
more especially in the book of Job, and the prophecies of Isaiah. These,
however, I purposely omit, because a better opportunity of introducing
them will be found when I come to treat of the Scriptural account of the
creation. (*Infra*, chap. 14 s. 1, 2, 20, *sq*). I only wish to observe
here, that this method of investigating the divine perfections, by
tracing the lineaments of his countenance as shadowed forth in the
firmament and on the earth, is common both to those within and to those
without the pale of the Church. From the power of God we are naturally
led to consider his eternity since that from which all other things
derive their origin must necessarily be selfexistent and eternal.
Moreover, if it be asked what cause induced him to create all things at
first, and now inclines him to preserve them, we shall find that there
could be no other cause than his own goodness. But if this is the only
cause, nothing more should be required to draw forth our love towards
him; every creature, as the Psalmist reminds us, participating in his
mercy. “His tender mercies are over all his works,” (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p53.1"></span>[Ps.
145:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.vi-p53.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.vi-p54"></span>7. In the second class of God’s works,
namely those which are above the ordinary course of nature, the evidence
of his perfections are in every respect equally clear. For in conducting
the affairs of men, he so arranges the course of his providence, as
daily to declare, by the clearest manifestations, that though all are in
innumerable ways the partakers of his bounty, the righteous are the
special objects of his favour, the wicked and profane the special
objects of his severity. It is impossible to doubt his punishment of
crimes; while at the same time he, in no unequivocal manner, declares
that he is the protector, and even the avenger of innocence, by shedding
blessings on the good, helping their necessities, soothing and solacing
their griefs, relieving their sufferings, and in all ways providing for
their safety. And though he often permits the guilty to exult for a time
with impunity, and the innocent to be driven to and fro in adversity,
nay, even to be wickedly and iniquitously oppressed, this ought not to
produce any uncertainty as to the uniform justice of all his procedure.
Nay, an opposite inference should be drawn. When any one crime calls
forth visible manifestations of his anger, it must be because he hates
all crimes; and, on the other hand, his leaving many crimes unpunished,
only proves that there is a Judgment in reserve, when the punishment now
delayed shall be inflicted. In like manner, how richly does he supply us
with the means of contemplating his mercy when, as frequently happens,
he continues to visit miserable sinners with unwearied kindness, until
he subdues their depravity, and woos them back with more than a parent’s
fondness?

<span id="iv.i.vi-p55"></span>8. To this purpose the Psalmist (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p55.1"></span>[Ps.
107](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.vi-p55.1"></span>)
mentioning how God, in a wondrous manner, often brings sudden and
unexpected succour to the miserable when almost on the brink of despair,
whether in protecting them when they stray in deserts, and at length
leading them back into the right path, or supplying them with food when
famishing for want, or delivering them when captive from iron fetters
and foul dungeons, or conducting them safe into harbour after shipwreck,
or bringing them back from the gates of death by curing their diseases,
or, after burning up the fields with heat and drought, fertilising them
with the river of his grace, or exalting the meanest of the people, and
casting down the mighty from their lofty seats:—the Psalmist, after
bringing forward examples of this description, infers that those things
which men call fortuitous events, are so many proofs of divine
providence, and more especially of paternal clemency, furnishing ground
of joy to the righteous, and at the same time stopping the mouths of the
ungodly. But as the greater part of mankind, enslaved by error, walk
blindfold in this glorious theatre, he exclaims that it is a rare and
singular wisdom to meditate carefully on these works of God, which many,
who seem most sharp-sighted in other respects, behold without profit. It
is indeed true, that the brightest manifestation of divine glory finds
not one genuine spectator among a hundred. Still, neither his power nor
his wisdom is shrouded in darkness. His power is strikingly displayed
when the rage of the wicked, to all appearance irresistible, is crushed
in a single moment; their arrogance subdued, their strongest bulwarks
overthrown, their armour dashed to pieces, their strength broken, their
schemes defeated without an effort, and audacity which set itself above
the heavens is precipitated to the lowest depths of the earth. On the
other hand, the poor are raised up out of the dust, and the needy lifted
out of the dung hill (<span id="iv.i.vi-p55.2"></span>[Ps.
113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span
id="iv.i.vi-p55.2"></span>), the oppressed and afflicted are rescued in
extremity, the despairing animated with hope, the unarmed defeat the
armed, the few the many, the weak the strong. The excellence of the
divine wisdom is manifested in distributing everything in due season,
confounding the wisdom of the world, and taking the wise in their own
craftiness (<span id="iv.i.vi-p55.3"></span>[1 Cor.
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019)<span id="iv.i.vi-p55.3"></span>);
in short, conducting all things in perfect accordance with reason.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p56"></span>9. We see there is no need of a long and
laborious train of argument in order to obtain proofs which illustrate
and assert the Divine Majesty. The few which we have merely touched,
show them to be so immediately within our reach in every quarter, that
we can trace them with the eye, or point to them with the finger. And
here we must observe again (see chap. 2 s. 2), that the knowledge of God
which we are invited to cultivate is not that which, resting satisfied
with empty speculation, only flutters in the brain, but a knowledge
which will prove substantial and fruitful wherever it is duly perceived,
and rooted in the heart. The Lord is manifested by his perfections. When
we feel their power within us, and are conscious of their benefits, the
knowledge must impress us much more vividly than if we merely imagined a
God whose presence we never felt. Hence it is obvious, that in seeking
God, the most direct path and the fittest method is, not to attempt with
presumptuous curiosity to pry into his essence, which is rather to be
adored than minutely discussed, but to contemplate him in his works, by
which he draws near, becomes familiar, and in a manner communicates
himself to us. To this the Apostle referred when he said, that we need
not go far in search of him (<span id="iv.i.vi-p56.1"></span>[Acts
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.vi-p56.1"></span>), because, by the continual working of his
power, he dwells in every one of us. Accordingly, David (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p56.2"></span>[Psalm
145](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.vi-p56.2"></span>),
after acknowledging that his greatness is unsearchable, proceeds to
enumerate his works, declaring that his greatness will thereby be
unfolded. It therefore becomes us also diligently to prosecute that
investigation of God which so enraptures the soul with admiration as, at
the same time, to make an efficacious impression on it. And, as
Augustine expresses it (in <span id="iv.i.vi-p56.3"></span>[Psalm
144](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.vi-p56.3"></span>),
since we are unable to comprehend Him, and are, as it were, overpowered
by his greatness, our proper course is to contemplate his works, and so
refresh ourselves with his goodness.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p57"></span>10. By the knowledge thus acquired, we
ought not only to be stimulated to worship God, but also aroused and
elevated to the hope of future life. For, observing that the
manifestations which the Lord gives both of his mercy and severity are
only begun and incomplete, we ought to infer that these are doubtless
only a prelude to higher manifestations, of which the full display is
reserved for another state. Conversely, when we see the righteous
brought into affliction by the ungodly, assailed with injuries,
overwhelmed with calumnies, and lacerated by insult and contumely,
while, on the contrary, the wicked flourish, prosper, acquire ease and
honour, and all these with impunity, we ought forthwith to infer, that
there will be a future life in which iniquity shall receive its
punishment, and righteousness its reward. Moreover, when we observe that
the Lord often lays his chastening rod on the righteous, we may the more
surely conclude, that far less will the righteous ultimately escape the
scourges of his anger. There is a well-known passage in Augustine (De
Civitat. Dei, lib. 1 c. 8), “Were all sin now visited with open
punishment, it might be thought that nothing was reserved for the final
Judgment; and, on the other hand, were no sin now openly punished, it
might be supposed there was no divine providence.” It must be
acknowledged, therefore, that in each of the works of God, and more
especially in the whole of them taken together, the divine perfections
are delineated as in a picture, and the whole human race thereby invited
and allured to acquire the knowledge of God, and, in consequence of this
knowledge, true and complete felicity. Moreover, while his perfections
are thus most vividly displayed, the only means of ascertaining their
practical operation and tendency is to descend into ourselves, and
consider how it is that the Lord there manifests his wisdom, power, and
energy,—how he there displays his justice, goodness, and mercy. For
although David (<span id="iv.i.vi-p57.1"></span>[Psalm
92:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.vi-p57.1"></span>)
justly complains of the extreme infatuation of the ungodly in not
pondering the deep counsels of God, as exhibited in the government of
the human race, what he elsewhere says (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p57.2"></span>[Psalm
40](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.vi-p57.2"></span>) is
most true, that the wonders of the divine wisdom in this respect are
more in number than the hairs of our head. But I leave this topic at
present, as it will be more fully considered afterwards in its own place
(Book I. c. 16, see. 6-9).

<span id="iv.i.vi-p58"></span>11. Bright, however, as is the
manifestation which God gives both of himself and his immortal kingdom
in the mirror of his works, so great is our stupidity, so dull are we in
regard to these bright manifestations, that we derive no benefit from
them. For in regard to the fabric and admirable arrangement of the
universe, how few of us are there who, in lifting our eyes to the
heavens, or looking abroad on the various regions of the earth, ever
think of the Creator? Do we not rather overlook Him, and sluggishly
content ourselves with a view of his works? And then in regard to
supernatural events, though these are occurring every day, how few are
there who ascribe them to the ruling providence of God—how many who
imagine that they are casual results produced by the blind evolutions of
the wheel of chance? Even when under the guidance and direction of these
events, we are in a manner forced to the contemplation of God (a
circumstance which all must occasionally experience), and are thus led
to form some impressions of Deity, we immediately fly off to carnal
dreams and depraved fictions, and so by our vanity corrupt heavenly
truth. This far, indeed, we differ from each other, in that every one
appropriates to himself some peculiar error; but we are all alike in
this, that we substitute monstrous fictions for the one living and true
God—a disease not confined to obtuse and vulgar minds, but affecting the
noblest, and those who, in other respects, are singularly acute. How
lavishly in this respect have the whole body of philosophers betrayed
their stupidity and want of sense? To say nothing of the others whose
absurdities are of a still grosser description, how completely does
Plato, the soberest and most religious of them all, lose himself in his
round globe?6  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59) What must be the
case with the rest, when the leaders, who ought to have set them an
example, commit such blunders, and labour under such hallucinations? In
like manner, while the government of the world places the doctrine of
providence beyond dispute, the practical result is the same as if it
were believed that all things were carried hither and thither at the
caprice of chance; so prone are we to vanity and error. I am still
referring to the most distinguished of the philosophers, and not to the
common herd, whose madness in profaning the truth of God exceeds all
bounds.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p60"></span>12. Hence that immense flood of error with
which the whole world is overflowed. Every individual mind being a kind
of labyrinth, it is not wonderful, not only that each nation has adopted
a variety of fictions, but that almost every man has had his own god. To
the darkness of ignorance have been added presumption and wantonness,
and hence there is scarcely an individual to be found without some idol
or phantom as a substitute for Deity. Like water gushing forth from a
large and copious spring, immense crowds of gods have issued from the
human mind, every man giving himself full license, and devising some
peculiar form of divinity, to meet his own views. It is unnecessary here
to attempt a catalogue of the superstitions with which the world was
overspread. The thing were endless; and the corruptions themselves,
though not a word should be said, furnish abundant evidence of the
blindness of the human mind. I say nothing of the rude and illiterate
vulgar; but among the philosophers6  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) who attempted, by reason and learning, to
pierce the heavens, what shameful disagreement! The higher any one was
endued with genius, and the more he was polished by science and art, the
more specious was the colouring which he gave to his opinions. All
these, however, if examined more closely, will be found to be vain show.
The Stoics plumed themselves on their acuteness, when they sai that the
various names of God might be extracted from all the parts of nature,
and yet that his unity was not thereby divided: as if we were not
already too prone to vanity, and had no need of being presented with an
endless multiplicity of gods, to lead us further and more grossly into
error. The mystic theology of the Egyptians shows how sedulously they
laboured to be thought rational on this subject.6  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61) And, perhaps, at the first glance, some
show of probability might deceive the simple and unwary; but never did
any mortal devise a scheme by which religion was not foully corrupted.
This endless variety and confusion emboldened the Epicureans, and other
gross despisers of piety, to cut off all sense of God. For when they saw
that the wisest contradicted each others they hesitated not to infer
from their dissensions, and from the frivolous and absurd doctrines of
each, that men foolishly, and to no purpose, brought torment upon
themselves by searching for a God, there being none: and they thought
this inference safe, because it was better at once to deny God
altogether, than to feign uncertain gods, and thereafter engage in
quarrels without end. They, indeed, argue absurdly, or rather weave a
cloak for their impiety out of human ignorance; though ignorance surely
cannot derogate from the prerogatives of God. But since all confess that
there is no topic on which such difference exists, both among learned
and unlearned, the proper inference is, that the human mind, which thus
errs in inquiring after God, is dull and blind in heavenly mysteries.
Some praise the answer of Simonides, who being asked by King Hero what
God was, asked a day to consider. When the king next day repeated the
question, he asked two days; and after repeatedly doubling the number of
days, at length replied, “The longer I consider, the darker the subject
appears.”6  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) He, no doubt, wisely
suspended his opinion, when he did not see clearly: still his answer
shows, that if men are only naturally taught, instead of having any
distinct, solid, or certain knowledge, they fasten only on contradictory
principles, and, in consequence, worship an unknown God.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p64"></span>13. Hence we must hold, that whosoever
adulterates pure religion (and this must be the case with all who cling
to their own views), make a departure from the one God. No doubt, they
will allege that they have a different intention; but it is of little
consequence what they intend or persuade themselves to believe, since
the Holy Spirit pronounces all to be apostates, who, in the blindness of
their minds, substitute demons in the place of God. For this reason Paul
declares that the Ephesians were “without God,” (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p64.1"></span>[Eph.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="iv.i.vi-p64.1"></span>),
until they had learned from the Gospel what it is to worship the true
God. Nor must this be restricted to one people only, since, in another
place, he declares in general, that all men “became vain in their
imaginations,” after the majesty of the Creator was manifested to them
in the structure of the world. Accordingly, in order to make way for the
only true God, he condemns all the gods celebrated among the Gentiles as
lying and false, leaving no Deity anywhere but in Mount Zion where the
special knowledge of God was professed (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p64.2"></span>[Hab. 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#018),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#020)<span id="iv.i.vi-p64.2"></span>).
Among the Gentiles in the time of Christ, the Samaritans undoubtedly
made the nearest approach to true piety; yet we hear from his own mouth
that they worshipped they knew not what (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p64.3"></span>[John
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.vi-p64.3"></span>);
whence it follows that they were deluded by vain errors. In short,
though all did not give way to gross vice, or rush headlong into open
idolatry, there was no pure and authentic religion founded merely on
common belief. A few individuals may not have gone all insane lengths
with the vulgar; still Paul’s declaration remains true, that the wisdom
of God was not apprehended by the princes of this world (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p64.4"></span>[1 Cor.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.vi-p64.4"></span>).
But if the most distinguished wandered in darkness, what shall we say of
the refuse? No wonder, therefore, that all worship of man’s device is
repudiated by the Holy Spirit as degenerate. Any opinion which man can
form in heavenly mysteries, though it may not beget a long train of
errors, is still the parent of error. And though nothing worse should
happen, even this is no light sin—to worship an unknown God at random.
Of this sin, however, we hear from our Saviour’s own mouth (<span
id="iv.i.vi-p64.5"></span>[John
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span id="iv.i.vi-p64.5"></span>),
that all are guilty who have not been taught out of the law who the God
is whom they ought to worship. Nay, even Socrates in Xenophon (lib. 1
Memorabilia), lauds the response of Apollo enjoining every man to
worship the gods according to the rites of his country, and the
particular practice of his own city. But what right have mortals thus to
decide of their own authority in a matter which is far above the world;
or who can so acquiesce in the will of his forefathers, or the decrees
of the people, as unhesitatingly to receive a god at their hands? Every
one will adhere to his own Judgment, sooner than submit to the dictation
of others. Since, therefore, in regulating the worship of God, the
custom of a city, or the consent of antiquity, is a too feeble and
fragile bond of piety; it remains that God himself must bear witness to
himself from heaven.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p65"></span>14. In vain for us, therefore, does
Creation exhibit so many bright lamps lighted up to show forth the glory
of its Author. Though they beam upon us from every quarter, they are
altogether insufficient of themselves to lead us into the right path.
Some sparks, undoubtedly, they do throw out; but these are quenched
before they can give forth a brighter effulgence. Wherefore, the
apostle, in the very place where he says that the worlds are images of
invisible things, adds that it is *by faith* we understand that they
were framed by the word of God (<span id="iv.i.vi-p65.1"></span>[Heb.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.vi-p65.1"></span>);
thereby intimating that the invisible Godhead is indeed represented by
such displays, but that we have no eyes to perceive it until they are
enlightened through faith by internal revelation from God. When Paul
says that that which may be known of God is manifested by the creation
of the world, he does not mean such a manifestation as may be
comprehended by the wit of man (<span id="iv.i.vi-p65.2"></span>[Rom.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019)<span id="iv.i.vi-p65.2"></span>);
on the contrary, he shows that it has no further effect than to render
us inexcusable (<span id="iv.i.vi-p65.3"></span>[Acts
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.vi-p65.3"></span>). And though he says, elsewhere, that we have
not far to seek for God, inasmuch as he dwells within us, he shows, in
another passage, to what extent this nearness to God is availing. God,
says he, “in times past, suffered all nations to walk in their own ways.
Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, in that he did good,
and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts
with food and gladness,” (<span id="iv.i.vi-p65.4"></span>[Acts
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)<span id="iv.i.vi-p65.4"></span>).
But though God is not left without a witness, while, with numberless
varied acts of kindness, he woos men to the knowledge of himself, yet
they cease not to follow their own ways, in other words, deadly errors.

<span id="iv.i.vi-p66"></span>15. But though we are deficient in natural
powers which might enable us to rise to a pure and clear knowledge of
God, still, as the dullness which prevents us is within, there is no
room for excuse. We cannot plead ignorance, without being at the same
time convicted by our own consciences both of sloth and ingratitude. It
were, indeed, a strange defence for man to pretend that he has no ears
to hear the truth, while dumb creatures have voices loud enough to
declare it; to allege that he is unable to see that which creatures
without eyes demonstrate, to excuse himself on the ground of weakness of
mind, while all creatures without reason are able to teach. Wherefore,
when we wander and go astray, we are justly shut out from every species
of excuse, because all things point to the right path. But while man
must bear the guilt of corrupting the seed of divine knowledge so
wondrously deposited in his mind, and preventing it from bearing good
and genuine fruit, it is still most true that we are not sufficiently
instructed by that bare and simple, but magnificent testimony which the
creatures bear to the glory of their Creator. For no sooner do we, from
a survey of the world, obtain some slight knowledge of Deity, than we
pass by the true God, and set up in his stead the dream and phantom of
our own brain, drawing away the praise of justice, wisdom, and goodness,
from the fountain-head, and transferring it to some other quarter.
Moreover, by the erroneous estimate we form, we either so obscure or
pervert his daily works, as at once to rob them of their glory and the
author of them of his just praise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](inst019.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p21"></span>8 58 Augustinus: Astrologia magnum
religiosis argumentum, tormentumque curiosis.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](inst019.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p23"></span>9 59 See Aristot. Hist. Anim. lib. i. c.
17; Macrob. in Somn. Scip lib. 2 c. 12; Boeth. De Definitione.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](inst019.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p26"></span> 60 Aeneid, 6 724, sq. See Calvin on <span
id="iv.i.vi-p26.1"></span>[Acts
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="iv.i.vi-p26.1"></span>
Manil. lib. 1. Astron.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](inst019.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p37"></span>1 61 Dryden’s Virgil, Æneid, Book 4 1.
980-990.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](inst019.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p39"></span>2 62 Georgic 4. 220. Plat. in Tim. Arist.
lib. 1 De Animo. See also Metaph. lib. 1. Merc. Trismegr. in Pimandro.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](inst019.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p50"></span>3 63 Dryden’s Virgil, Book 4. 1. 252-262.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](inst019.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p52"></span>4 64 He maintains, in the beginning of the
First Book, that nothing is produced of nothing, but that all things are
formed out of certain primitive materials. He also perverts the ordinary
course of generation into an argument against the existence of God. In
the Fifth Book, however, he admits that the world was born and will die.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](inst019.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p59"></span>5 65 Plato in Timaeos. See also Cic. De
Nat. Deorum, lib. 1 ; Plut. De Philos Placitis, lib. i.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](inst019.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p61"></span>6 66 Cicero : Qui deos esse dixerunt tanta
sunt in varietate ac dissensione, ut eorum molestum sit enumerare
sententias.—Cicero, De Nat Deorum, lib. 1 and 2. Lactant Inst. Div. lib.
1 &c.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](inst019.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p62"></span>8 68 Plutarch. lib. De Iside et Osiride.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](inst019.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.i.vi-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.vi-p63"></span>9 69 Cicero, De Nat. Deor. lib. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 6. - THE NEED OF SCRIPTURE, AS A GUIDE AND TEACHER, IN
COMING TO GOD AS A CREATOR](inst020)
