[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst026)  [Next](inst028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiv"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.xiv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 13.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p1"></span>THE UNITY OF THE DIVINE ESSENCE IN THREE
PERSONS TAUGHT, IN SCRIPTURE, FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p2"></span>This chapter consists of two parts. The
former delivers the orthodox doctrine concerning the Holy Trinity. This
occupies from sec. 1-21, and may be divided into four heads; the first,
treating of the meaning of Person, including both the term and the thing
meant by it, sec. 2-6; the second, proving the deity of the Son, sec.
7-13; the third, the deity of the Holy Spirit, sec. 14 and 15; and the
fourth, explaining what is to be held concerning the Holy Trinity. The
second part of the chapter refutes certain heresies which have arisen,
particularly in our age, in opposition to this orthodox doctrine. This
occupies from sec. 21 to the end.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p4"></span>1. Scripture, in teaching that the essence
of God is immense and spiritual, refutes not only idolaters and the
foolish wisdom of the world, but also the Manichees and
Anthropomorphites. These latter briefly refuted.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p5"></span>2. In this one essence are three persons,
yet so that neither is there a triple God, nor is the simple essence of
God divided. Meaning of the word Person in this discussion. Three
hypostases in God, or the essence of God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p6"></span>3. Objection of those who, in this
discussion, reject the use of the word Person. Answer 1. That it is not
a foreign term, but is employed for the explanation of sacred mysteries.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p7"></span>4. Answer continued, 2. The orthodox
compelled to use the terms, Trinity, Subsistence, and Person. Examples
from the case of the Asians and Sabellians.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p8"></span>5. Answer continued, 3. The ancient
Church, though differing somewhat in the explanation of these terms,
agree in substance. Proofs from Hilary, Jerome, Augustine, in their use
of the words Essence, Substance, Hypostasis. 4. Provided the orthodox
meaning is retained, there should be no dispute about mere terms. But
those who object to the terms usually favour the Arian and Sabellian
heresy.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p9"></span>6. After the definition of the term
follows a definition and explanation of the thing meant by it. The
distinction of Persons.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p10"></span>7. Proofs of the eternal Deity of the
Son. The Son the λόγος of the Eternal Father, and, therefore, the Son
Eternal God. Objection. Reply.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p11"></span>8. Objection, that the Λόγος began to be
when the creating God spoke. Answer confirmed by Scripture and argument.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p12"></span>9. The Son called God and Jehovah. Other
names of the Eternal Father applied to him in the Old Testament. He is,
therefore, the Eternal God. Another objection refuted. Case of the Jews
explained.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p13"></span>10. The angel who appeared to the fathers
under the Law asserts that he is Jehovah. That angel was the Λόγος of
the Eternal Father. The Son being that Λόγος is Eternal God. Impiety of
Servetus refuted. Why the Son appeared in the form of an angel.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p14"></span>11. Passages from the New Testament in
which the Son is acknowledged to be the Lord of Hosts, the Judge of the
world, the God of glory, the Creator of the world, the Lord of angels,
the King of the Church, the eternal Λόγος, God blessed for ever, God
manifest in the flesh, the equal of God, the true God and eternal life,
the Lord and God of all believers. Therefore, the Eternal God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p15"></span>12. Christ the Creator, Preserver,
Redeemer, and Searcher of hearts. Therefore, the Eternal God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p16"></span>13. Christ, by his own inherent power,
wrought miracles, and bestowed the power of working them on others. Out
of the Eternal God there is no salvation, no righteousness, no life. All
these are in Christ. Christ, consequently, is the Eternal God. He in
whom we believe and hope, to whom we pray, whom the Church acknowledges
as the Saviour of the faithful, whom to know is life eternal, in whom
the pious glory, and through whom eternal blessings are communicated, is
the Eternal God. All these Christ is, and, therefore, he is God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p17"></span>14. The Divinity of the Spirit proved. I.
He is the Creator and Preserver of the world. II. He sent the Prophets.
III. He quickeneth all things. IV. He is everywhere present. V. He
renews the saints, and fits them for eternal life. VI. All the offices
of Deity belong to him.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p18"></span>15. The Divinity of the Spirit continued.
VII. He is called God. VIII. Blasphemy against him is not forgiven.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p19"></span>16. What view to be taken of the Trinity.
The form of Christian baptism proves that there are in one essence. The
Arian and Macedonian heresies.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p20"></span>17. Of the distinction of Persons. They
are distinct, but not divided. This proved.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p21"></span>18. Analogies taken from human affairs to
be cautiously used. Due regard to be paid to those mentioned by
Scripture.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p22"></span>19. How the Three Persons not only do not
destroy, but constitute the most perfect unity

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p23"></span>20. Conclusion of this part of the
chapter, and summary of the true doctrine concerning the unity of
Essence and the Three Persons.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p24"></span>21. Refutation of Arian, Macedonian, and
Anti Trinitarian heresies. Caution to be observed.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p25"></span>22. The more modern Anti Trinitarians,
and especially Servetus, refuted.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p26"></span>23. Other Anti Trinitarians refuted. No
good objection that Christ is called the Son of God, since he is also
called God. Impious absurdities of some heretics.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p27"></span>24. The name of God sometimes given to
the Son absolutely as to the Father. Same as to other attributes.
Objections refuted.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p28"></span>25. Objections further refuted. Caution
to be used.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p29"></span>26. Previous refutations further
explained.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p30"></span>27. Reply to certain passages produced
from Irenaeus. The meaning of Irenaeus.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p31"></span>28. Reply to certain passages produced
from Tertullian. The meaning of Tertullian.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p32"></span>29. Anti Trinitarians refuted by ancient
Christian writers; *e.g.*, Justin, Hilary. Objections drawn from
writings improperly attributed to Ignatius. Conclusion of the whole
discussion concerning the Trinity.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p33"></span>1. The doctrine of Scripture concerning
the immensity and the spirituality of the essence of God, should have
the effect not only of dissipating the wild dreams of the vulgar, but
also of refuting the subtleties of a profane philosophy. One of the
ancients thought he spake shrewdly when he said that everything we see
and everything we do not see is God (Senec. Praef. lib. 1 Quaest. Nat.)
In this way he fancied that the Divinity was transfused into every
separate portion of the world. But although God, in order to keep us
within the bounds of soberness, treats sparingly of his essence, still,
by the two attributes which I have mentioned, he at once suppresses all
gross imaginations, and checks the audacity of the human mind. His
immensity surely ought to deter us from measuring him by our sense,
while his spiritual nature forbids us to indulge in carnal or earthly
speculation concerning him. With the same view he frequently represents
heaven as his dwelling-place. It is true, indeed, that as he is
incomprehensible, he fills the earth also, but knowing that our minds
are heavy and grovel on the earth, he raises us above the worlds that he
may shake off our sluggishness and inactivity. And here we have a
refutation of the error of the Manichees, who, by adopting two first
principles, made the devil almost the equal of God. This, assuredly, was
both to destroy his unity and restrict his immensity. Their attempt to
pervert certain passages of Scripture proved their shameful ignorance,
as the very nature of the error did their monstrous infatuation. The
Anthropomorphites also, who dreamed of a corporeal God, because mouth,
ears, eyes, hands, and feet, are often ascribed to him in Scripture, are
easily refuted. For who is so devoid of intellect as not to understand
that God, in so speaking, lisps with us as nurses are wont to do with
little children? Such modes of expression, therefore, do not so much
express what kind of a being God is, as accommodate the knowledge of him
to our feebleness. In doing so, he must, of course, stoop far below his
proper height.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p34"></span>2. But there is another special mark by
which he designates himself, for the purpose of giving a more intimate
knowledge of his nature. While he proclaims his unity, he distinctly
sets it before us as existing in three persons. These we must hold,
unless the bare and empty name of Deity merely is to flutter in our
brain without any genuine knowledge. Moreover, lest any one should dream
of a threefold God, or think that the simple essence is divided by the
three Persons, we must here seek a brief and easy definition which may
effectually guard us from error. But as some strongly inveigh against
the term Person as being merely of human inventions let us first
consider how far they have any ground for doing so.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p35"></span>When the Apostle calls the Son of God
“the express image of his person,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p35.1"></span>[Heb.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p35.1"></span>),
he undoubtedly does assign to the Father some subsistence in which he
differs from the Son. For to hold with some interpreters that the term
is equivalent to essence (as if Christ represented the substance of the
Father like the impression of a seal upon wax), were not only harsh but
absurd. For the essence of God being simple and undivided, and contained
in himself entire, in full perfection, without partition or diminution,
it is improper, nay, ridiculous, to call it his express image
(χαρακτερ). But because the Father, though distinguished by his own
peculiar properties, has expressed himself wholly in the Son, he is said
with perfect reason to have rendered his person (hypostasis) manifest in
him. And this aptly accords with what is immediately added—viz. that he
is “the brightness of his glory.” The fair inference from the Apostle’s
words is, that there is a proper subsistence (hypostasis) of the Father,
which shines refulgent in the Son. From this, again it is easy to infer
that there is a subsistence (hypostasis) of the Son which distinguishes
him from the Father. The same holds in the case of the Holy Spirit; for
we will immediately prove both that he is God, and that he has a
separate subsistence from the Father. This, moreover, is not a
distinction of essence, which it were impious to multiply. If credit,
then, is given to the Apostle’s testimony, it follows that there are
three persons (hypostases) in God. The Latins having used the word
*Persona* to express the same thing as the Greek ὑπόστατις, it betrays
excessive fastidiousness and even perverseness to quarrel with the term.
The most literal translation would be *subsistence*. Many have used
*substance* in the same sense. Nor, indeed, was the use of the term
Person confined to the Latin Church. For the Greek Church in like
manner, perhaps, for the purpose of testifying their consent, have
taught that there are three πρόσωπα (*aspects*) in God. All these,
however, whether Greeks or Latins, though differing as to the word, are
perfectly agreed in substance.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p36"></span>3. Now, then, though heretics may snarl
and the excessively fastidious carp at the word Person as inadmissible,
in consequence of its human origin, since they cannot displace us from
our position that three are named, each of whom is perfect God, and yet
that there is no plurality of gods, it is most uncandid to attack the
terms which do nothing more than explain what the Scriptures declare and
sanction. “It were better,” they say, “to confine not only our meanings
but our words within the bounds of Scripture, and not scatter about
foreign terms to become the future seed-beds of brawls and dissensions.
In this way, men grow tired of quarrels about words; the truth is lost
in altercation, and charity melts away amid hateful strife.” If they
call it a *foreign* term, because it cannot be pointed out in Scripture
in so many syllables, they certainly impose an unjust law—a law which
would condemn every interpretation of Scripture that is not composed of
other words of Scripture. But if by *foreign* they mean that which,
after being idly devised, is superstitiously defended,—which tends more
to strife than edification,—which is used either out of place, or with
no benefit which offends pious ears by its harshness, and leads them
away from the simplicity of God’s Word, I embrace their soberness with
all my heart. For I think we are bound to speak of God as reverently as
we are bound to think of him. As our own thoughts respecting him are
foolish, so our own language respecting him is absurd. Still, however,
some medium must be observed. The unerring standard both of thinking and
speaking must be derived from the Scriptures: by it all the thoughts of
ours minds, and the words of our mouths, should he tested. But in regard
to those parts of Scripture which, to our capacities, are dark and
intricate, what forbids us to explain them in clearer terms—terms,
however, kept in reverent and faithful subordination to Scripture truth,
used sparingly and modestly, and not without occasion? Of this we are
not without many examples. When it has been proved that the Church was
impelled, by the strongest necessity, to use the words Trinity and
Person, will not he who still inveighs against novelty of terms be
deservedly suspected of taking offence at the light of truth, and of
having no other ground for his invective, than that the truth is made
plain and transparent?

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p37"></span>4. Such novelty (if novelty it should be
called) becomes most requisite, when the truth is to be maintained
against calumniators who evade it by quibbling. Of this, we of the
present day have too much experience in being constantly called upon to
attack the enemies of pure and sound doctrine. These slippery snakes
escape by their swift and tortuous windings, if not strenuously pursued,
and when caught, firmly held. Thus the early Christians, when harassed
with the disputes which heresies produced, were forced to declare their
sentiments in terms most scrupulously exact in order that no indirect
subterfuges might remain to ungodly men, to whom ambiguity of expression
was a kind of hiding-place. Arius confessed that Christ was God, and the
Son of God; because the passages of Scripture to this effect were too
clear to be resisted, and then, as if he had done well, pretended to
concur with others. But, meanwhile, he ceased not to give out that
Christ was created, and had a beginning like other creatures. To drag
this man of wiles out of his lurking-places, the ancient Church took a
further step, and declared that Christ is the eternal Son of the Father,
and consubstantial with the Father. The impiety was fully disclosed when
the Arians began to declare their hatred and utter detestation of the
term ὁμοούσιος. Had their first confession—viz. that Christ was God,
been sincere and from the heart, they would not have denied that he was
consubstantial with the Father. Who dare charge those ancient writers as
men of strife and contention, for having debated so warmly, and
disturbed the quiet of the Church for a single word? That little word
distinguished between Christians of pure faith and the blasphemous
Arians. Next Sabellius arose, who counted the names of Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, as almost nonentities; maintaining that they were not used
to mark out some distinction, but that they were different attributes of
God, like many others of a similar kind. When the matter was debated, he
acknowledged his belief that the Father was God, the Son God, the Spirit
God; but then he had the evasion ready, that he had said nothing more
than if he had called God powerful, and just, and wise. Accordingly, he
sung another note—viz. that the Father was the Son, and the Holy Spirit
the Father, without order or distinction. The worthy doctors who then
had the interests of piety at heart, in order to defeat it is man’s
dishonesty, proclaimed that three subsistence were to be truly
acknowledged in the one God. That they might protect themselves against
tortuous craftiness by the simple open truth, they affirmed that a
Trinity of Persons subsisted in the one God, or (which is the same
thing) in the unity of God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p38"></span>5. Where names have not been invented
rashly, we must beware lest we become chargeable with arrogance and
rashness in rejecting them. I wish, indeed, that such names were buried,
provided all would concur in the belief that the Father, Son, and
Spirit, are one God, and yet that the Son is not the Father, nor the
Spirit the Son, but that each has his peculiar subsistence. I am not so
minutely precise as to fight furiously for mere words. For I observe,
that the writers of the ancient Church, while they uniformly spoke with
great reverence on these matters, neither agreed with each other, nor
were always consistent with themselves. How strange the formula used by
Councils, and defended by Hilary! How extravagant the view which
Augustine sometimes takes! How unlike the Greeks are to the Latins! But
let one example of variance suffice. The Latins, in translating
ὁμοούσιος used consubstantialis (consubstantial), intimating that there
was one substance of the Father and the Son, and thus using the word
Substance for Essence. Hence Jerome, in his Letter to Damasus, says it
is profane to affirm that there are three substances in God. But in
Hilary you will find it said more than a hundred times that there are
three substances in God. Then how greatly is Jerome perplexed with the
word Hypostasis! He suspects some lurking poison, when it is said that
there are three Hypostases in God. And he does not disguise his belief
that the expression, though used in a pious sense, is improper; if,
indeed, he was sincere in saying this, and did not rather designedly
endeavour, by an unfounded calumny, to throw odium on the Eastern
bishops whom he hated. He certainly shows little candour in asserting,
that in all heathen schools οὐσία is equivalent to Hypostasis—an
assertion completely refuted by trite and common use.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p39"></span>More courtesy and moderation is shown by
Augustine (De Trinit. lib. 5 c. 8 and 9), who, although he says that
Hypostasis in this sense is new to Latin ears, is still so far from
objecting to the ordinary use of the term by the Greeks, that he is even
tolerant of the Latins, who had imitated the Greek phraseology. The
purport of what Socrates says of the term, in the Sixth Book of the
Tripartite History, is, that it had been improperly applied to this
purpose by the unskilful. Hilary (De Trinitat. lib. 2) charges it upon
the heretics as a great crime, that their misconduct had rendered it
necessary to subject to the peril of human utterance things which ought
to have been reverently confined within the mind, not disguising his
opinion that those who do so, do what is unlawful, speak what is
ineffable, and pry into what is forbidden. Shortly after, he apologises
at great length for presuming to introduce new terms. For, after putting
down the natural names of Father, Son, and Spirit, he adds, that all
further inquiry transcends the significance of words, the discernment of
sense, and the apprehension of intellect. And in another place (De
Conciliis), he congratulates the Bishops of France in not having framed
any other confession, but received, without alteration, the ancient and
most simple confession received by all Churches from the days of the
Apostles. Not unlike this is the apology of Augustine, that the term had
been wrung from him by necessity from the poverty of human language in
so high a matter: not that the reality could be thereby expressed, but
that he might not pass on in silence without attempting to show how the
Father, Son, and Spirit, are three.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p40"></span>The modesty of these holy men should be
an admonition to us not instantly to dip our pen in gall, and sternly
denounce those who may be unwilling to swear to the terms which we have
devised, provided they do not in this betray pride, or petulance, or
unbecoming heat, but are willing to ponder the necessity which compels
us so to speak, and may thus become gradually accustomed to a useful
form of expression. Let men also studiously beware, that in opposing the
Asians on the one hand, and the Sabellians on the other, and eagerly
endeavouring to deprive both of any handle for cavil, they do not bring
themselves under some suspicion of being the disciples of either Arius
or Sabellius. Arius says that *Christ is God*, and then mutters that *he
was made and had a beginning*. He says, that *he is one with the
Father*; but secretly whispers in the ears of his party, *made one*,
like other believers, though with special privilege. Say, *he is
consubstantial*, and you immediately pluck the mask from this chameleon,
though you add nothing to Scripture. Sabellius says that *the Father,
Son, and Spirit, indicate some distinction in God*. Say, *they are
three*, and he will bawl out that you are making three Gods. Say, that
*there is a Trinity of Persons in one Divine essence*, you will only
express in one word what the Scriptures say, and stop his empty prattle.
Should any be so superstitiously precise as not to tolerate these terms,
still do their worst, they will not be able to deny that when *one* is
spoken of, a unity of substance must be understood, and when *three* in
one essence, the persons in this Trinity are denoted. When this is
confessed without equivocations we dwell not on words. But I was long
ago made aware, and, indeed, on more than one occasion, that those who
contend pertinaciously about words are tainted with some hidden poison;
and, therefore, that it is more expedient to provoke them purposely,
than to court their favour by speaking obscurely.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p41"></span>6. But to say nothing more of words, let
us now attend to the thing signified. By *person*, then, I mean a
subsistence in the Divine essence,—a subsistence which, while related to
the other two, is distinguished from them by incommunicable properties.
By *subsistence* we wish something else to be understood than *essence*.
For if the Word were God simply and had not some property peculiar to
himself, John could not have said correctly that he had always been with
God. When he adds immediately after, that the Word was God, he calls us
back to the one essence. But because he could not be with God without
dwelling in the Father, hence arises that subsistence, which, though
connected with the essence by an indissoluble tie, being incapable of
separation, yet has a special mark by which it is distinguished from it.
Now, I say that each of the three subsistences while related to the
others is distinguished by its own properties. Here relation is
distinctly expressed, because, when God is mentioned simply and
indefinitely the name belongs not less to the Son and Spirit than to the
Father. But whenever the Father is compared with the Son, the peculiar
property of each distinguishes the one from the other. Again, whatever
is proper to each I affirm to be incommunicable, because nothing can
apply or be transferred to the Son which is attributed to the Father as
a mark of distinction. I have no objections to adopt the definition of
Tertullian, provided it is properly understood, “that there is in God a
certain arrangement or economy, which makes no change on the unity of
essence.”—Tertull. Lib. contra Praxeam.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p42"></span>7. Before proceeding farther, it will be
necessary to prove the divinity of the Son and the Holy Spirit.
Thereafter, we shall see how they differ from each other. When the Word
of God is set before us in the Scriptures, it were certainly most absurd
to imagine that it is only a fleeting and evanescent voice, which is
sent out into the air, and comes forth beyond God himself, as was the
case with the communications made to the patriarchs, and all the
prophecies. The reference is rather to the wisdom ever dwelling with
God, and by which all oracles and prophecies were inspired. For, as
Peter testifies (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p42.1"></span>[1 Pet.
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p42.1"></span>), the ancient prophets spake by the Spirit
of Christ just as did the apostles, and all who after them were
ministers of the heavenly doctrine. But as Christ was not yet
manifested, we necessarily understand that the Word was begotten of the
Father before all ages. But if that Spirit, whose organs the prophets
were, belonged to the Word, the inference is irresistible, that the Word
was truly God. And this is clearly enough shown by Moses in his account
of the creation, where he places the Word as intermediate. For why does
he distinctly narrate that God, in creating each of his works, said, Let
there be this—let there be that, unless that the unsearchable glory of
God might shine forth in his image? I know prattlers would easily evade
this, by saying that *Word* is used for *order* or *command*; but the
apostles are better expositors, when they tell us that the worlds were
created by the Son, and that he sustains all things by his mighty word
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p42.2"></span>[Heb.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p42.2"></span>).
For we here see that *word* is used for the nod or command of the Son,
who is himself the eternal and essential Word of the Father. And no man
of sane mind can have any doubt as to Solomon’s meaning, when he
introduces Wisdom as begotten by God, and presiding at the creation of
the world, and all other divine operations (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p42.3"></span>[Prov.
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p42.3"></span>). For it were trifling and foolish to
imagine any temporary command at a time when God was pleased to execute
his fixed and eternal counsel, and something more still mysterious. To
this our Saviour’s words refer, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I
work,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p42.4"></span>[John
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p42.4"></span>). In thus affirming, that from the
foundation of the world he constantly worked with the Father, he gives a
clearer explanation of what Moses simply touched. The meaning therefore
is, that God spoke in such a manner as left the Word his peculiar part
in the work, and thus made the operation common to both. But the
clearest explanation is given by John, when he states that the
Word—which was from the beginning, God and with God, was, together with
God the Father, the maker of all things. For he both attributes a
substantial and permanent essence to the Word, assigning to it a certain
peculiarity, and distinctly showing how God spoke the world into being.
Therefore, as all revelations from heaven are duly designated by the
title of the Word of God, so the highest place must be assigned to that
substantial Word, the source of all inspiration, which, as being liable
to no variation, remains for ever one and the same with God, and is God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p43"></span>8. Here an outcry is made by certain men,
who, while they dare not openly deny his divinity, secretly rob him of
his eternity. For they contend that the Word only began to be when God
opened his sacred mouth in the creation of the world. Thus, with
excessive temerity, they imagine some change in the essence of God. For
as the names of God, which have respect to external work, began to be
ascribed to him from the existence of the work (as when he is called the
Creator of heaven and earth), so piety does not recognise or admit any
name which might indicate that a change had taken place in God himself.
For if any thing adventitious took place, the saying of James would
cease to be true, that “every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from
above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p43.1"></span>[James
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p43.1"></span>). Nothing, therefore, is more intolerable
than to fancy a beginning to that Word which was always God, and
afterwards was the Creator of the world. But they think they argue
acutely, in maintaining that Moses, when he says that God then spoke for
the first time, must be held to intimate that till then no Word existed
in him. This is the merest trifling. It does not surely follow, that
because a thing begins to be manifested at a certain time, it never
existed previously. I draw a very different conclusion. Since at the
very moment when God said, “Let there be light,” the energy of the
Word-was immediately exerted, it must have existed long before. If any
inquire how long, he will find it was without beginning. No certain
period of time is defined, when he himself says, “Now O Father, glorify
thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before
the world was,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p43.2"></span>[John
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p43.2"></span>). Nor is this omitted by John: for before he
descends to the creation of the world, he says, that “in the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God.” We, therefore, again conclude,
that the Word was eternally begotten by God, and dwelt with him from
everlasting. In this way, his true essence, his eternity, and divinity,
are established.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p44"></span>9. But though I am not now treating of
the office of the Mediator, having deferred it till the subject of
redemption is considered, yet because it ought to be clear and
incontrovertible to all, that Christ is that Word become incarnate, this
seems the most appropriate place to introduce those passages which
assert the Divinity of Christ. When it is said in the forty-fifth Psalm,
“Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever,” the Jews quibble that the
name Elohim is applied to angels and sovereign powers. But no passage is
to be found in Scripture, where an eternal throne is set up for a
creature. For he is not called God simply, but also the eternal Ruler.
Besides, the title is not conferred on any man, without some addition,
as when it is said that Moses would be a God to Pharaoh (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.1"></span>[Exod.
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p44.1"></span>).
Some read as if it were in the genitive case, but this is too insipid. I
admit, that anything possessed of singular excellence is often called
divine, but it is clear from the context, that this meaning here were
harsh and forced, and totally inapplicable. But if their perverseness
still refuses to yield, surely there is no obscurity in Isaiah, where
Christ is introduced both us God, and as possessed of supreme powers one
of the peculiar attributes of God, “His name shall be called the Mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.2"></span>[Isa.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p44.2"></span>).
Here, too, the Jews object, and invert the passage thus, This is the
name by which the mighty God, the Everlasting Father, will call him; so
that all which they leave to the Son is, “ Prince of Peace.” But why
should so many epithets be here accumulated on God the Father, seeing
the prophet’s design is to present the Messiah with certain
distinguished properties which may induce us to put our faith in him?
There can be no doubt, therefore, that he who a little before was called
Emmanuel, is here called the Mighty God. Moreover, there can be nothing
clearer than the words of Jeremiah, “This is the name whereby he shall
be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.3"></span>[Jer.
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.3"></span>). For as the Jews themselves teach that the
other names of God are mere epithets, whereas this, which they call the
ineffable name, is substantive, and expresses his essence, we infer,
that the only begotten Son is the eternal God, who elsewhere declares,
“My glory will I not give to another,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.4"></span>[Isa.
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.4"></span>). An attempt is made to evade this from the
fact, that this name is given by Moses to the altar which he built, and
by Ezekiel to the New Jerusalem. But who sees not that the altar was
erected as a memorial to show that God was the exalter of Moses, and
that the name of God was applied to Jerusalem, merely to testify the
Divine presence? For thus the prophet speaks, “The name of the city from
that day shall be, The Lord is there,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.5"></span>[Ezek.
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p44.5"></span>). In the same way, “Moses built an altar,
and called the name of it JEHOVAH-nissi,” (Jehovah my exaltation). But
it would seem the point is still more keenly disputed as to another
passage in Jeremiah, where the same title is applied to Jerusalem in
these words, “In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall
dwell safely; and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The
Lord our Righteousness.” But so far is this passage from being adverse
to the truth which we defend, that it rather supports it. The prophet
having formerly declared that Christ is the true Jehovah from whom
righteousness flows, now declares that the Church would be made so
sensible of this as to be able to glory in assuming his very name. In
the former passage, therefore, the fountain and cause of righteousness
is set down, in the latter, the effect is described.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45"></span>10. But if this does not satisfy the
Jews, I know not what cavils will enable them to evade the numerous
passages in which Jehovah is said to have appeared in the form of an
Angel (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.1"></span>[Judges
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.1"></span>;
13:16-23, &c). This Angel claims for himself the name of the Eternal
God. Should it be alleged that this is done in respect of the office
which he bears, the difficulty is by no means solved. No servant would
rob God of his honour, by allowing sacrifice to be offered to himself.
But the Angel, by refusing to eat bread, orders the sacrifice due to
Jehovah to be offered to him. Thus the fact itself proves that he was
truly Jehovah. Accordingly, Manoah and his wife infer from the sign,
that they had seen not only an angel, but God. Hence Manoah’s
exclamation, “We shall die; for we have seen the Lord.” When the woman
replies, “If Jehovah had wished to slay us, he would not have received
the sacrifice at our hand,” she acknowledges that he who is previously
called an angel was certainly God. We may add, that the angel’s own
reply removes all doubt, “Why do ye ask my name, which is wonderful?”
Hence the impiety of Servetus was the more detestable, when he
maintained that God was never manifested to Abraham and the Patriarchs,
but that an angel was worshipped in his stead. The orthodox doctors of
the Church have correctly and wisely expounded, that the Word of God was
the supreme angel, who then began, as it were by anticipation, to
perform the office of Mediator. For though he were not clothed with
flesh, yet he descended as in an intermediate form, that he might have
more familiar access to the faithful. This closer intercourse procured
for him the name of the Angel; still, however, he retained the character
which justly belonged to him—that of the God of ineffable glory. The
same thing is intimated by Hosea, who, after mentioning the wrestling of
Jacob with the angel, says, “Even the Lord God of hosts; the Lord is his
memorial,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.2"></span>[Hosea
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p45.2"></span>). Servetus again insinuates that God
personated an angel; as if the prophet did not confirm what had been
said by Moses, “Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name?”
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.3"></span>[Gen.
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.3"></span>).
And the confession of the holy Patriarch sufficiently declares that he
was not a created angel, but one in whom the fulness of the Godhead
dwelt, when he says, “I have seen God face to face.” Hence also Paul’s
statement, that Christ led the people in the wilderness (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p45.4"></span>[1 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.4"></span>.
See also Calvin on <span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.5"></span>[Acts
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.5"></span>,
and *infra*, chap. 14, s. 9). Although the time of humiliation had not
yet arrived, the eternal Word exhibited a type of the office which he
was to fulfil. Again, if the first chapter of Zechariah (ver. 9, &c).
and the second (ver. 3, &c). be candidly considered, it will be seen
that the angel who sends the other angel is immediately after declared
to be the Lord of hosts, and that supreme power is ascribed to him. I
omit numberless passages in which our faith rests secure, though they
may not have much weight with the Jews. For when it is said in Isaiah,
“Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us; this
is the Lord: we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his
salvation,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.6"></span>[Isa.
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p45.6"></span>), even the blind may see that the God
referred to is he who again rises up for the deliverance of his people.
And the emphatic description, twice repeated, precludes the idea that
reference is made to any other than to Christ. Still clearer and
stronger is the passage of Malachi, in which a promise is made that the
messenger who was then expected would come to his own temple (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p45.7"></span>[Mal.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p45.7"></span>).
The temple certainly was dedicated to Almighty God only, and yet the
prophet claims it for Christ. Hence it follows, that he is the God who
was always worshipped by the Jews.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46"></span>11. The New Testament teems with
innumerable passages, and our object must therefore be, the selection of
a few, rather than an accumulation of the whole. But though the Apostles
spoke of him after his appearance in the flesh as Mediator, every
passage which I adduce will be sufficient to prove his eternal Godhead.
And the first thing deserving of special observation is that predictions
concerning the eternal God are applied to Christ, as either already
fulfilled in him, or to be fulfilled at some future period. Isaiah
prophesies, that “the Lord of Hosts” shall be “for a stone of stumbling,
and for a rock of offence,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.1"></span>[Isa.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.1"></span>). Paul asserts that this prophecy was
fulfilled in Christ (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.2"></span>[Rom.
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.2"></span>), and, therefore, declares that Christ is
that Lord of Hosts. In like manner, he says in another passage, “We
shall all stand before the Judgment-seat of Christ. For it is written,
As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue
shall confess to God.” Since in Isaiah God predicts this of himself
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.3"></span>[Isa.
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.3"></span>), and Christ exhibits the reality fulfilled
in himself, it follows that he is the very God, whose glory cannot be
given to another. It is clear also, that the passage from the Psalms
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.4"></span>[Ps.
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.4"></span>) which he quotes in the Epistle to the
Ephesians, is applicable only to God, “When he ascended up on high, he
led captivity captive,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.5"></span>[Eph.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.5"></span>).
Understanding that such an ascension was shadowed forth when the Lord
exerted his power, and gained a glorious victory over heathen nations,
he intimates that what was thus shadowed was more fully manifested in
Christ. So John testifies that it was the glory of the Son which was
revealed to Isaiah in a vision (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.6"></span>[John
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.6"></span>; <span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.7"></span>[Isa.
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.7"></span>),
though Isaiah himself expressly says that what he saw was the Majesty of
God. Again, there can be no doubt that those qualities which, in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, are applied to the Son, are the brightest
attributes of God, “Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the
foundation of the earth,” &c., and, “Let all the angels of God worship
him,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.8"></span>[Heb.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.8"></span>).
And yet he does not pervert the passages in thus applying them to
Christ, since Christ alone performed the things which these passages
celebrate. It was he who arose and pitied Zion—he who claimed for
himself dominion over all nations and islands. And why should John have
hesitated to ascribe the Majesty of God to Christ, after saying in his
preface that the Word was God? (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.9"></span>[John
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.9"></span>). Why should Paul have feared to place
Christ on the Judgment-seat of God (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.10"></span>[2
Cor. 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.10"></span>), after he had so openly proclaimed his
divinity, when he said that he was God over all, blessed for ever? And
to show how consistent he is in this respect, he elsewhere says that
“God was manifest in the flesh,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.11"></span>[1
Tim. 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.11"></span>). If he is God blessed for ever, he
therefore it is to whom alone, as Paul affirms in another place, all
glory and honour is due. Paul does not disguise this, but openly
exclaims, that “being in the form of God (he) thought it not robbery to
be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.12"></span>[Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.12"></span>). And lest the wicked should glamour and
say that he was a kind of spurious God, John goes farther, and affirms,
“This is the true God, and eternal life.” Though it ought to be enough
for us that he is called God, especially by a witness who distinctly
testifies that we have no more gods than one, Paul says, “Though there
be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in earth (as there be gods
many, and lords many), but to us there is but one God,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.13"></span>[1 Cor.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p46.13"></span>).
When we hear from the same lips that God was manifest in the flesh, that
God purchased the Church with his own blood, why do we dream of any
second God, to whom he makes not the least allusion? And there is no
room to doubt that all the godly entertained the same view. Thomas, by
addressing him as his Lord and God, certainly professes that he was the
only God whom he had ever adored (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.14"></span>[John
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p46.14"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p47"></span>12. The divinity of Christ, if judged by
the works which are ascribed to him in Scripture, becomes still more
evident. When he said of himself, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I
work,” the Jews, though most dull in regard to his other sayings,
perceived that he was laying claim to divine power. And, therefore, as
John relates (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p47.1"></span>[John
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p47.1"></span>), they sought the more to kill him, because
he not only broke the Sabbath, but also said that God was his Father,
making himself equal with God. What, then, will be our stupidity if we
do not perceive from the same passage that his divinity is plainly
instructed? To govern the world by his power and providence, and
regulate all things by an energy inherent in himself (this an Apostle
ascribes to him, <span id="iv.i.xiv-p47.2"></span>[Heb.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p47.2"></span>),
surely belongs to none but the Creator. Nor does he merely share the
government of the world with the Father, but also each of the other
offices, which cannot be communicated to creatures. The Lord proclaims
by his prophets “I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for mine own sake,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p47.3"></span>[Is.
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p47.3"></span>). When, in accordance with this declaration,
the Jews thought that injustice was done to God when Christ forgave
sins, he not only asserted, in distinct terms, that this power belonged
to him, but also proved it by a miracle (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p47.4"></span>[Mt.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p47.4"></span>).
We thus see that he possessed in himself not the ministry of forgiving
sins, but the inherent power which the Lord declares he will not give to
another. What! Is it not the province of God alone to penetrate and
interrogate the secret thoughts of the heart? But Christ also had this
power, and therefore we infer that Christ is God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p48"></span>13. How clearly and transparently does
this appear in his miracles? I admit that similar and equal miracles
were performed by the prophets and apostles; but there is this very
essential difference, that they dispensed the gifts of God as his
ministers, whereas he exerted his own inherent might. Sometimes, indeed,
he used prayer, that he might ascribe glory to the Father, but we see
that for the most part his own proper power is displayed. And how should
not he be the true author of miracles, who, of his own authority,
commissions others to perform them? For the Evangelist relates that he
gave power to the apostles to cast out devils, cure the lepers, raise
the dead, &c. And they, by the mode in which they performed this
ministry, showed plainly that their whole power was derived from Christ.
“In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,” says Peter (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p48.1"></span>[Acts
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p48.1"></span>),
“rise up and walk.” It is not surprising, then, that Christ appealed to
his miracles in order to subdue the unbelief of the Jews, inasmuch as
these were performed by his own energy, and therefore bore the most
ample testimony to his divinity.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p49"></span>Again, if out of God there is no
salvation, no righteousness, no life, Christ, having all these in
himself, is certainly God. Let no one object that life or salvation is
transfused into him by God. For it is said not that he received, but
that he himself is salvation. And if there is none good but God, how
could a mere man be pure, how could he be, I say not good and just, but
goodness and justice? Then what shall we say to the testimony of the
Evangelist, that from the very beginning of the creation “in him was
life, and this life was the light of men?” Trusting to such proofs, we
can boldly put our hope and faith in him, though we know it is
blasphemous impiety to confide in any creature.9  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) “Ye believe in God,”9  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) says he, “believe also in me,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p51.1"></span>[John
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p51.1"></span>). And so Paul (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p51.2"></span>[Rom.
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p51.2"></span>, and 15:12) interprets two passages of
Isaiah “Whose believeth in him shall not be confounded,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p51.3"></span>[Isa.
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p51.3"></span>); and, “In that day there shall be a root of
Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the
Gentiles seek,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p51.4"></span>[Isa.
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p51.4"></span>). But why adduce more passages of Scripture
on this head, when we so often meet with the expression, “He that
believeth in me has eternal life?”

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p52"></span>Again, the prayer of faith is addressed
to him—prayer, which specially belongs to the divine majesty, if
anything so belongs. For the Prophet Joel says, “And it shall come to
pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord (Jehovah) shall
be delivered” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p52.1"></span>[Joel
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p52.1"></span>). And another says, “The name of the Lord
(Jehovah) is a strong tower; the righteous runneth into it and is safe,”
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p52.2"></span>[Prov.
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p52.2"></span>). But the name of Christ is invoked for
salvation, and therefore it follows that he is Jehovah. Moreover, we
have an example of invocation in Stephen, when he said, “Lord Jesus,
receive my spirit;” and thereafter in the whole Church, when Ananias
says in the same book, “Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how much
evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem; and here he has authority
from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p52.3"></span>[Acts 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#014)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p52.3"></span>).
And to make it more clearly understood that in Christ dwelt the whole
fulness of the Godhead bodily, the Apostle declares that the only
doctrine which he professed to the Corinthians, the only doctrine which
he taught, was the knowledge of Christ (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p52.4"></span>[1 Cor.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p52.4"></span>).
Consider what kind of thing it is, and how great, that the name of the
Son alone is preached to us, though God command us to glory only in the
knowledge of himself (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p52.5"></span>[Jer.
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p52.5"></span>). Who will dare to maintain that he, whom to
know forms our only ground of glorying, is a mere creature? To this we
may add, that the salutations prefixed to the Epistles of Paul pray for
the same blessings from the Son as from the Father. By this we are
taught, not only that the blessings which our heavenly Father bestows
come to us through his intercession, but that by a partnership in power,
the Son himself is their author. This practical knowledge is doubtless
surer and more solid than any idle speculation. For the pious soul has
the best view of God, and may almost be said to handle him, when it
feels that it is quickened, enlightened, saved, justified, and
sanctified by him.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p53"></span>14. In asserting the divinity of the
Spirit, the proof must be derived from the same sources. And it is by no
means an obscure testimony which Moses bears in the history of the
creation, when he says that the Spirit of God was expanded over the
abyss or shapeless matter; for it shows not only that the beauty which
the world displays is maintained by the invigorating power of the
Spirit, but that even before this beauty existed the Spirit was at work
cherishing the confused mass.9  <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)
Again, no cavils can explain away the force of what Isaiah says, “And
now the Lord God, and his Spirit, has sent me,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p54.1"></span>[Isa.
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p54.1"></span>), thus ascribing a share in the sovereign
power of sending the prophets to the Holy Spirit. (Calvin in <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p54.2"></span>[Acts
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p54.2"></span>). In this his divine majesty is clear.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p55"></span>But, as I observed, the best proof to us
is our familiar experience. For nothing can be more alien from a
creature, than the office which the Scriptures ascribe to him, and which
the pious actually feel him discharging,—his being diffused over all
space, sustaining, invigorating, and quickening all things, both in
heaven and on the earth. The mere fact of his not being circumscribed by
any limits raises him above the rank of creatures, while his transfusing
vigour into all things, breathing into them being, life, and motion, is
plainly divine. Again, if regeneration to incorruptible life is higher,
and much more excellent than any present quickening, what must be
thought of him by whose energy it is produced? Now, many passages of
Scripture show that he is the author of regeneration, not by a borrowed,
but by an intrinsic energy; and not only so, but that he is also the
author of future immortality. In short, all the peculiar attributes of
the Godhead are ascribed to him in the same way as to the Son. He
searches the deep things of Gods and has no counsellor among the
creatures; he bestows wisdom and the faculty of speech, though God
declares to Moses (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p55.1"></span>[Exod.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#011)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p55.1"></span>)
that this is his own peculiar province. In like manner, by means of him
we become partakers of the divine nature, so as in a manner to feel his
quickening energy within us. Our justification is his work; from him is
power, sanctification, truth, grace, and every good thought, since it is
from the Spirit alone that all good gifts proceed. Particular attention
is due to Paul’s expression, that though there are diversities of gifts,
“all these worketh that one and the self-same Spirit,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p55.2"></span>[1 Cor.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p55.2"></span>), he being not only the beginning or origin,
but also the author;9  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) as is even
more clearly expressed immediately after in these words “dividing to
every man severally as he will.” For were he not something subsisting in
God, will and arbitrary disposal would never be ascribed to him. Most
clearly, therefore does Paul ascribe divine power to the Spirit, and
demonstrate that he dwells hypostatically in God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p57"></span>15. Nor does the Scripture, in speaking
of him, withhold the name of God. Paul infers that we are the temple of
God, from the fact that “the Spirit of God dwelleth in us,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p57.1"></span>[1 Cor.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p57.1"></span>;
6:19; and <span id="iv.i.xiv-p57.2"></span>[2 Cor.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p57.2"></span>). Now it ought not to be slightly
overlooked, that all the promises which God makes of choosing us to
himself as a temple, receive their only fulfilment by his Spirit
dwelling in us. Surely, as it is admirably expressed by Augustine (Ad
Maximinum, <span id="iv.i.xiv-p57.3"></span>Ep. 66<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p57.3"></span>), “were we ordered to make a temple of wood
and stone to the Spirit, inasmuch as such worship is due to God alone,
it would be a clear proof of the Spirit’s divinity; how much clearer a
proof in that we are not to make a temple to him, but to be ourselves
that temple.” And the Apostle says at one time that we are the temple of
God, and at another time, in the same sense, that we are the temple of
the Holy Spirit. Peter, when he rebuked Ananias for having lied to the
Holy Spirit, said, that he had not lied unto men, but unto God. And when
Isaiah had introduced the Lord of Hosts as speaking, Paul says, it was
the Holy Spirit that spoke (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p57.4"></span>[Acts
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p57.4"></span>).
Nay, words uniformly said by the prophets to have been spoken by the
Lord of Hosts, are by Christ and his apostles ascribed to the Holy
Spirit. Hence it follows that the Spirit is the true Jehovah who
dictated the prophecies. Again, when God complains that he was provoked
to anger by the stubbornness of the people, in place of Him, Isaiah says
that his Holy Spirit was grieved (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p57.5"></span>[Isa.
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p57.5"></span>). Lastly, while blasphemy against the Spirit
is not forgiven, either in the present life or that which is to come,
whereas he who has blasphemed against the Son may obtain pardon, that
majesty must certainly be divine which it is an inexpiable crime to
offend or impair. I designedly omit several passages which the ancient
fathers adduced. They thought it plausible to quote from David, “By the
word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath (Spirit) of his mouth,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p57.6"></span>[Ps.
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p57.6"></span>), in order to prove that the world was not
less the work of the Holy Spirit than of the Son. But seeing it is usual
in the Psalms to repeat the same thing twice, and in Isaiah the *spirit*
(breath) of the mouth is equivalent to *word*, that proof was weak; and,
accordingly, my wish has been to advert briefly to those proofs on which
pious minds may securely rest.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p58"></span>16. But as God has manifested himself
more clearly by the advent of Christ, so he has made himself more
familiarly known in three persons. Of many proofs let this one suffice.
Paul connects together these three, God, Faith, and Baptism, and reasons
from the one to the other—viz. because there is one faith he infers that
there is one God; and because there is one baptism he infers that there
is one faith. Therefore, if by baptism we are initiated into the faith
and worship of one God, we must of necessity believe that he into whose
name we are baptised is the true God. And there cannot be a doubt that
our Saviour wished to testify, by a solemn rehearsal, that the perfect
light of faith is now exhibited, when he said, “Go and teach all
nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Spirit,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p58.1"></span>[Mt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p58.1"></span>), since this is the same thing as to be
baptised into the name of the one God, who has been fully manifested in
the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. Hence it plainly appears, that the
three persons, in whom alone God is known, subsist in the Divine
essence. And since faith certainly ought not to look hither and thither,
or run up and down after various objects, but to look, refer, and cleave
to God alone, it is obvious that were there various kinds of faith,
there behaved also to be various gods. Then, as the baptism of faith is
a sacrament, its unity assures us of the unity of God. Hence also it is
proved that it is lawful only to be baptised into one God, because we
make a profession of faith in him in whose name we are baptised. What,
then, is our Saviour’s meaning in commanding baptism to be administered
in the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, if it be
not that we are to believe with one faith in the name of the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Spirit?9  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) But
is this any thing else than to declare that the Father, Son, and Spirit,
are one God? Wherefore, since it must be held certain that there is one
God, not more than one, we conclude that the Word and Spirit are of the
very essence of God. Nothing could be more stupid than the trifling of
the Arians, who, while acknowledging the divinity of the Son, denied his
divine essence. Equally extravagant were the ravings of the Macedonians,
who insisted that by the Spirit were only meant the gifts of grace
poured out upon men. For as wisdom understanding, prudence, fortitude,
and the fear of the Lord, proceed from the Spirit, so he is the one
Spirit of wisdom, prudence, fortitude, and piety. He is not divided
according to the distribution of his gifts, but, as the Apostle assures
us (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p59.1"></span>[1 Cor.
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p59.1"></span>), however they be divided, he remains one
and the same.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p60"></span>17. On the other hand, the Scriptures
demonstrate that there is some distinction between the Father and the
Word, the Word and the Spirit; but the magnitude of the mystery reminds
us of the great reverence and soberness which ought to he employed in
discussing it. It seems to me, that nothing can be more admirable than
the words of Gregory Nanzianzen: “ ̔Ου φθάνω το ἕι νοη̑σαι, καὶ τοι̑ς
τρισὶ περιλάμπομαι οὐ φθάνω τὰ τρία διελει̑ν καὶ εὶς τὸ ἑν ἀναφέρομαι”
(Greg. Nanzian. in Serm. de Sacro Baptis.). “I cannot think of the unity
without being irradiated by the Trinity: I cannot distinguish between
the Trinity without being carried up to the unity.”9  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Therefore, let us beware of imagining
such a Trinity of persons as will distract our thoughts, instead of
bringing them instantly back to the unity. The words Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, certainly indicate a real distinction, not allowing us to
suppose that they are merely epithets by which God is variously
designated from his works. Still they indicate distinction only, not
division. The passages we have already quoted show that the Son has a
distinct subsistence from the Father, because the Word could not have
been with God unless he were distinct from the Father; nor but for this
could he have had his glory with the Father. In like manner, Christ
distinguishes the Father from himself when he says that there is another
who bears witness of him (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p61.1"></span>[John
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#032)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p61.1"></span>;
8:16). To the same effect is it elsewhere said, that the Father made all
things by the Word. This could not be, if he were not in some respect
distinct from him. Besides, it was not the Father that descended to the
earth, but he who came forth from the Father; nor was it the Father that
died and rose again, but he whom the Father had sent. This distinction
did not take its beginning at the incarnation: for it is clear that the
only begotten Son previously existed in the bosom of the Father (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p61.2"></span>[John
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p61.2"></span>). For who will dare to affirm that the Son
entered his Father’s bosom for the first time, when he came down from
heaven to assume human nature? Therefore, he was previously in the bosom
of the Father, and had his glory with the Father. Christ intimates the
distinction between the Holy Spirit and the Father, when he says that
the Spirit proceedeth from the Father, and between the Holy Spirit and
himself, when he speaks of him as another as he does when he declares
that he will send another Comforter; and in many other passages besides
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p61.3"></span>[John
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p61.3"></span>;
15:26; 14:16).

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p62"></span>18. I am not sure whether it is expedient
to borrow analogies from human affairs to express the nature of this
distinction. The ancient fathers sometimes do so, but they at the same
time admits that what they bring forward as analogous is very widely
different. And hence it is that I have a great dread of any thing like
presumption here, lest some rash saying may furnish an occasion of
calumny to the malicious, or of delusion to the unlearned. It were
unbecoming, however, to say nothing of a distinction which we observe
that the Scriptures have pointed out. This distinction is, that to the
Father is attributed the beginning of action, the fountain and source of
all things; to the Son, wisdom, counsel, and arrangement in action,
while the energy and efficacy of action is assigned to the Spirit.
Moreover, though the eternity of the Father is also the eternity of the
Son and Spirit, since God never could be without his own wisdom and
energy; and though in eternity there can be no room for first or last,
still the distinction of order is not unmeaning or superfluous, the
Father being considered first, next the Son from him, and then the
Spirit from both. For the mind of every man naturally inclines to
consider, first, God, secondly, the wisdom emerging from him, and,
lastly, the energy by which he executes the purposes of his counsel. For
this reason, the Son is said to be of the Father only; the Spirit of
both the Father and the Son. This is done in many passages, but in none
more clearly than in the eighth chapter to the Romans, where the same
Spirit is called indiscriminately the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit
of him who raised up Christ from the dead. And not improperly. For Peter
also testifies (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p62.1"></span>[1 Pet.
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p62.1"></span>), that it was the Spirit of Christ which
inspired the prophets, though the Scriptures so often say that it was
the Spirit of God the Father.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p63"></span>19. Moreover, this distinction is so far
from interfering with the most perfect unity of God, that the Son may
thereby be proved to be one God with the Father, inasmuch as he
constitutes one Spirit with him, and that the Spirit is not different
from the Father and the Son, inasmuch as he is the Spirit of the Father
and the Son. In each hypostasis the whole nature is understood the only
difference being that each has his own peculiar subsistence. The whole
Father is in the Son, and the whole Son in the Father, as the Son
himself also declares (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p63.1"></span>[John
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p63.1"></span>), “I am in the Father, and the Father in
me;” nor do ecclesiastical writers admit that the one is separated from
the other by any difference of essence. “By those names which denote
distinctions” says Augustine “is meant the relation which they mutually
bear to each other, not the very substance by which they are one.” In
this way, the sentiments of the Fathers, which might sometimes appear to
be at variance with each other, are to be reconciled. At one time they
teach that the Father is the beginning of the Son, at another they
assert that the Son has both divinity and essence from himself, and
therefore is one beginning with the Father. The cause of this
discrepancy is well and clearly explained by Augustine, when he says,10
 <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) “Christ, as to himself, is called
God, as to the Father he is called Son.” And again, “The Father, as to
himself, is called God, as to the Son he is called Father. He who, as to
the Son, is called Father, is not Son; and he who, as to himself, is
called Father, and he who, as to himself, is called Son, is the same
God.” Therefore, when we speak of the Son simply, without reference to
the Father, we truly and properly affirm that he is of himself, and,
accordingly, call him the only beginning; but when we denote the
relation which he bears to the Father, we correctly make the Father the
beginning of the Son. Augustine’s fifth book on the Trinity is wholly
devoted to the explanation of this subject. But it is far safer to rest
contented with the relation as taught by him, than get bewildered in
vain speculation by subtle prying into a sublime mystery.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p65"></span>20. Let those, then, who love soberness,
and are contented with the measure of faith, briefly receive what is
useful to be known. It is as follows:—When we profess to believe in one
God, by the name God is understood the one simple essence, comprehending
three persons or hypostases; and, accordingly, whenever the name of God
is used indefinitely, the Son and Spirit, not less than the Father, is
meant. But when the Son is joined with the Father, relation comes into
view, and so we distinguish between the Persons. But as the Personal
subsistence carry an order with them, the principle and origin being in
the Father, whenever mention is made of the Father and Son, or of the
Father and Spirit together, the name of God is specially given to the
Father. In this way the unity of essence is retained, and respect is had
to the order, which, however derogates in no respect from the divinity
of the Son and Spirit. And surely since we have already seen how the
apostles declare the Son of God to have been He whom Moses and the
prophets declared to be Jehovah, we must always arrive at a unity of
essence. We, therefore, hold it detestable blasphemy to call the Son a
different God from the Father, because the simple name God admits not of
relation, nor can God, considered in himself, be said to be this or
that. Then, that the name Jehovah, taken indefinitely, may be applied to
Christ, is clear from the words of Paul, “For this thing I besought the
Lord thrice.” After giving the answer, “My grace is sufficient for
thee,” he subjoins, “that the power of Christ may rest upon me,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p65.1"></span>[2 Cor.
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p65.1"></span>).
For it is certain that the name of Lord (Κυρίος) is there put for
Jehovah, and, therefore, to restrict it to the person of the Mediator
were puerile and frivolous, the words being used absolutely, and not
with the view of comparing the Father and the Son. And we know that, in
accordance with the received usage of the Greeks, the apostles uniformly
substitute the word Κυρίος for Jehovah. Not to go far for an example,
Paul besought the Lord in the same sense in which Peter quotes the
passage of Joel, “Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall
be saved,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p65.2"></span>[Acts
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p65.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.xiv-p65.3"></span>[Joel
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p65.3"></span>). Where this name is specially applied to
the Son, there is a different ground for it, as will be seen in its own
place; at present it is sufficient to remember, that Paul, after praying
to God absolutely, immediately subjoins the name of Christ. Thus, too,
the Spirit is called God absolutely by Christ himself. For nothing
prevents us from holding that he is the entire spiritual essence of God,
in which are comprehended Father, Son, and Spirit. This is plain from
Scripture. For as God is there called a Spirit, so the Holy Spirit also,
in so far as he is a hypostasis of the whole essence, is said to be both
of God and from God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p66"></span>21. But since Satan, in order to pluck up
our faith by the roots, has always provoked fierce disputes, partly
concerning the divine essence of the Son and Spirit, and partly
concerning the distinction of persons; since in almost every age he has
stirred up impious spirits to vex the orthodox doctors on this head, and
is attempting in the present day to kindle a new flame out of the old
embers, it will be proper here to dispose of some of these perverse
dreams. Hitherto our chief object has been to stretch out our hand for
the guidance of such as are disposed to learn, not to war with the
stubborn and contentious; but now the truth which was calmly
demonstrated must be vindicated from the calumnies of the ungodly.
Still, however it will be our principal study to provide a sure footing
for those whose ears are open to the word of God. Here, if any where, in
considering the hidden mysteries of Scripture, we should speculate
soberly and with great moderation, cautiously guarding against allowing
either our mind or our tongue to go a step beyond the confines of God’s
word. For how can the human minds which has not yet been able to
ascertain of what the body of the sun consists, though it is daily
presented to the eye, bring down the boundless essence of God to its
little measure? Nay, how can it, under its own guidance, penetrate to a
knowledge of the substance of God while unable to understand its own?
Wherefore, let us willingly leave to God the knowledge of himself. In
the words of Hilary (De Trinit. lib. 1), “He alone is a fit witness to
himself who is known only by himself.” This knowledge, then, if we would
leave to God, we must conceive of him as he has made himself known, and
in our inquiries make application to no other quarter than his word. On
this subject we have five homilies of Chrysostom against the Anomoei (De
Incomprehensit. Dei Natura), in which he endeavoured, but in vain, to
check the presumption of the sophists, and curb their garrulity. They
showed no more modesty here than they are wont to do in everything else.
The very unhappy results of their temerity should be a warning to us to
bring more docility than acumen to the discussion of this question,
never to attempt to search after God anywhere but in his sacred word,
and never to speak or think of him farther than we have it for our
guide. But if the distinction of Father, Son, and Spirit, subsisting in
the one Godhead (certainly a subject of great difficulty), gives more
trouble and annoyance to some intellects than is meet, let us remember
that the human mind enters a labyrinth whenever it indulges its
curiosity, and thus submit to be guided by the divine oracles, how much
soever the mystery may be beyond our reach.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p67"></span>22. It were tedious, and to no purpose
toilsome, to form a catalogue of the errors by which, in regard to this
branch of doctrine, the purity of the faith has been assailed. The
greater part of heretics have with their gross deliriums made a general
attack on the glory of God, deeming it enough if they could disturb and
shake the unwary. From a few individuals numerous sects have sprung up,
some of them rending the divine essence, and others confounding the
distinction of Persons. But if we hold, what has already been
demonstrated from Scripture, that the essence of the one God, pertaining
to the Father, Son, and Spirit, is simple and indivisible, and again,
that the Father differs in some special property from the Son, and the
Son from the Spirit, the door will be shut against Arius and Sabellius,
as well as the other ancient authors of error. But as in our day have
arisen certain frantic men, such as Servetus and others, who, by new
devices, have thrown every thing into confusion, it may be worthwhile
briefly to discuss their fallacies.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p68"></span>The name of Trinity was so much disliked,
nay detested, by Servetus, that he charged all whom he called
Trinitarians with being Atheists. I say nothing of the insulting terms
in which he thought proper to make his charges. The sum of his
speculations was, that a threefold Deity is introduced wherever three
Persons are said to exist in his essence, and that this Triad was
imaginary, inasmuch as it was inconsistent with the unity of God. At the
same time, he would have it that the Persons are certain external ideas
which do not truly subsist in the Divine essence, but only figure God to
us under this or that form: that at first, indeed, there was no
distinction in God, because originally the Word was the same as the
Spirit, but ever since Christ came forth God of God, another Spirit,
also a God, had proceeded from him. But although he sometimes cloaks his
absurdities in allegory, as when he says that the eternal Word of God
was the Spirit of Christ with God, and the reflection of the idea,
likewise that the Spirit was a shadow of Deity, he at last reduces the
divinity of both to nothing; maintaining that, according to the mode of
distribution, there is a part of God as well in the Son as in the
Spirit, just as the same Spirit substantially is a portion of God in us,
and also in wood and stone. His absurd babbling concerning the person of
the Mediator will be seen in its own place.10  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p70"></span>The monstrous fiction that a Person is
nothing else than a visible appearance of the glory of God, needs not a
long refutation. For when John declares that before the world was
created the Logos was God (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p70.1"></span>[John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p70.1"></span>),
he shows that he was something very different from an idea. But if even
then, and from the remotest eternity, that Logos, who was God, was with
the Father, and had his own distinct and peculiar glory with the Father
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p70.2"></span>[John
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p70.2"></span>), he certainly could not be an external or
figurative splendour, but must necessarily have been a hypostasis which
dwelt inherently in God himself. But although there is no mention made
of the Spirit antecedent to the account of the creation, he is not there
introduced as a shadow, but as the essential power of God, where Moses
relates that the shapeless mass was unborn by him (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p70.3"></span>[Gen.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p70.3"></span>).
It is obvious that the eternal Spirit always existed in God, seeing he
cherished and sustained the confused materials of heaven and earth
before they possessed order or beauty. Assuredly he could not then be an
image or representation of God, as Servetus dreams. But he is elsewhere
forced to make a more open disclosure of his impiety when he says, that
God by his eternal reason decreeing a Son to himself, in this way
assumed a visible appearance. For if this be true, no other Divinity is
left to Christ than is implied in his having been ordained a Son by
God’s eternal decree. Moreover, those phantoms which Servetus
substitutes for the hypostases he so transforms as to make new changes
in God. But the most execrable heresy of all is his confounding both the
Son and Spirit promiscuously with all the creatures. For he distinctly
asserts, that there are parts and partitions in the essence of God, and
that every such portion is God. This he does especially when he says,
that the spirits of the faithful are co-eternal and consubstantial with
God, although he elsewhere assigns a substantial divinity, not only to
the soul of man, but to all created things.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p71"></span>23. This pool has bred another monster
not unlike the former. For certain restless spirits, unwilling to share
the disgrace and obloquy of the impiety of Servetus, have confessed that
there were indeed three Persons, but added, as a reason, that the
Father, who alone is truly and properly God, transfused his Divinity
into the Son and Spirit when he formed them. Nor do they refrain from
expressing themselves in such shocking terms as these: that the Father
is essentially distinguished from the Son and Spirit by this; that he is
the only *essentiator*. Their first pretext for this is, that Christ is
uniformly called the Son of God. From this they infer, that there is no
proper God but the Father. But they forget, that although the name of
God is common also to the Son, yet it is sometimes, by way of
excellence, ascribed to the Father, as being the source and principle of
Divinity; and this is done in order to mark the simple unity of essence.
They object, that if the Son is truly God, he must be deemed the Son of
a person: which is absurd. I answer, that both are true; namely, that he
is the Son of God, because he is the Word, begotten of the Father before
all ages; (for we are not now speaking of the Person of the Mediator),
and yet, that for the purpose of explanation, regard must be had to the
Person, so that the name God may not be understood in its absolute
sense, but as equivalent to Father. For if we hold that there is no
other God than the Fathers this rank is clearly denied to the Son.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72"></span>In every case where the Godhead is
mentioned, we are by no means to admit that there is an antithesis
between the Father and the Son, as if to the former only the name of God
could competently be applied. For assuredly, the God who appeared to
Isaiah was the one true God, and yet John declares that he was Christ
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.1"></span>[Isa.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.2"></span>[John
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.2"></span>). He who declared, by the mouth of Isaiah,
that he was to be “for a stone of stumbling” to the Jews, was the one
God; and yet Paul declares that he was Christ (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.3"></span>[Isa.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.3"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.4"></span>[Rom.
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.4"></span>). He who proclaims by Isaiah, “Unto me every
knee shall bow,” is the one God; yet Paul again explains that he is
Christ (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.5"></span>[Isa.
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.5"></span>; <span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.6"></span>[Rom.
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.6"></span>). To this we may add the passages quoted by
an Apostle, “Thou, Lord, hast laid the foundations of the earth;” “Let
all the angels of God worship him,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.7"></span>[Heb.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.7"></span>;
10:6; <span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.8"></span>[Ps.
102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.8"></span>; 97:7). All these apply to the one God; and
yet the Apostle contends that they are the proper attributes of Christ.
There is nothing in the cavil, that what properly applies to God is
transferred to Christ, because he is the brightness of his glory. Since
the name of Jehovah is everywhere applied to Christ, it follows that, in
regard to Deity, he is of himself. For if he is Jehovah, it is
impossible to deny that he is the same God who elsewhere proclaims by
Isaiah, “I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no
God,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.9"></span>[Is.
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.9"></span>). We would also do well to ponder the words
of Jeremiah, “The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth,
even they shall perish from the earth and from under these heavens,”
(<span id="iv.i.xiv-p72.10"></span>[Jer.
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.10"></span>); whence it follows conversely, that He
whose divinity Isaiah repeatedly proves from the creation of the world,
is none other than the Son of God. And how is it possible that the
Creator, who gives to all should not be of himself, but should borrow
his essence from another? Whosoever says that the Son was *essentiated*
by the Father,10  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) denies his
selfexistence. Against this, however, the Holy Spirit protests, when he
calls him Jehovah. On the supposition, then, that the whole essence is
in the Father only, the essence becomes divisible, or is denied to the
Son, who, being thus robbed of his essences will be only a titular God.
If we are to believe these triflers, divine essence belongs to the
Father only, on the ground that he is sole God, and *essentiator* of the
Son. In this way, the divinity of the Son will be something abstracte
 <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) from the essence of God, or the
derivation of a part from the whole. On the same principle it must also
be conceded, that the Spirit belongs to the Father only. For if the
derivation is from the primary essence which is proper to none but the
Father, the Spirit cannot justly be deemed the Spirit of the Son. This
view, however, is refuted by the testimony of Paul, when he makes the
Spirit common both to Christ and the Father. Moreover, if the Person of
the Father is expunged from the Trinity, in what will he differ from the
Son and Spirit, except in being the only God? They confess that Christ
is God, and that he differs from the Father. If he differs, there must
be some mark of distinction between them. Those who place it in the
essence, manifestly reduce the true divinity of Christ to nothing, since
divinity cannot exist without essence, and indeed without entire
essence.10  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) The Father certainly
cannot differ from the Son, unless he have something peculiar to
himself, and not common to him with the Son. What, then, do these men
show as the mark of distinction? If it is in the essence, let them tell
whether or not he communicated essence to the Son. This he could not do
in part merely, for it were impious to think of a divided God. And
besides, on this supposition, there would be a rending of the Divine
essence. The whole entire essence must therefore be common to the Father
and the Son; and if so, in respect of essence there is no distinction
between them. If they reply that the Father, while essentiating, still
remains the only God, being the possessor of the essence, then Christ
will be a figurative God, one in name or semblance only, and not in
reality, because no property can be more peculiar to God than essence,
according to the words, “I Am hath sent me unto you,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p75.1"></span>[Ex.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p75.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p76"></span>24. The assumption, that whenever God is
mentioned absolutely, the Father only is meant, may be proved erroneous
by many passages. Even in those which they quote in support of their
views they betray a lamentable inconsistency because the name of Son
occurs there by way of contrast, showing that the other name God is used
relatively, and in that way confined to the person of the Father. Their
objection may be disposed of in a single word. Were not the Father alone
the true God, he would, say they, be his own Father. But there is
nothing absurd in the name of God being specially applied, in respect of
order and degree, to him who not only of himself begat his own wisdom,
but is the God of the Mediator, as I will more fully show in its own
place. For ever since Christ was manifested in the flesh he is called
the Son of God, not only because begotten of the Father before all
worlds he was the Eternal Word, but because he undertook the person and
office of the Mediator that he might unite us to God. Seeing they are so
bold in excluding the Son from the honour of God, I would fain know
whether, when he declares that there is “none good but one, that is,
God,” he deprives himself of goodness. I speak not of his human nature,
lest perhaps they should object, that whatever goodness was in it was
derived by gratuitous gift: I ask whether the Eternal Word of God is
good, yes or no? If they say no, their impiety is manifest; if yes, they
refute themselves. Christ’s seeming at the first glance to disclaim the
name of good (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p76.1"></span>[Mt.
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p76.1"></span>), rather confirms our view. Goodness. being
the special property of God alone, and yet being at the time applied to
him in the ordinary way of salutation, his rejection of false honour
intimates that the goodness in which he excels is Divine. Again, I ask
whether, when Paul affirms. that God alone is “immortal,” “wise, and
true,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p76.2"></span>[1 Tim.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p76.2"></span>), he reduces Christ to the rank of beings
mortal, foolish, and false. Is not he immortal, who, from the beginning,
had life so as to bestow immortality on angels? Is not he wise who is
the eternal wisdom of God? Is not he true who is truth itself?

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p77"></span>I ask, moreover, whether they think
Christ should be worshipped. If he claims justly, that every knee shall
bow to him, it follows that he is the God who, in the law, forbade
worship to be offered to any but himself. If they insist on applying to
the Father only the words of Isaiah, “I am, and besides me there is none
else,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p77.1"></span>[Is.
44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p77.1"></span>), I turn the passage against themselves,
since we see that every property of God is attributed to Christ.10
 <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) There is no room for the cavil
that Christ was exalted in the flesh in which he humbled himself, and in
respect of which all power is given to him in heaven and on earth. For
although the majesty of King and Judge extends to the whole person of
the Mediator, yet had he not been God manifested in the flesh, he could
not have been exalted to such a height without coming into collision
with God. And the dispute is admirably settled by Paul, when he declares
that he was equal with God before he humbled himself, and assumed the
form of a servants (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p78.1"></span>[Phil.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p78.1"></span>).
Moreover, how could such equality exist, if he were not that God whose
name is Jah and Jehovah, who rides upon the cherubim, is King of all the
earth, and King of ages? Let them glamour as they may, Christ cannot be
robbed of the honour described by Isaiah, “Lo, this is our God; we have
waited for him,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p78.2"></span>[Is.
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p78.2"></span>); for these words describe the advent of God
the Redeemer, who was not only to bring back the people from Babylonish
captivity, but restore the Church, and make her completely perfect.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p79"></span>Nor does another cavil avail them, that
Christ was God in his Father. For though we admit that, in respect of
order and gradation, the beginning of divinity is in the Father, we hold
it a detestable fiction to maintain that essence is proper to the Father
alone, as if he were the deifier of the Son. On this view either the
essence is manifold, or Christ is God only in name and imagination. If
they grant that the Son is God, but only in subordination to the Father,
the essence which in the Father is unformed and unbegotten will in him
be formed and begotten. I know that many who would be thought wise
deride us for extracting the distinction of persons from the words of
Moses when he introduces God as saying, “Let us make man in our own
image,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p79.1"></span>[Gen.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p79.1"></span>). Pious readers, however, see how frigidly
and absurdly the colloquy were introduced by Moses, if there were not
several persons in the Godhead. It is certain that those whom the Father
addresses must have been untreated. But nothing is untreated except the
one God. Now then, unless they concede that the power of creating was
common to the Father, Son, and Spirit, and the power of commanding
common, it will follow that God did not speak thus inwardly with
himself, but addressed other extraneous architects. In fine, there is a
single passage which will at once dispose of these two objections. The
declaration of Christ that “God is a Spirit,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p79.2"></span>[John
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p79.2"></span>), cannot be confined to the Father only, as
if the Word were not of a spiritual nature. But if the name Spirit
applies equally to the Son as to the Father, I infer that under the
indefinite name of God the Son is included. He adds immediately after,
that the only worshipers approved by the Father are those who worship
him in spirit and in truth; and hence I also infer, that because Christ
performs the office of teacher under a head, he applies the name God to
the Father, not for the purpose of destroying his own Divinity, but for
the purpose of raising us up to it as it were step by step.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p80"></span>25. The hallucination consists in
dreaming of individuals, each of whom possesses a part of the essence.
The Scriptures teach that there is essentially but one God, and,
therefore, that the essence both of the Son and Spirit is unbegotten;
but inasmuch as the Father is first in order, and of himself begat his
own Wisdom, he, as we lately observed, is justly regarded as the
principle and fountain of all the Godhead. Thus God, taken indefinitely,
is unbegotten, and the Father, in respect of his person, is unbegotten.
For it is absurd to imagine that our doctrine gives any ground for
alleging that we establish a quaternion of gods. They falsely and
calumniously ascribe to us the figment of their own brain, as if we
virtually held that three persons emanate from one essence,10  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) whereas it is plain, from our writings,
that we do not disjoin the persons from the essence, but interpose a
distinction between the persons residing in it. If the persons were
separated from the essence, there might be some plausibility in their
argument; as in this way there would be a trinity of Gods, not of
persons comprehended in one God. This affords an answer to their futile
question—whether or not the essence concurs in forming the Trinity; as
if we imagined that three Gods were derived from it. Their objection,
that there would thus be a Trinity without a God, originates in the same
absurdity. Although the essence does not contribute to the distinction,
as if it were a part or member, the persons are not without it, or
external to it; for the Father, if he were not God, could not be the
Father; nor could the Son possibly be Son unless he were God. We say,
then, that the Godhead is absolutely of itself. And hence also we hold
that the Son, regarded as God, and without reference to person, is also
of himself; though we also say that, regarded as Son, he is of the
Father. Thus his essence is without beginning, while his person has its
beginning in God. And, indeed, the orthodox writers who in former times
spoke of the Trinity, used this term only with reference to the Persons.
To have included the essence in the distinction, would not only have
been an absurd error, but gross impiety. For those who class the three
thus—Essence, Son, and Spirit10  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100)
—plainly do away with the essence of the Son and Spirit; otherwise the
parts being intermingled would merge into each other—a circumstance
which would vitiate any distinction.10  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) In short, if God and Father were
synonymous terms, the Father would be deifier in a sense which would
leave the Son nothing but a shadow; and the Trinity would be nothing
more than the union of one God with two creatures.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p84"></span>26. To the objection, that if Christ be
properly God, he is improperly called the Son of God, it has been
already answered, that when one person is compared with another, the
name God is not used indefinitely, but is restricted to the Father,
regarded as the beginning of the Godhead, not by *essentiating*, as
fanatics absurdly express it, but in respect of order. In this sense are
to be understood the words which Christ addressed to the Father, “This
is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou hast sent,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p84.1"></span>[John
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p84.1"></span>). For speaking in the person of the
Mediator, he holds a middle place between God and man; yet so that his
majesty is not diminished thereby. For though he humbled (emptied)
himself, he did not lose the glory which he had with the Father, though
it was concealed from the world. So in the Epistle to the Hebrews (<span
id="iv.i.xiv-p84.2"></span>[Heb.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p84.2"></span>;
2:9), though the apostle confesses that Christ was made a little lower
than the angels, he at the same time hesitates not to assert that he is
the eternal God who founded the earth. We must hold, therefore, that as
often as Christ, in the character of Mediator, addresses the Father, he,
under the term God, includes his own divinity also. Thus, when he says
to the apostles, “It is expedient for you that I go away,” “My Father is
greater than I,” he does not attribute to himself a secondary divinity
merely, as if in regard to eternal essence he were inferior to the
Father; but having obtained celestial glory, he gathers together the
faithful to share it with him. He places the Father in the higher
degree, inasmuch as the full perfection of brightness conspicuous in
heaven, differs from that measure of glory which he himself displayed
when clothed in flesh. For the same reason Paul says, that Christ will
restore “the kingdom to God, even the Father,” “that God may be all in
all,” (<span id="iv.i.xiv-p84.3"></span>[1 Cor.
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p84.3"></span>).
Nothing can be more absurd than to deny the perpetuity of Christ’s
divinity. But if he will never cease to be the Son of God, but will ever
remain the same that he was from the beginning, it follows that under
the name of Father the one divine essence common to both is
comprehended. And assuredly Christ descended to us for the very purpose
of raising us to the Father, and thereby, at the same time, raising us
to himself, inasmuch as he is one with the Father. It is therefore
erroneous and impious to confine the name of God to the Father, so as to
deny it to the Son. Accordingly, John, declaring that he is the true
God, has no idea of placing him beneath the Father in a subordinate rank
of divinity. I wonder what these fabricators of new gods mean, when they
confess that Christ is truly God, and yet exclude him from the godhead
of the Father, as if there could be any true God but the one God, or as
if transfused divinity were not a mere modern fiction.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p85"></span>27. In the many passages which they
collect from Irenæus, in which he maintains that the Father of Christ is
the only eternal God of Israel, they betray shameful ignorance, or very
great dishonesty. For they ought to have observed, that that holy man
was contending against certain frantic persons, who, denying that the
Father of Christ was that God who had in old times spoken by Moses and
the prophets, held that he was some phantom or other produced from the
pollution of the world. His whole object, therefore, is to make it
plain, that in the Scriptures no other God is announced but the Father
of Christ; that it is wicked to imagine any other. Accordingly, there is
nothing strange in his so often concluding that the God of Israel was no
other than he who is celebrated by Christ and the apostles. Now, when a
different heresy is to be resisted, we also say with truth, that the God
who in old times appeared to the fathers, was no other than Christ.
Moreover, if it is objected that he was the Father, we have the answer
ready, that while we contend for the divinity of the Son, we by no means
exclude the Father. When the reader attends to the purpose of Irenæus,
the dispute is at an end. Indeed, we have only to look to lib. 3 c. 6,
where the pious writer insists on this one point, “that he who in
Scripture is called God absolutely and indefinitely, is truly the only
God; and that Christ is called God absolutely.” Let us remember (as
appears from the whole work, and especially from lib. 2 c. 46), that the
point under discussion was, that the name of Father is not applied
enigmatically and parabolically to one who was not truly God. We may
adds that in lib. 3 c. 9, he contends that the Son as well as the Father
united was the God proclaimed by the prophets and apostles. He
afterwards explains (lib. 3 c. 12) how Christ, who is Lord of all, and
King and Judge, received power from him who is God of all, namely, in
respect of the humiliation by which he humbled himself, even to the
death of the cross. At the same time he shortly after affirms (lib. 3 c.
16), that the Son is the maker of heaven and earth, who delivered the
law by the hand of Moses, and appeared to the fathers. Should any
babbler now insist that, according to Irenaeus, the Father alone is the
God of Israel, I will refer him to a passage in which Irenaeus
distinctly says (lib. 3 c. 18, 23), that Christ is ever one and the
same, and also applies to Christ the words of the prophecy of Habakkuk,
“God cometh from the south.” To the same effect he says (lib. 4 c. 9),
“Therefore, Christ himself, with the Father, is the God of the living.”
And in the 12th chapter of the same book he explains that Abraham
believed God, because Christ is the maker of heaven and earth, and very
God.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p86"></span>28. With no more truth do they claim
Tertullian as a patron. Though his style is sometimes rugged and
obscure, he delivers the doctrine which we maintain in no ambiguous
manner, namely, that while there is one God, his Word, however, is with
dispensation or economy; that there is only one God in unity of
substance; but that, nevertheless, by the mystery of dispensation, the
unity is arranged into Trinity; that there are three, not in state, but
in degree—not in substance, but in form—not in power, but in order.10
 <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) He says indeed that he holds
the Son to be second to the Father; but he means that the only
difference is by distinction. In one place he says the Son is visible;
but after he has discoursed on both views, he declares that he is
invisible regarded as the Word. In fine, by affirming that the Father is
characterised by his own Person, he shows that he is very far from
countenancing the fiction which we refute. And although he does not
acknowledge any other God than the Father, yet, explaining himself in
the immediate context, he shows that he does not speak exclusively in
respect of the Son, because he denies that he is a different God from
the Father; and, accordingly, that the one supremacy is not violated by
the distinction of Person. And it is easy to collect his meaning from
the whole tenor of his discourse. For he contends against Praxeas, that
although God has three distinct Persons, yet there are not several gods,
nor is unity divided. According to the fiction of Praxeas, Christ could
not be God without being the Father also; and this is the reason why
Tertullian dwells so much on the distinction. When he calls the Word and
Spirit a portion of the whole, the expression, though harsh, may be
allowed, since it does not refer to the substance, but only (as
Tertullian himself testifies) denotes arrangement and economy which
applies to the persons only. Accordingly, he asks, “How many persons,
Praxeas, do you think there are, but just as many as there are names
for?” In the same way, he shortly after says, “That they may believe the
Father and the Son, each in his own name and person.” These things, I
think, sufficiently refute the effrontery of those who endeavour to
blind the simple by pretending the authority of Tertullian.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p88"></span>29. Assuredly, whosoever will compare the
writings of the ancient fathers with each other, will not find any thing
in Irenaeus different from what is taught by those who come after him.
Justin is one of the most ancient, and he agrees with us out and out.
Let them object that, by him and others, the Father of Christ is called
the one God. The same thing is taught by Hilary, who uses the still
harsher expression, that Eternity is in the Father. Is it that he may
withhold divine essence from the Son? His whole work is a defence of the
doctrine which we maintain; and yet these men are not ashamed to produce
some kind of mutilated excerpts for the purpose of persuading us that
Hilary is a patron of their heresy. With regard to what they pretend as
to Ignatius, if they would have it to be of the least importance, let
them prove that the apostles enacted laws concerning Lent, and other
corruptions. Nothing can be more nauseating, than the absurdities which
have been published under the name of Ignatius; and therefore, the
conduct of those who provide themselves with such masks for deception is
the less entitled to toleration.

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p89"></span>Moreover, the consent of the ancient
fathers clearly appears from this, that in the Council of Nice, no
attempt was made by Arius to cloak his heresy by the authority of any
approved author; and no Greek or Latin writer apologises as dissenting
from his predecessors. It cannot be necessary to observe how carefully
Augustine, to whom all these miscreants are most violently opposed,
examined all ancient writings, and how reverently he embraced the
doctrine taught by them (August. lib. de Trinit. &c). He is most
scrupulous in stating the grounds on which he is forced to differ from
them, even in the minutest point. On this subject, too, if he finds any
thing ambiguous or obscure in other writers, he does not disguise it.11
 <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) And he assumes it as an
acknowledged fact, that the doctrine opposed by the Arians was received
without dispute from the earliest antiquity. At the same time, he was
not ignorant of what some others had previously taught. This is obvious
from a single expression. When he says (De Doct. Christ. lib. 1). that
“unity is in the Father,” will they pretend that he then forgot himself?
In another passage, he clears away every such charge, when he calls the
Father the beginning of the Godhead, as being from none—thus wisely
inferring that the name of God is specially ascribed to the Father,
because, unless the beginning were from him, the simple unity of essence
could not be maintained. I hope the pious reader will admit that I have
now disposed of all the calumnies by which Satan has hitherto attempted
to pervert or obscure the pure doctrine of faith. The whole substance of
the doctrine has, I trust, been faithfully expounded, if my readers will
set bounds to their curiosity, and not long more eagerly than they ought
for perplexing disputation. I did not undertake to satisfy those who
delight in speculate views, but I have not designedly omitted any thing
which I thought adverse to me. At the same time, studying the
edification of the Church, I have thought it better not to touch on
various topics, which could have yielded little profit, while they must
have needlessly burdened and fatigued the reader. For instance, what
avails it to discuss, as Lombard does at length (lib. 1 dist. 9),
Whether or not the Father always generates? This idea of continual
generation becomes an absurd fiction from the moment it is seen, that
from eternity there were three persons in one God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](inst027.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p50"></span>4 94 The French adds, “Et ne faisons
point cela témérairement, mais selon sa parole.”—And let us not do this
rashly, but in accordance with his Word.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](inst027.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p51"></span>5 95 Calvin translates interrogatively,
“Do ye believe in God?”

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](inst027.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p54"></span>6 96 The French adds, “à ce qu’elle ne
fust point aneantie incontinent; ”—so as to prevent its being instantly
annihilated.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](inst027.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p56"></span>7 97 The French adds, “Sainct Paul n’eust
jamais ainsi parlé, s’il n’eust cognu la vraie Divinté du Sainct
Esprit”—St Paul would never have so spoken, if he had not known the
divinity of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](inst027.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p59"></span>8 98 The French entirely omits the three
previous sentences, beginning, “Then, as,” &c.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](inst027.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p61"></span>9 99 Bernard, De Consider. lib. 5 “Cum
dico unum, non me trinitatis turbat numerus, qui essentiam non
multiplicat, non variat, nec partitur. Rursum, quum, dico tria, non me
arguit intuitus unitatis, quia illa quæcunque tria, seu illos tres, nec
in confusionem cogit, nec in singularitatem redigit. ”—See also Bernard,
Serm. 71 in Cantica.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](inst027.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p64"></span>00 100 August. Homil. De Temp. 38, De
Trinitate. See also Ad Pascentium Epist. 174 Cyrill. De Trinit. lib. 7;
Idem, lib. 3 Dialog.; Aug. in <span id="iv.i.xiv-p64.1"></span>[Psal
59](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p64.1"></span>;
et Tract. in Joann 89; Idem, in <span id="iv.i.xiv-p64.2"></span>[Psal.
68](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.xiv-p64.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](inst027.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p69"></span>01 101 See Calvin. Defensio Orthodox.
Fid. S. Trinit. Adv. Prod. Error. M. Serveti

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](inst027.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p72.11"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p73"></span>02 102 The French adds, “puisque tels
abuseurs forgent des noms contre nature;”—for these perverters forge
names against nature.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](inst027.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p74"></span>03 103 The French is, “tiré comme par un
álambic;”—extracted as by an alembic.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](inst027.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p75"></span>04 104 See Bernard, Serm. 80, super
Cantica., on the heresy of Gilbert, Bishop of Poiotiers.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](inst027.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p78"></span>05 105 The French is expressed somewhat
differently, “veu que l’Apostre en l’allegant de Christ, lui attribue
tout ce quí est de Dieu;”—seeing the Apostle, by applying it to Christ,
attributes to him everything belonging to God.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](inst027.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p80.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p81"></span>06 106 The French adds, “Comme trois
ruissuaux;”—like three streams.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](inst027.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p82"></span>07 107 The French adds, “Comme si
l’essense étoit au lieu de la personne du Pére;”—as if the essence were
in place of the person of the Father.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](inst027.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p82.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p83"></span>08 108 The French is somewhat differently
expressed: “Car le Fils a quelque l’estre, ou il n’en a point. S’il en
a, voila deux essences pour jouster l’un contre autre; s’il n’en a
point, ce ne seroit qu’une ombre.” For the Son has some being, or he has
none. If some, here are two essences to tilt with each other; if none,
he is only a shadow.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](inst027.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p86.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p87"></span>09 109 Tertullianus, lib. adv.
Praxeam;—Perversitas hæ (Praxeæ scil.) se existimat meram veritatem
possidere, dum unicum Deum non alias putat credendum, quam si ipsum
eundemque et Patrem et Filium et Spiritum sanctum dicat: quasi non sic
quoque unas sit omnia, dum ex uno omnia, per substantæ scilicet
unitatem, et nihilominus custodiatur  sacramentum, quæ
unitatem in trinitatem disponit, tres dirigens, Patrem, Filium, et
Spiritum sanctum. Tres autem non statu, ded gradu: nec substantia, sed
forma: nec potestate, sed specie: unius autem substantiæ, et unius
status, et unius potestatis: quia unus Deus, ex quo et gradus isti,
formaæ et species, in nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spriitus sancti
deputantur. Quomodo numerum sine divisione patiuntur, procedentes
tractatus demonstrabunt,:&c.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](inst027.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iv.i.xiv-p89.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiv-p90"></span>10 110 Athanasuis expresses himself thus
learnedly and piously:—“On this subject, though you cannot explain
yourself, you are not therefore to distrust the Holy Scriptures. It is
better, while hesitating through ignorance, to be silent and believe,
than not to believe because you hesitate”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 14. - IN THE CREATION OF THE WORLD, AND ALL THINGS IN IT,
THE TRUE GOD DISTINGUISHED BY CERTAIN MARKS FROM FICTITIOUS
GODS.](inst028)
