[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst024)  [Next](inst026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xii"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.xii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 11.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p1"></span>IMPIETY OF ATTRIBUTING A VISIBLE FORM TO
GOD.—THE SETTING UP OF IDOLS A DEFECTION FROM THE TRUE GOD.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p2"></span>There are three leading divisions in this
chapter. The first contains a refutation of those who ascribe a visible
form to God (s. 1 and 2), with an answer to the objection of those who,
because it is said that God manifested his presence by certain symbols,
use it as a defence of their error (s. 3 and 4). Various arguments are
afterwards adduced, disposing of the trite objection from Gregory’s
expression, that images are the books of the unlearned (s. 5-7). The
second division of the chapter relates to the origin of idols or images,
and the adoration of them, as approved by the Papists (s. 8-10). Their
evasion refuted (s. 11). The third division treats of the use and abuse
of images (s. 12). Whether it is expedient to have them in Christian
Churches (s. 13). The concluding part contains a refutation of the
second Council of Nice, which very absurdly contends for images in
opposition to divine truth, and even to the disparagement of the
Christian name.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.xii-p4"></span>1. God is opposed to idols, that all may
know he is the only fit witness to himself. He expressly forbids any
attempt to represent him by a bodily shape.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p5"></span>2. Reasons for this prohibition from
Moses, Isaiah, and Paul. The complaint of a heathen. It should put the
worshipers of idols to shame.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p6"></span>3. Consideration of an objection taken
from various passages in Moses. The Cherubim and Seraphim show that
images are not fit to represent divine mysteries. The Cherubim belonged
to the tutelage of the Law.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p7"></span>4. The materials of which idols are made,
abundantly refute the fiction of idolaters. Confirmation from Isaiah and
others. Absurd precaution of the Greeks.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p8"></span>5. Objection,—That images are the books of
the unlearned. Objection answered, 1. Scripture declares images to be
teachers of vanity and lies.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p9"></span>6. Answer continued, 2. Ancient
Theologians condemn the formation and worship of idols.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p10"></span>7. Answer continued,—3. The use of images
condemned by the luxury and meretricious ornaments given to them in
Popish Churches. 4. The Church must be trained in true piety by another
method.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p11"></span>8. The second division of the chapter.
Origin of idols or images. Its rise shortly after the flood. Its
continual progress.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p12"></span>9. Of the worship of images. Its nature.
A pretext of idolaters refuted. Pretexts of the heathen. Genius of
idolaters.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p13"></span>10. Evasion of the Papists. Their
agreement with ancient idolaters.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p14"></span>11. Refutation of another evasion or
sophism—viz. the distinction of δυλια and λατρια.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p15"></span>12. Third division of the chapter—viz.
the use and abuse of images.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p16"></span>13. Whether it is expedient to have
images in Christian temples.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p17"></span>14. Absurd defence of the worship of
images by the second so-called Council of Nice. Sophisms or perversions
of Scripture in defence of images in churches.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p18"></span>15. Passages adduced in support of the
worship of images.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p19"></span>16. The blasphemous expressions of some
ancient idolaters approved by not a few of the more modern, both in word
and deed.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p20"></span>1. As Scripture, in accommodation to the
rude and gross intellect of man, usually speaks in popular terms, so
whenever its object is to discriminate between the true God and false
deities, it opposes him in particular to idols; not that it approves of
what is taught more elegantly and subtilely by philosophers, but that it
may the better expose the folly, nay, madness of the world in its
inquiries after God, so long as every one clings to his own
speculations. This exclusive definition, which we uniformly meet with in
Scripture, annihilates every deity which men frame for themselves of
their own accord—God himself being the only fit witness to himself.
Meanwhile, seeing that this brutish stupidity has overspread the globe,
men longing after visible forms of God, and so forming deities of wood
and stone, silver and gold, or of any other dead and corruptible matter,
we must hold it as a first principle, that as often as any form is
assigned to God, his glory is corrupted by an impious lie. In the Law,
accordingly, after God had claimed the glory of divinity for himself
alone, when he comes to show what kind of worship he approves and
rejects, he immediately adds, “Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven
image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven above, or in the
earth beneath, or in the water under the earth,” (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p20.1"></span>[Exod.
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p20.1"></span>). By these words he curbs any licentious
attempt we might make to represent him by a visible shape, and briefly
enumerates all the forms by which superstition had begun, even long
before, to turn his truth into a lie. For we know that the Sun was
worshipped by the Persian. As many stars as the foolish nations saw in
the sky, so many gods they imagined them to be. Then to the Egyptians,
every animal was a figure of God.8  <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73)
The Greeks, again, plumed themselves on their superior wisdom in
worshipping God under the human form (Maximum Tyrius Platonic. Serm.
38). But God makes no comparison between images, as if one were more,
and another less befitting; he rejects, without exception, all shapes
and pictures, and other symbols by which the superstitious imagine they
can bring him near to them.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p22"></span>2. This may easily be inferred from the
reasons which he annexes to his prohibition. First, it is said in the
books of Moses (<span id="iv.i.xii-p22.1"></span>[Deut.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p22.1"></span>), “Take ye therefore good heed unto
yourselves; for ye saw no manner of similitude in the day that the Lord
spake unto you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire, lest ye corrupt
yourselves, and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure,”
&c. We see how plainly God declares against all figures, to make us
aware that all longing after such visible shapes is rebellion against
him. Of the prophets, it will be sufficient to mention Isaiah, who is
the most copious on this subjects (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p22.2"></span>[Isaiah
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p22.2"></span>; 41:7, 29; 45:9; 46:5), in order to show how
the majesty of God is defiled by an absurd and indecorous fiction, when
he who is incorporeal is assimilated to corporeal matter; he who is
invisible to a visible image; he who is a spirit to an inanimate object;
and he who fills all space to a bit of paltry wood, or stone, or gold.
Paul, too, reasons in the same way, “Forasmuch, then, as we are the
offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto
gold, or silver, or stone, graven by art and man’s device,” (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p22.3"></span>[Acts
17:29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p22.3"></span>). Hence it is manifest, that whatever
statues are set up or pictures painted to represent God, are utterly
displeasing to him, as a kind of insults to his majesty. And is it
strange that the Holy Spirit thunders such responses from heaven, when
he compels even blind and miserable idolaters to make a similar
confession on the earth? Seneca’s complaint, as given by Augustine De
Civit. Dei, c. 10, is well known. He says “The sacred immortal, and
invisible gods they exhibit in the meanest and most ignoble materials,
and dress them in the clothing of men and beasts; some confound the
sexes, and form a compound out of different bodies, giving the name of
deities to objects, which, if they were met alive, would be deemed
monsters.” Hence, again, it is obvious, that the defenders of images
resort to a paltry quibbling evasion, when they pretend that the Jews
were forbidden to use them on account of their proneness to
superstition; as if a prohibition which the Lord founds on his own
eternal essences and the uniform course of nature, could be restricted
to a single nation. Besides, when Paul refuted the error of giving a
bodily shape to God, he was addressing not Jews, but Athenians.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p23"></span>3. It is true that the Lord occasionally
manifested his presence by certain signs, so that he was said to be seen
face to face; but all the signs he ever employed were in apt accordance
with the scheme of doctrine, and, at the same time, gave plain
intimation of his incomprehensible essence. For the cloud, and smoke,
and flame, though they were symbols of heavenly glory (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p23.1"></span>[Deut.
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p23.1"></span>), curbed men’s minds as with a bridle, that
they might not attempt to penetrate farther. Therefore, even Moses (to
whom, of all men, God manifested himself most familiarly) was not
permitted though he prayed for it, to behold that face, but received for
answer, that the refulgence was too great for man (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p23.2"></span>[Exod.
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p23.2"></span>). The Holy Spirit appeared under the form of
a dove, but as it instantly vanished, who does not see that in this
symbol of a moment, the faithful were admonished to regard the Spirit as
invisible, to be contented with his power and grace, and not call for
any external figure? God sometimes appeared in the form of a man, but
this was in anticipation of the future revelation in Christ, and,
therefore, did not give the Jews the least pretext for setting up a
symbol of Deity under the human form. The mercy-seat, also (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p23.3"></span>[Exod.
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#018),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021)<span id="iv.i.xii-p23.3"></span>),
where, under the Law, God exhibited the presence of his power, was so
framed, as to intimate that God is best seen when the mind rises in
admiration above itself: the Cherubim with outstretched wings shaded,
and the veil covered it, while the remoteness of the place was in itself
a sufficient concealment. It is therefore mere infatuation to attempt to
defend images of God and the saints by the example of the Cherubim. For
what, pray, did these figures mean, if not that images are unfit to
represent the mysteries of God, since they were so formed as to cover
the mercy-seat with their wings, thereby concealing the view of God, not
only from the eye, but from every human sense, and curbing presumption?
To this we may add, that the prophets depict the Seraphim, who are
exhibited to us in vision, as having their faces veiled; thus
intimating, that the refulgence of the divine glory is so great, that
even the angels cannot gaze upon it directly, while the minute beams
which sparkle in the face of angels are shrouded from our view.
Moreover, all men of sound Judgment acknowledge that the Cherubim in
question belonged to the old tutelage of the law. It is absurd,
therefore, to bring them forward as an example for our age. For that
period of puerility, if I may so express it, to which such rudiments
were adapted, has passed away. And surely it is disgraceful, that
heathen writers should be more skilful interpreters of Scripture than
the Papists. Juvenal (Sat. 14) holds up the Jews to derision for
worshipping the thin clouds and firmament. This he does perversely and
impiously; still, in denying that any visible shape of Deity existed
among them, he speaks more accurately than the Papists, who prate about
there having been some visible image. In the fact that the people every
now and then rushed forth with boiling haste in pursuit of idols, just
like water gushing forth with violence from a copious spring, let us
learn how prone our nature is to idolatry, that we may not, by throwing
the whole blame of a common vice upon the Jews, be led away by vain and
sinful enticements to sleep the sleep of death.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p24"></span>4. To the same effect are the words of
the Psalmist (<span id="iv.i.xii-p24.1"></span>[Ps.
115:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#004),
[135](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#135)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p24.1"></span>:15), “Their idols are silver and gold, the
works of men’s hands.” From the materials of which they are made, he
infers that they are not gods, taking it for granted that every human
device concerning God is a dull fiction. He mentions silver and gold
rather than clay or stone, that neither splendour nor cost may procure
reverence to idols. He then draws a general conclusion, that nothing is
more unlikely than that gods should be formed of any kind of inanimate
matter. Man is forced to confess that he is but the creature of a day
(see Book 3 c. 9 s. 2), and yet would have the metal which he has
deified to be regarded as God. Whence had idols their origin, but from
the will of man? There was ground, therefore, for the sarcasm of the
heathen poet (Hor. Sat. I. 8), “I was once the trunk of a fig-tree, a
useless log, when the tradesman, uncertain whether he should make me a
stool, &c., chose rather that I should be a god.” In other words, an
earth-born creature, who breathes out his life almost every moment, is
able by his own device to confer the name and honour of deity on a
lifeless trunk. But as that Epicurean poet, in indulging his wit, had no
regard for religion, without attending to his jeers or those of his
fellows, let the rebuke of the prophet sting, nay, cut us to the heart,
when he speaks of the extreme infatuation of those who take a piece of
wood to kindle a fire to warm themselves, bake bread, roast or boil
flesh, and out of the residue make a god, before which they prostrate
themselves as suppliants (<span id="iv.i.xii-p24.2"></span>[Isaiah
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p24.2"></span>). Hence, the same prophet, in another place,
not only charges idolaters as guilty in the eye of the law, but upbraids
them for not learning from the foundations of the earth, nothing being
more incongruous than to reduce the immense and incomprehensible Deity
to the stature of a few feet. And yet experience shows that this
monstrous proceeding, though palpably repugnant to the order of nature,
is natural to man. It is, moreover, to be observed, that by the mode of
expression which is employed, every form of superstition is denounced.
Being works of men, they have no authority from God (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p24.3"></span>[Isa. 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#008),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#031)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p24.3"></span>:7; <span id="iv.i.xii-p24.4"></span>[Hos.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003)<span id="iv.i.xii-p24.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.i.xii-p24.5"></span>[Mic.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p24.5"></span>); and, therefore, it must be regarded as a
fixed principle, that all modes of worship devised by man are
detestable. The infatuation is placed in a still stronger light by the
Psalmist (<span id="iv.i.xii-p24.6"></span>[Psalm
115:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p24.6"></span>), when he shows how aid is implored from
dead and senseless objects, by beings who have been endued with
intelligence for the very purpose of enabling them to know that the
whole universe is governed by Divine energy alone. But as the corruption
of nature hurries away all mankind collectively and individually into
this madness, the Spirit at length thunders forth a dreadful
imprecation, “They that make them are like unto them, so is every one
that trusteth in them.”8  <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) And it is
to be observed, that the thing forbidden is *likeness*, whether
sculptured or otherwise. This disposes of the frivolous precaution taken
by the Greek Church. They think they do admirably, because they have no
sculptured shape of Deity, while none go greater lengths in the
licentious use of pictures. The Lord, however, not only forbids any
image of himself to be erected by a statuary, but to be formed by any
artist whatever, because every such image is sinful and insulting to his
majesty.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p26"></span>5. I am not ignorant, indeed, of the
assertion, which is now more than threadbare, “that images are the books
of the unlearned.” So said Gregory:8  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) a but the Holy Spirit goes a very
different decision; and had Gregory got his lesson in this matter in the
Spirit’s school, he never would have spoken as he did. For when Jeremiah
declares that “the stock is a doctrine of vanities,” (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p27.3"></span>[Jer.
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p27.3"></span>), and Habakkuk, “that the molten image” is
“a teacher of lies,” the general doctrine to be inferred certainly is,
that every thing respecting God which is learned from images is futile
and false. If it is objected that the censure of the prophets is
directed against those who perverted images to purposes of impious
superstition, I admit it to be so; but I add (what must be obvious to
all), that the prophets utterly condemn what the Papists hold to be an
undoubted axiom—viz. that images are substitutes for books. For they
contrast images with the true God, as if the two were of an opposite
nature, and never could be made to agree. In the passages which I lately
quoted, the conclusion drawn is, that seeing there is one true God whom
the Jews worshipped, visible shapes made for the purpose of representing
him are false and wicked fictions; and all, therefore, who have recourse
to them for knowledge are miserably deceived. In short, were it not true
that all such knowledge is fallacious and spurious, the prophets would
not condemn it in such general terms. This at least I maintain, that
when we teach that all human attempts to give a visible shape to God are
vanity and lies, we do nothing more than state *verbatim* what the
prophets taught.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p28"></span>6. Moreover, let Lactantius and Eusebius8
 <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) be read on this subject.8  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) These writers assume it as an
indisputable fact, that all the beings whose images were erected were
originally men. In like manner, Augustine distinctly declares, that it
is unlawful not only to worship images, but to dedicate them. And in
this he says no more than had been long before decreed by the Libertine
Council, the thirty-sixth Canon of which is, “There must be no pictures
used in churches: Let nothing which is adored or worshipped be painted
on walls.” But the most memorable passage of all is that which Augustine
quotes in another place from Varro, and in which he expressly
concurs:—“Those who first introduced images of the gods both took away
fear and brought in error.” Were this merely the saying of Varro, it
might perhaps be of little weight, though it might well make us ashamed,
that a heathen, groping as it were in darkness, should have attained to
such a degree of light, as to see that corporeal images are unworthy of
the majesty of God, and that, because they diminish reverential fear and
encourage error. The sentiment itself bears witness that it was uttered
with no less truth than shrewdness. But Augustine, while he borrows it
from Varro, adduces it as conveying his own opinion. At the outset,
indeed, he declares that the first errors into which men fell concerning
God did not originate with images, but increased with them, as if new
fuel had been added. Afterwards, he explains how the fear of God was
thereby extinguished or impaired, his presence being brought into
contempt by foolish, and childish, and absurd representations.8  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) The truth of this latter remark I wish we
did not so thoroughly experience. Whosoever, therefore, is desirous of
being instructed in the true knowledge of God must apply to some other
teacher than images.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p32"></span>7. Let Papists, then, if they have any
sense of shame, henceforth desist from the futile plea, that images are
the books of the unlearned—a plea so plainly refuted by innumerable
passages of Scripture. And yet were I to admit the plea, it would not be
a valid defence of their peculiar idols. It is well known what kind of
monsters they obtrude upon us as divine. For what are the pictures or
statues to which they append the names of saints, but exhibitions of the
most shameless luxury or obscenity? Were any one to dress himself after
their model, he would deserve the pillory. Indeed, brothels exhibit
their inmates more chastely and modestly dressed than churches do images
intended to represent virgins. The dress of the martyrs is in no respect
more becoming. Let Papists then have some little regard to decency in
decking their idols, if they would give the least plausibility to the
false allegation, that they are books of some kind of sanctity. But even
then we shall answer, that this is not the method in which the Christian
people should be taught in sacred places. Very different from these
follies is the doctrine in which God would have them to be there
instructed. His injunction is, that the doctrine common to all should
there be set forth by the preaching of the Word, and the administration
of the sacraments,—a doctrine to which little heed can be given by those
whose eyes are carried too and fro gazing at idols. And who are the
unlearned, whose rudeness admits of being taught by images only? Just
those whom the Lord acknowledges for his disciples; those whom he
honours with a revelation of his celestial philosophy, and desires to be
trained in the saving mysteries of his kingdom. I confess, indeed, as
matters now are, there are not a few in the present day who cannot want
such books. But, I ask, whence this stupidity, but just because they are
defrauded of the only doctrine which was fit to instruct them? The
simple reason why those who had the charge of churches resigned the
office of teaching to idols was, because they themselves were dumb. Paul
declares, that by the true preaching of the gospel Christ is portrayed
and in a manner crucified before our eyes (<span
id="iv.i.xii-p32.1"></span>[Gal.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span id="iv.i.xii-p32.1"></span>).
Of what use, then, were the erection in churches of so many crosses of
wood and stone, silver and gold, if this doctrine were faithfully and
honestly preached—viz. Christ died that he might bear our curse upon the
tree, that he might expiate our sins by the sacrifice of his body, wash
them in his blood, and, in short, reconcile us to God the Father? From
this one doctrine the people would learn more than from a thousand
crosses of wood and stone. As for crosses of gold and silver, it may be
true that the avaricious give their eyes and minds to them more eagerly
than to any heavenly instructor.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p33"></span>8. In regard to the origin of idols, the
statement contained in the Book of Wisdom has been received with almost
universal consent—viz. that they originated with those who bestowed this
honour on the dead, from a superstitious regard to their memory. I admit
that this perverse practice is of very high antiquity, and I deny not
that it was a kind of torch by which the infatuated proneness of mankind
to idolatry was kindled into a greater blaze. I do not, however, admit
that it was the first origin of the practice. That idols were in use
before the prevalence of that ambitious consecration of the images of
the dead, frequently adverted to by profane writers, is evident from the
words of Moses (<span id="iv.i.xii-p33.1"></span>[Gen.
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p33.1"></span>). When he relates that Rachel stole her
father’s images, he speaks of the use of idols as a common vice. Hence
we may infer, that the human mind is, so to speak, a perpetual forge of
idols. There was a kind of renewal of the world at the deluge, but
before many years elapse, men are forging gods at will. There is reason
to believe, that in the holy Patriarch’s lifetime his grandchildren were
given to idolatry: so that he must with his own eyes, not without the
deepest grief, have seen the earth polluted with idols—that earth whose
iniquities God had lately purged with so fearful a Judgment. For Joshua
testifies (<span id="iv.i.xii-p33.2"></span>[Josh.
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p33.2"></span>), that Torah and Nachor, even before the
birth of Abraham, were the worshipers of false gods. The progeny of Shem
having so speedily revolted, what are we to think of the posterity of
Ham, who had been cursed long before in their father? Thus, indeed, it
is. The human mind, stuffed as it is with presumptuous rashness, dares
to imagine a god suited to its own capacity; as it labours under
dullness, nay, is sunk in the grossest ignorance, it substitutes vanity
and an empty phantom in the place of God. To these evils another is
added. The god whom man has thus conceived inwardly he attempts to
embody outwardly. The mind, in this way, conceives the idol, and the
hand gives it birth. That idolatry has its origin in the idea which men
have, that God is not present with them unless his presence is carnally
exhibited, appears from the example of the Israelites: “Up,” said they,
“make us gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man
that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wet not what is become
of him,” (<span id="iv.i.xii-p33.3"></span>[Exod.
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p33.3"></span>). They knew, indeed, that there was a God
whose mighty power they had experienced in so many miracles, but they
had no confidence of his being near to them, if they did not with their
eyes behold a corporeal symbol of his presence, as an attestation to his
actual government. They desired, therefore, to be assured by the image
which went before them, that they were journeying under Divine guidance.
And daily experience shows, that the flesh is always restless until it
has obtained some figment like itself, with which it may vainly solace
itself as a representation of God. In consequence of this blind passion
men have, almost in all ages since the world began, set up signs on
which they imagined that God was visibly depicted to their eyes.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p34"></span>9. After such a figment is formed,
adoration forthwith ensues: for when once men imagined that they beheld
God in images, they also worshipped him as being there. At length their
eyes and minds becoming wholly engrossed by them, they began to grow
more and more brutish, gazing and wondering as if some divinity were
actually before them. It hence appears that men do not fall away to the
worship of images until they have imbibed some idea of a grosser
description: not that they actually believe them to be gods, but that
the power of divinity somehow or other resides in them. Therefore,
whether it be God or a creature that is imaged, the moment you fall
prostrate before it in veneration, you are so far fascinated by
superstition. For this reason, the Lord not only forbade the erection of
statues to himself, but also the consecration of titles and stones which
might be set up for adoration. For the same reason, also, the second
commandment has an additional part concerning adoration. For as soon as
a visible form is given to God, his power also is supposed to be annexed
to it. So stupid are men, that wherever they figure God, there they fix
him, and by necessary consequence proceed to adore him. It makes no
difference whether they worship the idol simply, or God in the idol; it
is always idolatry when divine honours are paid to an idol, be the
colour what it may. And because God wills not to be worshipped
superstitiously whatever is bestowed upon idols is so much robbed from
him.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p35"></span>Let those attend to this who set about
hunting for miserable pretexts in defence of the execrable idolatry in
which for many past ages true religion has been buried and sunk. It is
said that the images are not accounted gods. Nor were the Jews so
utterly thoughtless as not to remember that there was a God whose hand
led them out of Egypt before they made the calf. Indeed, Aaron saying,
that these were the gods which had brought them out of Egypt, they
intimated, in no ambiguous terms, that they wished to retain God, their
deliverer, provided they saw him going before them in the calf. Nor are
the heathen to be deemed to have been so stupid as not to understand
that God was something else than wood and stone. For they changed the
images at pleasure, but always retained the same gods in their minds;8
 <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) besides, they daily consecrated
new images without thinking they were making new gods. Read the excuses
which Augustine tells us were employed by the idolaters of his time
(*August. in Ps.* 113). The vulgar, when accused, replied that they did
not worship the visible object, but the Deity which dwelt in it
invisibly. Those, again, who had what he calls a more refined religion,
said, that they neither worshipped the image, nor any inhabiting Deity,
but by means of the corporeal image beheld a symbol of that which it was
their duty to worship. What then? All idolaters whether Jewish or
Gentile, were actuated in the very way which has been described. Not
contented with spiritual understanding, they thought that images would
give them a surer and nearer impression. When once this preposterous
representation of God was adopted, there was no limit until, deluded
every now and then by new impostures, they came to think that God
exerted his power in images.8  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80)
Still the Jews were persuaded, that under such images they worshipped
the eternal God, the one true Lord of heaven and earth; and the
Gentiles, also, in worshipping their own false gods, supposed them to
dwell in heaven.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p38"></span>10. It is an impudent falsehood to deny
that the thing which was thus anciently done is also done in our day.
For why do men prostrate themselves before images? Why, when in the act
of praying, do they turn towards them as to the ears of God? It is
indeed true, as Augustine says (in <span id="iv.i.xii-p38.1"></span>[Ps.
113](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.xii-p38.1"></span>),
that no person thus prays or worships, looking at an image, without
being impressed with the idea that he is heard by it, or without hoping
that what he wishes will be performed by it. Why are such distinctions
made between different images of the same God, that while one is passed
by, or receives only common honour, another is worshipped with the
highest solemnities? Why do they fatigue themselves with votive
pilgrimages to images while they have many similar ones at home?8  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) Why at the present time do they fight for
them to blood and slaughter, as for their altars and hearths, showing
more willingness to part with the one God than with their idols? And yet
I am not now detailing the gross errors of the vulgar—errors almost
infinite in number, and in possession of almost all hearts. I am only
referring to what those profess who are most desirous to clear
themselves of idolatry. They say, we do not call them our gods. Nor did
either the Jews or Gentiles of old so call them; and yet the prophets
never ceased to charge them with their adulteries with wood and stone
for the very acts which are daily done by those who would be deemed
Christians, namely, for worshipping God carnally in wood and stone.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p40"></span>11. I am not ignorant, however, and I
have no wish to disguise the fact, that they endeavour to evade the
charge by means of a more subtle distinction, which shall afterwards be
fully considered (see *infra*, s. 16, and chap. 12 s. 2). The worship
which they pay to their images they cloak with the name of εἰδωλοδυλεία
(ιδολοδυλια), and deny to be εἰδωλολατρεία (ιδολατρια). So they speaks
holding that the worship which they call δυλια may, without insult to
God, be paid to statues and pictures. Hence, they think themselves
blameless if they are only the *servants*, and not the *worshippers*, of
idols; as if it were not a lighter matter to *worship* than *to serve*.
And yet, while they take refuge in a Greek term, they very childishly
contradict themselves. For the Greek word λατρεύειν having no other
meaning than *to worship*, what they say is just the same as if they
were to confess that they worship their images without worshipping them.
They cannot object that I am quibbling upon words. The fact is, that
they only betray their ignorance while they attempt to throw dust in the
eyes of the simple. But how eloquent soever they may be, they will never
prove by their eloquence that one and the same thing makes two. Let them
show how the things differ if they would be thought different from
ancient idolaters. For as a murderer or an adulterer will not escape
conviction by giving some adventitious name to his crime, so it is
absurd for them to expect that the subtle device of a name will
exculpate them, if they, in fact, differ in nothing from idolaters whom
they themselves are forced to condemn. But so far are they from proving
that their case is different, that the source of the whole evil consists
in a preposterous rivalship with them, while they with their minds
devise, and with their hands execute, symbolical shapes of God.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p41"></span>12. I am not, however, so superstitious
as to think that all visible representations of every kind are unlawful.
But as sculpture and painting are gifts of God, what I insist for is,
that both shall be used purely and lawfully,—that gifts which the Lord
has bestowed upon us, for his glory and our good, shall not be
preposterously abused, nay, shall not be perverted to our destruction.
We think it unlawful to give a visible shape to God, because God himself
has forbidden it, and because it cannot be done without, in some degree,
tarnishing his glory. And lest any should think that we are singular in
this opinion, those acquainted with the productions of sound divines
will find that they have always disapproved of it. If it be unlawful to
make any corporeal representation of God, still more unlawful must it be
to worship such a representation instead of God, or to worship God in
it. The only things, therefore, which ought to be painted or sculptured,
are things which can be presented to the eye; the majesty of God, which
is far beyond the reach of any eye, must not be dishonored by unbecoming
representations. Visible representations are of two classes—viz.
historical, which give a representation of events, and pictorial, which
merely exhibit bodily shapes and figures. The former are of some use for
instruction or admonition. The latter, so far as I can see, are only
fitted for amusement. And yet it is certain, that the latter are almost
the only kind which have hitherto been exhibited in churches. Hence we
may infer, that the exhibition was not the result of judicious
selection, but of a foolish and inconsiderate longing. I say nothing as
to the improper and unbecoming form in which they are presented, or the
wanton license in which sculptors and painters have here indulged (a
point to which I alluded a little ago, *supra*, s. 7). I only say, that
though they were otherwise faultless, they could not be of any utility
in teaching.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p42"></span>13. But, without reference to the above
distinction, let us here consider, whether it is expedient that churches
should contain representations of any kind, whether of events or human
forms. First, then, if we attach any weight to the authority of the
ancient Church, let us remember, that for five hundred years, during
which religion was in a more prosperous condition, and a purer doctrine
flourished, Christian churches were completely free from visible
representations (see Preface, and Book 4, c. 9 s. 9). Hence their first
admission as an ornament to churches took place after the purity of the
ministry had somewhat degenerated. I will not dispute as to the
rationality of the grounds on which the first introduction of them
proceeded, but if you compare the two periods, you will find that the
latter had greatly declined from the purity of the times when images
were unknown. What then? Are we to suppose that those holy fathers, if
they had judged the thing to be useful and salutary, would have allowed
the Church to be so long without it? Undoubtedly, because they saw very
little or no advantage, and the greatest danger in it, they rather
rejected it intentionally and on rational grounds, than omitted it
through ignorance or carelessness. This is clearly attested by Augustine
in these words (<span id="iv.i.xii-p42.1"></span>Ep. 49<span
id="iv.i.xii-p42.1"></span>. See also De Civit. Dei, lib 4 c. 31) “When
images are thus placed aloft in seats of honour, to be beheld by those
who are praying or sacrificing, though they have neither sense nor life,
yet from appearing as if they had both, they affect weak minds just as
if they lived and breathed,” &c. And again, in another passage (in <span
id="iv.i.xii-p42.2"></span>[Ps.
112](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#000)<span id="iv.i.xii-p42.2"></span>)
he says, “The effect produced, and in a manner extorted, by the bodily
shape, is, that the mind, being itself in a body, imagines that a body
which is so like its oven must be similarly affected,” &c. A little
farther on he says, “Images are more capable of giving a wrong bent to
an unhappy soul, from having mouth, eyes, ears, and feet, than of
correcting it, as they neither speak, nor see, nor hear, nor walk.” This
undoubtedly is the reason why John (<span id="iv.i.xii-p42.3"></span>[1
John 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021)<span
id="iv.i.xii-p42.3"></span>) enjoins us to beware, not only of the
worship of idols, but also of idols themselves. And from the fearful
infatuation under which the world has hitherto laboured, almost to the
entire destruction of piety, we know too well from experience that the
moment images appear in churches, idolatry has as it were raised its
banner; because the folly of manhood cannot moderate itself, but
forthwith falls away to superstitious worship. Even were the danger less
imminent, still, when I consider the proper end for which churches are
erected, it appears to me more unbecoming their sacredness than I well
can tell, to admit any other images than those living symbols which the
Lord has consecrated by his own word: I mean Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper, with the other ceremonies. By these our eyes ought to be more
steadily fixed, and more vividly impressed, than to require the aid of
any images which the wit of man may devise. Such, then, is the
incomparable blessing of images—a blessing, the want of which, if we
believe the Papists, cannot possibly be compensated!8  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82)

<span id="iv.i.xii-p44"></span>14. Enough, I believe, would have been
said on this subject, were I not in a manner arrested by the Council of
Nice; not the celebrated Council which Constantine the Great assembled,
but one which was held eight hundred years ago by the orders and under
the auspices of the Empress Irene.9  <span
id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) This Council decreed not only that images
were to be used in churches, but also that they were to be worshipped.
Every thing, therefore, that I have said, is in danger of suffering
great prejudice from the authority of this Synod. To confess the truth,
however, I am not so much moved by this consideration, as by a wish to
make my readers aware of the lengths to which the infatuation has been
carried by those who had a greater fondness for images than became
Christians. But let us first dispose of this matter. Those who defend
the use of images appeal to that Synod for support. But there is a
refutation extant which bears the name of Charlemagne, and which is
proved by its style to be a production of that period. It gives the
opinions delivered by the bishops who were present, and the arguments by
which they supported them. John, deputy of the Eastern Churches, said,
“God created man in his own image,” and thence inferred that images
ought to be used. He also thought there was a recommendation of images
in the following passage, “Show me thy face, for it is beautiful.”
Another, in order to prove that images ought to be placed on altars,
quoted the passage, “No man, when he has lighted a candle, putteth it
under a bushel.” Another, to show the utility of looking at images,
quoted a verse of the Psalms “The light of thy countenance, O Lord, has
shone upon us.” Another laid hold of this similitude: As the Patriarchs
used the sacrifices of the Gentiles, so ought Christians to use the
images of saints instead of the idols of the Gentiles. They also twisted
to the same effect the words, “Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy
house.” But the most ingenious interpretation was the following, “As we
have heard, so also have we seen;” therefore, God is known not merely by
the hearing of the word, but also by the seeing of images. Bishop
Theodore was equally acute: “God,” says he, “is to be admired in his
saints;” and it is elsewhere said, “To the saints who are on earth;”
therefore this must refer to images. In short, their absurdities are so
extreme that it is painful even to quote them.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p46"></span>15. When they treat of adoration, great
stress is laid on the worship of Pharaoh, the staff of Joseph, and the
inscription which Jacob set up. In this last case they not only pervert
the meaning of Scripture, but quote what is nowhere to be found. Then
the passages, “Worship at his footstool”—“Worship in his holy
mountain”—“The rulers of the people will worship before thy face,” seem
to them very solid and apposite proofs. Were one, with the view of
turning the defenders of images into ridicule, to put words into their
mouths, could they be made to utter greater and grosser absurdities? But
to put an end to all doubt on the subject of images, Theodosius Bishop
of Mira confirms the propriety of worshipping them by the dreams of his
archdeacon, which he adduces with as much gravity as if he were in
possession of a response from heaven. Let the patrons of images now go
and urge us with the decree of this Synod, as if the venerable Fathers
did not bring themselves into utter discredit by handling Scripture so
childishly, or wresting it so shamefully and profanely.

<span id="iv.i.xii-p47"></span>16. I come now to monstrous impieties,
which it is strange they ventured to utter, and twice strange that all
men did not protest against with the utmost detestation.9  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) It is right to expose this frantic and
flagitious extravagance, and thereby deprive the worship of images of
that gloss of antiquity in which Papists seek to deck it. Theodosius
Bishop of Amora fires oft an anathema at all who object to the worship
of images. Another attributes all the calamities of Greece and the East
to the crime of not having worshipped them. Of what punishment then are
the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs worthy, in whose day no images
existed? They afterwards add, that if the statue of the Emperor is met
with odours and incense, much more are the images of saints entitled to
the honour. Constantius, Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus, professes to
embrace images with reverence, and declares that he will pay them the
respect which is due to the ever blessed Trinity: every person refusing
to do the same thing he anathematises and classes with Marcionites and
Manichees. Lest you should think this the private opinion of an
individual, they all assent. Nay, John the Eastern legate, carried still
farther by his zeal, declares it would be better to allow a city to be
filled with brothels than be denied the worship of images. At last it is
resolved with one consent that the Samaritans are the worst of all
heretics, and that the enemies of images are worse than the Samaritans.
But that the play may not pass off without the accustomed *Plaudite*,
the whole thus concludes, “Rejoice and exult, ye who, having the image
of Christ, offer sacrifice to it.” Where is now the distinction of
λατρια and δυλια with which they would throw dust in all eyes, human and
divine? The Council unreservedly relies as much on images as on the
living God.9  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](inst025.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p21"></span> 80 The French adds, “voire jusques aux
oignons et porreaux;”—they have gone even to onions and leeks.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](inst025.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p24.7"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p25"></span>1 81 Calvin translates the words of the
Psalmist as an imprecation, “Similes illis fiant qui faciunt ea;”—Let
those who make them be like unto them.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](inst025.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p27"></span>2 82 See Gregory, Ep. ad Serenum
Massiliens, <span id="iv.i.xii-p27.1"></span>Ep. 109<span
id="iv.i.xii-p27.1"></span>. lib. 7; and <span
id="iv.i.xii-p27.2"></span>Ep. 9<span id="iv.i.xii-p27.2"></span> lib.
9; images, rather accuses it.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](inst025.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p29"></span>3 83 The French adds, “deux des plus
anciens Docteurs de l’Eglise;”—two of the most ancient Doctors of the
Church.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](inst025.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p30"></span>4 84 Lact. Inst. Div. lib. 1 c. 15;
Euseb. Præf. Evang. lib. 3 c. 3, 4; also August. De Civitate Dei, lib. 4
c. 9, 31.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](inst025.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p31"></span>5 85 The French is “Pourceque la gloire
de sa Divinite est vilipendée en une chose si sotte et lourde comme est
un marmouset;”—because the glory of his Divinity is degraded into an
object so silly and stupid as a marmoset.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](inst025.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p36"></span>6 86 The French is “Neantmoins ils ne
disoyent point pour cela au’un Dieu fut divisé;”—nevertheless, they did
not therefore say that the unity of God was divided.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](inst025.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p37"></span>7 87 French, “Ne vouloit monstrer sa
vertu que sous les images;”—would only show his power under the form of
images.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](inst025.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p39"></span>8 88 The two last sentences in French
are, “Car laissans là un crucifix, ou une image de leur nostre-dame, ou
n’en tenans point grand comte, ils mettent leur devotion à un autre.
Pourquoy est-ce qu’ils trotent si loin en pelerinage pour voir un
marmouset, duquel ils ont le semblable à leur porte?”—For there passing
by a crucifix, or an image of what they call “Our Lady,” or making no
great account of them, they pay their devotion to another. Why is it
that they trot so far on a pilgrimage to see a marmoset, when they have
one like it at their door?

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](inst025.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p42.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p43"></span>9 89 The French is “qu’il n’y ait nulle
recompense qui vaille un marmouset guignant à travers et faisant la mine
tortue;”—that no compensation can equal the value of a marmoset looking
askance and twisting its face.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](inst025.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p45"></span> 90 The French is “une mechante
Proserpine nommée Irene;”—a wicked Proserpine named Irene.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](inst025.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p48"></span>1 91 The French adds, “et qu’il ne se
soit trouvé gens qui leur crachassent au visage;”—and that people were
not found to spit in their face.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](inst025.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iv.i.xii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xii-p49"></span>2 92 See Calvin, De Vitandis
Superstitionibus, where also see Resp. Pastorum, Tigurin. adver.
Nicidenitas. See also Calvin, De Fugiendis Illicitis Sacris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 12. - GOD DISTINGUISHED FROM IDOLS, THAT HE MAY BE THE
EXCLUSIVE OBJECT OF WORSHIP.](inst026)
