[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst016)  [Next](inst018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.iv"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.iv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 3.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p1"></span>THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD NATURALLY IMPLANTED IN
THE HUMAN MIND.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p2"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.iv-p3"></span>1. The knowledge of God being manifested to
all makes the reprobate without excuse. Universal belief and
acknowledgement of the existence of God.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p4"></span>2. Objection—that religion and the belief
of a Deity are the inventions of crafty politicians. Refutation of the
objection. This universal belief confirmed by the examples of wicked men
and Atheists.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p5"></span>3. Confirmed also by the vain endeavours of
the wicked to banish all fear of God from their minds. Conclusion, that
the knowledge of God is naturally implanted in the human mind.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p6"></span>1. That there exists in the human minds and
indeed by natural instinct, some sense of Deity, we hold to be beyond
dispute, since God himself, to prevent any man from pretending
ignorance, has endued all men with some idea of his Godhead, the memory
of which he constantly renews and occasionally enlarges, that all to a
man being aware that there is a God, and that he is their Maker, may be
condemned by their own conscience when they neither worship him nor
consecrate their lives to his service. Certainly, if there is any
quarter where it may be supposed that God is unknown, the most likely
for such an instance to exist is among the dullest tribes farthest
removed from civilisation. But, as a heathen tells us,5  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) there is no nation so barbarous, no race
so brutish, as not to be imbued with the conviction that there is a God.
Even those who, in other respects, seem to differ least from the lower
animals, constantly retain some sense of religion; so thoroughly has
this common conviction possessed the mind, so firmly is it stamped on
the breasts of all men. Since, then, there never has been, from the very
first, any quarter of the globe, any city, any household even, without
religion, this amounts to a tacit confession, that a sense of Deity is
inscribed on every heart. Nay, even idolatry is ample evidence of this
fact. For we know how reluctant man is to lower himself, in order to set
other creatures above him. Therefore, when he chooses to worship wood
and stone rather than be thought to have no God, it is evident how very
strong this impression of a Deity must be; since it is more difficult to
obliterate it from the mind of man, than to break down the feelings of
his nature,—these certainly being broken down, when, in opposition to
his natural haughtiness, he spontaneously humbles himself before the
meanest object as an act of reverence to God.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p8"></span>2. It is most absurd, therefore, to
maintain, as some do, that religion was devised by the cunning and craft
of a few individuals, as a means of keeping the body of the people in
due subjection, while there was nothing which those very individuals,
while teaching others to worship God, less believed than the existence
of a God. I readily acknowledge, that designing men have introduced a
vast number of fictions into religion, with the view of inspiring the
populace with reverence or striking them with terror, and thereby
rendering them more obsequious; but they never could have succeeded in
this, had the minds of men not been previously imbued with that uniform
belief in God, from which, as from its seed, the religious propensity
springs. And it is altogether incredible that those who, in the matter
of religion, cunningly imposed on their ruder neighbours, were
altogether devoid of a knowledge of God. For though in old times there
were some, and in the present day not a few are foun who deny the being
of a God, yet, whether they will or not, they occasionally feel the
truth which they are desirous not to know. We do not read of any man who
broke out into more unbridled and audacious contempt of the Deity than
C. Caligula,5  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) and yet none showed
greater dread when any indication of divine wrath was manifested. Thus,
however unwilling, he shook with terror before the God whom he
professedly studied to condemn. You may every day see the same thing
happening to his modern imitators. The most audacious despiser of God is
most easily disturbed, trembling at the sound of a falling leaf. How so,
unless in vindication of the divine majesty, which smites their
consciences the more strongly the more they endeavour to flee from it.
They all, indeed, look out for hiding-places where they may conceal
themselves from the presence of the Lord, and again efface it from their
mind; but after all their efforts they remain caught within the net.
Though the conviction may occasionally seem to vanish for a moment, it
immediately returns, and rushes in with new impetuosity, so that any
interval of relief from the gnawing of conscience is not unlike the
slumber of the intoxicated or the insane, who have no quiet rest in
sleep, but are continually haunted with dire horrific dreams. Even the
wicked themselves, therefore, are an example of the fact that some idea
of God always exists in every human mind.

<span id="iv.i.iv-p10"></span>3. All men of sound Judgment will
therefore hold, that a sense of Deity is indelibly engraven on the human
heart. And that this belief is naturally engendered in all, and
thoroughly fixed as it were in our very bones, is strikingly attested by
the contumacy of the wicked, who, though they struggle furiously, are
unable to extricate themselves from the fear of God. Though Diagoras,5
 <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) and others of like stamps make
themselves merry with whatever has been believed in all ages concerning
religion, and Dionysus scoffs at the Judgment of heaven, it is but a
Sardonian grin; for the worm of conscience, keener than burning steel,
is gnawing them within. I do not say with Cicero, that errors wear out
by age, and that religion increases and grows better day by day. For the
world (as will be shortly seen) labours as much as it can to shake off
all knowledge of God, and corrupts his worship in innumerable ways. I
only say, that, when the stupid hardness of heart, which the wicked
eagerly court as a means of despising God, becomes enfeebled, the sense
of Deity, which of all things they wished most to be extinguished, is
still in vigour, and now and then breaks forth. Whence we infer, that
this is not a doctrine which is first learned at school, but one as to
which every man is, from the womb, his own master; one which nature
herself allows no individual to forget, though many, with all their
might, strive to do so. Moreover, if all are born and live for the
express purpose of learning to know God, and if the knowledge of God, in
so far as it fails to produce this effect, is fleeting and vain, it is
clear that all those who do not direct the whole thoughts and actions of
their lives to this end fail to fulfil the law of their being. This did
not escape the observation even of philosophers. For it is the very
thing which Plato meant (in *Phœd. et Theact.*) when he taught, as he
often does, that the chief good of the soul consists in resemblance to
God; *i.e.*, when, by means of knowing him, she is wholly transformed
into him. Thus Gryllus, also, in Plutarch (*lib. guod bruta anim.
ratione utantur*), reasons most skilfully, when he affirms that, if once
religion is banished from the lives of men, they not only in no respect
excel, but are, in many respects, much more wretched than the brutes,
since, being exposed to so many forms of evil, they continually drag on
a troubled and restless existence: that the only thing, therefore, which
makes them superior is the worship of God, through which alone they
aspire to immortality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](inst017.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p7"></span>4 54 “Intelligi necesse est deos, quoniam
insitas eorum vel potius innatas cognitiones habemus.—Quae nobis natura
informationem deorum ipsorum dedit, eadem insculpsit in mentibus ut eos
aeternos et beatos haberemus.”—Cic. de Nat. Deor. lib. 1 c. 17.—“Itaque
inter omnes omnium gentium summa constat; omnibus enim innatum est, et
in animo quasi insculptum esse deos.”—Lib. 2. c. 4. See also Lact. Inst.
Div. lib. 3 c. 10.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](inst017.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p9"></span>6 56 Suet. Calig. c. 51.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](inst017.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.i.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.iv-p11"></span>7 57 Cic. De Nat. Deor. lib. 1 c. 23.
Valer. Max. lib. 1. c. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 4. - THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD STIFLED OR CORRUPTED,
IGNORANTLY OR MALICIOUSLY.](inst018)
