[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst083)  [Next](inst085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.v"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.v-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 4.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p1"></span>OF THE STATE OF THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH, AND
THE MODE OF GOVERNMENT IN USE BEFORE THE PAPACY.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are,—I. The
mode of government in the primitive Church, sec 1-10. II. The formal
ordination of Bishops and Ministers in the primitive Church, sec. 10-15.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p4"></span>1. The method of government in the
primitive Church. Not in every respect conformable to the rule of the
word of God. Three distinct orders of Ministers.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p5"></span>2. First, the Bishop, for the sake of
preserving order, presided over the Presbyters or Pastors. The office of
Bishop. Presbyter and Bishop the same. The institution of this order
ancient.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p6"></span>3. The office of Bishop and Presbyters.
Strictly preserved in the primitive Church.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p7"></span>4. Of Archbishops and Patriarchs. Very
seldom used. For what end instituted. Hierarchy an improper name, and
not used in Scripture.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p8"></span>5. Deacons, the second order of Ministers
in the primitive Church. Their proper office. The Bishop their
inspector. Subdeacons, their assistants. Archdeacons, their presidents.
The reading of the Gospel, an adventitious office conferred in honour on
the Deacons.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p9"></span>6. Mode in which the goods of the Church
were anciently dispensed. 1. The support of the poor. 2. Due provision
for the ministers of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p10"></span>7. The administration at first free and
voluntary. The revenues of the Church afterwards classed under four
heads.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p11"></span>8. A third part of the revenues devoted to
the fabric of churches. To this, however, when necessary, the claim of
the poor was preferred. Sayings, testimonies, and examples to this
effect, from Cyril, Acatius, Jerome, Exuperius, Ambrose.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p12"></span>9. The Clerici, among whom were the
Doorkeepers and Acolytes, were the names given to exercises used as a
kind of training for tyros.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p13"></span>10. Second part of the chapter, treating
of the calling of Ministers. Some error introduced in course of time in
respect to celibacy from excessive strictness. In regard to the
ordination of Ministers, full regard not always paid to the consent of
the people. Why the people less anxious to maintain their right.
Ordinations took place at stated times.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p14"></span>11. In the ordination of Bishops the
liberty of the people maintained.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p15"></span>12. Certain limits afterwards introduced
to restrain the inconsiderate licence of the multitude.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p16"></span>13. This mode of election long prevailed.
Testimony of Gregory. Nothing repugnant to this in the decretals of
Gratian.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p17"></span>14. The form of ordination in the ancient
Church.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p18"></span>15. This form gradually changed.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p19"></span>1. Hitherto we have discoursed of the
order of church government as delivered to us in the pure word of God,
and of ministerial offices as instituted by Christ (chap. 1 sec. 5, 6;
chap. 3). Now that the whole subject may be more clearly and familiarly
explained, and also better fixed in our minds, it will be useful to
attend to the form of the early church, as this will give us a kind of
visible representation of the divine institution. For although the
bishops of those times published many canons, in which they seemed to
express more than is expressed by the sacred volume, yet they were so
cautious in framing all their economy on the word of God, the only
standard, that it is easy to see that they scarcely in any respect
departed from it. Even if something may be wanting in these enactments,
still, as they were sincerely desirous to preserve the divine
institution, and have not strayed far from it, it will be of great
benefit here briefly to explain what their observance was. As we have
stated that three classes of ministers are set before us in Scripture,
so the early Church distributed all its ministers into three orders. For
from the order of presbyters, part were selected as pastors and
teachers, while to the remainder was committed the censure of manners
and discipline. To the deacons belonged the care of the poor and the
dispensing of alms. Readers and Acolytes were not the names of certain
offices; but those whom they called clergy, they accustomed from their
youth to serve the Church by certain exercises, that they might the
better understand for what they were destined, and afterwards come
better prepared for their duty, as I will shortly show at greater
length. Accordingly, Jerome, in setting forth five orders in the Church,
enumerates Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, Believers, Catechumens: to the
other Clergy and Monks he gives no proper place53  <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542) (Hieron. in Jes. c. 9).

<span id="iv.iv.v-p21"></span>2. All, therefore, to whom the office of
teaching was committed, they called presbyters, and in each city these
presbyters selected one of their number to whom they gave the special
title of bishop, lest, as usually happens, from equality dissension
should arise. The bishop, however, was not so superior in honour and
dignity as to have dominion over his colleagues, but as it belongs to a
president in an assembly to bring matters before them, collect their
opinions, take precedence of others in consulting, advising, exhorting,
guide the whole procedure by his authority, and execute what is decreed
by common consent, a bishop held the same office in a meeting of
presbyters. And the ancients themselves confess that this practice was
introduced by human arrangement, according to the exigency of the times.
Thus Jerome, on the Epistle to Titus, cap. 1, says, “A bishop is the
same as a presbyter. And before dissensions were introduced into
religion by the instigation of the devil, and it was said among the
people, I am of Paul, and I of Cephas, churches were governed by a
common council of presbyters. Afterwards, that the seeds of dissension
might be plucked up, the whole charge was devolved upon mendatory
rescripts, preventions, and the like. But they all conduct one.
Therefore, as presbyters know that by the custom of the Church they are
subject to him who presides, so let bishops know that they are greater
than presbyters more by custom than in consequence of our Lord’s
appointment, and ought to rule the Church for the common good.” In
another place he shows how ancient the custom was (Hieron. Epist. ad
Evang.). For he says that at Alexandria, from Mark the Evangelist, as
far down as Heraclas and Dionysius, presbyters always placed one,
selected from themselves, in a higher rank, and gave him the name of
bishop. Each city, therefore, had a college of presbyters, consisting of
pastors and teachers. For they all performed to the people that office
of teaching, exhorting, and correcting, which Paul enjoins on bishops
(<span id="iv.iv.v-p21.1"></span>[Tit.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#009)<span id="iv.iv.v-p21.1"></span>);
and that they might leave a seed behind them, they made it their
business to train the younger men who had devoted themselves to the
sacred warfare. To each city was assigned a certain district which took
presbyters from it, and was considered as it were incorporated into that
church. Each presbyter, as I have said, merely to preserve order and
peace, was under one bishop, who, though he excelled others in dignity,
was subject to the meeting of the brethren. But if the district which
was under his bishopric was too large for him to be able to discharge
all the duties of bishop, presbyters were distributed over it in certain
places to act as his substitutes in minor matters. These were called
*Chorepiscopi* (rural bishops), because they represented the bishops
throughout the province.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p22"></span>3. But, in regard to the office of which
we now treat, the bishop as well as the presbyters behoved to employ
themselves in the administration of word and sacraments. For, at
Alexandria only (as Arius had there troubled the Church), it was
enacted, that no presbyter should deliver an address to the people, as
Socrates says, Tripartit. Hist. Lib. 9. Jerome does not conceal his
dissatisfaction with the enactment (Hieron. Epist. ad Evagr.). It
certainly would have been deemed monstrous for one to give himself out
as a bishop, and yet not show himself a true bishop by his conduct.
Such, then, was the strictness of those times, that all ministers were
obliged to fulfil the office as the Lord requires of them. Nor do I
refer to the practice of one age only, since not even in the time of
Gregory, when the Church had almost fallen (certainly had greatly
degenerated from ancient purity), would any bishop have been tolerated
who abstained from preaching. In some part of his twenty-fourth Epistle
he says, “The priest dies when no sound is heard from him: for he calls
forth the wrath of the unseen Judge against him if he walks without the
sound of preaching.” Elsewhere he says, “When Paul testifies that he is
pure from the blood of all men (<span id="iv.iv.v-p22.1"></span>[Acts
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.v-p22.1"></span>), by his words, we, who are called priests,
are charged, are arraigned, are shown to be guilty, since to those sins
which we have of our own we add the deaths of other men, for we commit
murder as often as lukewarm and silent we see them daily going to
destruction” (Gregor. Hom. in <span id="iv.iv.v-p22.2"></span>[Ezek.
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#026)<span id="iv.iv.v-p22.2"></span>
). He calls himself and others silent when less assiduous in their work
than they ought to be. Since he does not spare even those who did their
duty partially, what think you would he do in the case of those who
entirely neglected it? For a long time, therefore, it was regarded in
the Church as the first duty of a bishop to feed the people by the word
of God, or to edify the Church, in public and private, with sound
doctrine.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p23"></span>4. As to the fact, that each province had
an archbishop among the bishops (see chap. 7 sec. 15), and, moreover,
that, in the Council of Nice, patriarchs were appointed to be superior
to archbishops, in order and dignity, this was designed for the
preservation of discipline, although, in treating of the subject here,
it ought not to be omitted, that the practice was very rare. The chief
reason for which these orders were instituted was, that if anything
occurred in any church which could not well be explicated by a few, it
might be referred to a provincial synod. If the magnitude or difficulty
of the case demanded a larger discussion, patriarchs were employed along
with synods,54  <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543) and from them
there was no appeal except to a General Council. To the government thus
constituted some gave the name of Hierarchy—a name, in my opinion,
improper, certainly one not used by Scripture. For the Holy Spirit
designed to provide that no one should dream of primacy or domination in
regard to the government of the Church. But if, disregarding the term,
we look to the thing, we shall find that the ancient bishops had no wish
to frame a form of church government different from that which God has
prescribed in his word.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p25"></span>5. Nor was the case of deacons then
different from what it had been under the apostles (chap. 3 sec. 6). For
they received the daily offerings of the faithful, and the annual
revenues of the Church, that they might apply them to their true uses;
in other words, partly in maintaining ministers, and partly in
supporting the poor; at the sight of the bishop, however, to whom they
every year gave an account of their stewardship. For, although the
canons uniformly make the bishop the dispenser of all the goods of the
Church, this is not to be understood as if he by himself undertook that
charge, but because it belonged to him to prescribe to the deacon who
were to be admitted to the public alimony of the Church, and point out
to what persons, and in what portions, the residue was to be
distributed, and because he was entitled to see whether the deacon
faithfully performed his office. Thus, in the canons which they ascribe
to the apostles, it is said, “We command that the bishop have the
affairs of the Church under his control. For if the souls of men, which
are more precious, have been intrusted to him, much more is he entitled
to have the charge of money matters, so that under his control all may
be dispensed to the poor by the presbyters and deacons, that the
ministration may be made reverently and with due care.” And in the
Council of Antioch, it was decreed (cap. 35), that bishops, who
inter-meddled with the effects of the Church, without the knowledge of
the presbyters and deacons, should be restrained. But there is no
occasion to discuss this point farther, since it is evident, from many
of the letters of Gregory, that even at that time, when the
ecclesiastical ordinances were otherwise much vitiated, it was still the
practice for the deacons to be, under the bishops, the stewards of the
poor. It is probable that at the first subdeacons were attached to the
deacons, to assist them in the management of the poor; but the
distinction was gradually lost. Archdeacons began to be appointed when
the extent of the revenues demanded a new and more exact method of
administration, though Jerome mentions that it already existed in his
day.54  <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) To them belonged the
amount of revenues, possessions, and furniture, and the charge of the
daily offerings. Hence Gregory declares to the Archdeacon Solitanus,
that the blame rested with him, if any of the goods of the Church
perished through his fraud or negligence. The reading of the word to the
people, and exhortation to prayer, was assigned to them, and they were
permitted, moreover, to give the cup in the sacred Supper; but this was
done for the purpose of honouring their office, that they might perform
it with greater reverence, when they were reminded by such symbols that
what they discharged was not some profane stewardship, but a spiritual
function dedicated to God.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p27"></span>6. Hence, also, we may judge what was the
use, and of what nature was the distribution of ecclesiastical goods.
You may everywhere find, both from the decrees of synods, and from
ancient writers, that whatever the Church possessed, either in lands or
in money, was the patrimony of the poor. Accordingly, the saying is ever
and anon sounded in the ears of bishops and deacons, Remember that you
are not handling your own property, but that destined for the
necessities of the poor; if you dishonestly conceal or dilapidate it,
you will be guilty of blood. Hence they are admonished to distribute
them to those to whom they are due, with the greatest fear and
reverence, as in the sight of God, without respect of persons. Hence,
also, in Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, and other like bishops, those
grave obtestations in which they assert their integrity before the
people. But since it is just in itself, and was sanctioned by a divine
law, that those who devote their labour to the Church shall be supported
at the public expense of the Church, and some presbyters in that age
having consecrated their patrimony to God, had become voluntarily poor,
the distribution was so made that aliment was afforded to ministers, and
the poor were not neglected. Meanwhile, it was provided that the
ministers themselves, who ought to be an example of frugality to others,
should not have so much as might be abused for luxury or delicacy; but
only what might be needful to support their wants: “For those clergy,
who can be supported by their own patrimony,” says Jerome, “commit
sacrilege if they accept what belongs to the poor, and by such abuse eat
and drink judgment to themselves.”

<span id="iv.iv.v-p28"></span>7. At first the administration was free
and voluntary, when bishops and deacons were faithful of their own
accord, and when integrity of conscience and purity of life supplied the
place of laws. Afterwards, when, from the cupidity and depraved desires
of some, bad examples arose, canons were framed, to correct these evils,
and divided the revenues of the Church into four parts, assigning one to
the clergy, another to the poor, another to the repair of churches and
other edifices, a fourth to the poor, whether54  <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) strangers or natives. For though other
canons attribute this last part to the bishop, it differs in no respect
from the division which I have mentioned. For they do not mean that it
is his property, which he may devour alone or squander in any way he
pleases, but that it may enable him to use the hospitality which Paul
requires in that order (<span id="iv.iv.v-p29.1"></span>[1 Tim.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.v-p29.1"></span>).
This is the interpretation of Gelasius and Gregory. For the only reason
which Gelasius gives why the bishop should claim anything to himself is,
that he may be able to bestow it on captives and strangers. Gregory
speaks still more clearly: “It is the custom of the Apostolic See,” says
he, “to give command to the bishop who has been ordained, to divide all
the revenues into four portions—namely, one to the bishop and his
household for hospitality and maintenance, another to the clergy, a
third to the poor, a fourth to the repair of churches.” The bishop,
therefore, could not lawfully take for his own use more than was
sufficient for moderate and frugal food and clothing. When any one began
to wanton either in luxury or ostentation and show, he was immediately
reprimanded by his colleagues, and if he obeyed not, was deprived of his
honours.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p30"></span>8. Moreover, the sum expended on the
adorning of churches was at first very trifling, and even afterwards,
when the Church had become somewhat more wealthy, they in that matter
observed mediocrity. Still, whatever money was then collected was
reserved for the poor, when any greater necessity occurred. Thus Cyril,
when a famine prevailed in the province of Jerusalem, and the want could
not otherwise be supplied, took the vessels and robes and sold them for
the support of the poor. In like manner, Acatius, Bishop of Amida, when
a great multitude of the Persians were almost destroyed by famine,
having assembled the clergy, and delivered this noble address, “Our God
has no need either of chalices or salvers, for he neither eats nor
drinks” (Tripart. Hist. Lib. 5 and Lib. 11 c. 16) melted down the plate,
that he might be able to furnish food and obtain the means of ransoming
the miserable. Jerome also, while inveighing against the excessive
splendour of churches, relates that Exuperius, Bishop of Tholouse, in
his day, though he carried the body of the Lord in a wicker basket, and
his blood in a glass, nevertheless suffered no poor man to be hungry
(Hieron. ad Nepotian). What I lately said of Acatius, Ambrose relates of
himself. For when the Arians assailed him for having broken down the
sacred vessels for the ransom of captives, he made this most admirable
excuse: “He who sent the apostles without gold has also gathered
churches without gold. The Church has gold not to keep but to
distribute, and give support in necessity. What need is there of keeping
what is of no benefit? Are we ignorant how much gold and silver the
Assyrians carried off from the temple of the Lord? Is it not better for
a priest to melt them for the support of the poor, if other means are
wanting, than for a sacrilegious enemy to carry them away? Would not the
Lord say, Why have you suffered so many poor to die of hunger, and you
certainly had gold wherewith to minister to their support? Why have so
many captives been carried away and not redeemed? Why have so many been
slain by the enemy? It had been better to preserve living than metallic
vessels. These charges you will not be able to answer: for what could
you say? I feared lest the temple of God should want ornament. He would
answer, Sacraments require not gold, and things which are not bought
with gold please not by gold. The ornament of the Sacraments is the
ransom of captives” (Ambros. de Offic. Lib. 2 c. 28). In a word, we see
the exact truth of what he elsewhere says—viz. that whatever the Church
then possessed was the revenue of the needy. Again, A bishop has nothing
but what belongs to the poor (Ambros. Lib. 5 <span
id="iv.iv.v-p30.1"></span>Eph. 31:0, Eph. 33:0<span
id="iv.iv.v-p30.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.v-p31"></span>9. We have now reviewed the ministerial
offices of the ancient Church. For others, of which ecclesiastical
writers make mention, were rather exercises and preparations than
distinct offices. These holy men, that they might leave a nursery of the
Church behind them, received young men, who, with the consent and
authority of their parents, devoted themselves to the spiritual warfare
under their guardianship and training, and so formed them from their
tender years, that they might not enter on the discharge of the office
as ignorant novices. All who received this training were designated by
the general name of *Clerks*. I could wish that some more appropriate
name had been given them, for this appellation had its origin in error,
or at least improper feeling, since the whole church is by Peter
denominated κληρος (*clerus*), that is, the inheritance of the Lord
(<span id="iv.iv.v-p31.1"></span>[1 Pet.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.v-p31.1"></span>).
It was in itself, however, a most sacred and salutary institution, that
those who wished to devote themselves and their labour to the Church
should be brought up under the charge of the bishop; so that no one
should minister in the Church unless he had been previously well
trained, unless he had in early life imbibed sound doctrine, unless by
stricter discipline he had formed habits of gravity and severer morals,
been withdrawn from ordinary business, and accustomed to spiritual cares
and studies. For as tyros in the military art are trained by mock fights
for true and serious warfare, so there was a rudimental training by
which they were exercised in clerical duty before they were actually
appointed to office. First, then, they intrusted them with the opening
and shutting of the church, and called them Ostiarii. Next, they gave
the name of Acolytes to those who assisted the bishop in domestic
services, and constantly attended him, first, as a mark of respect; and,
secondly, that no suspicion might arise.54  <span
id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) Moreover, that they might gradually
become known to the people, and recommend themselves to them, and at the
same time might learn to stand the gaze of all, and speak before all,
that they might not, when appointed presbyters, be overcome with shame
when they came forward to teach, the office of reading in the desk was
given them.54  <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) In this way they
were gradually advanced, that they might prove their carefulness in
separate exercises, until they were appointed subdeacons. All I mean by
this is, that these were rather the rudimentary exercises of tyros than
functions which were accounted among the true ministries of the Church.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p34"></span>10. In regard to what we have set down as
the first and second heads in the calling of ministers—viz. the persons
to be elected and the religious care to be therein exercised—the ancient
Church followed the injunction of Paul, and the examples of the
apostles. For they were accustomed to meet for the election of pastors
with the greatest reverence, and with earnest prayer to God. Moreover,
they had a form of examination by which they tested the life and
doctrine of those who were to be elected by the standard of Paul (<span
id="iv.iv.v-p34.1"></span>[1 Tim.
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.v-p34.1"></span>);
only here they sometimes erred from excessive strictness, by exacting
more of a bishop than Paul requires, and especially, in process of time,
by exacting celibacy: but in other respects their practice corresponded
with Paul’s description. In regard to our third head, however—viz. Who
were entitled to appoint ministers?—they did not always observe the same
rule. Anciently none were admitted to the number of the clergy without
the consent of the whole people: and hence Cyprian makes a laboured
apology for having appointed Aurelius a reader without consulting the
Church, because, although done contrary to custom, it was not done
without reason. He thus premises: “In ordaining clergy, dearest
brethren, we are wont previously to consult you, and weigh the manners
and merits of each by the common advice” (Cyprian. Lib. 2 Ep. 5). But as
in these minor exercises54  <span id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548)
there was no great danger, inasmuch as they were appointed to a long
probation and unimportant function, the consent of the people ceased to
be asked. Afterwards, in other orders also, with the exception of the
bishopric, the people usually left the choice and decision to the bishop
and presbyters, who thus determined who were fit and worthy, unless,
perhaps, when new presbyters were appointed to parishes, for then the
express consent of the inhabitants of the place behoved to be given. Nor
is it strange that in this matter the people were not very anxious to
maintain their right, for no subdeacon was appointed who had not given a
long proof of his conduct in the clerical office, agreeably to the
strictness of discipline then in use. After he had approved himself in
that degree, he was appointed deacon, and thereafter, if he conducted
himself faithfully, he attained to the honour of a presbyter. Thus none
were promoted whose conduct had not, in truth, been tested for many
years under the eye of the people. There were also many canons for
punishing their faults, so that the Church, if she did not neglect the
remedies, was not burdened with bad presbyters or deacons. In the case
of presbyters, indeed, the consent of the citizens was always required,
as is attested by the canon (Primus Distinct. 67), which is attributed
to Anacletus. In fine, all ordinations took place at stated periods of
the year, that none might creep in stealthily without the consent of the
faithful, or be promoted with too much facility without witnesses.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p36"></span>11. In electing bishops, the people long
retained their right of preventing any one from being intruded who was
not acceptable to all. Accordingly, it was forbidden by the Council of
Antioch to induct any one on the unwilling. This also Leo I. carefully
confirms. Hence these passages: “Let him be elected whom the clergy and
people or the majority demand.” Again. “Let him who is to preside over
all be elected by all” (Leo, <span id="iv.iv.v-p36.1"></span>Ep. 90<span
id="iv.iv.v-p36.1"></span>, cap. 2). He, therefore, who is appointed
while unknown and unexamined, must of necessity be violently intruded.
Again, “Let him be elected who is chosen by the clergy, and called by
the people, and let him be consecrated by the provincials with the
judgment of the metropolitan.” So careful were the holy fathers that
this liberty of the people should on no account be diminished, that when
a general council, assembled at Constantinople, were ordaining
Nectarius, they declined to do it without the approbation of the whole
clergy and people, as their letter to the Roman synod testified.
Accordingly, when any bishop nominated his successor, the act was not
ratified without consulting the whole people. Of this you have not only
an example, but the form, in Augustine, in the nomination of Eradius
(August. <span id="iv.iv.v-p36.2"></span>Ep. 110<span
id="iv.iv.v-p36.2"></span>). And Theodoret, after relating that Peter
was the successor nominated by Athanasius, immediately adds, that the
sacerdotal order ratified it, that the magistracy, chief men, and whole
people, by their acclamation approved.54  <span
id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549)

<span id="iv.iv.v-p38"></span>12. It was, indeed, decreed (and I admit
on the best grounds) by the Council of Laodicea (Can. 18) that the
election should not be left to crowds. For it scarcely ever happens that
so many heads, with one consent, settle any affair well. It generally
holds true, “Incertum scindi studia in contraria vulgus;”—“Opposing
wishes rend the fickle crowd.” For, first, the clergy alone selected,
and presented him whom they had selected to the magistrate, or senate,
and chief men. These, after deliberation, put their signature to the
election, if it seemed proper, if not, they chose another whom they more
highly approved. The matter was then laid before the multitude, who,
although not bound by those previous proceedings, were less able to act
tumultuously. Or, if the matter began with the multitude, it was only
that it might be known whom they were most desirous to have; the wishes
of the people being heard, the clergy at length elected. Thus, it was
neither lawful for the clergy to appoint whom they chose, nor were they,
however, under the necessity of yielding to the foolish desires of the
people. Leo sets down this order, when he says, “The wishes of the
citizens, the testimonies of the people, the choice of the honourable,
the election of the clergy, are to be waited for” (Leo, <span
id="iv.iv.v-p38.1"></span>Ep. 87<span id="iv.iv.v-p38.1"></span>).
Again, “Let the testimony of the honourable, the subscription of the
clergy, the consent of the magistracy and people, be obtained; otherwise
(says he) it must on no account be done.” Nor is anything more intended
by the decree of the Counci1 of Laodicea, than that the clergy and
rulers were not to allow themselves to be carried away by the rash
multitude, but rather by their prudence and gravity to repress their
foolish desires whenever there was occasion.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p39"></span>13. This mode of election was still in
force in the time of Gregory, and probably continued to a much later
period. Many of his letters which are extant clearly prove this, for
whenever a new bishop is to be elected, his custom is to write to the
clergy, magistrates, and people; sometimes also to the governor,
according to the nature of the government. But if, on account of the
unsettled state of the Church, he gives the oversight of the election to
a neighbouring bishop, he always requires a formal decision confirmed by
the subscriptions of all. Nay, when one Constantius was elected Bishop
of Milan, and in consequence of the incursions of the Barbarians many of
the Milanese had fled to Genoa, he thought that the election would not
be lawful unless they too were called together and gave their assent
(Gregor. Lib. 2 Ep. 69). Nay, five hundred years have not elapsed since
Pope Nicholas fixed the election of the Roman Pontiff in this way,
first, that the cardinals should precede; next, that they should join to
themselves the other clergy; and, lastly, that the election should be
ratified by the consent of the people. And in the end he recites the
decree of Leo, which I lately quoted, and orders it to be enforced in
future. But should the malice of the wicked so prevail that the clergy
are obliged to quit the city, in order to make a pure election, he,
however, orders that some of the people shall, at the same time, be
present. The suffrage of the Emperor, as far as we can understand, was
required only in two churches, those of Rome and Constantinople, these
being the two seats of empire. For when Ambrose was sent by
Valentinianus to Milan with authority to superintend the election of a
new bishop, it was an extraordinary proceeding, in consequence of the
violent factions which raged among the citizens. But at Rome the
authority of the Emperor in the election of the bishop was so great,
that Gregory says he was appointed to the government of the Church by
his order (Gregor. Lib. 1 Ep. 5), though he had been called by the
people in regular form. The custom, however, was, that when the
magistrates, clergy, and people, nominated any one, he was forthwith
presented to the Emperor, who either by approving ratified, or by
disapproving annulled the election. There is nothing contrary to this
practice in the decretals which are collected by Gratian. where all that
is said is, that it was on no account to be tolerated, that canonical
election should be abolished, and a king should at pleasure appoint a
bishop, and that one thus promoted by violent authority was not to be
consecrated by the metropolitans. For it is one thing to deprive the
Church of her right, and transfer it entirely to the caprice of a single
individual; it is another thing to assign to a king or emperor the
honour of confirming a legitimate election by his authority.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p40"></span>14. It now remains to treat of the form by
which the ministers of the ancient Church were initiated to their office
after election. This was termed by the Latins, Ordination or
consecration, and by the Greeks χειροτονία, sometimes also χειροθεσία,
though χειροτονία properly denotes that mode of election by which
suffrages are declared by a show of hands. There is extant a decree of
the Council of Nice, to the effect that the metropolitans, with all the
bishops of the province, were to meet to ordain him who was chosen. But
if, from distance, or sickness, or any other necessary cause, part were
prevented, three at least should meet, and those who were absent signify
their consent by letter. And this canon, after it had fallen into
desuetude, was afterwards renewed by several councils. All, or at least
all who had not an excuse, were enjoined to be present, in order that a
stricter examination might be had of the life and doctrine of him who
was to be ordained; for the thing was not done without examination. And
it appears, from the words of Cyprian, that, in old time, they were not
wont to be called after the election, but to be present at the election,
and with the view of their acting as moderators, that no disorder might
be committed by the crowd. For after saying that the people had the
power either of choosing worthy or refusing unworthy priests, he
immediately adds, “For which reason, we must carefully observe and hold
by the divine and apostolic tradition (which is observed by us also, and
almost by all the provinces), that for the due performance of
ordinations all the nearest bishops of the province should meet with the
people over whom the person is proposed to be ordained, and the bishop
should be elected in presence of the people. But as they were sometimes
too slowly assembled, and there was a risk that some might abuse the
delay for purposes of intrigue, it was thought that it would be
sufficient if they came after the designation was made, and on due
investigation consecrated him who had been approved.

<span id="iv.iv.v-p41"></span>15. While this was done everywhere without
exception, a different custom gradually gained ground—namely, that those
who were elected should go to the metropolitan to obtain ordination.
This was owing more to ambition, and the corruption of the ancient
custom, than to any good reason. And not long after, the authority of
the Romish See being now increased, another still worse custom was
introduced, of applying to it for the consecration of the bishops of
almost all Italy. This we may observe from the letters of Gregory (Lib.
2 Ep. 69, 76). The ancient right was preserved by a few cities only
which had not yielded so easily; for instance, Milan. Perhaps
metropolitan sees only retained their privilege. For, in order to
consecrate an archbishop, it was the practice for all the provincial
bishops to meet in the metropolitan city. The form used was the laying
on of hands (chap. 19 sec. 28, 31). I do not read that any other
ceremonies were used, except that, in the public meeting, the bishops
had some dress to distinguish them from the other presbyters.
Presbyters, also, and deacons, were ordained by the laying on of hands;
but each bishop, with the college of presbyters, ordained his own
presbyters. But though they all did the same act, yet because the bishop
presided, and the ordination was performed as it were under his
auspices, it was said to be his. Hence ancient writers often say that a
presbyter does not differ in any respect from a bishop except in not
having the power of ordaining.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_542"></span>[543](inst084.htm#fr_542) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p20"></span>39 539 “Pourtant Sainct Hierome apres
avoir divisé l’Eglise en cinq ordres, nomme les Eveques, secondement,
les Pretres, tiercement, les Diacres, puis les fideles en commun,
finalement, ceux qui n’etoient pas baptisés encore, mais qui s’etoient
presentés pour etre instruits en la foy Chretienne; et puis recevoient
le baptéme. Ainsi il n’attribue point de certain lieu au reste du Clergé
ni aux Moines.”—However, St Jerome, after dividing the Church into five
orders, names the Bishops, secondly, the Priests, thirdly the Deacons,
then the faithful in common, lastly, those who were not yet baptised but
had presented themselves to be instructed in the Christian faith, and
thereafter received baptism. Thus he attributes no certain place to the
remainder of the Clergy or to the Monks.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[544](inst084.htm#fr_543) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p24"></span>40 540 French, “La cognoissance venoit aux
patriarches, qui assemblerent le concile do tous les eveques respondant
a leur primauté;”—the cognisance fell to the patriarchs, who assembled a
council of all the bishops corresponding to their precedence.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[545](inst084.htm#fr_544) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p26"></span>41 541 Hieronymus, Epist. ad Nepotianum.
It is mentioned also by Chrysostom, Epist. ad Innocent.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[546](inst084.htm#fr_545) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p29"></span>42 542 In the Amsterdam edition the words
are only “quartam vero advenis pauperibus.” The Geneva edition of 1559,
the last published under Calvin’s own eye, has “quartam vero tam advenis
quam indigenis pauperibus.” With this Tholuck agrees.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[547](inst084.htm#fr_546) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p32"></span>43 543 The French adds, “Afin qu’il n’all’
nulle part sans compagnie et sans temoin;”— in order that he might not
go anywhere without company and without witness.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[548](inst084.htm#fr_547) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p33"></span>44 544 French, “On leur ordonnoit de faire
la lecture des Pseaumes au pulpitre;”—they ordered them to read the
Psalms in the desk.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[549](inst084.htm#fr_548) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p35"></span>45 545 The French adds, “Comme de Lecteurs
et Acolytes;”—as Readers and Acolytes.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[550](inst084.htm#fr_549) <span
id="iv.iv.v-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.v-p37"></span>46 546 The whole narrative in Theodoret is
most deserving of notice. Theodoret. Lib. 4 cap. 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 5. - THE ANCIENT FORM OF GOVERNMENT UTTERLY CORRUPTED BY
THE TYRANNY OF THE PAPACY.](inst085)
