[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst087)  [Next](inst089) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iv.ix"></span>

### <span id="iv.iv.ix-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 8.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p1"></span>OF THE POWER OF THE CHURCH IN ARTICLES OF
FAITH. THE UNBRIDLED LICENCE OF THE PAPAL CHURCH IN DESTROYING PURITY OF
DOCTRINE.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p2"></span>This chapter is divided into two parts,—I.
The limits within which the Church ought to confine herself in matters
of this kind, sec. 1-9. II. The Roman Church convicted of having
transgressed these limits, sec. 10-16.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p4"></span>1. The marks and government of the Church
having been considered in the seven previous chapters, the power of the
Church is now considered under three heads—viz. Doctrine, Legislation,
Jurisdiction.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p5"></span>2. The authority and power given to
Church-officers not given to themselves, but their office. This shown in
the case of Moses and the Levitical priesthood.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p6"></span>3. The same thing shown in the case of the
Prophets.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p7"></span>4. Same thing shown in the case of the
Apostles, and of Christ himself.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p8"></span>5. The Church astricted to the written
Word of God. Christ the only teacher of the Church. From his lips
ministers must derive whatever they teach for the salvation of others.
Various modes of divine teaching. 1. Personal revelations.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p9"></span>6. Second mode of teaching—viz. by the Law
and the Prophets. The Prophets were in regard to doctrine, the
expounders of the Law. To these were added Historical Narratives and the
Psalms.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p10"></span>7. Last mode of teaching by our Saviour
himself manifested in the flesh. Different names given to this
dispensation, to show that we are not to dream of anything more perfect
than the written word.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p11"></span>8. Nothing can be lawfully taught in the
Church, that is not contained in the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, as dictated by the Spirit of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p12"></span>9. Neither the Apostles, nor apostolic
men. nor the whole Church, allowed to overstep these limits. This
confirmed by passages of Peter and Paul. Argument *a fortiori.*

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p13"></span>10. The Roman tyrants have taught a
different doctrine—viz. that Councils cannot err, and, therefore, may
coin new dogmas.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p14"></span>11. Answer to the Papistical arguments
for the authority of the Church. Argument, that the Church is to be led
into all truth. Answer. This promise made not only to the whole Church,
but to every individual believer.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p15"></span>12. Answers continued.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p16"></span>13. Answers continued.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p17"></span>14. Argument, that the Church should
supply the deficiency of the written word by traditions. Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p18"></span>15. Argument founded on <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>[Mt.
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p18.1"></span>. Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p19"></span>16. Objections founded on Infant Baptism,
and the Canon of the Council of Nice, as to the consubstantiality of the
Son. Answer.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p20"></span>1. We come now to the third division—viz.
the *Power of the Church*, as existing either in individual bishops, or
in councils, whether provincial or general. I speak only of the
spiritual power which is proper to the Church, and which consists either
in doctrine, or jurisdiction, or in enacting laws. In regard to
doctrine, there are two divisions—viz. the authority of delivering
dogmas, and the interpretation of them. Before we begin to treat of each
in particular, I wish to remind the pious reader, that whatever is
taught respecting the power of the Church, ought to have reference to
the end for which Paul declares (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p20.1"></span>[2
Cor. 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p20.1"></span>; 13:10) that it was given—namely, for
edification, and not for destruction, those who use it lawfully deeming
themselves to be nothing more than servants of Christ, and, at the same
time, servants of the people in Christ. Moreover, the only mode by which
ministers can edify the Church is, by studying to maintain the authority
of Christ, which cannot be unimpaired, unless that which he received of
the Father is left to him—viz. to be the only Master of the Church. For
it was not said of any other but of himself alone, “Hear him” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p20.2"></span>[Mt.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p20.2"></span>). Ecclesiastical power, therefore, is not to
be mischievously adorned, but it is to be confined within certain
limits, so as not to be drawn hither and thither at the caprice of men.
For this purpose, it will be of great use to observe how it is described
by Prophets and Apostles. For if we concede unreservedly to men all the
power which they think proper to assume, it is easy to see how soon it
will degenerate into a tyranny which is altogether alien from the Church
of Christ.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21"></span>2. Therefore, it is here necessary to
remember, that whatever authority and dignity the Holy Spirit in
Scripture confers on priests, or prophets, or apostles, or successors of
Apostles, is wholly given not to men themselves, but to the ministry to
which they are appointed; or, to speak more plainly, to the word, to the
ministry of which they are appointed. For were we to go over the whole
in order, we should find that they were not invested with authority to
teach or give responses, save in the name and word of the Lord. For
whenever they are called to office, they are enjoined not to bring
anything of their own, but to speak by the mouth of the Lord. Nor does
he bring them forward to be heard by the people, before he has
instructed them what they are to speak, lest they should speak anything
but his own word. Moses, the prince of all the prophets, was to be heard
in preference to others (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>[Exod.
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21.2"></span>[Deut.
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.2"></span>); but he is previously furnished with his
orders, that he may not be able to speak at all except from the Lord.
Accordingly, when the people embraced his doctrine, they are said to
have believed the Lord, and his servant Moses (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.3"></span>[Exod.
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.3"></span>). It was also provided under the severest
sanctions, that the authority of the priests should not be despised
(<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21.4"></span>[Exod.
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.4"></span>). But the Lord, at the same time, shows in
what terms they were to be heard, when he says that he made his covenant
with Levi, that the law of truth might be in his mouth (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.5"></span>[Mal.
2:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.5"></span>). A little after he adds, “The priest’s lips
should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth; for he
is the messenger of the Lord of hosts.” Therefore, if the priest would
be heard, let him show himself to be the messenger of God; that is, let
him faithfully deliver the commands which he has received from his
Maker. When the mode of hearing, then, is treated of, it is expressly
said, “According to the sentence of the law which they shall teach thee”
(<span id="iv.iv.ix-p21.6"></span>[Deut.
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p21.6"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p22"></span>3. The nature of the power conferred upon
the prophets in general is elegantly described by Ezekiel: “Son of man,
I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the
word at my mouth, and give them warning from me” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>[Ezek.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.1"></span>). Is not he who is ordered to hear at the
mouth of the Lord prohibited from devising anything of himself? And what
is meant by giving a warning from the Lord, but just to speak so as to
be able confidently to declare that the word which he delivers is not
his own but the Lord’s? The same thing is expressed by Jeremiah in
different terms, “The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream;
and he that hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.2"></span>[Jer.
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.2"></span>). Surely God here declares the law to all,
and it is a law which does not allow any one to teach more than he has
been ordered. He afterwards gives the name of chaff to whatever has not
proceeded from himself alone. Accordingly, none of the prophets opened
his mouth unless preceded by the word of the Lord. Hence we so often
meet with the expressions, “The word of the Lord, The burden of the
Lord, Thus saith the Lord, The mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.”55
 <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) And justly, for Isaiah exclaims
that his lips are unclean (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23.1"></span>[Isa.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23.1"></span>);
and Jeremiah confesses that he knows not how to speak because he is a
child (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23.2"></span>[Jer.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23.2"></span>).
Could anything proceed from the unclean lips of the one, and the
childish lips of the other, if they spoke their own language, but what
was unclean or childish? But their lips were holy and pure when they
began to be organs of the Holy Spirit. The prophets, after being thus
strictly bound not to deliver anything but what they received, are
invested with great power and illustrious titles. For when the Lord
declares, “See, I have this day set thee over the nations, and over the
kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw
down, to build, and to plant,” he at the same time gives the reason,
“Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth ” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p23.3"></span>[Jer. 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24"></span>4. Now, if you look to the apostles, they
are commended by many distinguished titles, as the Light of the world,
and the Salt of the earth, to be heard in Christ’s stead, whatever they
bound or loosed on earth being bound or loosed in heaven (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p24.1"></span>[Matt.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24.2"></span>[Luke
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p24.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iv.ix-p24.3"></span>[John
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p24.3"></span>). But they declare in their own name what
the authority was which their office conferred on them—viz. if they are
apostles they must not speak their own pleasure, but faithfully deliver
the commands of him by whom they are sent. The words in which Christ
defined their embassy are sufficiently clear, “Go ye, therefore, and
teach all nations, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24.4"></span>[Matt.
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24.4"></span>).
Nay, that none might be permitted to decline this law, he received it
and imposed it on himself. “My doctrine is not mine, but his that sent
me” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p24.5"></span>[John
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p24.5"></span>). He who always was the only and eternal
counsellor of the Father, who by the Father was constituted Lord and
Master of all, yet because he performed the ministry of teaching,
prescribed to all ministers by his example the rule which they ought to
follow in teaching. The power of the Church, therefore, is not infinite,
but is subject to the word of the Lord, and, as it were, included in it.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p25"></span>5. But though the rule which always
existed in the Church from the beginning, and ought to exist in the
present day, is, that the servants of God are only to teach what they
have learned from himself, yet, according to the variety of times, they
have had different methods of learning. The mode which now exists
differs very much from that of former times. First, if it is true, as
Christ says, “Neither knoweth any man the Father save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p25.1"></span>[Mt.
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p25.1"></span>), then those who wish to attain to the
knowledge of God behoved always to be directed by that eternal wisdom.
For how could they have comprehended the mysteries of God in their mind,
or declared them to others, unless by the teaching of him, to whom alone
the secrets of the Father are known? The only way, therefore, by which
in ancient times holy men knew God, was by beholding him in the Son as
in a mirror. When I say this, I mean that God never manifested himself
to men by any other means than by his Son, that is, his own only wisdom,
light, and truth. From this fountain Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
and others, drew all the heavenly doctrine which they possessed.  <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) From the same fountain all the
prophets also drew all the heavenly oracles which they published. For
this wisdom did not always display itself in one manner. With the
patriarchs he employed secret revelations, but, at the same time, in
order to confirm these, had recourse to signs so as to make it
impossible for them to doubt that it was God that spake to them. What
the patriarchs received they handed down to posterity, for God had, in
depositing it with them, bound them thus to propagate it, while their
children and descendants knew by the inward teaching of God, that what
they heard was of heaven and not of earth.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p27"></span>6. But when God determined to give a more
illustrious form to the Church, he was pleased to commit and consign his
word to writing, that the priests might there seek what they were to
teach the people, and every doctrine delivered be brought to it as a
test (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p27.1"></span>[Mal.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p27.1"></span>).
Accordingly, after the promulgation of the Law, when the priests are
enjoined to teach from the mouth of the Lord, the meaning is, that they
are not to teach anything extraneous or alien to that kind of doctrine
which God had summed up in the Law, while it was unlawful for them to
add to it or take from it. Next followed the prophets, by whom God
published the new oracles which were added to the Law, not so new,
however, but that they flowed from the Law, and had respect to it. For
in so far as regards doctrine, they were only interpreters of the Law,
adding nothing to it but predictions of future events. With this
exception, all that they delivered was pure exposition of the Law. But
as the Lord was pleased that doctrine should exist in a clearer and more
ample form, the better to satisfy weak consciences, he commanded the
prophecies also to be committed to writing, and to be held part of his
word. To these at the same time were added historical details, which are
also the composition of prophets, but dictated by the Holy Spirit;
 <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) I include the Psalms among the
Prophecies, the quality which we attribute to the latter belonging also
to the former. The whole body, therefore, composed of the Law, the
Prophets, the Psalms, and Histories, formed the word of the Lord to his
ancient people, and by it as a standard, priests and teachers, before
the advent of Christ, were bound to test their doctrine, nor was it
lawful for them to turn aside either to the right hand or the left,
because their whole office was confined to this—to give responses to the
people from the mouth of God. This is gathered from a celebrated passage
of Malachi, in which it is enjoined to remember the Law, and give heed
to it until the preaching of the Gospel (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p28.1"></span>[Mal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#004)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p28.1"></span>).
For he thus restrains men from all adventitious doctrines, and does not
allow them to deviate in the least from the path which Moses had
faithfully pointed out. And the reason why David so magnificently extols
the Law, and pronounces so many encomiums on it (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p28.2"></span>[Ps. 19:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#000),
[Ps. 119:0](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p28.2"></span>), was, that the Jews might not long after
any extraneous aid, all perfection being included in it.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p29"></span>7. But when at length the Wisdom of God
was manifested in the flesh, he fully unfolded to us all that the human
mind can comprehend, or ought to think of the heavenly Father. Now,
therefore, since Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, has arisen, we have
the perfect refulgence of divine truth, like the brightness of noon-day,
whereas the light was previously dim. It was no ordinary blessing which
the apostle intended to publish when he wrote: “God, who at sundry times
and in divers manners, spake in time past unto the fathers by the
prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p29.1"></span>[Heb. 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p29.1"></span>);
for he intimates, nay, openly declares, that God will not henceforth, as
formerly, speak by this one and by that one, that he will not add
prophecy to prophecy, or revelation to revelation, but has so completed
all the parts of teaching in the Son, that it is to be regarded as his
last and eternal testimony. For which reason, the whole period of the
new dispensation, from the time when Christ appeared to us with the
preaching of his Gospel, until the day of judgment, is designated by the
*last hour, the last times, the last days*, that, contented with the
perfection of Christ’s doctrine, we may learn to frame no new doctrine
for ourselves, or admit any one devised by others. With good cause,
therefore, the Father appointed the Son our teacher, with special
prerogative, commanding that he and no human being should be heard. When
he said, “Hear him” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p29.2"></span>[Mt.
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p29.2"></span>), he commended his office to us, in few
words, indeed, but words of more weight and energy than is commonly
supposed, for it is just as if he had withdrawn us from all doctrines of
man, and confined us to him alone, ordering us to seek the whole
doctrine of salvation from him alone, to depend on him alone, and cleave
to him alone; in short (as the words express), to listen only to his
voice. And, indeed, what can now be expected or desired from man, when
the very Word of life has appeared before us, and familiarly explained
himself? Nay, every mouth should be stopped when once he has spoken, in
whom, according to the pleasure of our heavenly Father, “are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p29.3"></span>[Col.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p29.3"></span>),
and spoken as became the Wisdom of God (which is in no part defective)
and the Messiah (from whom the revelation of all things was expected)
(<span id="iv.iv.ix-p29.4"></span>[John
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p29.4"></span>); in other words, has so spoken as to leave
nothing to be spoken by others after him.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p30"></span>8. Let this then be a sure axiom—that
there is no word of God to which place should be given in the Church
save that which is contained, first, in the Law and the Prophets; and,
secondly, in the writings of the Apostles, and that the only due method
of teaching in the Church is according to the prescription and rule of
his word. Hence also we infer that nothing else was permitted to the
apostles than was formerly permitted to the prophets—namely, to expound
the ancient Scriptures, and show that the things there delivered are
fulfilled in Christ: this, however, they could not do unless from the
Lord; that is, unless the Spirit of Christ went before, and in a manner
dictated words to them.  <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) For
Christ thus defined the terms of their embassy, when he commanded them
to go and teach, not what they themselves had at random fabricated, but
whatsoever he had commanded (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p31.1"></span>[Mt.
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p31.1"></span>). And nothing can be plainer than his words
in another passage, “Be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master,
even Christ” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p31.2"></span>[Mt.
23:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p31.2"></span>). To impress this more deeply in their
minds, he in the same place repeats it twice. And because from ignorance
they were unable to comprehend the things which they had heard and
learned from the lips of their Master, the Spirit of truth is promised
to guide them unto all truth (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p31.3"></span>[John
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p31.3"></span>; 16:13). The restriction should be carefully
attended to. The office which he assigns to the Holy Spirit is to bring
to remembrance what his own lips had previously taught.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p32"></span>9. Accordingly, Peter, who was perfectly
instructed by his Master as to the extent of what was permitted to him,
leaves nothing more to himself or others than to dispense the doctrine
delivered by God. “If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of
God” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p32.1"></span>[1 Peter
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p32.1"></span>); that is, not hesitatingly, as those are
wont whose convictions are imperfect, but with the full confidence which
becomes a servant of God, provided with a sure message. What else is
this than to banish all the inventions of the human mind (whatever be
the head which may have devised them), that the pure word of God may be
taught and learned in the Church of the faithful,—than to discard the
decrees, or rather fictions of men (whatever be their rank), that the
decrees of God alone may remain steadfast? These are “the weapons of our
warfare,” which “are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strongholds; casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p32.2"></span>[2 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p32.2"></span>).
Here is the supreme power with which pastors of the Church, by whatever
name they are called, should be invested— namely, to dare all boldly for
the word of God, compelling all the virtue, glory, wisdom, and rank of
the world to yield and obey its majesty; to command all from the highest
to the lowest, trusting to its power to build up the house of Christ and
overthrow the house of Satan; to feed the sheep and chase away the
wolves; to instruct and exhort the docile, to accuse, rebuke, and subdue
the rebellious and petulant, to bind and loose; in fine, if need be, to
fire and fulminate, but all in the word of God. Although, as I have
observed, there is this difference between the apostles and their
successors, they were sure and authentic amanuenses of the Holy Spirit;
 <span id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) and, therefore, their writings
are to be regarded as the oracles of God, whereas others have no other
office than to teach what is delivered and sealed in the holy
Scriptures. We conclude, therefore, that it does not now belong to
faithful ministers to coin some new doctrine, but simply to adhere to
the doctrine to which all, without exception, are made subject. When I
say this, I mean to show not only what each individual, but what the
whole Church, is bound to do. In regard to individuals, Paul certainly
had been appointed an apostle to the Corinthians, and yet he declares
that he has no dominion over their faith (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p33.1"></span>[2 Cor.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p33.1"></span>). Who will now presume to arrogate a
dominion to which the apostle declares that he himself was not
competent? But if he had acknowledged such licence in teaching, that
every pastor could justly demand implicit faith in whatever he
delivered, he never would have laid it down as a rule to the
Corinthians, that while two or three prophets spoke, the others should
judge, and that, if anything was revealed to one sitting by, the first
should be silent (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p33.2"></span>[1 Cor.
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#030)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p33.2"></span>).
Thus he spared none, but subjected the authority of all to the censure
of the word of God. But it will be said, that with regard to the whole
Church the case is different. I answer, that in another place Paul meets
the objection also when he says, that faith cometh by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p33.3"></span>[Rom.
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p33.3"></span>). In other words, if faith depends upon the
word of God alone, if it regards and reclines on it alone, what place is
left for any word of man? He who knows what faith is can never hesitate
here, for it must possess a strength sufficient to stand intrepid and
invincible against Satan, the machinations of hell, and the whole world.
This strength can be found only in the word of God. Then the reason to
which we ought here to have regard is universal: God deprives man of the
power of producing any new doctrine, in order that he alone may be our
master in spiritual teaching, as he alone is true, and can neither lie
nor deceive. This reason applies not less to the whole Church than to
every individual believer.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p34"></span>10. But if this power of the church which
is here described be contrasted with that which spiritual tyrants,
falsely styling themselves bishops and religious prelates, have now for
several ages exercised among the people of God, there will be no more
agreement than that of Christ with Belial. It is not my intention here
to unfold the manner, the unworthy manner, in which they have used their
tyranny; I will only state the doctrine which they maintain in the
present day, first, in writing, and then, by fire and sword. Taking it
for granted, that a universal council is a true representation of the
Church, they set out with this principle, and, at the same time, lay it
down as incontrovertible, that such councils are under the immediate
guidance of the Holy Spirit, and therefore cannot err. But as they rule
councils, nay, constitute them, they in fact claim for themselves
whatever they maintain to be due to councils. Therefore, they will have
our faith to stand and fall at their pleasure, so that whatever they
have determined on either side must be firmly seated in our minds; what
they approve must be approved by us without any doubt; what they condemn
we also must hold to be justly condemned. Meanwhile, at their own
caprice, and in contempt of the word of God, they coin doctrines to
which they in this way demand our assent, declaring that no man can be a
Christian unless he assent to all their dogmas, affirmative as well as
negative, if not with explicit, yet with implicit faith, because it
belongs to the Church to frame new articles of faith.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p35"></span>11. First, let us hear by what arguments
they prove that this authority was given to the Church, and then we
shall see how far their allegations concerning the Church avail them.
The Church, they say, has the noble promise that she will never be
deserted by Christ her spouse, but be guided by his Spirit into all
truth. But of the promises which they are wont to allege, many were
given not less to private believers than to the whole Church. For
although the Lord spake to the twelve apostles, when he said, “Lo! I am
with you alway, even unto the end of the world” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.1"></span>[Mt.
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.1"></span>); and again, “I will pray the Father, and he
shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever:
even the Spirit of truth” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p35.2"></span>[John
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p35.2"></span>),
he made these promises not only to the twelve, but to each of them
separately, nay, in like manner, to other disciples whom he already had
received, or was afterwards to receive. When they interpret these
promises, which are replete with consolation, in such a way as if they
were not given to any particular Christian but to the whole Church
together, what else is it but to deprive Christians of the confidence
which they ought thence to have derived, to animate them in their
course? I deny not that the whole body of the faithful is furnished with
a manifold variety of gifts, and endued with a far larger and richer
treasure of heavenly wisdom than each Christian apart; nor do I mean
that this was said of believers in general, as implying that all possess
the spirit of wisdom and knowledge in an equal degree: but we are not to
give permission to the adversaries of Christ to defend a bad cause, by
wresting Scripture from its proper meaning. Omitting this, however, I
simply hold what is true—viz. that the Lord is always present with his
people, and guides them by his Spirit. He is the Spirit, not of error,
ignorance, falsehood, or darkness, but of sure revelation, wisdom,
truth, and light, from whom they can, without deception, learn the
things which have been given to them (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.3"></span>[1 Cor.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.3"></span>); in other words, “what is the hope of their
calling, and what the riches of the glory of their inheritance in the
saints” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p35.4"></span>[Eph.
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.4"></span>). But while believers, even those of them
who are endued with more excellent graces, obtain in the present life
only the first-fruits, and, as it were, a foretaste of the Spirit,
nothing better remains to them than, under a consciousness of their
weakness, to confine themselves anxiously within the limits of the word
of God, lest, in following their own sense too far, they forthwith stray
from the right path, being left without that Spirit, by whose teaching
alone truth is discerned from falsehood. For all confess with Paul, that
“they have not yet reached the goal” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.5"></span>[Phil.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p35.5"></span>). Accordingly, they rather aim at daily
progress than glory in perfection.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p36"></span>12. But it will be objected, that
whatever is attributed in part to any of the saints, belongs in complete
fulness to the Church. Although there is some semblance of truth in
this, I deny that it is true. God, indeed, measures out the gifts of his
Spirit to each of the members, so that nothing necessary to the whole
body is wanting, since the gifts are bestowed for the common advantage.
The riches of the Church, however, are always of such a nature, that
much is wanting to that supreme perfection of which our opponents boast.
Still the Church is not left destitute in any part, but always has as
much as is sufficient, for the Lord knows what her necessities require.
But to keep her in humility and pious modesty, he bestows no more on her
than he knows to be expedient. I am aware, it is usual here to object,
that Christ hath cleansed the Church “with the washing of water by the
word: that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle” (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p36.1"></span>[Eph.
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p36.1"></span>),
and that it is therefore called the “pillar and ground of the truth”
(<span id="iv.iv.ix-p36.2"></span>[1 Tim.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p36.2"></span>). But the former passage rather shows what
Christ daily performs in it, than what he has already perfected. For if
he daily sanctifies all his people, purifies, refines them, and wipes
away their stains, it is certain that they have still some spots and
wrinkles, and that their sanctification is in some measure defective.
How vain and fabulous is it to suppose that the Church, all whose
members are somewhat spotted and impure, is completely holy and spotless
in every part? It is true, therefore, that the Church is sanctified by
Christ, but here the commencement of her sanctification only is seen;
the end and entire completion will be effected when Christ, the Holy of
holies, shall truly and completely fill her with his holiness. It is
true also, that her stains and wrinkles have been effaced, but so that
the process is continued every day, until Christ at his advent will
entirely remove every remaining defect. For unless we admit this, we
shall be constrained to hold with the Pelagians, that the righteousness
of believers is perfected in this life: like the Cathari and Donatists
we shall tolerate no infirmity in the Church.56  <span
id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573) The other passage, as we have
elsewhere seen (chap. 1 sec. 10), has a very different meaning from what
they put upon it. For when Paul instructed Timothy, and trained him to
the office of a true bishop, he says, he did it in order that he might
learn how to behave himself in the Church of God. And to make him devote
himself to the work with greater seriousness and zeal, he adds, that the
Church is the pillar and ground of the truth. And what else do these
words mean, than just that the truth of God is preserved in the Church,
and preserved by the instrumentality of preaching; as he elsewhere says,
that Christ “gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some,
evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers;” “that we henceforth be no
more children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive; but, speaking the truth in love, may grow up
into him in all things, who is the head, even Christ”? (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p37.1"></span>[Eph. 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015)<span id="iv.iv.ix-p37.1"></span>)
The reason, therefore, why the truth, instead of being extinguished in
the world, remains unimpaired, is, because he has the Church as a
faithful guardian, by whose aid and ministry it is maintained. But if
this guardianship consists in the ministry of the Prophets and Apostles,
it follows, that the whole depends upon this—viz. that the word of the
Lord is faithfully preserved and maintained in purity.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p38"></span>13. And that my readers may the better
understand the hinge on which the question chiefly turns, I will briefly
explain what our opponents demand, and what we resist. When they deny
that the Church can err, their end and meaning are to this effect: Since
the Church is governed by the Spirit of God, she can walk safely without
the word; in whatever direction she moves, she cannot think or speak
anything but the truth, and hence, if she determines anything without or
beside the word of God, it must be regarded in no other light than if it
were a divine oracle. If we grant the first point—viz. that the Church
cannot err in things necessary to salvation—our meaning is, that she
cannot err, because she has altogether discarded her own wisdom, and
submits to the teaching of the Holy Spirit through the word of God. Here
then is the difference. They place the authority of the Church without
the word of God; we annex it to the word, and allow it not to be
separated from it. And is it strange if the spouse and pupil of Christ
is so subject to her lord and master as to hang carefully and constantly
on his lips? In every well-ordered house the wife obeys the command of
her husband, in every well-regulated school the doctrine of the master
only is listened to. Wherefore, let not the Church be wise in herself,
nor think any thing of herself, but let her consider her wisdom
terminated when he ceases to speak. In this way she will distrust all
the inventions of her own reason; and when she leans on the word of God,
will not waver in diffidence or hesitation but rest in full assurance
and unwavering constancy. Trusting to the liberal promises which she has
received, she will have the means of nobly maintaining her faith, never
doubting that the Holy Spirit is always present with her to be the
perfect guide of her path. At the same time, she will remember the use
which God wishes to be derived from his Spirit. “When he, the Spirit of
truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p38.1"></span>[John
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p38.1"></span>). How? “He shall bring to your remembrance
all things whatsoever I have said unto you.” He declares, therefore,
that nothing more is to be expected of his Spirit than to enlighten our
minds to perceive the truth of his doctrine. Hence Chrysostom most
shrewdly observes, “Many boast of the Holy Spirit, but with those who
speak their own it is a false pretence. As Christ declared that he spoke
not of himself (<span id="iv.iv.ix-p38.2"></span>[John
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#050)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p38.2"></span>; 14:10), because he spoke according to the
Law and the Prophets; so, if anything contrary to the Gospel is obtruded
under the name of the Holy Spirit, let us not believe it. For as Christ
is the fulfilment of the Law and the Prophets, so is the Spirit the
fulfilment of the Gospel” (Chrysost. Serm. de Sancto et Adorando
Spiritu.) Thus far Chrysostom. We may now easily infer how erroneously
our opponents act in vaunting of the Holy Spirit, for no other end than
to give the credit of his name to strange doctrines, extraneous to the
word of God, whereas he himself desires to be inseparably connected with
the word of God; and Christ declares the same thing of him, when he
promises him to the Church. And so indeed it is. The soberness which our
Lord once prescribed to his Church, he wishes to be perpetually
observed. He forbade that anything should be added to his word, and that
anything should be taken from it. This is the inviolable decree of God
and the Holy Spirit, a decree which our opponents endeavour to annul
when they pretend that the Church is guided by the Spirit without the
word.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p39"></span>14. Here again they mutter that the
Church behoved to add something to the writings of the apostles, or that
the apostles themselves behoved orally to supply what they had less
clearly taught, since Christ said to them, “I have yet many things to
say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now” (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p39.1"></span>[John
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p39.1"></span>), and that these are the points which have
been received, without writing, merely by use and custom. But what
effrontery is this? The disciples, I admit, were ignorant and almost
indocile when our Lord thus addressed them, but were they still in this
condition when they committed his doctrine to writing, so as afterwards
to be under the necessity of supplying orally that which, through
ignorance, they had omitted to write? If they were guided by the Spirit
of truth unto all truth when they published their writings, what
prevented them from embracing a full knowledge of the Gospel, and
consigning it therein? But let us grant them what they ask, provided
they point out the things which behoved to be revealed without writing.
Should they presume to attempt this, I will address, them in the words
of Augustine, “When the Lord is silent, who of us may say, this is, or
that is? or if we should presume to say it, how do we prove it?”
(August. in Joann. 96) But why do I contend superfluously? Every child
knows that in the writings of the apostles, which these men represent as
mutilated and incomplete, is contained the result of that revelation
which the Lord then promised to them.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p40"></span>15. What, say they, did not Christ
declare that nothing which the Church teaches and decrees can be
gainsayed, when he enjoined that every one who presumes to contradict
should be regarded as a heathen man and a publican? (<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p40.1"></span>[Mt.
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p40.1"></span>.) First, there is here no mention of
doctrine, but her authority to censure, for correction is asserted, in
order that none who had been admonished or reprimanded might oppose her
judgment. But to say nothing of this, it is very strange that those men
are so lost to all sense of shame, that they hesitate not to plume
themselves on this declaration. For what, pray, will they make of it,
but just that the consent of the Church, a consent never given but to
the word of God, is not to be despised? The Church is to be heard, say
they. Who denies this? since she decides nothing but according to the
word of God. If they demand more than this, let them know that the words
of Christ give them no countenance. I ought not to seem contentious when
I so vehemently insist that we cannot concede to the Church any new
doctrine; in other words, allow her to teach and oracularly deliver more
than the Lord has revealed in his word. Men of sense see how great the
danger is if so much authority is once conceded to men. They see also
how wide a door is opened for the jeers and cavils of the ungodly, if we
admit that Christians are to receive the opinions of men as if they were
oracles. We may add, that our Saviour, speaking according to the
circumstances of his times, gave the name of Church to the Sanhedrim,
that the disciples might learn afterwards to revere the sacred meetings
of the Church. Hence it would follow, that single cities and districts
would have equal liberty in coining dogmas.

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p41"></span>16. The examples which they bring do not
avail them. They say that pædobaptism proceeds not so much on a plain
command of Scripture, as on a decree of the Church. It would be a
miserable asylum if, in defence of pædobaptism, we were obliged to
betake ourselves to the bare authority of the Church; but it will be
made plain enough elsewhere (chap. 16) that it is far otherwise. In like
manner, when they object that we nowhere find in the Scriptures what was
declared in the Council of Nice—viz. that the Son is consubstantial with
the Father (see August. <span id="iv.iv.ix-p41.1"></span>Ep. 178<span
id="iv.iv.ix-p41.1"></span>)—they do a grievous injustice to the
Fathers, as if they had rashly condemned Arius for not swearing to their
words, though professing the whole of that doctrine which is contained
in the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. I admit that the
expression does not exist in Scripture, but seeing it is there so often
declared that there is one God, and Christ is so often called true and
eternal God, one with the Father, what do the Nicene Fathers do when
they affirm that he is of one essence, than simply declare the genuine
meaning of Scripture? Theodoret relates that Constantine, in opening
their meeting, spoke as follows: “In the discussion of divine matters,
the doctrine of the Holy Spirit stands recorded. The Gospels and
apostolical writings, with the oracles of the prophets, fully show us
the meaning of the Deity. Therefore, laying aside discord, let us take
the exposition of questions from the words of the Spirit” (Theodoret.
Hist. Eccles. Lib. 1 c. 5). There was none who opposed this sound
advice; none who objected that the Church could add something of her
own, that the Spirit did not reveal all things to the apostles, or at
least that they did not deliver them to posterity, and so forth. If the
point on which our opponents insist is true, Constantine, first, was in
error in robbing the Church of her power; and, secondly, when none of
the bishops rose to vindicate it, their silence was a kind of perfidy,
and made them traitors to Ecclesiastical law. But since Theodoret
relates that they readily embraced what the Emperor said, it is evident
that this new dogma was then wholly unknown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](inst088.htm#fr_568) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p23"></span>59 559 The French adds, “Vision receue du
Seigneur; Le Seigneur des armees l’a dit,”—A vision received from the
Lord; The Lord of hosts hath spoken it.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](inst088.htm#fr_569) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p26"></span>116 D116 This section admirably expresses
Calvin’s view concerning the centrality of Christ in divine revelation.
From Creation to Consummation, Christ is God’s only wisdom, light, and
truth, the only mirror in which God has Himself as Redeemer, the only
fountain of heavenly doctrine, and the only way by which man can come to
know God. Here there is no room for the concept that Christ was
completely concealed in the Old Testament, whereas He is completely
revealed in the New; nor for the idea that Old Testament saints trusted
in God, whereas New Testament saints trust in Christ.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](inst088.htm#fr_570) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p28"></span>117 D117 Although Calvin uses the term
“dictated” in connection with this explanation of the manner in which
the body of Old Testament Scripture was formed, this should not be taken
to express the mode of Inspiration, but rather to call attention to the
result of Inspiration. That this is his intention may be seen in the
previous assertion that historical details “are also the composition of
prophets,” which assertion takes into account the human factor in the
process of the inscripturation of revelation.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](inst088.htm#fr_571) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p31"></span>118 D118 This assertion that the Spirit
of Christ “in a manner dictated words to them” implies at least three
ideas: (1) The guidance of the Spirit in the inspiration of Scripture
extends to the very words which the apostles and prophets employed; (2)
The words of Scripture express the very thoughts which God wished
expressed, so that the result of the Spirit’s inspiration is, in regard
to truth, the same as if the words had been dictated; (3) Yet the words
of Scripture were only “in a manner” dictated, since the Spirit used the
faculties peculiar to the human instruments, thereby ensuring a
Scripture characterized by differences of vocabulary, syntax, grammar,
literary style, historical setting, and theological approach.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](inst088.htm#fr_572) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p33"></span>119 D119 The expression, “sure and
authentic amanuenses,” would at first glance, seem to imply that the
apostles were mere scribes and copyists, and that Inspiration should be
defined as “infallible supernatural superintendence of mechanical human
reproduction of divinely communicated words.” But Calvin would have
subscribed to such a “dictation theory” of Inspiration is abundantly
clear from the many relevant portions of the Institutes. (See also notes
on sections 6 and 8 of this chapter.)

<span id="fn_573"></span>[574](inst088.htm#fr_573) <span
id="iv.iv.ix-p36.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iv.ix-p37"></span>60 560 The French adds, “Or, nos
adversaires mesmes tiennent tous ceux-la pour heretiques.”—Now, our
opponents themselves regard all those as heretics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 9. - OF COUNCILS AND THEIR AUTHORITY](inst089)
