[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst029)  [Next](inst031) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xvii"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.xvii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 16.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p1"></span>THE WORLD, CREATED BY GOD, STILL
CHERISHED AND PROTECTED BY HIM. EACH AND ALL OF ITS PARTS GOVERNED BY
HIS PROVIDENCE.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are, I. The
doctrine of the special providence of God over all the creatures, singly
and collectively, as opposed to the dreams of the Epicureans about
fortune and fortuitous causes. II. The fiction of the Sophists
concerning the omnipotence of God, and the error of philosophers, as to
a confused and equivocal government of the world, sec. 1-5. All animals,
but especially mankind, from the peculiar superintendence exercised over
them, are proofs, evidences, and examples of the providence of God, sec.
6, 7. III. A consideration of fate, fortune, chance, contingence, and
uncertain events (on which the matter here under discussion turns).

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p4"></span>1. Even the wicked, under the guidance of
carnal sense, acknowledge that God is the Creator. The godly acknowledge
not this only, but that he is a most wise and powerful governor and
preserver of all created objects. In so doing, they lean on the Word of
God, some passages from which are produced.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p5"></span>2. Refutation of the Epicureans, who
oppose fortune and fortuitous causes to Divine Providence, as taught in
Scripture. The sun, a bright manifestation of Divine Providence.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p6"></span>3. Figment of the Sophists as to an
indolent Providence refuted. Consideration of the Omnipotence as
combined with the Providence of God. Double benefit resulting from a
proper acknowledgement of the Divine Omnipotence. Cavils of Infidelity.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p7"></span>4. A definition of Providence refuting
the erroneous dogmas of Philosophers. Dreams of the Epicureans and
Peripatetics.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p8"></span>5. Special Providence of God asserted and
proved by arguments founded on a consideration of the Divine Justice and
Mercy. Proved also by passages of Scripture, relating to the sky, the
earth, and animals.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p9"></span>6. Special Providence proved by passages
relating to the human race, and the more especially that for its sake
the world was created.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p10"></span>7. Special Providence proved, lastly,
from examples taken from the history of the Israelites, of Jonah, Jacob,
and from daily experience.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p11"></span>8. Erroneous views as to Providence
refuted:—I. The sect of the Stoics. II. The fortune and chance of the
Heathen.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p12"></span>9. How things are said to be fortuitous
to us, though done by the determinate counsel of God. Example. Error of
separating contingency and event from the secret, but just, and most
wise counsel of God. Two examples.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p13"></span>1. It were cold and lifeless to
represent God as a momentary Creator, who completed his work once for
all, and then left it. Here, especially, we must dissent from the
profane, and maintain that the presence of the divine power is
conspicuous, not less in the perpetual condition of the world then in
its first creation. For, although even wicked men are forced, by the
mere view of the earth and sky, to rise to the Creator, yet faith has a
method of its own in assigning the whole praise of creation to God. To
this effect is the passage of the Apostle already quoted that by faith
we understand that the worlds were framed by the Word of God (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p13.1"></span>[Heb.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p13.1"></span>); because, without proceeding to his
Providence, we cannot understand the full force of what is meant by God
being the Creator, how much soever we may seem to comprehend it with our
mind, and confess it with our tongue. The carnal mind, when once it has
perceived the power of God in the creation, stops there, and, at the
farthest, thinks and ponders on nothing else than the wisdom, power, and
goodness displayed by the Author of such a work (matters which rise
spontaneously, and force themselves on the notice even of the
unwilling), or on some general agency on which the power of motion
depends, exercised in preserving and governing it. In short, it imagines
that all things are sufficiently sustained by the energy divinely
infused into them at first. But faith must penetrate deeper. After
learning that there is a Creator, it must forthwith infer that he is
also a Governor and Preserver, and that, not by producing a kind of
general motion in the machine of the globe as well as in each of its
parts, but by a special providence sustaining, cherishing,
superintending, all the things which he has made, to the very minutest,
even to a sparrow. Thus David, after briefly premising that the world
was created by God, immediately descends to the continual course of
Providence, “By the word of the Lord were the heavens framed, and all
the host of them by the breath of his mouth;” immediately adding, “The
Lord looketh from heaven, he beholdeth the children of men,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p13.2"></span>[Ps. 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#013)<span id="iv.i.xvii-p13.2"></span>,
&c). He subjoins other things to the same effect. For although all do
not reason so accurately, yet because it would not be credible that
human affairs were superintended by God, unless he were the maker of the
world, and no one could seriously believe that he is its Creator without
feeling convinced that he takes care of his works; David with good
reason, and in admirable order, leads us from the one to the other. In
general, indeed, philosophers teach, and the human mind conceives, that
all the parts of the world are invigorated by the secret inspiration of
God. They do not, however reach the height to which David rises taking
all the pious along with him, when he says, “These wait all upon thee,
that thou mayest give them their meat in due season. That thou givest
them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they are filled with good.
Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their breath,
they die, and return to their dust. Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they
are created, and thou renewest the face of the earth,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p13.3"></span>[Ps.
104:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p13.3"></span>). Nay, though they subscribe to the
sentiment of Paul, that in God “we live, and move, and have our being,”
(<span id="iv.i.xvii-p13.4"></span>[Acts
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p13.4"></span>), yet they are far from having a serious
apprehension of the grace which he commends, because they have not the
least relish for that special care in which alone the paternal favour of
God is discerned.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p14"></span>2. That this distinction may be the more
manifest, we must consider that the Providence of God, as taught in
Scripture, is opposed to fortune and fortuitous causes. By an erroneous
opinion prevailing in all ages, an opinion almost universally prevailing
in our own day—viz. that all things happen fortuitously, the true
doctrine of Providence has not only been obscured, but almost buried. If
one falls among robbers, or ravenous beasts; if a sudden gust of wind at
sea causes shipwreck; if one is struck down by the fall of a house or a
tree; if another, when wandering through desert paths, meets with
deliverance; or, after being tossed by the waves, arrives in port, and
makes some wondrous hair-breadth escape from death—all these
occurrences, prosperous as well as adverse, carnal sense will attribute
to fortune. But whose has learned from the mouth of Christ that all the
hairs of his head are numbered (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p14.1"></span>[Mt.
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p14.1"></span>), will look farther for the cause, and hold
that all events whatsoever are governed by the secret counsel of God.
With regard to inanimate objects again we must hold that though each is
possessed of its peculiar properties, yet all of them exert their force
only in so far as directed by the immediate hand of God. Hence they are
merely instruments, into which God constantly infuses what energy he
sees meet, and turns and converts to any purpose at his pleasure. No
created object makes a more wonderful or glorious display than the sun.
For, besides illuminating the whole world with its brightness, how
admirably does it foster and invigorate all animals by its heat, and
fertilise the earth by its rays, warming the seeds of grain in its lap,
and thereby calling forth the verdant blade! This it supports,
increases, and strengthens with additional nurture, till it rises into
the stalk; and still feeds it with perpetual moisture, till it comes
into flower; and from flower to fruit, which it continues to ripen till
it attains maturity. In like manner, by its warmth trees and vines bud,
and put forth first their leaves, then their blossom, then their fruit.
And the Lord, that he might claim the entire glory of these things as
his own, was pleased that light should exist, and that the earth should
be replenished with all kinds of herbs and fruits before he made the
sun. No pious man, therefore, will make the sun either the necessary or
principal cause of those things which existed before the creation of the
sun, but only the instrument which God employs, because he so pleases;
though he can lay it aside, and act equally well by himself: Again, when
we read, that at the prayer of Joshua the sun was stayed in its course
(<span id="iv.i.xvii-p14.2"></span>[Josh.
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p14.2"></span>); that as a favour to Hezekiah, its shadow
receded ten degrees (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p14.3"></span>[2 Kings
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#011)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p14.3"></span>); by these miracles God declared that the
sun does not daily rise and set by a blind instinct of nature, but is
governed by Him in its course, that he may renew the remembrance of his
paternal favour toward us. Nothing is more natural than for spring, in
its turns to succeed winter, summer spring, and autumn summer; but in
this series the variations are so great and so unequal as to make it
very apparent that every single year, month, and day, is regulated by a
new and special providence of God.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p15"></span>3. And truly God claims omnipotence to
himself, and would have us to acknowledge it,—not the vain, indolent,
slumbering omnipotence which sophists feign, but vigilant, efficacious,
energetic, and ever active,—not an omnipotence which may only act as a
general principle of confused motion, as in ordering a stream to keep
within the channel once prescribed to it, but one which is intent on
individual and special movements. God is deemed omnipotent, not because
he can act though he may cease or be idle, or because by a general
instinct he continues the order of nature previously appointed; but
because, governing heaven and earth by his providence, he so overrules
all things that nothing happens without his counsel. For when it is said
in the Psalms, “He has done whatsoever he has pleased,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p15.1"></span>[Ps.
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p15.1"></span>), the thing meant is his sure and
deliberate purpose. It were insipid to interpret the Psalmist’s words in
philosophic fashion, to mean that God is the primary agent, because the
beginning and cause of all motion. This rather is the solace of the
faithful, in their adversity, that every thing which they endure is by
the ordination and command of God, that they are under his hand. But if
the government of God thus extends to all his works, it is a childish
cavil to confine it to natural influx.13  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) Those moreover who confine the
providence of God within narrow limits, as if he allowed all things to
be borne along freely according to a perpetual law of nature, do not
more defraud God of his glory than themselves of a most useful doctrine;
for nothing were more wretched than man if he were exposed to all
possible movements of the sky, the air, the earth, and the water. We may
add, that by this view the singular goodness of God towards each
individual is unbecomingly impaired. David exclaims (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p16.1"></span>[Ps.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p16.1"></span>), that infants hanging at their mothers
breasts are eloquent enough to celebrate the glory of God, because, from
the very moment of their births they find an aliment prepared for them
by heavenly care. Indeed, if we do not shut our eyes and senses to the
fact, we must see that some mothers have full provision for their
infants, and others almost none, according as it is the pleasure of God
to nourish one child more liberally, and another more sparingly. Those
who attribute due praise to the omnipotence of God thereby derive a
double benefit. He to whom heaven and earth belong, and whose nod all
creatures must obey, is fully able to reward the homage which they pay
to him, and they can rest secure in the protection of Him to whose
control everything that could do them harm is subject, by whose
authority, Satan, with all his furies and engines, is curbed as with a
bridle, and on whose will everything adverse to our safety depends. In
this way, and in no other, can the immoderate and superstitious fears,
excited by the dangers to which we are exposed, be calmed or subdued. I
say superstitious fears. For such they are, as often as the dangers
threatened by any created objects inspire us with such terror, that we
tremble as if they had in themselves a power to hurt us, or could hurt
at random or by chance; or as if we had not in God a sufficient
protection against them. For example, Jeremiah forbids the children of
God “ to be dismayed at the signs of heaven, as the heathen are dismayed
at them,” (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p16.2"></span>[Jer.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p16.2"></span>). He does not, indeed, condemn every kind
of fear. But as unbelievers transfer the government of the world from
God to the stars, imagining that happiness or misery depends on their
decrees or presages, and not on the Divine will, the consequence is,
that their fear, which ought to have reference to him only, is diverted
to stars and comets. Let him, therefore, who would beware of such
unbelief, always bear in mind, that there is no random power, or agency,
or motion in the creatures, who are so governed by the secret counsel of
God, that nothing happens but what he has knowingly and willingly
decreed.13  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125)

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p18"></span>4. First, then, let the reader remember
that the providence we mean is not one by which the Deity, sitting idly
in heaven, looks on at what is taking place in the world, but one by
which he, as it were, holds the helms and overrules all events. Hence
his providence extends not less to the hand than to the eye.13  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) When Abraham said to his son, *God
will provide* (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p19.1"></span>[Gen.
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p19.1"></span>), he meant not merely to assert that the
future event was foreknown to Gods but to resign the management of an
unknown business to the will of Him whose province it is to bring
perplexed and dubious matters to a happy result. Hence it appears that
providence consists in action. What many talk of bare prescience is the
merest trifling. Those do not err quite so grossly who attribute
government to God, but still, as I have observed, a confused and
promiscuous government which consists in giving an impulse and general
movement to the machine of the globe and each of its parts, but does not
specially direct the action of every creature. It is impossible,
however, to tolerate this error. For, according to its abettors, there
is nothing in this providence, which they call universal, to prevent all
the creatures from being moved contingently, or to prevent man from
turning himself in this direction or in that, according to the mere
freedom of his own will. In this ways they make man a partner with
God,—God, by his energy, impressing man with the movement by which he
can act, agreeably to the nature conferred upon him while man
voluntarily regulates his own actions. In short, their doctrine is, that
the world, the affairs of men, and men themselves, are governed by the
power, but not by the decree of God. I say nothing of the Epicureans (a
pest with which the world has always been plagued), who dream of an
inert and idle God,13  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) and
others, not a whit sounder, who of old feigned that God rules the upper
regions of the air, but leaves the inferior to Fortune. Against such
evident madness even dumb creatures lift their voice.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p21"></span>My intention now is, to refute an
opinion which has very generally obtained—an opinion which, while it
concedes to God some blind and equivocal movement, withholds what is of
principal moment—viz. the disposing and directing of every thing to its
proper end by incomprehensible wisdom. By withholding government, it
makes God the ruler of the world in name only, not in reality. For what,
I ask, is meant by government, if it be not to preside so as to regulate
the destiny of that over which you preside? I do not, however, totally
repudiate what is said of an universal providence, provided, on the
other hand, it is conceded to me that the world is governed by God, not
only because he maintains the order of nature appointed by him, but
because he takes a special charge of every one of his works. It is true,
indeed, that each species of created objects is moved by a secret
instinct of nature, as if they obeyed the eternal command of God, and
spontaneously followed the course which God at first appointed. And to
this we may refer our Saviour’s words, that he and his Father have
always been at work from the beginning (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p21.1"></span>[John
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p21.1"></span>); also the words of Paul, that “in him we
live, and move, and have our being,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p21.2"></span>[Acts
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p21.2"></span>); also the words of the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, who, when wishing to prove the divinity of
Christ, says, that he upholdeth “all things by the word of his power,”
(<span id="iv.i.xvii-p21.3"></span>[Heb.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p21.3"></span>). But some, under pretext of the general,
hide and obscure the special providence, which is so surely and clearly
taught in Scripture, that it is strange how any one can bring himself to
doubt of it. And, indeed, those who interpose that disguise are
themselves forced to modify their doctrine, by adding that many things
are done by the special care of God. This, however, they erroneously
confine to particular acts. The thing to be proved, therefore, is, that
single events are so regulated by God, and all events so proceed from
his determinate counsel, that nothing happens fortuitously.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p22"></span>5. Assuming that the beginning of motion
belongs to God, but that all things move spontaneously or casually,
according to the impulse which nature gives, the vicissitudes of day and
nights summer and winter, will be the work of God; inasmuch as he, in
assigning the office of each, appointed a certain law, namely, that they
should always with uniform tenor observe the same course, day succeeding
night, month succeeding month, and year succeeding year. But, as at one
time, excessive heat, combined with drought, burns up the fields; at
another time excessive rains rot the crops, while sudden devastation is
produced by tempests and storms of hail, these will not be the works of
God, unless in so far as rainy or fair weather, heat or cold, are
produced by the concourse of the stars, and other natural causes.
According to this view, there is no place left either for the paternal
favour, or the Judgments of God. If it is said that God fully manifests
his beneficence to the human race, by furnishing heaven and earth with
the ordinary power of producing food, the explanation is meagre and
heathenish: as if the fertility of one year were not a special blessing,
the penury and dearth of another a special punishment and curse from
God. But as it would occupy too much time to enumerate all the
arguments, let the authority of God himself suffice. In the Law and the
Prophets he repeatedly declares, that as often as he waters the earth
with dew and rain, he manifests his favour, that by his command the
heaven becomes hard as iron, the crops are destroyed by mildew and other
evils, that storms and hail, in devastating the fields, are signs of
sure and special vengeance. This being admitted, it is certain that not
a drop of rain falls without the express command of God. David, indeed
(<span id="iv.i.xvii-p22.1"></span>[Ps.
146:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p22.1"></span>), extols the general providence of God in
supplying food to the young ravens that cry to him but when God himself
threatens living creatures with famine, does he not plainly declare that
they are all nourished by him, at one time with scanty, at another with
more ample measure? It is childish, as I have already said, to confine
this to particular acts, when Christ says, without reservation, that not
a sparrow falls to the ground without the will of his Father (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p22.2"></span>[Mt.
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p22.2"></span>). Surely, if the flight of birds is
regulated by the counsel of God, we must acknowledge with the prophet,
that while he “dwelleth on high,” he “humbleth himself to behold the
things that are in heaven and in the earth,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p22.3"></span>[Ps.
113:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006)<span id="iv.i.xvii-p22.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p23"></span>6. But as we know that it was chiefly
for the sake of mankind that the world was made, we must look to this as
the end which God has in view in the government of it. The prophet
Jeremiah exclaims, “O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in
himself: it is not in man that walketh to direct his steps,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.1"></span>[Jer.
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.1"></span>). Solomon again says, “Man’s goings are of
the Lord: how can a man then understand his own way?” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.2"></span>[Prov.
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#024)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.2"></span>). Will it now be said that man is moved by
God according to the bent of his nature, but that man himself gives the
movement any direction he pleases? Were it truly so, man would have the
full disposal of his own ways. To this it will perhaps be answered, that
man can do nothing without the power of God. But the answer will not
avail, since both Jeremiah and Solomon attribute to God not power only,
but also election and decree. And Solomon, in another place, elegantly
rebukes the rashness of men in fixing their plans without reference to
God, as if they were not led by his hand. “The preparations of the heart
in man, and the answer of the tongue, is from the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.3"></span>[Prov.
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.3"></span>). It is a strange infatuation, surely for
miserable men, who cannot even give utterance except in so far as God
pleases, to begin to act without him! Scriptures moreover, the better to
show that every thing done in the world is according to his decree,
declares that the things which seem most fortuitous are subject to him.
For what seems more attributable to chance than the branch which falls
from a tree, and kills the passing traveller? But the Lord sees very
differently, and declares that He delivered him into the hand of the
slayer (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p23.4"></span>[Exod.
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.4"></span>). In like manners who does not attribute
the lot to the blindness of Fortune? Not so the Lord, who claims the
decision for himself (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p23.5"></span>[Prov.
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.5"></span>). He says not, that by his power the lot is
thrown into the lap, and taken out, but declares that the only thing
which could be attributed to chance is from him. To the same effect are
the words of Solomon, “The poor and the deceitful man meet together; the
Lord lighteneth both their eyes,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.6"></span>[Prov.
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.6"></span>). For although rich and poor are mingled
together in the world, in saying that the condition of each is divinely
appointed, he reminds us that God, Who enlightens all, has his own eye
always open, and thus exhorts the poor to patient endurance, seeing that
those who are discontented with their lot endeavour to shake off a
burden which God has imposed upon them. Thus, too, another prophet
upbraids the profane, who ascribe it to human industry, or to fortune,
that some grovel in the mire while others rise to honour. “Promotion
cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south. But
God is the judge: he putteth down ones and setteth up another,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p23.7"></span>[Ps. 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007)<span id="iv.i.xvii-p23.7"></span>).
Because God cannot divest himself of the office of judge, he infers that
to his secret counsel it is owing that some are elevated, while others
remain without honour.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24"></span>7. Nay, I affirm in general, that
particular events are evidences of the special providence of God. In the
wilderness God caused a south wind to blow, and brought the people a
plentiful supply of birds (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.1"></span>[Exod.
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.1"></span>). When he desired that Jonah should be
thrown into the sea, he sent forth a whirlwind. Those who deny that God
holds the reins of government will say that this was contrary to
ordinary practice, whereas I infer from it that no wind ever rises or
rages without his special command. In no way could it be true that “he
maketh the winds his messengers, and the flames of fire his ministers;”
that “he maketh the clouds his chariot, and walketh upon the wings of
the wind,” (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.2"></span>[Ps.
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.2"></span>),
did he not at pleasure drive the clouds and winds and therein manifest
the special presence of his power. In like manner, we are elsewhere
taught, that whenever the sea is raised into a storm, its billows attest
the special presence of God. “He commandeth and raiseth the stormy wind,
which lifteth up the waves.” “He maketh the storm a calm, so that the
waves thereof are still,” (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.3"></span>[Ps.
107:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#029)<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.3"></span>
) He also elsewhere declares, that he had smitten the people with
blasting and mildew (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.4"></span>[Amos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.4"></span>). Again while man naturally possesses the
power of continuing his species, God describes it as a mark of his
special favour, that while some continue childless, others are blessed
with offspring: for the fruit of the womb is his gift. Hence the words
of Jacob to Rachel, “Am I in God’s stead, who has withheld from thee the
fruit of the womb?” (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.5"></span>[Gen.
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.5"></span>). To conclude in one word. Nothing in
nature is more ordinary than that we should be nourished with bread. But
the Spirit declares not only that the produce of the earth is God’s
special gift, but “that man does not live by bread only,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.6"></span>[Deut.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.6"></span>), because it is not mere fulness that
nourishes him but the secret blessing of God. And hence, on the other
hand, he threatens to take away “the stay and the staff, the whole stay
of bread, and the whole stay of water,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.7"></span>[Is.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.7"></span>). Indeed, there could be no serious meaning
in our prayer for daily bread, if God did not with paternal hand supply
us with food. Accordingly, to convince the faithful that God, in feeding
them, fulfils the office of the best of parents, the prophet reminds
them that he “giveth food to all flesh,” (<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.8"></span>[Ps.
136:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.8"></span>). In fine, when we hear on the one hand,
that “the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open
unto their cry,” and, on the other hand, that “the face of the Lord is
against them that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the
earth,” (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p24.9"></span>[Ps.
34:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p24.9"></span>), let us be assured that all creatures
above and below are ready at his service, that he may employ them in
whatever way he pleases. Hence we infer, not only that the general
providence of God, continuing the order of nature, extends over the
creatures, but that by his wonderful counsel they are adapted to a
certain and special purpose.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p25"></span>8. Those who would cast obloquy on this
doctrine, calumniate it as the dogma of the Stoics concerning fate. The
same charge was formerly brought against Augustine (lib. ad Bonifac. 2,
c. 6 et alibi). We are unwilling to dispute about words; but we do not
admit the term Fate, both because it is of the class which Paul teaches
us to shun, as profane novelties (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p25.1"></span>[1
Tim. 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p25.1"></span>), and also because it is attempted, by
means of an odious term, to fix a stigma on the truth of God. But the
dogma itself is falsely and maliciously imputed to us. For we do not
with the Stoics imagine a necessity consisting of a perpetual chain of
causes, and a kind of involved series contained in nature, but we hold
that God is the disposer and ruler of all things,—that from the remotest
eternity, according to his own wisdom, he decreed what he was to do, and
now by his power executes what he decreed. Hence we maintain, that by
his providence, not heaven and earth and inanimate creatures only, but
also the counsels and wills of men are so governed as to move exactly in
the course which he has destined. What, then, you will say, does nothing
happen fortuitously, nothing contingently? I answer, it was a true
saying of Basil the Great, that Fortune and Chance are heathen terms;
the meaning of which ought not to occupy pious minds. For if all success
is blessing from God, and calamity and adversity are his curse, there is
no place left in human affairs for fortune and chance. We ought also to
be moved by the words of Augustine (Retract. lib. 1 cap. 1), “In my
writings against the Academics,” says he, “I regret having so often used
the term Fortune; although I intended to denote by it not some goddess,
but the fortuitous issue of events in external matters, whether good or
evil. Hence, too, those words, Perhaps, Perchance, Fortuitously,13
 <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) which no religion forbids us to
use, though everything must be referred to Divine Providence. Nor did I
omit to observe this when I said, Although, perhaps, that which is
vulgarly called Fortune, is also regulated by a hidden order, and what
we call Chance is nothing else than that the reason and cause of which
is secret. It is true, I so spoke, but I repent of having mentioned
Fortune there as I did, when I see the very bad custom which men have of
saying, not as they ought to do, ‘So God pleased,’ but, ‘So Fortune
pleased.’ ” In short, Augustine everywhere teaches, that if anything is
left to fortune, the world moves at random. And although he elsewhere
declares (Quæstionum, lib. 83). that all things are carried on, partly
by the free will of man, and partly by the Providence of God, he shortly
after shows clearly enough that his meaning was, that men also are ruled
by Providence, when he assumes it as a principle, that there cannot be a
greater absurdity than to hold that anything is done without the
ordination of God; because it would happen at random. For which reason,
he also excludes the contingency which depends on human will,
maintaining a little further on, in clearer terms, that no cause must be
sought for but the will of God. When he uses the term permission, the
meaning which he attaches to it will best appear from a single passage
(De Trinity. lib. 3 cap. 4), where he proves that the will of God is the
supreme and primary cause of all things, because nothing happens without
his order or permission. He certainly does not figure God sitting idly
in a watch-tower, when he chooses to permit anything. The will which he
represents as interposing is, if I may so express it, active
(*actualis*), and but for this could not be regarded as a cause.

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p27"></span>9. But since our sluggish minds rest far
beneath the height of Divine Providence, we must have recourse to a
distinction which may assist them in rising. I say then, that though all
things are ordered by the counsel and certain arrangement of God, to us,
however, they are fortuitous,—not because we imagine that Fortune rules
the world and mankind, and turns all things upside down at random (far
be such a heartless thought from every Christian breast); but as the
order, method, end, and necessity of events, are, for the most part,
hidden in the counsel of God, though it is certain that they are
produced by the will of God, they have the appearance of being
fortuitous, such being the form under which they present themselves to
us, whether considered in their own nature, or estimated according to
our knowledge and Judgment. Let us suppose, for example, that a
merchant, after entering a forest in company with trust-worthy
individuals, imprudently strays from his companions and wanders
bewildered till he falls into a den of robbers and is murdered. His
death was not only foreseen by the eye of God, but had been fixed by his
decree. For it is said, not that he foresaw how far the life of each
individual should extend, but that he determined and fixed the bounds
which could not be passed (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p27.1"></span>[Job
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p27.1"></span>). Still, in relation to our capacity of
discernment, all these things appear fortuitous. How will the Christian
feel? Though he will consider that every circumstance which occurred in
that person’s death was indeed in its nature fortuitous, he will have no
doubt that the Providence of God overruled it and guided fortune to his
own end. The same thing holds in the case of future contingencies. All
future events being uncertain to us, seem in suspense as if ready to
take either direction. Still, however, the impression remains seated in
our hearts, that nothing will happen which the Lord has not provided. In
this sense the term event is repeatedly used in Ecclesiastes, because,
at the first glance, men do not penetrate to the primary cause which
lies concealed. And yet, what is taught in Scripture of the secret
providence of God was never so completely effaced from the human heart,
as that some sparks did not always shine in the darkness. Thus the
soothsayers of the Philistine, though they waver in uncertainty,
attribute the adverse event partly to God and partly to chance. If the
ark, say they, “Goes up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemish, then
he has done us this great evil; but if not, then we shall know that it
is not his hand that smote us, it was a chance that happened to us.”
(<span id="iv.i.xvii-p27.2"></span>[1 Sam.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p27.2"></span>). Foolishly, indeed, when divination fails
them they flee to fortune. Still we see them constrained, so as not to
venture to regard their disaster as fortuitous. But the mode in which
God, by the curb of his Providence, turns events in whatever direction
he pleases, will appear from a remarkable example. At the very same
moment when David was discovered in the wilderness of Maon, the
Philistines make an inroad into the country, and Saul is forced to
depart (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p27.3"></span>[1 Sam.
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#027)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p27.3"></span>). If God, in order to provide for the
safety of his servant, threw this obstacle in the way of Saul, we surely
cannot say, that though the Philistine took up arms contrary to human
expectation, they did it by chance. What seems to us contingence, faith
will recognise as the secret impulse of God. The reason is not always
equally apparent, but we ought undoubtedly to hold that all the changes
which take place in the world are produced by the secret agency of the
hand of God. At the same time, that which God has determined, though it
must come to pass, is not, however, precisely, or in its own nature,
necessary. We have a familiar example in the case of our Saviour’s
bones. As he assumed a body similar to ours, no sane man will deny that
his bones were capable of being broken and yet it was impossible that
they should be broken (<span id="iv.i.xvii-p27.4"></span>[John
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036)<span
id="iv.i.xvii-p27.4"></span>). Hence, again, we see that there was good
ground for the distinction which the Schoolmen made between necessity,
*secundum quid*, and necessity absolute, also between the necessity of
*consequent* and of *consequence*. God made the bones of his Son
frangible, though he exempted them from actual fracture; and thus, in
reference to the necessity of his counsel, made that impossible which
might have naturally taken place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](inst030.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iv.i.xvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p16"></span>31 131 See Hyperius in Methodo
Theologiæ.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](inst030.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iv.i.xvii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p17"></span>32 132 See Calvin adversus Astrolog.
Judiciariam. August De Ordine, lib. 2 cap. 15.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](inst030.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iv.i.xvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p19"></span>33 133 The French adds, “Cest à dire,
que non seulement il voit, mais aussi ordonne ce qu’il veut estra
fait;”—“that is to say, he not only sees, but ordains what he wills to
be done.”

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](inst030.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.i.xvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p20"></span>34 134 Plin. lib. 2. c. 7. “Irridendum
vero, agere curam rerum humanarum, illud, quicquid est sumum. Anne tam
tristi atque multiplici ministerio non pollui credamus dubitemusve?”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](inst030.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iv.i.xvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xvii-p26"></span>35 135 Forte. Forsan. Forsitan,
Fortuito.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 17. - USE TO BE MADE OF THE DOCTRINE OF
PROVIDENCE.](inst031)
