[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst025)  [Next](inst027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i.xiii"></span>

### <span id="iv.i.xiii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 12.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p1"></span>GOD DISTINGUISHED FROM IDOLS, THAT HE MAY
BE THE EXCLUSIVE OBJECT OF WORSHIP.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p2"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p3"></span>1. Scripture, in teaching that there is
but one God, does not make a dispute about words, but attributes all
honour and religious worship to him alone. This proved, 1st, By the
etymology of the term. 2d, By the testimony of God himself, when he
declares that he is a jealous God, and will not allow himself to be
confounded with any fictitious Deity.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p4"></span>2. The Papists in opposing this pure
doctrine, gain nothing by their distinction of δυλια and λατρια.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p5"></span>3. Passages of Scripture subversive of
the Papistical distinction, and proving that religious worship is due to
God alone. Perversions of Divine worship.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p6"></span>1. We said at the commencement of our
work (chap. 2), that the knowledge of God consists not in frigid
speculation, but carries worship along with it; and we touched by the
way (chap. 5 s. 6, 9, 10) on what will be more copiously treated in
other places (Book 2, chap. 8)—viz. how God is duly worshipped. Now I
only briefly repeat, that whenever Scripture asserts the unity of God,
it does not contend for a mere name, but also enjoins that nothing which
belongs to Divinity be applied to any other; thus making it obvious in
what respect pure religion differs from superstition. The Greek word
εὐσέβεια means “right worship;” for the Greeks, though groping in
darkness, were always aware that a certain rule was to be observed, in
order that God might not be worshipped absurdly. Cicero truly and
shrewdly derives the name *religion* from *relego*, and yet the reason
which he assigns is forced and farfetched—viz. that honest worshipers
*read* and *read again*, and ponder what is true.9  <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) I rather think the name is used in
opposition to *vagrant license*—the greater part of mankind rashly
taking up whatever first comes in their way, whereas piety, that it may
stand with a firm step, confines itself within due bounds. In the same
way superstition seems to take its name from its not being contented
with the measure which reason prescribes, but accumulating a superfluous
mass of vanities. But to say nothing more of words, it has been
universally admitted in all ages, that religion is vitiated and
perverted whenever false opinions are introduced into it, and hence it
is inferred, that whatever is allowed to be done from inconsiderate
zeal, cannot be defended by any pretext with which the superstitious may
choose to cloak it. But although this confession is in every man’s
mouth, a shameful stupidity is forthwith manifested, inasmuch as men
neither cleave to the one God, nor use any selection in their worship,
as we have already observed.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p8"></span>But God, in vindicating his own right,
first proclaims that he is a jealous God, and will be a stern avenger if
he is confounded with any false god; and thereafter defines what due
worship is, in order that the human race may be kept in obedience. Both
of these he embraces in his Law when he first binds the faithful in
allegiance to him as their only Lawgiver, and then prescribes a rule for
worshipping him in accordance with his will. The Law, with its manifold
uses and objects, I will consider in its own place; at present I only
advert to this one, that it is designed as a bridle to curb men, and
prevent them from turning aside to spurious worship. But it is necessary
to attend to the observation with which I set out—viz. that unless
everything peculiar to divinity is confined to God alone, he is robbed
of his honour, and his worship is violated.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p9"></span>It may be proper here more particularly
to attend to the subtleties which superstition employs. In revolting to
strange gods, it avoids the appearance of abandoning the Supreme God, or
reducing him to the same rank with others. It gives him the highest
place, but at the same time surrounds him with a tribe of minor deities,
among whom it portions out his peculiar offices. In this way, though in
a dissembling and crafty manner, the glory of the Godhead is dissected,
and not allowed to remain entire. In the same way the people of old,
both Jews and Gentiles, placed an immense crowd in subordination to the
father and ruler of the gods, and gave them, according to their rank, to
share with the supreme God in the government of heaven and earth. In the
same way, too, for some ages past, departed saints have been exalted to
partnership with God, to be worshipped, invoked, and lauded in his
stead. And yet we do not even think that the majesty of God is obscured
by this abomination, whereas it is in a great measure suppressed and
extinguished—all that we retain being a frigid opinion of his supreme
power. At the same time, being deluded by these entanglements, we go
astray after divers gods.

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p10"></span>2. The distinction of what is called
δυλια and λατρια was invented for the very purpose of permitting divine
honours to be paid to angels and dead men with apparent impunity. For it
is plain that the worship which Papists pay to saints differs in no
respect from the worship of God: for this worship is paid without
distinction; only when they are pressed they have recourse to the
evasion, that what belongs to God is kept unimpaired, because they leave
him λατρια. But since the question relates not to the word, but the
thing, how can they be allowed to sport at will with a matter of the
highest moment? But not to insist on this, the utmost they will obtain
by their distinction is, that they give worship to God, and service to
the others. For λατρεὶα in Greek has the same meaning as *worship* in
Latin; whereas δουλεὶα properly means service, though the words are
sometimes used in Scripture indiscriminately. But granting that the
distinction is invariably preserved, the thing to be inquired into is
the meaning of each. Δουλεὶα unquestionably means service, and λατρεὶα
worship. But no man doubts that to *serve* is something higher than to
*worship*. For it were often a hard thing to serve him whom you would
not refuse to reverence. It is, therefore, an unjust division to assign
the greater to the saints and leave the less to God. But several of the
ancient fathers observed this distinction. What if they did, when all
men see that it is not only improper, but utterly frivolous?

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p11"></span>3. Laying aside subtleties, let us
examine the thing. When Paul reminds the Galatians of what they were
before they came to the knowledge of Gods he says that they “did service
unto them which by nature are no gods,” (<span
id="iv.i.xiii-p11.1"></span>[Gal.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008)<span
id="iv.i.xiii-p11.1"></span>). Because he does not say λατρια, was their
superstition excusable? This superstition, to which he gives the name of
δυλια, he condemns as much as if he had given it the name of λατρια.
When Christ repels Satan’s insulting proposal with the words, “It is
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou
serve,” (<span id="iv.i.xiii-p11.2"></span>[Mt.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiii-p11.2"></span>), there was no question of λατρια. For all
that Satan asked was προσκὺνεσις (obeisance). In like manners when John
is rebuked by the angel for falling on his knees before him (<span
id="iv.i.xiii-p11.3"></span>[Rev.
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i.xiii-p11.3"></span>; 22:8, 9), we ought not to suppose that
John had so far forgotten himself as to have intended to transfer the
honour due to God alone to an angel. But because it was impossible that
a worship connected with religion should not savour somewhat of divine
worship, he could not προσκὺνει̑ν (do obeisance to) the angel without
derogating from the glory of God. True, we often read that men were
worshipped; but that was, if I may so speak, civil honour. The case is
different with religious honour, which, the moment it is conjoined with
worship, carries profanation of the divine honour along with it. The
same thing may be seen in the case of Cornelius (<span
id="iv.i.xiii-p11.4"></span>[Acts
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#025)<span
id="iv.i.xiii-p11.4"></span>). He had not made so little progress in
piety as not to confine supreme worship to God alone. Therefore, when he
prostrates himself before Peter, he certainly does it not with the
intention of adoring him instead of God. Yet Peter sternly forbids him.
And why, but just because men never distinguish so accurately between
the worship of God and the creatures as not to transfer promiscuously to
the creature that which belongs only to God. Therefore, if we would have
one God, let us remember that we can never appropriate the minutest
portion of his glory without retaining what is his due. Accordingly,
when Zechariah discourses concerning the repairing of the Church, he
distinctly says not only that there would be one God, but also that he
would have only one name—the reason being, that he might have nothing in
common with idols. The nature of the worship which God requires will be
seen in its own place (Book 2, c. 7 and 8). He has been pleased to
prescribe in his Law what is lawful and right, and thus restrict men to
a certain rule, lest any should allow themselves to devise a worship of
their own. But as it is inexpedient to burden the reader by mixing up a
variety of topics, I do not now dwell on this one. Let it suffice to
remember, that whatever offices of piety are bestowed anywhere else than
on God alone, are of the nature of sacrilege. First, superstition
attached divine honours to the sun and stars, or to idols: afterwards
ambition followed—ambition which, decking man in the spoils of God,
dared to profane all that was sacred. And though the principle of
worshipping a supreme Deity continued to be held, still the practice was
to sacrifice promiscuously to genii and minor gods, or departed heroes:
so prone is the descent to this vice of communicating to a crowd that
which God strictly claims as his own peculiar right!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](inst026.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iv.i.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i.xiii-p7"></span>3 93 Cic. De Nat. Deor. lib. 2 c. 28. See
also Lactant. Inst. Div. lib. 4 c. 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 13. - THE UNITY OF THE DIVINE ESSENCE IN THREE PERSONS
TAUGHT, IN SCRIPTURE, FROM THE FOUNDATION OF THE WORLD.](inst027)
