[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst074)  [Next](inst076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 22.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p1"></span>THIS DOCTRINE CONFIRMED BY PROOFS FROM
SCRIPTURE.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are,—I.
A confirmation of the orthodox doctrine in opposition to two classes of
individuals. This confirmation founded on a careful exposition of our
Savior’s words, and passages in the writings of Paul, sec. 1-7. II. A
refutation of some objections taken from ancient writers, Thomas
Aquinas, and more modern writers, sec. 8-10. III. Of reprobation, which
is founded entirely on the righteous will of God, sec. 11.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p4"></span>1. Some imagine that God elects or
reprobates according to a foreknowledge of merit. Others make it a
charge against God that he elects some and passes by others. Both
refuted, 1. By invincible arguments; 2. By the testimony of Augustine.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p5"></span>2. Who are elected, when, in whom, to
what, for what reason.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p6"></span>3. The reason is the good pleasure of
God, which so reigns in election that no works, either past or future,
are taken into consideration. This proved by notable declarations of one
Savior and passages of Paul.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p7"></span>4. Proved by a striking discussion in
the Epistle to the Romans. Its scope and method explained. The advocates
of foreknowledge refuted by the Apostle, when he maintains that election
is special and wholly of grace.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p8"></span>5. Evasion refuted. A summary and
analysis of the Apostle’s discussion.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p9"></span>6. An exception, with three answers to
it. The efficacy of gratuitous election extends only to believers, who
are said to be elected according to foreknowledge. This foreknowledge or
prescience is not speculative but active.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p10"></span>7. This proved from the words of
Christ. Conclusion of the answer, and solution of the objection with
regard to Judas.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p11"></span>8. An objection taken from the
ancient fathers. Answer from Augustine, from Ambrose, as quoted by
Augustine, and an invincible argument by an Apostle. Summary of this
argument.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p12"></span>9. Objection from Thomas Aquinas.
Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p13"></span>10. Objection of more modern writers.
Answers. Passages in which there is a semblance of contradiction
reconciled. Why many called and few chosen. An objection founded on
mutual consent between the word and faith. Solution confirmed by the
words of Paul, Augustine, and Bernard. A clear declaration by our
Savior.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p14"></span>11. The view to be taken of
reprobation. It is founded on the righteous will of God.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p15"></span>1. Many controvert all the positions
which we have laid down, especially the gratuitous election of
believers, which, however, cannot be overthrown. For they commonly
imagine that God distinguishes between men according to the merits which
he foresees that each individual is to have, giving the adoption of sons
to those whom he foreknows will not be unworthy of his grace, and
dooming those to destruction whose dispositions he perceives will be
prone to mischief and wickedness. Thus by interposing foreknowledge as a
veil, they not only obscure election, but pretend to give it a different
origin. Nor is this the commonly received opinion of the vulgar merely,
for it has in all ages had great supporters (see sec. 8). This I
candidly confess, lest any one should expect greatly to prejudice our
cause by opposing it with their names. The truth of God is here too
certain to be shaken, too clear to be overborne by human authority.
Others who are neither versed in Scripture, nor entitled to any weight,
assail sound doctrine with a petulance and improbity which it is
impossible to tolerate.49  <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491)
Because God of his mere good pleasure electing some passes by others,
they raise a plea against him. But if the fact is certain, what can they
gain by quarreling with God? We teach nothing but what experience proves
to be true—viz. that God has always been at liberty to bestow his grace
on whom he would. Not to ask in what respect the posterity of Abraham
excelled others if it be not in a worth, the cause of which has no
existence out of God, let them tell why men are better than oxen or
asses. God might have made them dogs when he formed them in his own
image. Will they allow the lower animals to expostulate with God, as if
the inferiority of their condition were unjust? It is certainly not more
equitable that men should enjoy the privilege which they have not
acquired by any merit, than that he should variously distribute favors
as seems to him meet. If they pass to the case of individuals where
inequality is more offensive to them, they ought at least, in regard to
the example of our Savior, to be restrained by feelings of awe from
talking so confidently of this sublime mystery. He is conceived a mortal
man of the seed of David; what, I would ask them, are the virtues by
which he deserved to become in the very womb, the head of angels the
only begotten Son of God, the image and glory of the Father, the light,
righteousness, and salvation of the world? It is wisely observed by
Augustine,49  <span id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) that in the very
head of the Church we have a bright mirror of free election, lest it
should give any trouble to us the members—viz. that he did not become
the Son of God by living righteously, but was freely presented with this
great honor, that he might afterwards make others partakers of his
gifts. Should any one here ask, why others are not what he was, or why
we are all at so great a distance from him, why we are all corrupt while
he is purity, he would not only betray his madness, but his effrontery
also. But if they are bent on depriving God of the free right of
electing and reprobating, let them at the same time take away what has
been given to Christ. It will now be proper to attend to what Scripture
declares concerning each. When Paul declares that we were chosen in
Christ before the foundation of the world (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>[Eph.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p17.1"></span>), he certainly shows that no regard is
had to our own worth; for it is just as if he had said, Since in the
whole seed of Adam our heavenly Father found nothing worthy of his
election, he turned his eye upon his own Anointed, that he might select
as members of his body those whom he was to assume into the fellowship
of life. Let believers, then, give full effect to this reason—viz. that
we were in Christ adopted unto the heavenly inheritance, because in
ourselves we were incapable of such excellence. This he elsewhere
observes in another passage, in which he exhorts the Colossians to give
thanks that they had been made meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the saints (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p17.2"></span>[Col.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p17.2"></span>). If election precedes that divine grace
by which we are made fit to obtain immortal life, what can God find in
us to induce him to elect us? What I mean is still more clearly
explained in another passage: God, says he, “has chosen us in him before
the foundation of the world, that we might be holy and without blame
before him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of
his will,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p17.3"></span>[Eph.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p17.3"></span>). Here he opposes the good pleasure of
God to our merits of every description.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p18"></span>Holiness of life springs from
election, and is the object of it2. That the proof may be more complete,
it is of importance to attend to the separate clauses of that passage.
When they are connected together they leave no doubt. From giving them
the name of elect, it is clear that he is addressing believers, as
indeed he shortly after declares. It is, therefore, a complete
perversion of the name to confine it to the age in which the gospel was
published. By saying they were elected before the foundation of the
world, he takes away all reference to worth. For what ground of
distinction was there between persons who as yet existed not, and
persons who were afterwards like them to exist in Adam? But if they were
elected in Christ, it follows not only that each was elected on some
extrinsic ground, but that some were placed on a different footing from
others, since we see that all are not members of Christ. In the
additional statement that they were elected that they might be holy, the
apostle openly refutes the error of those who deduce election from
prescience, since he declares that whatever virtue appears in men is the
result of election. Then, if a higher cause is asked, Paul answers that
God so predestined, and predestined according to the good pleasure of
his will. By these words, he overturns all the grounds of election which
men imagine to exist in themselves. For he shows that whatever favors
God bestows in reference to the spiritual life flow from this one
fountain, because God chose whom he would, and before they were born had
the grace which he designed to bestow upon them set apart for their use.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19"></span>3. Wherever this good pleasure of God
reigns, no good works are taken into account. The Apostle, indeed, does
not follow out the antithesis, but it is to be understood, as he himself
explains it in another passage, “Who has called us with a holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace,
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>[1 Tim.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.1"></span>). We have already shown that the
additional words, “that we might be holy,” remove every doubt. If you
say that he foresaw they would be holy, and therefore elected them, you
invert the order of Paul. You may, therefore, safely infer, If he
elected us that we might be holy, he did not elect us because he foresaw
that we would be holy. The two things are evidently inconsistent—viz.
that the pious owe it to election that they are holy, and yet attain to
election by means of works. There is no force in the cavil to which they
are ever recurring, that the Lord does not bestow election in recompense
of preceding, but bestows it in consideration of future merits. For when
it is said that believers were elected that they might be holy, it is at
the same time intimated that the holiness which was to be in them has
its origin in election. And how can it be consistently said, that things
derived from election are the cause of election? The very thing which
the Apostle had said, he seems afterwards to confirm by adding,
“According to his good pleasure which he has purposed in himself,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.2"></span>[Eph.
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.2"></span>); for the expression that God “purposed
in himself,” is the same as if it had been said, that in forming his
decree he considered nothing external to himself; and, accordingly, it
is immediately subjoined, that the whole object contemplated in our
election is, that “we should be to the praise of his glory.” Assuredly
divine grace would not deserve all the praise of election, were not
election gratuitous; and it would not be gratuitous did God in electing
any individual pay regard to his future works. Hence, what Christ said
to his disciples is found to be universally applicable to all believers,
“Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.3"></span>[John
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.3"></span>). Here he not only excludes past merits,
but declares that they had nothing in themselves for which they could be
chosen except in so far as his mercy anticipated. And how are we to
understand the words of Paul, “Who has first given to him, and it shall
be recompensed unto him again?” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.4"></span>[Rom.
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#035)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p19.4"></span>). His meaning obviously is, that men are
altogether indebted to the preventing goodness of God, there being
nothing in them, either past or future, to conciliate his favor.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p20"></span>4. In the Epistle to the Romans
(<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>[Rom.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p20.1"></span>), in which he again treats this subject
more reconditely and at greater length, he declares that “they are not
all Israel which are of Israel;” for though all were blessed in respect
of hereditary rights yet all did not equally obtain the succession. The
whole discussion was occasioned by the pride and vain-glorying of the
Jews, who, by claiming the name of the Church for themselves, would have
made the faith of the Gospel dependent on their pleasure; just as in the
present day the Papists would fain under this pretext substitute
themselves in place of God. Paul, while he concedes that in respect of
the covenant they were the holy offspring of Abraham, yet contends that
the greater part of them were strangers to it, and that not only because
they were degenerate, and so had become bastards instead of sons, but
because the principal point to be considered was the special election of
God, by which alone his adoption was ratified. If the piety of some
established them in the hope of salvation, and the revolt of others was
the sole cause of their being rejected, it would have been foolish and
absurd in Paul to carry his readers back to a secret election. But if
the will of God (no cause of which external to him either appears or is
to be looked for) distinguishes some from others, so that all the sons
of Israel are not true Israelites, it is vain for any one to seek the
origin of his condition in himself. He afterwards prosecutes the subject
at greater length, by contrasting the cases of Jacob and Esau. Both
being sons of Abraham, both having been at the same time in the womb of
their mother, there was something very strange in the change by which
the honor of the birthright was transferred to Jacob, and yet Paul
declares that the change was an attestation to the election of the one
and the reprobation of the other.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p21"></span>The question considered is the origin
and cause of election. The advocates of foreknowledge insist that it is
to be found in the virtues and vices of men. For they take the short and
easy method of asserting, that God showed in the person of Jacob, that
he elects those who are worthy of his grace; and in the person of Esau,
that he rejects those whom he foresees to be unworthy. Such is their
confident assertion; but what does Paul say? “For the children being not
yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God
according to election might stand, not of works, but of him that
calleth; it was said unto her, \[Rebecca,\] The elder shall serve the
younger. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>[Rom.
9:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p21.1"></span>). If foreknowledge had anything to do
with this distinction of the brothers, the mention of time would have
been out of place. Granting that Jacob was elected for a worth to be
obtained by future virtues, to what end did Paul say that he was not yet
born? Nor would there have been any occasion for adding, that as yet he
had done no good, because the answer was always ready, that nothing is
hid from God, and that therefore the piety of Jacob was present before
him. If works procure favor, a value ought to have been put upon them
before Jacob was born, just as if he had been of full age. But in
explaining the difficulty, the Apostle goes on to show, that the
adoption of Jacob proceeded not on works but on the calling of God. In
works he makes no mention of past or future, but distinctly opposes them
to the calling of God, intimating, that when place is given to the one
the other is overthrown; as if he had said, The only thing to be
considered is what pleased God, not what men furnished of themselves.
Lastly, it is certain that all the causes which men are wont to devise
as external to the secret counsel of God, are excluded by the use of the
terms *purpose* and *election*.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p22"></span>5. Why should men attempt to darken
these statements by assigning some place in election to past or future
works? This is altogether to evade what the Apostle contends for—viz.
that the distinction between the brothers is not founded on any ground
of works, but on the mere calling of God, inasmuch as it was fixed
before the children were born. Had there been any solidity in this
subtlety, it would not have escaped the notice of the Apostle, but being
perfectly aware that God foresaw no good in man, save that which he had
already previously determined to bestow by means of his election, he
does not employ a preposterous arrangement which would make good works
antecedent to their cause. We learn from the Apostle’s words, that the
salvation of believers is founded entirely on the decree of divine
election, that the privilege is procured not by works but free calling.
We have also a specimen of the thing itself set before us. Esau and
Jacob are brothers, begotten of the same parents, within the same womb,
not yet born. In them all things are equal, and yet the judgment of God
with regard to them is different. He adopts the one and rejects the
other. The only right of precedence was that of primogeniture; but that
is disregarded, and the younger is preferred to the elder. Nay, in the
case of others, God seems to have disregarded primogeniture for the
express purpose of excluding the flesh from all ground of boasting.
Rejecting Ishmael he gives his favor to Isaac, postponing Manasseh he
honors Ephraim.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p23"></span>6. Should any one object that these
minute and inferior favors do not enable us to decide with regard to the
future life, that it is not to be supposed that he who received the
honor of primogeniture was thereby adopted to the inheritance of heaven;
(many objectors do not even spare Paul, but accuse him of having in the
quotation of these passages wrested Scripture from its proper meaning);
I answer as before, that the Apostle has not erred through
inconsideration, or spontaneously misapplied the passages of Scripture;
but he saw (what these men cannot be brought to consider) that God
purposed under an earthly sign to declare the spiritual election of
Jacob, which otherwise lay hidden at his inaccessible tribunal. For
unless we refer the primogeniture bestowed upon him to the future world,
the form of blessing would be altogether vain and ridiculous, inasmuch
as he gained nothing by it but a multitude of toils and annoyances,
exile, sharp sorrows, and bitter cares. Therefore, when Paul knew beyond
a doubt that by the external, God manifested the spiritual and unfading
blessings, which he had prepared for his servant in his kingdom, he
hesitated not in proving the latter to draw an argument from the former.
For we must remember that the land of Canaan was given in pledge of the
heavenly inheritance; and that therefore there cannot be a doubt that
Jacob was like the angels ingrafted into the body of Christ, that he
might be a partaker of the same life. Jacob, therefore, is chosen, while
Esau is rejected; the predestination of God makes a distinction where
none existed in respect of merit. If you ask the reason the Apostle
gives it, “For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>[Rom.
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p23.1"></span>). And what pray, does this mean? It is
just a clear declaration by the Lord that he finds nothing in men
themselves to induce him to show kindness, that it is owing entirely to
his own mercy, and, accordingly, that their salvation is his own work.
Since God places your salvation in himself alone, why should you descend
to yourself? Since he assigns you his own mercy alone, why will you
recur to your own merits? Since he confines your thoughts to his own
mercy why do you turn partly to the view of your own works?

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24"></span>We must therefore come to that
smaller number whom Paul elsewhere describes as foreknown of God (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>[Rom.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.1"></span>); not foreknown, as these men imagine,
by idle, inactive contemplations but in the sense which it often bears.
For surely when Peter says that Christ was “delivered by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.2"></span>[Acts
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.2"></span>), he does not represent God as
contemplating merely, but as actually accomplishing our salvation. Thus
also Peter, in saying that the believers to whom he writes are elect
“according to the foreknowledge of God,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.3"></span>[1 Pet.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.3"></span>), properly expresses that secret
predestination by which God has sealed those whom he has been pleased to
adopt as sons. In using the term *purpose* as synonymous with a term
which uniformly denotes what is called a fixed determination, he
undoubtedly shows that God, in being the author of our salvation, does
not go beyond himself. In this sense he says in the same chapters that
Christ as “a lamb” “was foreordained before the creation of the world,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.4"></span>[1 Pet.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.4"></span>). What could have been more frigid or
absurd than to have represented God as looking from the height of heaven
to see whence the salvation of the human race was to come? By a people
foreknown, Peter means the same thing as Paul does by a remnant selected
from a multitude falsely assuming the name of God. In another passage,
to suppress the vain boasting of those who, while only covered with a
mask, claim for themselves in the view of the world a first place among
the godly, Paul says, “The Lord knoweth them that are his,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.5"></span>[2 Tim.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p24.5"></span>). In short, by that term he designates
two classes of people, the one consisting of the whole race of Abraham,
the other a people separated from that race, and though hidden from
human view, yet open to the eye of God. And there is no doubt that he
took the passage from Moses, who declares that God would be merciful to
whomsoever he pleased (although he was speaking of an elect people whose
condition was apparently equal); just as if he had said, that in a
common adoption was included a special grace which he bestows on some as
a holier treasure, and that there is nothing in the common covenant to
prevent this number from being exempted from the common order. God being
pleased in this matter to act as a free dispenser and disposer,
distinctly declares, that the only ground on which he will show mercy to
one rather than to another is his sovereign pleasure; for when mercy is
bestowed on him who asks it, though he indeed does not suffer a refusal,
he, however, either anticipates or partly acquires a favour, the whole
merit of which God claims for himself.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25"></span>7. Now, let the supreme Judge and
Master decide on the whole case. Seeing such obduracy in his hearers,
that his words fell upon the multitude almost without fruit, he to
remove this stumbling-block exclaims, “All that the Father giveth me
shall come to me.” “And this is the Father’s will which has sent me,
that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>[John
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.1"></span>). Observe that the donation of the
Father is the first step in our delivery into the charge and protection
of Christ. Some one, perhaps, will here turn round and object, that
those only peculiarly belong to the Father who make a voluntary
surrender by faith. But the only thing which Christ maintains is that
though the defections of vast multitudes should shake the world, yet the
counsel of God would stand firm, more stable than heaven itself, that
his election would never fail. The elect are said to have belonged to
the Father before he bestowed them on his only begotten Son. It is asked
if they were his by nature? Nay, they were aliens, but he makes them his
by delivering them. The words of Christ are too clear to be rendered
obscure by any of the mists of caviling. “No man can come to me except
the Father which has sent me draw him.” “Every man, therefore, that has
heard and learned of the Father comes unto me,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.2"></span>[John
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.2"></span>). Did all promiscuously bend the knee to
Christ, election would be common; whereas now in the small number of
believers a manifest diversity appears. Accordingly our Savior, shortly
after declaring that the disciples who were given to him were the common
property of the Father, adds, “I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou hast given me; for they are thine,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.3"></span>[John
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.3"></span>). Hence it is that the whole world no
longer belongs to its Creator, except in so far as grace rescues from
malediction, divine wrath, and eternal death, some, not many, who would
otherwise perish, while he leaves the world to the destruction to which
it is doomed. Meanwhile, though Christ interpose as a Mediator, yet he
claims the right of electing in common with the Father, “I speak not of
you all: I know whom I have chosen” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.4"></span>[John
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.4"></span>). If it is asked whence he has chosen
them, he answers in another passages “Out of the world;” which he
excludes from his prayers when he commits his disciples to the Father
(<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.5"></span>[John
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.5"></span>). We must, indeed hold, when he affirms
that he knows whom he has chosen, first, that some individuals of the
human race are denoted; and, secondly, that they are not distinguished
by the quality of their virtues, but by a heavenly decree. Hence it
follows, that since Christ makes himself the author of election, none
excel by their own strength or industry. In elsewhere numbering Judas
among the elect, though he was a devil (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.6"></span>[John
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.6"></span>), he refers only to the apostolical
office, which though a bright manifestation of divine favor (as Paul so
often acknowledges it to be in his own person), does not, however,
contain within itself the hope of eternal salvation. Judas, therefore,
when he discharged the office of Apostle perfidiously, might have been
worse than a devil; but not one of those whom Christ has once ingrafted
into his body will he ever permit to perish, for in securing their
salvation, he will perform what he has promised; that is, exert a divine
power greater than all (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.7"></span>[John
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.7"></span>). For when he says, “Those that thou
gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost but the son of
perdition,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.8"></span>[John
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p25.8"></span>), the expression, though there is a
catachresis in it, is not at all ambiguous. The sum is, that God by
gratuitous adoption forms those whom he wishes to have for sons; but
that the intrinsic cause is in himself, because he is contented with his
secret pleasure.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p26"></span>8. But Ambrose, Origin, and Jerome,
were of opinion, that God dispenses his grace among men according to the
use which he foresees that each will make of it. It may be added, that
Augustine also was for some time of this opinion; but after he had made
greater progress in the knowledge of Scripture, he not only retracted it
as evidently false, but powerfully confuted it (August. Retract. Lib. 1,
c. 13). Nay, even after the retractation, glancing at the Pelagians who
still persisted in that error, he says, “Who does not wonder that the
Apostle failed to make this most acute observation? For after stating a
most startling proposition concerning those who were not yet born, and
afterwards putting the question to himself by way of objection, ‘What
then? Is there unrighteousness with God?’ he had an opportunity of
answering, that God foresaw the merits of both, he does not say so, but
has recourse to the justice and mercy of God,” (August. Epist. 106, ad
Sixtum). And in another passage, after excluding all merit before
election, he says, “Here, certainly, there is no place for the vain
argument of those who defend the foreknowledge of God against the grace
of God, and accordingly maintain that we were elected before the
foundation of the world, because God foreknow that we would be good, not
that he himself would make us good. This is not the language of him who
says, ‘Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,’ (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>[John
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p26.1"></span>). For had he chosen us because he
foreknow that we would be good, he would at the same time also have
foreknown that we were to choose him,” (August. in Joann. 8, see also
what follows to the same effect). Let the testimony of Augustine prevail
with those who willingly acquiesce in the authority of the Fathers:
although Augustine allows not that he differs from the others,50  <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) but shows by clear evidence that the
difference which the Pelagians invidiously objected to him is unfounded.
For he quotes from Ambrose (Lib. de Prædest. Sanct. cap. 19), “Christ
calls whom he pities.” Again, “Had he pleased he could have made them
devout instead of undevout; but God calls whom he deigns to call, and
makes religious whom he will.” Were we disposed to frame an entire
volume out of Augustine, it were easy to show the reader that I have no
occasion to use any other words than his: but I am unwilling to burden
him with a prolix statement. But assuming that the fathers did not speak
thus, let us attend to the thing itself. A difficult question had been
raised—viz. Did God do justly in bestowing his grace on certain
individuals? Paul might have disencumbered himself of this question at
once by saying, that God had respect to works. Why does he not do so?
Why does he rather continue to use a language which leaves him exposed
to the same difficulty? Why, but just because it would not have been
right to say it? There was no obliviousness on the part of the Holy
Spirit, who was speaking by his mouth. He, therefore, answers without
ambiguity, that God favors his elect, because he is pleased to do so,
and shows mercy because he is pleased to do so. For the words, “I will
be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and show mercy on whom I will
show mercy,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>[Exod.
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p27.1"></span>), are the same in effect as if it had
been said, God is moved to mercy by no other reason than that he is
pleased to show mercy. Augustine’s declaration, therefore, remains true.
The grace of God does not find, but makes persons fit to be chosen.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p28"></span>9. Nor let us be detained by the
subtlety of Thomas, that the foreknowledge of merit is the cause of
predestination, not, indeed, in respect of the predestinating act, but
that on our part it may in some sense be so called, namely, in respect
of a particular estimate of predestination; as when it is said, that God
predestinates man to glory according to his merit, inasmuch as he
decreed to bestow upon him the grace by which he merits glory. For while
the Lord would have us to see nothing more in election than his mere
goodness, for any one to desire to see more is preposterous affectation.
But were we to make a trial of subtlety, it would not be difficult to
refute the sophistry of Thomas. He maintains that the elect are in a
manner predestinated to glory on account of their merits, because God
predestines to give them the grace by which they merit glory. What if I
should, on the contrary, object that predestination to grace is
subservient to election unto life, and follows as its handmaid; that
grace is predestined to those to whom the possession of glory was
previously assigned the Lord being pleased to bring his sons by election
to justification? For it will hence follow that the predestination to
glory is the cause of the predestination to grace, and not the converse.
But let us have done with these disputes as superfluous among those who
think that there is enough of wisdom for them in the word of God. For it
has been truly said by an old ecclesiastical writer, Those who ascribe
the election of God to merits, are wise above what they ought to be
(Ambrose. de Vocat. Gentium, lib. 1, c. 2).

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29"></span>10. Some object that God would be
inconsistent with himself, in inviting all without distinction while he
elects only a few. Thus, according to them, the universality of the
promise destroys the distinction of special grace. Some moderate men
speak in this way, not so much for the purpose of suppressing the truth,
as to get quit of puzzling questions, and curb excessive curiosity. The
intention is laudable, but the design is by no means to be approved,
dissimulation being at no time excusable. In those Again who display
their petulance, we see only a vile cavil or a disgraceful error. The
mode in which Scripture reconciles the two things—viz. that by external
preaching all are called to faith and repentance, and that yet the
Spirit of faith and repentance is not given to all, I have already
explained, and will again shortly repeat. But the point which they
assume I deny as false in two respects: for he who threatens that when
it shall rain on one city there will be drought in another (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>[Amos
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.1"></span>); and declares in another passage, that
there will be a famine of the word (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.2"></span>[Amos
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.2"></span>), does not lay himself under a fixed
obligation to call all equally. And he who, forbidding Paul to preach in
Asian and leading him away from Bithynia, carries him over to Macedonia
(<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.3"></span>[Acts
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.3"></span>), shows that it belongs to him to
distribute the treasure in what way he pleases. But it is by Isaiah he
more clearly demonstrates how he destines the promises of salvation
specially to the elect (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.4"></span>[Isa.
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.4"></span>); for he declares that his disciples
would consist of them only, and not indiscriminately of the whole human
race. Whence it is evident that the doctrine of salvation, which is said
to be set apart for the sons of the Church only, is abused when it is
represented as effectually available to all. For the present let it
suffice to observe, that though the word of the gospel is addressed
generally to all, yet the gift of faith is rare. Isaiah assigns the
cause when he says that the arm of the Lord is not revealed to all
(<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.5"></span>[Isa.
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.5"></span>). Had he said, that the gospel is
malignantly and perversely condemned, because many obstinately refuse to
hear, there might perhaps be some color for this universal call. It is
not the purpose of the Prophet, however, to extenuate the guilt of men,
when he states the source of their blindness to be, that God deigns not
to reveal his arm to them; he only reminds us that since faith is a
special gift, it is in vain that external doctrine sounds in the ear.
But I would fain know from those doctors whether it is mere preaching or
faith that makes men sons of God. Certainly when it is said, “As many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe on his name,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.6"></span>[John
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p29.6"></span>), a confused mass is not set before us,
but a special order is assigned to believers, who are “born not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God.”

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30"></span>But it is said, there is a mutual
agreement between faith and the word. That must be wherever there is
faith. But it is no new thing for the seed to fall among thorns or in
stony places; not only because the majority appear in fact to be
rebellious against God, but because all are not gifted with eyes and
ears. How, then, can it consistently be said, that God calls while he
knows that the called will not come? Let Augustine answer for me: “Would
you dispute with me? Wonder with me, and exclaim, O the depth! Let us
both agree in dread, lest we perish in error,” (August. de Verb. Apost.
Serm. 11). Moreover, if election is, as Paul declares, the parent of
faith, I retort the argument, and maintain that faith is not general,
since election is special. For it is easily inferred from the series of
causes and effects, when Paul says, that the Father “has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, according as he
has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>[Eph.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.1"></span>), that these riches are not common to
all, because God has chosen only whom he would. And the reason why in
another passage he commends the faith of the elect is, to prevent any
one from supposing that he acquires faith of his own nature; since to
God alone belongs the glory of freely illuminating those whom he had
previously chosen (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.2"></span>[Tit.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.2"></span>). For it is well said by Bernard, “His
friend hear apart when he says to them, Fear not, little flock: to you
it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom. Who are these? Those
whom he foreknew and predestinated to be conformed to the image of his
Son. He has made known his great and secret counsel. The Lord knoweth
them that are his, but that which was known to God was manifested to
men; nor, indeed, does he deign to give a participation in this great
mystery to any but those whom he foreknew and predestinated to be his
own,” (Bernard. ad Thomas Præpos. Benerlae. Epist. 107). Shortly after
he concludes, “The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him; from everlasting through predestination, to
everlasting through glorification: the one knows no beginning, the other
no end.” But why cite Bernard as a witness, when we hear from the lips
of our Master, “Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is
of God”? (<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.3"></span>[John
6:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.3"></span>). By these words he intimates that all
who are not regenerated by God are amazed at the brightness of his
countenance. And, indeed, faith is aptly conjoined with election,
provided it hold the second place. This order is clearly expressed by
our Savior in these words, “This is the Father’s will which has sent me,
that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing;” “And this is
the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, may have everlasting life,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.4"></span>[John
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.4"></span>). If he would have all to be saved, he
would appoint his Son their guardian, and would ingraft them all into
his body by the sacred bond of faith. It is now clear that faith is a
singular pledge of paternal love, treasured up for the sons whom he has
adopted. Hence Christ elsewhere says, that the sheep follow the shepherd
because they know his voice, but that they will not follow a stranger,
because they know not the voice of strangers (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.5"></span>[John
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.5"></span>). But whence that distinction, unless
that their ears have been divinely bored? For no man makes himself a
sheep, but is formed by heavenly grace. And why does the Lord declare
that our salvation will always be sure and certain, but just because it
is guarded by the invincible power of God? (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.6"></span>[John
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.6"></span>). Accordingly, he concludes that
unbelievers are not of his sheep (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.7"></span>[John
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p30.7"></span>). The reason is, because they are not of
the number of those who, as the Lord promised by Isaiah, were to be his
disciples. Moreover, as the passages which I have quoted imply
perseverance, they are also attestations to the inflexible constancy of
election.

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p31"></span>11. We come now to the reprobate, to
whom the Apostle at the same time refers (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>[Rom.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p31.1"></span>). For as Jacob, who as yet had merited
nothing by good works, is assumed into favor; so Esau, while as yet
unpolluted by any crime, is hated. If we turn our view to works, we do
injustice to the Apostle, as if he had failed to see the very thing
which is clear to us. Moreover, there is complete proof of his not
having seen it, since he expressly insists that when as yet they had
done neither good nor evil, the one was elected, the other rejected, in
order to prove that the foundation of divine predestination is not in
works. Then after starting the objection, Is God unjust? instead of
employing what would have been the surest and plainest defense of his
justice—viz. that God had recompensed Esau according to his wickedness,
he is contented with a different solution—viz. that the reprobate are
expressly raised up, in order that the glory of God may thereby be
displayed. At last, he concludes that God has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth (<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p31.2"></span>[Rom.
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p31.2"></span>). You see how he refers both to the mere
pleasure of God. Therefore, if we cannot assign any reason for his
bestowing mercy on his people, but just that it so pleases him, neither
can we have any reason for his reprobating others but his will. When God
is said to visit in mercy or harden whom he will, men are reminded that
they are not to seek for any cause beyond his will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_491"></span>[492](inst075.htm#fr_491) <span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p16"></span>98 498 French, “Il y en a d’a aucuns,
lesquels n’estans exercés en l’Ecriture ne sont dignes d’aucun, credit
ne reputation; et toutes fois sont plus hardis et temeraires à diffamer
la doctrine qui leur est incognue; et ainsi ce n’est par raison que leur
arrogance soit supportée.”—There are some who, not being exercised in
Scripture, are not worthy of any credit or reputation, and yet are more
bold and presumptuous in defaming the doctrine which is unknown to them,
and hence their arrogance is insupportable.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[493](inst075.htm#fr_492) <span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p17"></span>99 499 August. de Corrept. et Gratia
ad Valent. c. 15. Hom. de Bono Perseveran. c. 8. Item, de Verbis Apost.
Serm. 8.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[494](inst075.htm#fr_493) <span
id="iv.iii.xxiii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxiii-p27"></span>00 500 Latin, “a reliquis;” French,
“les autre Docteurs anciens;”—the other ancient Doctors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 23. - REFUTATION OF THE CALUMNIES BY WHICH THIS DOCTRINE
IS ALWAYS UNJUSTLY ASSAILED.](inst076)
