[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst076)  [Next](inst078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxv"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xxv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 24.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p1"></span>ELECTION CONFIRMED BY THE CALLING OF
GOD. THE REPROBATE BRING UPON THEMSELVES THE RIGHTEOUS DESTRUCTION TO
WHICH THEY ARE DOOMED.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p2"></span>The title of this chapter shows that it
consists of two parts,—I. The case of the Elect, from sec. 1-11. II. The
case of the Reprobate, from sec. 12-17.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p4"></span>1. The election of God is secret, but is
manifested by effectual calling. The nature of this effectual calling.
How election and effectual calling are founded on the free mercy of God.
A cavil of certain expositors refuted by the words of Augustine. An
exception disposed of.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p5"></span>2. Calling proved to be free, 1. By its
nature and the mode in which it is dispensed. 2. By the word of God. 3.
By the calling of Abraham, the father of the faithful. 4. By the
testimony of <span id="iv.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>[John.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p5.1"></span>.
By the example of those who have been called.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p6"></span>3. The pure doctrine of the calling of
the elect misunderstood, 1. By those who attribute too much to the human
will. 2. By those who make election dependent on faith. This error amply
refuted.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p7"></span>4. In this and the five following
sections the certainty of election vindicated from the assaults of
Satan. The leading arguments are:1. Effectual calling. 2. Christ
apprehended by faith. 3. The protection of Christ, the guardian of the
elect. We must not attempt to penetrate to the hidden recesses of the
divine wisdom, in order to learn what is decreed with regard to us at
the judgment-seat. We must begin and end with the call of God. This
confirmed by an apposite saying of Bernard.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p8"></span>5. Christ the foundation of this calling
and election. He who does not lean on him alone cannot be certain of his
election. He is the faithful interpreter of the eternal counsel in
regard to our salvation.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p9"></span>6. Another security of our election is
the protection of Christ our Shepherd. How it is manifested to us.
Objection 1. As to the future state. 2. As to perseverance. Both
objections refuted.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p10"></span>7. Objection, that those who seem
elected sometimes fall away. Answer. A passage of Paul dissuading us
from security explained. The kind of fear required in the elect.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p11"></span>8. Explanation of the saying, that many
are called, but few chosen. A twofold call.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p12"></span>9. Explanation of the passage, that
none is lost but the son of perdition. Refutation of an objection to the
certainty of election.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p13"></span>10. Explanation of the passages urged
against the certainty of election. Examples by which some attempt to
prove that the seed of election is sown in the hearts of the elect from
their very birth. Answer. 1. One or two examples do not make the rule.
2. This view opposed to Scripture. 3. Is expressly opposed by an
apostle.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p14"></span>11. An explanation and confirmation of
the third answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p15"></span>12. Second part of the chapter, which
treats of the reprobate. Some of them God deprives of the opportunity of
hearing his word. Others he blinds and stupefies the more by the
preaching of it.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p16"></span>13. Of this no other account can be
given than that the reprobate are vessels fitted for destruction. This
confirmed by the case of the elect; of Pharaoh and of the Jewish people
both before and after the manifestation of Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p17"></span>14. Question, Why does God blind the
reprobate? Two answers. These confirmed by different passages of
Scripture. Objection of the reprobate. Answer.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p18"></span>15. Objection to this doctrine of the
righteous rejection of the reprobate. The first founded on a passage in
Ezekiel. The passage explained.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p19"></span>16. A second objection founded on a
passage in Paul. The apostle’s meaning explained. A third objection and
fourth objection answered.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p20"></span>17. A fifth objection—viz. that there
seems to be a twofold will in God. Answer. Other objections and answers.
Conclusion.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p21"></span>1. But that the subject may be more
fully illustrated, we must treat both of the calling of the elect, and
of the blinding and hardening of the ungodly. The former I have already
in some measure discussed (chap. 22, sec. 10, 11), when refuting the
error of those who think that the general terms in which the promises
are made place the whole human race on a level. The special election
which otherwise would remain hidden in God, he at length manifests by
his calling. “For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son.” Moreover, “whom he did predestinate,
them he also called; and whom he called, them he also justified,” that
he may one day glorify (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.1"></span>[Rom.
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.1"></span>). Though the Lord, by electing his people,
adopted them as his sons, we, however, see that they do not come into
possession of this great good until they are called; but when called,
the enjoyment of their election is in some measure communicated to them.
For which reason the Spirit which they receive is termed by Paul both
the “Spirit of adoption,” and the “seal” and “earnest” of the future
inheritance; because by his testimony he confirms and seals the
certainty of future adoption on their hearts. For although the preaching
of the gospel springs from the fountain of election, yet being common to
them with the reprobate, it would not be in itself a solid proof. God,
however, teaches his elect effectually when he brings them to faith, as
we formerly quoted from the words of our Savior, “Not that any man has
seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen the Father,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.2"></span>[John
6:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#046)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.2"></span>). Again, “I have manifested thy name unto
the men which thou gavest me out of the world,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.3"></span>[John
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.3"></span>). He says in another passage, “No man can
come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw him,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.4"></span>[John
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.4"></span>). This passage Augustine ably expounds in
these words: “If (as Truth says) every one who has learned comes, then
every one who does not come has not learned. It does not therefore
follows that he who can come does come, unless he have willed and done
it; but every one who has learned of the Father, not only can come, but
also comes; the antecedence of possibility50  <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) the affection of will, and the effect
of action being now present,” (August. de Grat. Chr. Cont. Pelag., Lib.
1, c. 14, 31). In another passage, he says still more clearly, “What
means, Every one that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me,
but just that there is no one who hears and learns of the Father that
does not come to me? For if every one who has heard and learned, comes;
assuredly every one who does not come, has neither heard nor learned of
the Father: for if he had heard and learned, he would come. Far removed
from carnal sense is this school in which the Father is heard and
teaches us to come to the Son,” (August. de Prædes. Sanct. c. 8).
Shortly after, he says, “This grace, which is secretly imparted to the
hearts of men, is not received by any hard heart; for the reason for
which it is given is, that the hardness of the heart may first be taken
away. Hence, when the Father is heard within, he takes away the stony
heart, and gives a heart of flesh. Thus he makes them sons of promise
and vessels of mercy, which he has prepared for glory. Why then does he
not teach all to come to Christ, but just because all whom he teaches he
teaches in mercy, while those whom he teaches not he teaches not in
judgment? for he pities whom he will, and hardens whom he will.” Those,
therefore, whom God has chosen he adopts as sons, while he becomes to
them a Father. By calling, moreover, he admits them to his family, and
unites them to himself, that they may be one with him. When calling is
thus added to election, the Scripture plainly intimates that nothing is
to be looked for in it but the free mercy of God. For if we ask whom it
is he calls, and for what reason, he answers, it is those whom he had
chosen. When we come to election, mercy alone everywhere appears; and,
accordingly, in this the saying of Paul is truly realized, “So then, it
is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that
showeth mercy,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p22.1"></span>[Rom.
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p22.1"></span>); and that not as is commonly understood
by those who share the result between the grace of God and the will and
agency of man. For their exposition is, that the desire and endeavor of
sinners are of no avail by themselves, unless accompanied by the grace
of God, but that when aided by his blessing, they also do their part in
procuring salvation. This cavil I prefer refuting in the words of
Augustine rather than my own: “If all that the apostle meant is, that it
is not alone of him that willeth, or of him that runneth, unless the
Lord be present in mercy, we may retort and hold the converse, that it
is not of mercy alone, unless willing and running be present,” (August.
Enchir. ad Laurent., c. 31). But if this is manifestly impious, let us
have no doubt that the apostle attributes all to the mercy of the Lord,
and leaves nothing to our wills or exertions. Such were the sentiments
of that holy man. I set not the value of a straw on the subtlety to
which they have recourse—viz. that Paul would not have spoken thus had
there not been some will and effort on our part. For he considered not
what might be in man; but seeing that certain persons ascribed a part of
salvation to the industry of man, he simply condemned their error in the
former clause, and then claimed the whole substance of salvation for the
divine mercy. And what else do the prophets than perpetually proclaim
the free calling of God?

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p23"></span>2. Moreover, this is clearly
demonstrated by the nature and dispensation of calling, which consists
not merely of the preaching of the word, but also of the illumination of
the Spirit. Who those are to whom God offers his word is explained by
the prophet, “I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found of
them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation
that was not called by my name,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.1"></span>[Isaiah
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.1"></span>). And lest the Jews should think that that
mercy applied only to the Gentiles, he calls to their remembrance whence
it was he took their father Abraham when he condescended to be his
friend (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.2"></span>[Isaiah
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.2"></span>); namely, from the midst of idolatry, in
which he was plunged with all his people. When he first shines with the
light of his word on the undeserving, he gives a sufficiently clear
proof of his free goodness. Here, therefore, boundless goodness is
displayed, but not so as to bring all to salvation, since a heavier
judgment awaits the reprobate for rejecting the evidence of his love.
God also, to display his own glory, withholds from them the effectual
agency of his Spirit. Therefore, this inward calling is an infallible
pledge of salvation. Hence the words of John, “Hereby we know that he
abideth in us by the Spirit which he has given us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.3"></span>[1 John
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.3"></span>). And lest the flesh should glory, in at
least responding to him, when he calls and spontaneously offers himself,
he affirms that there would be no ears to hear, no eyes to see, did not
he give them. And he acts not according to the gratitude of each, but
according to his election. Of this you have a striking example in Luke,
when the Jews and Gentiles in common heard the discourse of Paul and
Barnabas. Though they were all instructed in the same word, it is said,
that “as many as were ordained to eternal life believed,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.4"></span>[Acts
13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p23.4"></span>). How can we deny that calling is
gratuitous, when election alone reigns in it even to its conclusion?

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p24"></span>3. Two errors are here to be avoided.
Some make man a fellow-worker with God in such a sense, that man’s
suffrage ratifies election, so that, according to them, the will of man
is superior to the counsel of God. As if Scripture taught that only the
power of being able to believe is given us, and not rather faith itself.
Others, although they do not so much impair the grace of the Holy
Spirit, yet, induced by what means I know not, make election dependent
on faith, as if it were doubtful and ineffectual till confirmed by
faith. There can be no doubt, indeed, that in regard to us it is so
confirmed. Moreover, we have already seen, that the secret counsel of
God, which lay concealed, is thus brought to light, by this nothing more
being understood than that that which was unknown is proved, and as it
were sealed. But it is false to say that election is then only effectual
after we have embraced the gospel, and that it thence derives its vigor.
It is true that we must there look for its certainty, because, if we
attempt to penetrate to the secret ordination of God, we shall be
engulfed in that profound abyss. But when the Lord has manifested it to
us, we must ascend higher in order that the effect may not bury the
cause. For what can be more absurd and unbecoming, than while Scripture
teaches that we are illuminated as God has chosen us, our eyes should be
so dazzled with the brightness of this light, as to refuse to attend to
election? Meanwhile, I deny not that, in order to be assured of our
salvation, we must begin with the word, and that our confidence ought to
go no farther than the word when we invoke God the Father. For some to
obtain more certainty of the counsel of God (which is nigh us in our
mouth, and in our heart, <span id="iv.iii.xxv-p24.1"></span>[Deut.
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p24.1"></span>), absurdly desire to fly above the clouds.
We must, therefore, curb that temerity by the soberness of faith, and be
satisfied to have God as the witness of his hidden grace in the external
word; provided always that the channel in which the water flows, and out
of which we may freely drink, does not prevent us from paying due honor
to the fountain.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p25"></span>4. Therefore as those are in error who
make the power of election dependent on the faith by which we perceive
that we are elected, so we shall follow the best order, if, in seeking
the certainty of our election, we cleave to those posterior signs which
are sure attestations to it. Among the temptations with which Satan
assaults believers, none is greater or more perilous, than when
disquieting them with doubts as to their election, he at the same time
stimulates them with a depraved desire of inquiring after it out of the
proper way. (See Luther in Genes. cap. 26). By inquiring out of the
proper way, I mean when puny man endeavors to penetrate to the hidden
recesses of the divine wisdom, and goes back even to the remotest
eternity, in order that he may understand what final determination God
has made with regard to him. In this way he plunges headlong into an
immense abyss, involves himself in numberless inextricable snares, and
buries himself in the thickest darkness. For it is right that the
stupidity of the human mind should be punished with fearful destruction,
whenever it attempts to rise in its own strength to the height of divine
wisdom. And this temptation is the more fatal, that it is the temptation
to which of all others almost all of us are most prone. For there is
scarcely a mind in which the thought does not sometimes rise, Whence
your salvation but from the election of God? But what proof have you of
your election? When once this thought has taken possession of any
individual, it keeps him perpetually miserable, subjects him to dire
torment, or throws him into a state of complete stupor. I cannot wish a
stronger proof of the depraved ideas, which men of this description form
of predestination, than experience itself furnishes, since the mind
cannot be infected by a more pestilential error than that which disturbs
the conscience, and deprives it of peace and tranquillity in regard to
God. Therefore, as we dread shipwreck, we must avoid this rock, which is
fatal to every one who strikes upon it. And though the discussion of
predestination is regarded as a perilous sea, yet in sailing over it the
navigation is calm and safe, nay pleasant, provided we do not
voluntarily court danger. For as a fatal abyss engulfs those who, to be
assured of their election, pry into the eternal counsel of God without
the word, yet those who investigate it rightly, and in the order in
which it is exhibited in the word, reap from it rich fruits of
consolation.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p26"></span>Let our method of inquiry then be, to
begin with the calling of God and to end with it. Although there is
nothing in this to prevent believers from feeling that the blessings
which they daily receive from the hand of God originate in that secret
adoption, as they themselves express it in Isaiah, “Thou hast done
wonderful things; thy counsels of old are faithfulness and truth,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p26.1"></span>[Isa.
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p26.1"></span>). For with this as a pledge, God is
pleased to assure us of as much of his counsel as can be lawfully known.
But lest any should think that testimony weak, let us consider what
clearness and certainty it gives us. On this subject there is an
apposite passage in Bernard. After speaking of the reprobate, he says,
“The purpose of God stands, the sentence of peace on those that fear him
also stands, a sentence concealing their bad and recompensing their good
qualities; so that, in a wondrous manner, not only their good but their
bad qualities work together for good. Who will lay any thing to the
charge of God’s elect? It is completely sufficient for my justification
to have him propitious against whom only I have sinned. Every thing
which he has decreed not to impute to me, is as if it had never been.” A
little after he says, “O the place of true rest, a place which I
consider not unworthy of the name of inner-chamber, where God is seen,
not as if disturbed with anger, or distracted by care, but where his
will is proved to be good, and acceptable, and perfect. That vision does
not terrify but soothe, does not excite restless curiosity but calms it,
does not fatigue but tranquilizes the senses. Here is true rest. A
tranquil God tranquilizes all things; and to see him at rest, is to be
at rest,” (Bernard, super Cantic. Serm. 14).

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p27"></span>5. First, if we seek for the paternal
mercy and favor of God, we must turn our eyes to Christ, in whom alone
the Father is well pleased (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.1"></span>[Mt.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.1"></span>). When we seek for salvation, life, and a
blessed immortality, to him also must we retake ourselves, since he
alone is the fountain of life and the anchor of salvation, and the heir
of the kingdom of heaven. Then what is the end of election, but just
that, being adopted as sons by the heavenly Father, we may by his favor
obtain salvation and immortality? How much soever you may speculate and
discuss you will perceive that in its ultimate object it goes no
farther. Hence, those whom God has adopted as sons, he is said to have
elected, not in themselves, but in Christ Jesus (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.2"></span>[Eph.
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.2"></span>); because he could love them only in him,
and only as being previously made partakers with him, honor them with
the inheritance of his kingdom. But if we are elected in him, we cannot
find the certainty of our election in ourselves; and not even in God the
Father, if we look at him apart from the Son. Christ, then, is the
mirror in which we ought, and in which, without deception, we may
contemplate our election. For since it is into his body that the Father
has decreed to ingraft those whom from eternity he wished to be his,
that he may regard as sons all whom he acknowledges to be his members,
if we are in communion with Christ, we have proof sufficiently clear and
strong that we are written in the Book of Life. Moreover, he admitted us
to sure communion with himself, when, by the preaching of the gospel, he
declared that he was given us by the Father, to be ours with all his
blessings (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.3"></span>[Rom.
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.3"></span>). We are said to be clothed with him, to
be one with him, that we may live, because he himself lives. The
doctrine is often repeated, “God so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.4"></span>[John
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.4"></span>). He who believes in him is said to have
passed from death unto life (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.5"></span>[John
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.5"></span>). In this sense he calls himself the
*bread of life*, of which if a man eat, he shall never die (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.6"></span>[John
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#035)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p27.6"></span>). He, I say, was our witness, that all by
whom he is received in faith will be regarded by our heavenly Father as
sons. If we long for more than to be regarded as sons of God and heirs,
we must ascend above Christ. But if this is our final goal, how
infatuated is it to seek out of him what we have already obtained in
him, and can only find in him? Besides, as he is the Eternal Wisdom, the
Immutable Truth, the Determinate Counsel of the Father, there is no room
for fear that any thing which he tells us will vary in the minutes
degree from that will of the Father after which we inquire. Nay, rather
he faithfully discloses it to us as it was from the beginning, and
always will be. The practical influence of this doctrine ought also to
be exhibited in our prayers. For though a belief of our election
animates us to involve God, yet when we frame our prayers, it were
preposterous to obtrude it upon God, or to stipulate in this way, “O
Lord, if I am elected, hear me.” He would have us to rest satisfied with
his promises, and not to inquire elsewhere whether or not he is disposed
to hear us. We shall thus be disentangled from many snares, if we know
how to make a right use of what is rightly written; but let us not
inconsiderately wrest it to purposes different from that to which it
ought to be confined.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p28"></span>6. Another confirmation tending to
establish our confidence is, that our election is connected with our
calling. For those whom Christ enlightens with the knowledge of his
name, and admits into the bosom of his Church, he is said to take under
his guardianship and protection. All whom he thus receives are said to
be committed and entrusted to him by the Father, that they may be kept
unto life eternal. What would we have? Christ proclaims aloud that all
whom the Father is pleased to save he has delivered into his protection
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p28.1"></span>[John
6:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p28.1"></span>, 17:6, 12). Therefore, if we would know
whether God cares for our salvation, let us ask whether he has committed
us to Christ, whom he has appointed to be the only Savior of all his
people. Then, if we doubt whether we are received into the protection of
Christ, he obviates the doubt when he spontaneously offers himself as
our Shepherd, and declares that we are of the number of his sheep if we
hear his voice (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p28.2"></span>[John
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p28.2"></span>). Let us, therefore, embrace Christ, who
is kindly offered to us, and comes forth to meet us: he will number us
among his flock, and keep us within his fold. But anxiety arises as to
our future state.50  <span id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) For as Paul
teaches, that those are called who were previously elected, so our
Savior shows that many are called, but few chosen (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.1"></span>[Mt.
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.1"></span>). Nay, even Paul himself dissuades us from
security, when he says, “Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed
lest he fall,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.2"></span>[1 Cor.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.2"></span>). And again, “Well, because of unbelief
they were broken off, and thou standest by faith. Be not high-minded,
but fear: for if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he
also spare not thee,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.3"></span>[Rom.
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.3"></span>). In fine, we are sufficiently taught by
experience itself, that calling and faith are of little value without
perseverance, which, however, is not the gift of all. But Christ has
freed us from anxiety on this head; for the following promises
undoubtedly have respect to the future: “All that the Father giveth me
shall come to me, and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out.”
Again, “This is the will of him that sent me, that of all which he has
given me I should lose nothing; but should raise it up at the last day,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.4"></span>[John
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.4"></span>). Again “My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them, and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand. My Father which gave them me is greater than all: and no man is
able to pluck them out of my Father’s hand,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.5"></span>[John
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.5"></span>). Again, when he declares, “Every plant
which my heavenly Father has not planted shall be rooted up,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.6"></span>[Mt.
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.6"></span>), he intimates conversely that those who
have their root in God can never be deprived of their salvation.
Agreeable to this are the words of John, “If they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.7"></span>[1 John
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.7"></span>). Hence, also, the magnificent triumph of
Paul over life and death, things present, and things to come (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.8"></span>[Rom.
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#038)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.8"></span>). This must be founded on the gift of
perseverance. There is no doubt that he employs the sentiment as
applicable to all the elect. Paul elsewhere says, “Being confident of
this very thing, that he who has begun a good work in you will perform
it until the day of Jesus Christ,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.9"></span>[Phil.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.9"></span>). David, also, when his faith threatened
to fail, leant on this support, “Forsake not the works of thy hands.”
Moreover, it cannot be doubted, that since Christ prays for all the
elect, he asks the same thing for them as he asked for Peter—viz. that
their faith fail not (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.10"></span>[Luke
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p29.10"></span>). Hence we infer, that there is no danger
of their falling away, since the Son of God, who asks that their piety
may prove constant, never meets with a refusal. What then did our Savior
intend to teach us by this prayer, but just to confide, that whenever we
are his our eternal salvation is secure?

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p30"></span>7. But it daily happens that those who
seemed to belong to Christ revolt from him and fall away: Nay, in the
very passage where he declares that none of those whom the Father has
given to him have perished, he excepts the son of perdition. This,
indeed, is true; but it is equally true that such persons never adhered
to Christ with that heartfelt confidence by which I say that the
certainty of our election is established: “They went out from us,” says
John, “but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would,
no doubt, have continued with us,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.1"></span>[1 John
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.1"></span>). I deny not that they have signs of
calling similar to those given to the elect; but I do not at all admit
that they have that sure confirmation of election which I desire
believers to seek from the word of the gospel. Wherefore, let not
examples of this kind move us away from tranquil confidence in the
promise of the Lord, when he declares that all by whom he is received in
true faith have been given him by the Father, and that none of them,
while he is their Guardian and Shepherd, will perish (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.2"></span>[John
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.2"></span>; 6:39). Of Judas we shall shortly speak
(sec. 9). Paul does not dissuade Christians from security simply, but
from careless, carnal security, which is accompanied with pride,
arrogance, and contempt of others, which extinguishes humility and
reverence for God, and produces a forgetfulness of grace received (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.3"></span>[Rom.
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.3"></span>). For he is addressing the Gentiles, and
showing them that they ought not to exult proudly and cruelly over the
Jews, in consequence of whose rejection they had been substituted in
their stead. He also enjoins fear, not a fear under which they may waver
in alarm, but a fear which, teaching us to receive the grace of God in
humility, does not impair our confidence in it, as has elsewhere been
said. We may add, that he is not speaking to individuals, but to sects
in general (see <span id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.4"></span>[1 Cor.
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p30.4"></span>). The Church having been divided into two
parties, and rivalship producing dissension, Paul reminds the Gentiles
that their having been substituted in the place of a peculiar and holy
people was a reason for modesty and fear. For there were many
vain-glorious persons among them, whose empty boasting it was expedient
to repress. But we have elsewhere seen, that our hope extends into the
future, even beyond death, and that nothing is more contrary to its
nature than to be in doubt as to our future destiny.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p31"></span>8. The expression of our Savior, “Many
are called, but few are chosen,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.1"></span>[Mt.
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.1"></span>), is also very improperly interpreted (see
Book 3, chap. 2, sec. 11, 12). There will be no ambiguity in it, if we
attend to what our former remarks ought to have made clear—viz. that
there are two species of calling: for there is an universal call, by
which God, through the external preaching of the word, invites all men
alike, even those for whom he designs the call to be a savor of death,
and the ground of a severer condemnation. Besides this there is a
special call which, for the most part, God bestows on believers only,
when by the internal illumination of the Spirit he causes the word
preached to take deep root in their hearts. Sometimes, however, he
communicates it also to those whom he enlightens only for a time, and
whom afterwards, in just punishment for their ingratitude, he abandons
and smites with greater blindness. Now, our Lord seeing that the gospel
was published far and wide, was despised by multitudes, and justly
valued by few, describes God under the character of a King, who,
preparing a great feast, sends his servants all around to invite a great
multitude, but can only obtain the presence of a very few, because
almost all allege causes of excuse; at length, in consequence of their
refusal, he is obliged to send his servants out into the highways to
invite every one they meet. It is perfectly clear, that thus far the
parable is to be understood of external calling. He afterwards adds,
that God acts the part of a kind entertainer, who goes round his table
and affably receives his guests; but still if he finds any one not
adorned with the nuptial garment, he will by no means allow him to
insult the festivity by his sordid dress. I admit that this branch of
the parable is to be understood of those who, by a profession of faith,
enter the Church, but are not at all invested with the sanctification of
Christ. Such disgraces to his Church, such cankers God will not always
tolerate, but will cast them forth as their turpitude deserves. Few,
then, out of the great number of called are chosen; the calling,
however, not being of that kind which enables believers to judge of
their election. The former call is common to the wicked, the latter
brings with it the spirit of regeneration, which is the earnest and seal
of the future inheritance by which our hearts are sealed unto the day of
the Lord (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.2"></span>[Eph.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.2"></span>). In one word, while hypocrites pretend to
piety, just as if they were true worshipers of God, Christ declares that
they will ultimately be ejected from the place which they improperly
occupy, as it is said in the psalm, “Lord, who shall abide in thy
tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy hill? He that walketh uprightly,
and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the truth in his heart,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.3"></span>[Ps.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.3"></span>). Again in another passage, “This is the
generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.4"></span>[Psalm
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p31.4"></span>). And thus the Spirit exhorts believers to
patience, and not to murmur because Ishmaelites are mingled with them in
the Church since the mask will at length be torn off, and they will be
ejected with disgrace.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p32"></span>9. The same account is to be given of
the passage lately quoted, in which Christ says, that none is lost but
the son of perdition (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.1"></span>[John
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.1"></span>). The expression is not strictly proper;
but it is by no means obscure: for Judas was not numbered among the
sheep of Christ, because he was one truly, but because he held a place
among them. Then, in another passage, where the Lord says, that he was
elected with the apostles, reference is made only to the office, “Have I
not chosen you twelve,” says he, “and one of you is a devil?” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.2"></span>[John
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.2"></span>). That is, he had chosen him to the office
of apostle. But when he speaks of election to salvation, he altogether
excludes him from the number of the elect, “I speak not of you all: I
know whom I have chosen,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.3"></span>[John
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.3"></span>). Should any one confound the term
*election* in the two passages, he will miserably entangle himself;
whereas if he distinguish between them, nothing can be plainer. Gregory,
therefore, is most grievously and perniciously in error; when he says
that we are conscious only of our calling, but are uncertain of our
election; and hence he exhorts all to fear and trembling, giving this as
the reason, that though we know what we are to-day, yet we know not what
we are to be (Gregor. Hom. 38). But in that passage he clearly shows how
he stumbled on that stone. By suspending election on the merit of works,
he had too good a reason for dispiriting the minds of his readers,
while, at the same time, as he did not lead them away from themselves to
confidence in the divine goodness, he was unable to confirm them. Hence
believers may in some measure perceive the truth of what we said at the
outset—viz. predestination duly considered does not shake faith, but
rather affords the best confirmation of it. I deny not, however, that
the Spirit sometimes accommodates his language to our feeble capacity;
as when he says, “They shall not be in the assembly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.4"></span>[Ezek.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.4"></span>). As if God were beginning to write the
names of those whom he counts among his people in the Book of Life;
whereas we know, even on the testimony of Christ, that the names of the
children of God were written in the Book of Life from the beginning
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.5"></span>[Luke
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.5"></span>). The words simply indicate the
abandonment of those who seemed to have a chief place among the elect,
as is said in the psalm, “Let them be blotted out of the Book of the
Living, and not be written with the righteous,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.6"></span>[Psalm
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p32.6"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p33"></span>10. For the elect are brought by
calling into the fold of Christ, not from the very womb, nor all at the
same time, but according as God sees it meet to dispense his grace.
Before they are gathered to the supreme Shepherd they wander dispersed
in a common desert, and in no respect differ from others, except that by
the special mercy of God they are kept from rushing to final
destruction. Therefore, if you look to themselves, you will see the
offspring of Adam giving token of the common corruption of the mass.
That they proceed not to extreme and desperate impiety is not owing to
any innate goodness in them, but because the eye of God watches for
their safety, and his hand is stretched over them. Those who dream of
some seed of election implanted in their hearts from their birth, by the
agency of which they are ever inclined to piety and the fear of God, are
not supported by the authority of Scripture, but refuted by experience.
They, indeed, produce a few examples to prove that the elect before they
were enlightened were not aliens from religion; for instance, that Paul
led an unblemished life during his Pharisaism, that Cornelius was
accepted for his prayers and alms, and so forth (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.1"></span>[Phil.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.2"></span>[Acts
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#002)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.2"></span>). The case of Paul we admit, but we hold
that they are in error as to Cornelius; for it appears that he was
already enlightened and regenerated, so that all which he wanted was a
clear revelation of the Gospel. But what are they to extract from these
few examples? Is it that all the elect were always endued with the
spirit of piety? Just as well might any one, after pointing to the
integrity of Aristides, Socrates, Xenocrates, Scipio, Curios, Camillus,
and others (see Book 2, c. 4, sec. 4), infer that all who are left in
the blindness of idolatry are studious of virtue and holiness. Nay, even
Scripture is plainly opposed to them in more passages than one. The
description which Paul gives of the state of the Ephesians before
regeneration shows not one grain of this seed. His words are, “You has
he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; wherein in time past
ye walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince
of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of
disobedience: among whom also we all had our conversation in times past
in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of
the mind; and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.3"></span>[Eph.
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.3"></span>). And again, “At that time ye were without
Christ,” “having no hope, and without God in the world,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.4"></span>[Eph.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.4"></span>). Again, “Ye were sometimes darkness, but
now are ye light in the Lord: walk as children of light,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.5"></span>[Eph.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.5"></span>). But perhaps they will insist that in
this last passage reference is made to that ignorance of the true God,
in which they deny not that the elect lived before they were called.
Though this is grossly inconsistent with the Apostle’s inference, that
they were no longer to lie or steal (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.6"></span>[Eph.
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.6"></span>). What answer will they give to other
passages; such as that in which, after declaring to the Corinthians that
“neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor
abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of
God,” he immediately adds, “Such were some of you: but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God”? (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.7"></span>[1 Cor.
6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.7"></span>). Again he says to the Romans, “As ye have
yielded your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity unto
iniquity; even so now yield your members servants to righteousness unto
holiness. For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from
righteousness. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed?” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.8"></span>[Rom.
6:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p33.8"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p34"></span>11. Say, then, what seed of election
germinated in those who, contaminated in various ways during their whole
lives, indulged as with desperate wickedness in every kind of
abomination? Had Paul meant to express this view, he ought to have shown
how much they then owed to the kindness of God, by which they had been
preserved from falling into such pollution. Thus, too, Peter ought to
have exhorted his countrymen to gratitude for a perpetual seed of
election. On the contrary, his admonition is, “The time past of our life
may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.1"></span>[1 Pet.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.1"></span>). What if we come to examples? Was there
any germ of righteousness in Rahab the harlot before she believed?
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.2"></span>[Josh.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.2"></span>); in Manasseh when Jerusalem was dyed and
almost deluged with the blood of the prophets? (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.3"></span>[2 Kings
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.3"></span>); in the thief who only with his last
breath thought of repentance? (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.4"></span>[Luke
23:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#042)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.4"></span>). Have done, then, with those arguments
which curious men of themselves rashly devise without any authority from
Scripture. But let us hold fast what Scripture states—viz. that “All we
like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.5"></span>[Isa.
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p34.5"></span>); that is to perdition. In this gulf of
perdition God leaves those whom he has determined one day to deliver
until his own time arrive; he only preserves them from plunging into
irremediable blasphemy.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p35"></span>12. As the Lord by the efficacy of his
calling accomplishes towards his elect the salvation to which he had by
his eternal counsel destined them, so he has judgments against the
reprobate, by which he executes his counsel concerning them. Those,
therefore, whom he has created for dishonor during life and destruction
at death, that they may be vessels of wrath and examples of severity, in
bringing to their doom, he at one time deprives of the means of hearing
his word, at another by the preaching of it blinds and stupefies them
the more. The examples of the former case are innumerable, but let us
select one of the most remarkable of all. Before the advent of Christ,
about four thousand years passed away, during which he hid the light of
saving doctrine from all nations. If any one answer, that he did not put
them in possession of the great blessing, because he judged them
unworthy, then their posterity will be in no respect more worthy. Of
this in addition to experience, Malachi is a sufficient witness; for
while charging them with mixed unbelief and blasphemy, he yet declares
that the Redeemer will come. Why then is he given to the latter rather
than to the former? They will in vain torment themselves in seeking for
a deeper cause than the secret and inscrutable counsel of God. And there
is no occasion to fear lest some disciple of Porphyry with impunity
arraign the justice of God, while we say nothing in its defense. For
while we maintain that none perish without deserving it, and that it is
owing to the free goodness of God that some are delivered, enough has
been said for the display of his glory; there is not the least occasion
for our caviling. The supreme Disposer then makes way for his own
predestination, when depriving those whom he has reprobated of the
communication of his light, he leaves them in blindness. Every day
furnishes instances of the latter case, and many of them are set before
us in Scripture. Among a hundred to whom the same discourse is
delivered, twenty, perhaps, receive it with the prompt obedience of
faith; the others set no value upon it, or deride, or spurn, or
abominate it. If it is said that this diversity is owing to the malice
and perversity of the latter, the answer is not satisfactory: for the
same wickedness would possess the minds of the former, did not God in
his goodness correct it. And hence we will always be entangled until we
call in the aid of Paul’s question, “Who maketh thee to differ?” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p35.1"></span>[1 Cor.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p35.1"></span>), intimating that some excel others, not
by their own virtue, but by the mere favour of God.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p36"></span>13. Why, then, while bestowing grace on
the one, does he pass by the other? In regard to the former, Luke gives
the reason, Because they “were ordained to eternal life,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.1"></span>[Acts
13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.1"></span>). What, then, shall we think of the
latter, but that they are vessels of wrath unto dishonor? Wherefore, let
us not decline to say with Augustine, “God could change the will of the
wicked into good, because he is omnipotent. Clearly he could. Why, then,
does he not do it? Because he is unwilling. Why he is unwilling remains
with himself,” (August. de Genes. ad Lit. Lib. 2). We should not attempt
to be wise above what is meet, and it is much better to take Augustine’s
explanation, than to quibble with Chrysostom, “that he draws him who is
willing, and stretching forth his hand,” (Chrysost. Hom. de Convers.
Pauli), lest the difference should seem to lie in the judgment of God,
and not in the mere will of man. So far is it, indeed, from being placed
in the mere will of man, that we may add, that even the pious, and those
who fear God, need this special inspiration of the Spirit. Lydia, a
seller of purple, feared God, and yet it was necessary that her heart
should be opened, that she might attend to the doctrine of Paul, and
profit in it (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.2"></span>[Acts
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.2"></span>). This was not said of one woman only but
to teach us that all progress in piety is the secret work of the Spirit.
Nor can it be questioned, that God sends his word to many whose
blindness he is pleased to aggravate. For why does he order so many
messages to be taken to Pharaoh? Was it because he hoped that he might
be softened by the repetition? Nay, before he began he both knew and had
foretold the result: “The Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest to
return into Egypt see that thou do all those wonders before Pharaoh,
which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that he
will not let the people go,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.3"></span>[Exod.
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.3"></span>). So when he raises up Ezekiel, he
forewarns him, “I send thee to the children of Israel, to a rebellious
nation that has rebelled against me.” “Be not afraid of their words.”
“Thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, which has eyes to
see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.4"></span>[Ezek.
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#003),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.4"></span>;
12:2). Thus he foretells to Jeremiah that the effect of his doctrine
would be, “to root out, and pull down, and to destroy,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.5"></span>[Jer.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.5"></span>). But the prophecy of Isaiah presses still
more closely; for he is thus commissioned by the Lord, “Go and tell this
people, Hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed but
perceive not. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears
heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.6"></span>[Isa.
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.6"></span>). Here he directs his voice to them, but
it is that they may turn a deafer ear; he kindles a light, but it is
that they may become more blind; he produces a doctrine, but it is that
they may be more stupid; he employs a remedy, but it is that they may
not be cured. And John, referring to this prophecy, declares that the
Jews could not believe the doctrine of Christ, because this curse from
God lay upon them. It is also incontrovertible, that to those whom God
is not pleased to illumine, he delivers his doctrine wrapt up in
enigmas, so that they may not profit by it, but be given over to greater
blindness. Hence our Savior declares that the parables in which he had
spoken to the multitude he expounded to the Apostles only, “because it
is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.7"></span>[Mt.
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p36.7"></span>). What, you will ask, does our Lord mean,
by teaching those by whom he is careful not to be understood? Consider
where the fault lies, and then cease to ask. How obscure soever the word
may be, there is always sufficient light in it to convince the
consciences of the ungodly.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p37"></span>14. It now remains to see why the Lord
acts in the manner in which it is plain that he does. If the answer be
given, that it is because men deserve this by their impiety, wickedness,
and ingratitude, it is indeed well and truly said; but still, because it
does not yet appear what the cause of the difference is, why some are
turned to obedience, and others remain obdurate we must, in discussing
it, pass to the passage from Moses, on which Paul has commented, namely,
“Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my
power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the
earth,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.1"></span>[Rom.
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.1"></span>). The refusal of the reprobate to obey the
word of God when manifested to them, will be properly ascribed to the
malice and depravity of their hearts, provided it be at the same time
added that they were adjudged to this depravity, because they were
raised up by the just but inscrutable judgment of God, to show forth his
glory by their condemnation. In like manner, when it is said of the sons
of Eli, that they would not listen to salutary admonitions “because the
Lord would slay them,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.2"></span>[1 Sam.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.2"></span>), it is not denied that their stubbornness
was the result of their own iniquity; but it is at the same time stated
why they were left to their stubbornness, when the Lord might have
softened their hearts: namely, because his immutable decree had once for
all doomed them to destruction. Hence the words of John, “Though he had
done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him; that
the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled which he spake,
Lord, who has believed our report?” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.3"></span>[John
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.3"></span>); for though he does not exculpate their
perverseness, he is satisfied with the reason that the grace of God is
insipid to men, until the Holy Spirit gives it its savor. And Christ, in
quoting the prophecy of Isaiah, “They shall be all taught of God,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.4"></span>[John
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.4"></span>), designs only to show that the Jews were
reprobates and aliens from the Church, because they would not be taught:
and gives no other reason than that the promise of God does not belong
to them. Confirmatory of this are the words of Paul, “Christ crucified”
was “unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness;
but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power
of God, and the wisdom of God,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.5"></span>[1
Cor. 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.5"></span>). For after mentioning the usual result
wherever the gospel is preached, that it exasperates some, and is
despised by others, he says, that it is precious to them only who are
called. A little before he had given them the name of believers, but he
was unwilling to refuse the proper rank to divine grace, which precedes
faith; or rather, he added the second term by way of correction, that
those who had embraced the gospel might ascribe the merit of their faith
to the calling of God. Thus, also, he shortly after shows that they were
elected by God. When the wicked hear these things, they complain that
God abuses his inordinate power; to make cruel sport with the miseries
of his creatures. But let us, who know that all men are liable on so
many grounds to the judgment of God, that they cannot answer for one in
a thousand of their transgressions (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.6"></span>[Job
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p37.6"></span>), confess that the reprobate suffer
nothing which is not accordant with the most perfect justice. When
unable clearly to ascertain the reason, let us not decline to be
somewhat in ignorance in regard to the depths of the divine wisdom.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p38"></span>15. But since an objection is often
founded on a few passages of Scripture, in which God seems to deny that
the wicked perish through his ordination, except in so far as they
spontaneously bring death upon themselves in opposition to his warning,
let us briefly explain these passages, and demonstrate that they are not
adverse to the above view. One of the passages adduced is, “have I any
pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God; and not
that he should return from his ways and live?” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p38.1"></span>[Ezek.
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p38.1"></span>). If we are to extend this to the whole
human race, why are not the very many whose minds might be more easily
bent to obey urged to repentance, rather than those who by his
invitations become daily more and more hardened? Our Lord declares that
the preaching of the gospel and miracles would have produced more fruit
among the people of Nineveh and Sodom than in Judea (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p38.2"></span>[Mt.
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p38.2"></span>). How comes its then, that if God would
have all to be saved he does not open a door of repentance for the
wretched, who would more readily have received grace? Hence we may see
that the passage is violently wrested, if the will of God, which the
prophet mentions, is opposed to his eternal counsel, by which he
separated the elect from the reprobate.50  <span
id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) Now, if the genuine meaning of the
prophet is inquired into, it will be found that he only means to give
the hope of pardon to them who repent. The sum is, that God is
undoubtedly ready to pardon whenever the sinner turns. Therefore, he
does not will his death, in so far as he wills repentance. But
experience shows that this will, for the repentance of those whom he
invites to himself, is not such as to make him touch all their hearts.
Still, it cannot be said that he acts deceitfully; for though the
external word only renders, those who hear its and do not obey it,
inexcusable, it is still truly regarded as an evidence of the grace by
which he reconciles men to himself. Let us therefore hold the doctrine
of the prophet, that God has no pleasure in the death of the sinner;
that the godly may feel confident that whenever they repent God is ready
to pardon them; and that the wicked may feel that their guilt is
doubled, when they respond not to the great mercy and condescension of
God. The mercy of God, therefore will ever be ready to meet the
penitent; but all the prophets, and apostles, and Ezekiel himself,
clearly tell us who they are to whom repentance is given.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40"></span>16. The second passage adduced is that
in which Paul says that “God will have all men to be saved,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.1"></span>[1 Tim.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.1"></span>). Though the reason here differs from the
former, they have somewhat in common. I answer, first, That the mode in
which God thus wills is plain from the context; for Paul connects two
things, a will to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
If by this they will have it to be fixed by the eternal counsel of God
that they are to receive the doctrine of salvation, what is meant by
Moses in these words, “What nation is there so great, who has God so
nigh unto them?” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.2"></span>[Deut.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.2"></span>). How comes it that many nations are
deprived of that light of the Gospel which others enjoy? How comes it
that the pure knowledge of the doctrine of godliness has never reached
some, and others have scarcely tasted some obscure rudiments of it? It
will now be easy to extract the purport of Paul’s statement. He had
commanded Timothy that prayers should be regularly offered up in the
church for kings and princes; but as it seemed somewhat absurd that
prayer should be offered up for a class of men who were almost hopeless
(all of them being not only aliens from the body of Christ, but doing
their utmost to overthrow his kingdom), he adds, that it was acceptable
to God, who will have all men to be saved. By this he assuredly means
nothing more than that the way of salvation was not shut against any
order of men; that, on the contrary, he had manifested his mercy in such
a way, that he would have none debarred from it. Other passages do not
declare what God has, in his secret judgment, determined with regard to
all, but declare that pardon is prepared for all sinners who only turn
to seek after it. For if they persist in urging the words, “God has
concluded all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.3"></span>[Rom.
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.3"></span>), I will, on the contrary, urge what is
elsewhere written, “Our God is in the heavens: he has done whatsoever he
has pleased,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.4"></span>[Ps.
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.4"></span>). we must, therefore, expound the passage
so as to reconcile it with another, I “will be gracious to whom I will
be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.5"></span>[Exod.
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.5"></span>). He who selects those whom he is to visit
in mercy does not impart it to all. But since it clearly appears that he
is there speaking not of individuals, but of orders of men, let us have
done with a longer discussion. At the same time, we ought to observe,
that Paul does not assert what God does always, everywhere, and in all
circumstances, but leaves it free to him to make kings and magistrates
partakers of heavenly doctrine, though in their blindness they rage
against it. A stronger objection seems to be founded on the passage in
Peter; the Lord is “not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.6"></span>[2 Pet.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.6"></span>). But the solution of the difficulty is to
be found in the second branch of the sentence, for his will that they
should come to repentance cannot be used in any other sense than that
which is uniformly employed. Conversion is undoubtedly in the hand of
God, whether he designs to convert all can be learned from himself, when
he promises that he will give some a heart of flesh, and leave to others
a heart of stone (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.7"></span>[Ezek.
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.7"></span>). It is true, that if he were not disposed
to receive those who implore his mercy, it could not have been said,
“Turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of Hosts, and I will turn unto you,
saith the Lord of Hosts,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.8"></span>[Zech.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.8"></span>); but I hold that no man approaches God
unless previously influenced from above. And if repentance were placed
at the will of man, Paul would not say, “If God per adventure will give
them repentance,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.9"></span>[2 Tim.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.9"></span>). Nay, did not God at the very time when
he is verbally exhorting all to repentance, influence the elect by the
secret movement of his Spirit, Jeremiah would not say, “Turn thou me,
and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I
was turned, I repented,” (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.10"></span>[Jer.
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p40.10"></span>).

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p41"></span>17. But if it is so (you will say),
little faith can be put in the Gospel promises, which, in testifying
concerning the will of God, declare that he wills what is contrary to
his inviolable decree. Not at all; for however universal the promises of
salvation may be, there is no discrepancy between them and the
predestination of the reprobate, provided we attend to their effect. We
know that the promises are effectual only when we receive them in faith,
but, on the contrary, when faith is made void, the promise is of no
effect. If this is the nature of the promises, let us now see whether
there be any inconsistency between the two things—viz. that God, by an
eternal decree, fixed the number of those whom he is pleased to embrace
in love, and on whom he is pleased to display his wrath, and that he
offers salvation indiscriminately to all. I hold that they are perfectly
consistent, for all that is meant by the promise is, just that his mercy
is offered to all who desire and implore it, and this none do, save
those whom he has enlightened. Moreover, he enlightens those whom he has
predestinated to salvation. Thus the truth of the promises remains firm
and unshaken, so that it cannot be said there is any disagreement
between the eternal election of God and the testimony of his grace which
he offers to believers. But why does he mention all men? Namely that the
consciences of the righteous may rest the more secure when they
understand that there is no difference between sinners, provided they
have faith, and that the ungodly may not be able to allege that they
have not an asylum to which they may retake themselves from the bondage
of sin, while they ungratefully reject the offer which is made to them.
Therefore, since by the Gospel the mercy of God is offered to both, it
is faith, in other words, the illumination of God, which distinguishes
between the righteous and the wicked, the former feeling the efficacy of
the Gospel, the latter obtaining no benefit from it. Illumination itself
has eternal election for its rule.

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p42"></span>Another passage quoted is the
lamentation of our Savior, “O Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often would I
have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not!” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p42.1"></span>[Mt.
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p42.1"></span>); but it gives them no support. I admit
that here Christ speaks not only in the character of man, but upbraids
them with having, in every age, rejected his grace. But this will of
God, of which we speak, must be defined. For it is well known what
exertions the Lord made to retain that people, and how perversely from
the highest to the lowest they followed their own wayward desires, and
refused to be gathered together. But it does not follow that by the
wickedness of men the counsel of God was frustrated. They object that
nothing is less accordant with the nature of God than that he should
have a double will. This I concede, provided they are sound
interpreters. But why do they not attend to the many passages in which
God clothes himself with human affections, and descends beneath his
proper majesty?50  <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) He says, “I
have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p43.1"></span>[Isa.
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p43.1"></span>), exerting himself early and late to bring
them back. Were they to apply these qualities without regarding the
figure, many unnecessary disputes would arise which are quashed by the
simple solution, that what is human is here transferred to God. Indeed,
the solution which we have given elsewhere (see Book 1, c. 18, sec. 3;
and Book 3, c. 20, sec. 43) is amply sufficient—viz. that though to our
apprehension the will of God is manifold, yet he does not in himself
will opposites, but, according to his manifold wisdom (so Paul styles
it, <span id="iv.iii.xxv-p43.2"></span>[Eph.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p43.2"></span>), transcends our senses, until such time
as it shall be given us to know how he mysteriously wills what now seems
to be adverse to his will.  <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) They
also amuse themselves with the cavil, that since God is the Father of
all, it is unjust to discard any one before he has by his misconduct
merited such a punishment. As if the kindness of God did not extend even
to dogs and swine. But if we confine our view to the human race, let
them tell why God selected one people for himself and became their
father, and why, from that one people, he plucked only a small number as
if they were the flower. But those who thus charge God are so blinded by
their love of evil speaking, that they consider not that as God “maketh
his sun to rise on the evil and on the good,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.1"></span>[Mt.
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.1"></span>), so the inheritance is treasured up for a
few to whom it shall one day be said, “Come, ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom,” &c. (<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.2"></span>[Mt.
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.2"></span>). They object, moreover, that God does not
hate any of the things which he has made. This I concede, but it does
not affect the doctrine which I maintain, that the reprobate are hateful
to God, and that with perfect justice, since those destitute of his
Spirit cannot produce any thing that does not deserve cursing. They add,
that there is no distinction of Jew and Gentile, and that, therefore,
the grace of God is held forth to all indiscriminately: true, provided
they admit (as Paul declares) that God calls as well Jews as Gentiles,
according to his good pleasure, without being astricted to any. This
disposes of their gloss upon another passage, “God has concluded all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.3"></span>[Rom.
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.3"></span>); in other words, he wills that all who
are saved should ascribe their salvation to his mercy, although the
blessing of salvation is not common to all. Finally, after all that has
been adduced on this side and on that, let it be our conclusion to feel
overawed with Paul at the great depth, and if petulant tongues will
still murmur, let us not be ashamed to join in his exclamation, “Nay,
but, O man, who art thou that replies against God?” (<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.4"></span>[Rom.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p44.4"></span>). Truly does Augustine maintain that it is
perverse to measure divine by the standard of human justice (De Prædest.
et Gra. c. 2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_499"></span>[500](inst077.htm#fr_499) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p21.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p22"></span>06 506 Latin, “possililitatis
profectus.”—French, “l’avancement de possibilité.”

<span id="fn_500"></span>[501](inst077.htm#fr_500) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p28.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p29"></span>07 507 French, “Mas quelcun dira qu’il
nous faut soucier de ce qui peut nous advenir: et quand nous pensons au
temps futur que nostre imbecilité nous admoneste d’etre en
solicitude;”—But some one will say, that we must feel anxious as to what
may happen to us; and that when we think on the future, our weakness
warns us to be solicitous.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[502](inst077.htm#fr_501) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p39"></span>08 508 Bernard, in his Sermon on the
Nativity, on <span id="iv.iii.xxv-p39.1"></span>[2 Cor.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p39.1"></span>, quoting the two passages, <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p39.2"></span>[Rom.
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p39.2"></span>, and <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p39.3"></span>[Ezek.
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p39.3"></span>, admirably reconciles them.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[503](inst077.htm#fr_502) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p43"></span>09 509 The French adds, “pour se
conformer à notre rudesse;”—in accommodation to our weakness.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[504](inst077.htm#fr_503) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p43.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p44"></span>100 D100 These two assertions—“to our
apprehension the will of God is manifold,” and “he mysteriously wills
what now seems to be adverse to his will”—uncover a difficulty with
which Calvin struggles: namely, the problem of whether God has a double
will (or wills contrary things at the same time). Does God reveal one
kind of will in the Gospel, while willing something else in His secret
purpose? Do the Gospel promises, “in testifying concerning the will of
God, declare that he wills what is contrary to his inviolable decree”?
(first line, this section). Calvin, although insisting that there is no
discrepancy, no inconsistency, between the predestination of the
reprobate and the indiscriminate offer of the Gospel to all (and
offering certain reasons for his conviction), nevertheless finds the
ultimate solution to this problem in the incomprehensibility of God. God
is so great, so far above us, and transcends our senses to such a
degree, that we can never hope to comprehend His mystery or the depths
of His infinite being. Yet he does not make the absolute distinction
which some have made, between God as He is in Himself (about whom we can
know nothing), and God as He appears to us (about whom we can know
something), for he asserts “yet he \[God\] does not in himself will
opposites.” Thus Calvin does say something about God as He is in Himself
(in fact, he asserts that God does not violate the law of
contradiction!) However, he leaves the final resolution of this apparent
discrepancy to the eschatological future, when perhaps the mystery
involved in this doctrine will be made known to our understanding. For
the present, he exhorts us to “feel overawed with Paul at the great
depth” of the wisdom and knowledge of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 25. - OF THE LAST RESURRECTION.](inst078)
