[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst104)  [Next](inst106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv"></span>

## <span id="v.iv-p0.1"></span>BOOK 4

<span id="v.iv-p1"></span>66. God keeps us united in the fellowship of
Christ by means of Ecclesiastical and Civil government.

<span id="v.iv-p2"></span>67. In Ecclesiastical government Three things
are considered. 1. What is the Church? 2. How is it governed? 3. What is
its power?

<span id="v.iv-p3"></span>68. The Church is regarded in two points of
view; as Invisible and Universal, which is the communion of saints; and
as Visible and Particular. The Church is discerned by the pure preaching
of the word, and by the lawful administration of the sacraments.

<span id="v.iv-p4"></span>69. As to the government of the Church, there
are Five points of inquiry. 1. Who rule? 2. What are they? 3. What is
their calling? 4. What is their office? 5. What was the condition of the
ancient Church?

<span id="v.iv-p5"></span>70. They that rule are not Angels, but Men. In
this respect, God declares his condescension towards us: we have a most
excellent training to humility and obedience, and it is singularly
fitted to bind us to mutual charity.

<span id="v.iv-p6"></span>71. These are Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
whose office was temporary; Pastors and Teachers, whose office is of
perpetual duration.

<span id="v.iv-p7"></span>72. Their calling is twofold; *internal* and
*external*. The *internal* is from the Spirit of God. In the *external*
there are Four things to be considered. 1. What sort of persons ought to
be chosen? Men of sound doctrine and holy lives. 2. In what manner? With
fasting and prayer. 3. By whom? Immediately, by God, as Prophets and
Apostles. Mediately, with the direction of the word, by Bishops, by
Elders, and by the people. 4. With what rite of ordination? By the
laying on of hands, the use of which is threefold. 1. That the dignity
of the ministry may be commended. 2. That he who is called may know that
he is devoted to God. 3. That he may believe that the Holy Spirit will
not desert this holy ministry.

<span id="v.iv-p8"></span>73. The duty of Pastors in the Church is, to
preach the Word, to administer the Sacraments, to exercise Discipline.

<span id="v.iv-p9"></span>74. The condition of the ancient Church was
distributed into Presbyters, Elders, Deacons, who dispensed the funds of
the Church to the Bishops, the Clergy, the poor, and for repairing
churches.

<span id="v.iv-p10"></span>75. The power of the Church is viewed in
relation to Doctrine, Legislation, and Jurisdiction.

<span id="v.iv-p11"></span>76. Doctrine respects the articles of faith,
none of which must be laid down without the authority of the word of
God, but all must be directed to the glory of God and the edification of
the Church. It respects also the application of the articles, which must
agree with the analogy of faith.

<span id="v.iv-p12"></span>77. Ecclesiastical laws, in precepts
necessary to be observed, must be in accordance with the written word of
God. In things indifferent, regard must be had to places, persons,
times, with a due attention to order and decorum. Those constitutions
ought to be avoided which have been laid down by pretended pastors
instead of the pure worship of God, which bind the consciences by rigid
necessity, which make void a commandment of God, which are useless and
trifling, which oppress the consciences by their number, which lead to
theatrical display, which are considered to be propitiatory sacrifices,
and which are turned to the purposes of gain.

<span id="v.iv-p13"></span>78. Jurisdiction is twofold. 1. That which
belongs to the Clergy, which was treated of under the head of Provincial
and General Synods. 2. That which is common to the Clergy and the
people, the design of which is twofold, that scandals may be prevented,
and that scandal which has arisen may be removed. The exercise of it
consists in private and public admonitions, and likewise in
excommunication, the object of which is threefold. 1. That the Church
may not be blamed; 2. That the good may not be corrupted by intercourse
with the bad; 3. That they who are excommunicated may be ashamed, and
may begin to repent.

<span id="v.iv-p14"></span>79. With regard to Times, Fasts are
appointed, and Vows are made. The design of Fasts is, that the flesh may
be mortified, that we may be better prepared for prayer, and that they
may be evidences of humility and obedience. They consist of Three
things, the time, the quality, and the quantity of food. But here we
must beware lest we rend our garments only, and not our hearts, as
hypocrites do, lest those actions be regarded as a meritorious
performance, and lest they be too rigorously demanded as necessary to
salvation.

<span id="v.iv-p15"></span>80. In Vows we must consider; 1. To whom the
vow is madeónamely, to God. Hence it follows that nothing must be
attempted but what is approved by his word, which teaches us what is
pleasing and what is displeasing to God. 2. Who it is that vowsónamely,
a man. We must, therefore, beware lest we disregard our liberty, or
promise what is beyond our strength or inconsistent with our calling. 3.
What is vowed. Here regard must be had to time; to the *past*, such as a
vow of thanksgiving and repentance; to the *future*, that we may
afterwards be more cautious, and may be stimulated by them to the
performance of duty. Hence it is evident what opinion we ought to form
respecting Popish vows.

<span id="v.iv-p16"></span>81. In explaining the Sacraments, there are
Three things to be considered. 1. What a sacrament is;ónamely, an
external sign, by which God seals on our consciences the promises of his
good-will towards us, in order to sustain the weakness of our faith. We
in our turn testify our piety towards him. 2. What things are
necessary;ónamely, the Sign, the Thing signified, the Promise, and the
general Participation. 3. What is the number of them;ónamely, Baptism
and the Lordís Supper.

<span id="v.iv-p17"></span>82. The Sign in Baptism is water; the Thing
Signified is the blood of Christ; the Promise is eternal life; the
Communicants or Partakers are, adults, after making a confession of
their faith, and likewise infants; for Baptism came in the place of
Circumcision, and in both the mystery, promise, use, and efficacy, are
the same. Forgiveness of sins also belongs to infants, and therefore it
is likewise a sign of this forgiveness.

<span id="v.iv-p18"></span>83. The end of Baptism is twofold. 1. To
promote our faith towards God. For it is a sign of our washing by the
blood of Christ, and of the mortification of our flesh, and the renewal
of our souls in Christ. Besides, being united to Christ, we believe that
we shall be partakers of all his blessings, and that we shall never fall
under condemnation. 2. To serve as our confession before our neighbour;
for it is a mark that we choose to be regarded as the people of God, and
we testify that we profess the Christian religion, and that our desire
is, that all the members of our body may proclaim the praise of God.

<span id="v.iv-p19"></span>84. The Lordís Supper is a spiritual feast,
by which we are preserved in that life into which God hath begotten us
by his word.

<span id="v.iv-p20"></span>85. The design of the Lordís Supper is
threefold. 1. To aid in confirming our faith towards God. 2. To serve as
a confession before men. 3. To be an exhortation to charity.

<span id="v.iv-p21"></span>86. We must beware lest, by undervaluing the
signs, we separate them too much from their mysteries, with which they
are in some measure connected; and lest, on the other hand, by
immoderately extolling them, we appear to obscure the mysteries
themselves.

<span id="v.iv-p22"></span>87. The parts are two. 1. The *spiritual
truth* in which the meaning is beheld, consists in the promises; the
*matter*, or substance, is Christ dead and risen; and the *effect* is
our redemption and justification. 2. The visible signs are, bread and
wine.

<span id="v.iv-p23"></span>88. With the Lordís Supper is contrasted the
Popish Mass. 1. It offers insult and blasphemy to Christ. 2. It buries
the cross of Christ. 3. It obliterates his death. 4. It robs us of the
benefits which we obtain in Christ. 5. It destroys the Sacraments in
which the memorial of his death was left.

<span id="v.iv-p24"></span>89. The Sacraments, falsely so called, are
enumerated, which are, Confirmation, Penitence, Extreme Unction, Orders
\[which gave rise to the (seven) less and the (three) greater\], and
Marriage.

<span id="v.iv-p25"></span>90. Next comes Civil government, which
belongs to the external regulation of manners.

<span id="v.iv-p26"></span>91. Under this head are considered
Magistrates, Laws, and the People.

<span id="v.iv-p27"></span>92. The Magistrate is Godís vicegerent, the
father of his country, the guardian of the laws, the administrator of
justice, the defender of the Church.

<span id="v.iv-p28"></span>93. By these names he is excited to the
performance of duty. 1. That he may walk in holiness before God, and
before men may maintain uprightness, prudence, temperance, harmlessness,
and righteousness. 2. That by wonderful consolation it may smooth the
difficulties of his office.

<span id="v.iv-p29"></span>94. The kinds of Magistracy or Civil
Government are, Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy.

<span id="v.iv-p30"></span>95. As to Laws, we must see what is their
constitution in regard to God and to men: and what is their equity in
regard to times, places, and nations.

<span id="v.iv-p31"></span>96. The People owe to the Magistrate, 1.
Reverence heartily rendered to him as Godís ambassador. 2. Obedience, or
compliance with edicts, or paying taxes, or undertaking public offices
and burdens. 3. That love which will lead us to pray to God for his
prosperity.

<span id="v.iv-p32"></span>97. We are enjoined to obey not only good
magistrates, but all who possess authority, though they may exercise
tyranny; for it was not without the authority of God that they were
appointed to be princes.

<span id="v.iv-p33"></span>98. When tyrants reign, let us first remember
our faults, which are chastised by such scourges; and, therefore,
humility will restrain our impatience. Besides, it is not in our power
to remedy these evils, and all that remains for us is to implore the
assistance of the Lord, in whose hand are the hearts of men and the
revolutions of kingdoms.

<span id="v.iv-p34"></span>99. In Two ways God restrains the fury of
tyrants; either by raising up from among their own subjects open
avengers, who rid the people of their tyranny, or by employing for that
purpose the rage of men whose thoughts and contrivances are totally
different, thus overturning one tyranny by means of another.

<span id="v.iv-p35"></span>100. The obedience enjoined on subjects does
not prevent the interference of any popular Magistrates whose office it
is to restrain tyrants and to protect the liberty of the people. Our
obedience to Magistrates ought to be such, that the obedience which we
owe to the King of kings shall remain entire and unimpaired.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](inst106)
