[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst062)  [Next](inst064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xi"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 10.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p1"></span>HOW TO USE THE PRESENT LIFE, AND THE
COMFORTS OF IT.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are, I. The
necessity and usefulness of this doctrine. Extremes to be avoided, if we
would rightly use the present life and its comforts, sec. 1, 2. II. One
of these extremes—viz. the intemperance of the flesh—to be carefully
avoided. Four methods of doing so described in order, sec. 3-6.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p4"></span>1. Necessity of this doctrine. Use of the
goods of the present life. Extremes to be avoided. 1. Excessive
austerity. 2. Carnal intemperance and lasciviousness.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p5"></span>2. God, by creating so many mercies,
consulted not only for our necessities, but also for our comfort and
delight. Confirmation from a passage in the Psalms, and from experience.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p6"></span>3. Excessive austerity, therefore, to be
avoided. So also must the wantonness of the flesh. 1. The creatures
invite us to know, love, and honour the Creator. 2. This not done by the
wicked, who only abuse these temporal mercies.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p7"></span>4. All earthly blessings to be despised
in comparison of the heavenly life. Aspiration after this life destroyed
by an excessive love of created objects. First, Intemperance.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p8"></span>5. Second, Impatience and immoderate
desire. Remedy of these evils. The creatures assigned to our use. Man
still accountable for the use he makes of them.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p9"></span>6. God requires us in all our actions to
look to his calling. Use of this doctrine. It is full of comfort.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p10"></span>1. By such rudiments we are at the same
time well instructed by Scripture in the proper use of earthly
blessings, a subject which, in forming a scheme of life, is by no mean
to be neglected. For if we are to live, we must use the necessary
supports of life; nor can we even shun those things which seem more
subservient to delight than to necessity. We must therefore observe a
mean, that we may use them with a pure conscience, whether for necessity
or for pleasure. This the Lord prescribes by his word, when he tells us
that to his people the present life is a kind of pilgrimage by which
they hasten to the heavenly kingdom. If we are only to pass through the
earth, there can be no doubt that we are to use its blessings only in so
far as they assist our progress, rather than retard it. Accordingly,
Paul, not without cause, admonishes us to use this world without abusing
it, and to buy possessions as if we were selling them (<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p10.1"></span>[1 Cor.
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p10.1"></span>). But as this is a slippery place, and
there is great danger of falling on either side, let us fix our feet
where we can stand safely. There have been some good and holy men who,
when they saw intemperance and luxury perpetually carried to excess, if
not strictly curbed, and were desirous to correct so pernicious an evil,
imagined that there was no other method than to allow man to use
corporeal goods only in so far as they were necessaries: a counsel pious
indeed, but unnecessarily austere; for it does the very dangerous thing
of binding consciences in closer fetters than those in which they are
bound by the word of God. Moreover, necessity, according to them,40
 <span id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) was abstinence from every thing
which could be wanted, so that they held it scarcely lawful to make any
addition to bread and water. Others were still more austere, as is
related of Cratetes the Theban, who threw his riches into the sea,
because he thought, that unless he destroyed them they would destroy
him. Many also in the present day, while they seek a pretext for carnal
intemperance in the use of external things, and at the same time would
pave the way for licentiousness, assume for granted, what I by no means
concede, that this liberty is not to be restrained by any modification,
but that it is to be left to every man’s conscience to use them as far
as he thinks lawful. I indeed confess that here consciences neither can
nor ought to be bound by fixed and definite laws; but that Scripture
having laid down general rules for the legitimate uses we should keep
within the limits which they prescribe.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p12"></span>2. Let this be our principle, that we
err not in the use of the gifts of Providence when we refer them to the
end for which their author made and destined them, since he created them
for our good, and not for our destruction. No man will keep the true
path better than he who shall have this end carefully in view. Now then,
if we consider for what end he created food, we shall find that he
consulted not only for our necessity, but also for our enjoyment and
delight. Thus, in clothing, the end was, in addition to necessity,
comeliness and honour; and in herbs, fruits, and trees, besides their
various uses, gracefulness of appearance and sweetness of smell. Were it
not so, the Prophet would not enumerate among the mercies of God “wine
that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine,”
(<span id="iv.iii.xi-p12.1"></span>[Ps.
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p12.1"></span>). The Scriptures would not everywhere
mention, in commendation of his benignity, that he had given such things
to men. The natural qualities of things themselves demonstrate to what
end, and how far, they may be lawfully enjoyed. Has the Lord adorned
flowers with all the beauty which spontaneously presents itself to the
eye, and the sweet odour which delights the sense of smell, and shall it
be unlawful for us to enjoy that beauty and this odour? What? Has he not
so distinguished colours as to make some more agreeable than others? Has
he not given qualities to gold and silver, ivory and marble, thereby
rendering them precious above other metals or stones? In short, has he
not given many things a value without having any necessary use?

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p13"></span>3. Have done, then, with that inhuman
philosophy which, in allowing no use of the creatures but for necessity,
not only maliciously deprives us of the lawful fruit of the divine
beneficence, but cannot be realised without depriving man of all his
senses, and reducing him to a block. But, on the other hand, let us with
no less care guard against the lusts of the flesh, which, if not kept in
order, break through all bounds, and are, as I have said, advocated by
those who, under pretence of liberty, allow themselves every sort of
license. First one restraint is imposed when we hold that the object of
creating all things was to teach us to know their author, and feel
grateful for his indulgence. Where is the gratitude if you so gorge or
stupify yourself with feasting and wine as to be unfit for offices of
piety, or the duties of your calling? Where the recognition of God, if
the flesh, boiling forth in lust through excessive indulgences infects
the mind with its impurity, so as to lose the discernment of honour and
rectitude? Where thankfulness to God for clothing, if on account of
sumptuous raiment we both admire ourselves and disdain others? if, from
a love of show and splendour, we pave the way for immodesty? Where our
recognition of God, if the glare of these things captivates our minds?
For many are so devoted to luxury in all their senses that their mind
lies buried: many are so delighted with marble, gold, and pictures, that
they become marble-hearted—are changed as it were into metal, and made
like painted figures. The kitchen, with its savoury smells, so engrosses
them that they have no spiritual savour. The same thing may be seen in
other matters. Wherefore, it is plain that there is here great necessity
for curbing licentious abuse, and conforming to the rule of Paul, “make
not provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p13.1"></span>[Rom.
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p13.1"></span>). Where too much liberty is given to them,
they break forth without measure or restraint.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p14"></span>4. There is no surer or quicker way of
accomplishing this than by despising the present life and aspiring to
celestial immortality. For hence two rules arise: First, “it remaineth,
that both they that have wives be as though they had none;” “and they
that use this world, as not abusing it,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p14.1"></span>[1 Cor.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p14.1"></span>). Secondly, we must learn to be no less
placid and patient in enduring penury, than moderate in enjoying
abundance. He who makes it his rule to use this world as if he used it
not, not only cuts off all gluttony in regard to meat and drink, and all
effeminacy, ambition, pride, excessive shows and austerity, in regard to
his table, his house, and his clothes, but removes every care and
affection which might withdraw or hinder him from aspiring to the
heavenly life, and cultivating the interest of his soul.40  <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) It was well said by Cato: Luxury
causes great care, and produces great carelessness as to virtue; and it
is an old proverb,—Those who are much occupied with the care of the
body, usually give little care to the soul. Therefore while the liberty
of the Christian in external matters is not to be tied down to a strict
rule, it is, however, subject to this law—he must indulge as little as
possible; on the other hand, it must be his constant aims not only to
curb luxury, but to cut off all show of superfluous abundance, and
carefully beware of converting a help into an hinderance.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p16"></span>5. Another rule is, that those in narrow
and slender circumstances should learn to bear their wants patiently,
that they may not become immoderately desirous of things, the moderate
use of which implies no small progress in the school of Christ. For in
addition to the many other vices which accompany a longing for earthly
good, he who is impatient under poverty almost always betrays the
contrary disease in abundance. By this I mean, that he who is ashamed of
a sordid garment will be vain-glorious of a splendid one; he who not
contented with a slender, feels annoyed at the want of a more luxurious
supper, will intemperately abuse his luxury if he obtains it; he who has
a difficulty, and is dissatisfied in submitting to a private and humble
condition, will be unable to refrain from pride if he attain to honour.
Let it be the aim of all who have any unfeigned desire for piety to
learn, after the example of the Apostle, “both to be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer need,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p16.1"></span>[Phil.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p16.1"></span>). Scripture, moreover, has a third rule for
modifying the use of earthly blessings. We have already adverted to it
when considering the offices of charity. For it declares that they have
all been given us by the kindness of God, and appointed for our use
under the condition of being regarded as trusts, of which we must one
day give account. We must, therefore, administer them as if we
constantly heard the words sounding in our ears, “Give an account of
your stewardship.” At the same time, let us remember by whom the account
is to be taken—viz. by him who, while he so highly commends abstinence,
sobriety, frugality, and moderation, abominates luxury, pride,
ostentation, and vanity; who approves of no administration but that
which is combined with charity, who with his own lips has already
condemned all those pleasures which withdraw the heart from chastity and
purity, or darken the intellect.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p17"></span>6. The last thing to be observed is,
that the Lord enjoins every one of us, in all the actions of life, to
have respect to our own calling. He knows the boiling restlessness of
the human mind, the fickleness with which it is borne hither and
thither, its eagerness to hold opposites at one time in its grasp, its
ambition. Therefore, lest all things should be thrown into confusion by
our folly and rashness, he has assigned distinct duties to each in the
different modes of life. And that no one may presume to overstep his
proper limits, he has distinguished the different modes of life by the
name of callings. Every man’s mode of life, therefore, is a kind of
station assigned him by the Lord, that he may not be always driven about
at random. So necessary is this distinction, that all our actions are
thereby estimated in his sight, and often in a very different way from
that in which human reason or philosophy would estimate them. There is
no more illustrious deed even among philosophers than to free one’s
country from tyranny, and yet the private individual who stabs the
tyrant is openly condemned by the voice of the heavenly Judge. But I am
unwilling to dwell on particular examples; it is enough to know that in
every thing the call of the Lord is the foundation and beginning of
right action. He who does not act with reference to it will never, in
the discharge of duty, keep the right path. He will sometimes be able,
perhaps, to give the semblance of something laudable, but whatever it
may be in the sight of man, it will be rejected before the throne of
God; and besides, there will be no harmony in the different parts of his
life. Hence, he only who directs his life to this end will have it
properly framed; because free from the impulse of rashness, he will not
attempt more than his calling justifies, knowing that it is unlawful to
overleap the prescribed bounds. He who is obscure will not decline to
cultivate a private life, that he may not desert the post at which God
has placed him. Again, in all our cares, toils, annoyances, and other
burdens, it will be no small alleviation to know that all these are
under the superintendence of God. The magistrate will more willingly
perform his office, and the father of a family confine himself to his
proper sphere. Every one in his particular mode of life will, without
repining, suffer its inconveniences, cares, uneasiness, and anxiety,
persuaded that God has laid on the burden. This, too, will afford
admirable consolation, that in following your proper calling, no work
will be so mean and sordid as not to have a splendour and value in the
eye of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_395"></span>[396](inst063.htm#fr_395) <span
id="iv.iii.xi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p11"></span>02 402 See Chrysost. ad <span
id="iv.iii.xi-p11.1"></span>[Heb.
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000)<span id="iv.iii.xi-p11.1"></span>.
As to Cratetes the Theban, see Plutarch, Lib. de Vitand. ære alien. and
Philostratus in Vita Apollonii.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[397](inst063.htm#fr_396) <span
id="iv.iii.xi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p15"></span>03 403 French, “Parer notre ame de ses
vrais ornemens;”—deck our soul with its true ornaments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 11. - OF JUSTIFICATION BY FAITH. BOTH THE NAME AND THE
REALITY DEFINED.](inst064)
