[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst036)  [Next](inst038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.iv-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 3.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span>EVERY THING PROCEEDING FROM THE CORRUPT
NATURE OF MAN DAMNABLE.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>The principal matters in this chapter
are—I. A recapitulation of the former chapter, proving, from passages of
Scriptures that the intellect and will of man are so corrupted, that no
integrity, no knowledge or fear of God, can now be found in him, sect. 1
and 2. II. Objections to this doctrine, from the virtues which shone in
some of the heathen, refuted, sect. 3 and 4. III. What kind of will
remains in man, the slave of sin, sect. 5. The remedy and cure, sect. 6.
IV. The opinion of Neo-Pelagian sophists concerning the preparation and
efficacy of the will, and also concerning perseverance and co-operating
grace, refuted, both by reason and Scripture, sect. 7–12. V. Some
passages from Augustine confirming the truth of this doctrine, sect. 13
and 14.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span>1. The intellect and will of the whole man
corrupt. The term *flesh* applies not only to the sensual, but also to
the higher part of the soul. This demonstrated from Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span>2. The heart also involved in corruption,
and hence in no part of man can integrity, or knowledge or the fear of
God, be found.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>3. Objection, that some of the heathen
were possessed of admirable endowments, and, therefore, that the nature
of man is not entirely corrupt. Answer, Corruption is not entirely
removed, but only inwardly restrained. Explanation of this answer.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>4. Objection still urged, that the
virtuous and vicious among the heathen must be put upon the same level,
or the virtuous prove that human nature, properly cultivated, is not
devoid of virtue. Answer, That these are not ordinary properties of
human nature, but special gifts of God. These gifts defiled by ambition,
and hence the actions proceeding from them, however esteemed by man,
have no merit with God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>5. Though man has still the faculty of
willing there is no soundness in it. He falls under the bondage of sin
necessarily, and yet voluntarily. Necessity must be distinguished from
compulsion. The ancient Theologians acquainted with this necessity. Some
passages condemning the vacillation of Lombard.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>6. Conversion to God constitutes the
remedy or soundness of the human will. This not only begun, but
continued and completed; the beginning, continuance, and completion,
being ascribed entirely to God. This proved by Ezekiel’s description of
the stony heart, and from other passages of Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span>7. Various Objections.—1. The will is
converted by God, but, when once prepared, does its part in the work of
conversion. Answer from Augustine. 2. Grace can do nothing without will,
nor the will without grace. Answer. Grace itself produces will. God
prevents the unwilling, making him willing, and follows up this
preventing grace that he may not will in vain. Another answer gathered
from various passages of Augustine.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span>8. Answer to the second Objection
continued. No will inclining to good except in the elect. The cause of
election out of man. Hence right will, as well as election, are from the
good pleasure of God. The beginning of willing and doing well is of
faith; faith again is the gift of God; and hence mere grace is the cause
of our beginning to will well. This proved by Scripture.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>9. Answer to second Objection continued.
That good will is merely of grace proved by the prayers of saints. Three
axioms 1. God does not prepare man’s heart, so that he can afterwards do
some good of himself, but every desire of rectitude, every inclination
to study, and every effort to pursue it, is from Him. 2. This desire,
study, and effort, do not stop short, but continue to effect. 3. This
progress is constant. The believer perseveres to the end. A third
Objection, and three answers to it.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span>10. A fourth Objection. Answer. Fifth
Objection. Answer. Answer confirmed by many passages of Scripture, and
supported by a passage from Augustine.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>11. Perseverance not of ourselves, but of
God. Objection. Two errors in the objection. Refutation of both.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span>12. An objection founded on the
distinction of co-operating grace. Answer. Answer confirmed by the
testimony of Augustine and Bernard.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p16"></span>13. Last part of the chapter, in which it
is proved by many passages of Augustine, that he held the doctrine here
taught.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p17"></span>14. An objection, representing Augustine
at variance with himself and other Theologians, removed. A summary of
Augustine’s doctrine on free will.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p18"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19"></span>1. The nature of man, in both parts of
his soul—viz. intellect and will—cannot be better ascertained than by
attending to the epithets applied to him in Scripture. If he is fully
depicted (and it may easily be proved that he is) by the words of our
Saviour, “that which is born of the flesh is flesh,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>[John
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19.1"></span>),
he must be a very miserable creature. For, as an apostle declares, “to
be carnally minded is death,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19.2"></span>[Rom.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19.2"></span>),
“It is enmity against God, and is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be.” Is it true that the flesh is so perverse, that it is
perpetually striving with all its might against God? that it cannot
accord with the righteousness of the divine law? that, in short, it can
beget nothing but the materials of death? Grant that there is nothing in
human nature but flesh, and then extract something good out of it if you
can. But it will be said, that the word *flesh* applies only to the
sensual, and not to the higher part of the soul. This, however, is
completely refuted by the words both of Christ and his apostle. The
statement of our Lord is, that a man must be born again, because he is
flesh. He requires not to be born again, with reference to the body. But
a mind is not born again merely by having some portion of it reformed.
It must be totally renewed. This is confirmed by the antithesis used in
both passages. In the contrast between the Spirit and the flesh, there
is nothing left of an intermediate nature. In this way, everything in
man, which is not spiritual, falls under the denomination of carnal. But
we have nothing of the Spirit except through regeneration. Everything,
therefore, which we have from nature is flesh. Any possible doubt which
might exist on the subject is removed by the words of Paul (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p19.3"></span>[Eph.
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p19.3"></span>), where, after a description of the old man,
who, he says, “is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts,” he bids us
“be renewed in the spirit” of our mind. You see that he places unlawful
and depraved desires not in the sensual part merely, but in the mind
itself, and therefore requires that it should be renewed. Indeed, he had
a little before drawn a picture of human nature, which shows that there
is no part in which it is not perverted and corrupted. For when he says
that the “Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, having the
understanding darkened being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19.4"></span>[Eph.
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#018)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19.4"></span>),
there can be no doubt that his words apply to all whom the Lord has not
yet formed anew both to wisdom and righteousness. This is rendered more
clear by the comparison which immediately follows, and by which he
reminds believers that they “have not so learned Christ” these words
implying that the grace of Christ is the only remedy for that blindness
and its evil consequences. Thus, too, had Isaiah prophesied of the
kingdom of Christ, when the Lord promised to the Church, that though
darkness should “cover the earth, and gross darkness the people,” yet
that he should “arise” upon it, and “his glory” should be seen upon it
(<span id="iv.ii.iv-p19.5"></span>[Isaiah
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p19.5"></span>). When it is thus declared that divine light
is to arise on the Church alone, all without the Church is left in
blindness and darkness. I will not enumerate all that occurs throughout
Scripture, and particularly in the Psalms and Prophetical writings, as
to the vanity of man. There is much in what David says, “Surely men of
low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie: to be laid in
the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p19.6"></span>[Ps.
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p19.6"></span>). The human mind receives a humbling blow
when all the thoughts which proceed from it are derided as foolish,
frivolous, perverse, and insane.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20"></span>2. In no degree more lenient is the
condemnation of the heart, when it is described as “deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p20.1"></span>[Jer.
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p20.1"></span>). But as I study brevity, I will be
satisfied with a single passage, one, however, in which as in a bright
mirror, we may behold a complete image of our nature. The Apostle, when
he would humble man’s pride, uses these words: “There is none righteous
no, not one: there is none that understandeth, there is none that
seeketh after God. They are all gone out of the way, they are together
become unprofitable; there is none that does good, no, not one. Their
throat is an open sepulchre; with their tongues they have used deceit;
the poison of asps is under their lips: Whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness: their feet are swift to shed blood: destruction and
misery are in their ways: and the way of peace have they not known:
there is no fear of God before their eyes,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>[Rom.
3:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p20.2"></span>). Thus he thunders not against certain
individuals, but against the whole posterity of Adam—not against the
depraved manners of any single age, but the perpetual corruption of
nature. His object in the passage is not merely to upbraid men in order
that they may repent, but to teach that all are overwhelmed with
inevitable calamity, and can be delivered from it only by the mercy of
God. As this could not be proved without previously proving the
overthrow and destruction of nature, he produced those passages to show
that its ruin is complete.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p21"></span>Let it be a fixed point, then, that men
are such as is here described, not by vicious custom, but by depravity
of nature. The reasoning of the Apostle, that there is no salvation for
man, save in the mercy of God, because in himself he is desperate and
undone, could not otherwise stand. I will not here labour to prove that
the passages apply, with the view of removing the doubts of any who
might think them quoted out of place. I will take them as if they had
been used by Paul for the first time, and not taken from the Prophets.
First, then, he strips man of righteousness, that is, integrity and
purity; and, secondly, he strips him of sound intelligence. He argues,
that defect of intelligence is proved by apostasy from God. To seek Him
is the beginning of wisdom, and, therefore, such defect must exist in
all who have revolted from Him. He subjoins, that all have gone astray,
and become as it were mere corruption; that there is none that does
good. He then enumerates the crimes by which those who have once given
loose to their wickedness pollute every member of their bodies. Lastly,
he declares that they have no fear of God, according to whose rule all
our steps should be directed. If these are the hereditary properties of
the human race, it is vain to look for anything good in our nature. I
confess indeed, that all these iniquities do not break out in every
individual. Still it cannot be denied that the hydra lurks in every
breast. For as a body, while it contains and fosters the cause and
matter of disease, cannot be called healthy, although pain is not
actually felt; so a soul, while teeming with such seeds of vice, cannot
be called sound. This similitude, however, does not apply throughout. In
a body however morbid the functions of life are performed; but the soul,
when plunged into that deadly abyss, not only labours under vice, but is
altogether devoid of good.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22"></span>3. Here, again we are met with a question
very much the same as that which was previously solved. In every age
there have been some who, under the guidance of nature, were all their
lives devoted to virtue. It is of no consequence, that many blots may be
detected in their conduct; by the mere study of virtue, they evinced
that there was somewhat of purity in their nature. The value which
virtues of this kind have in the sight of God will be considered more
fully when we treat of the merit of works. Meanwhile however, it will be
proper to consider it in this place also, in so far as necessary for the
exposition of the subject in hand. Such examples, then, seem to warn us
against supposing that the nature of man is utterly vicious, since,
under its guidance, some have not only excelled in illustrious deeds,
but conducted themselves most honourably through the whole course of
their lives. But we ought to consider, that, notwithstanding of the
corruption of our nature, there is some room for divine grace, such
grace as, without purifying it, may lay it under internal restraint.
For, did the Lord let every mind loose to wanton in its lusts, doubtless
there is not a man who would not show that his nature is capable of all
the crimes with which Paul charges it (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>[Rom.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#000)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22.1"></span>
compared with <span id="iv.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>[Ps.
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p22.2"></span>,
&c). What? Can you exempt yourself from the number of those whose feet
are swift to shed blood; whose hands are foul with rapine and murder;
whose throats are like open sepulchres; whose tongues are deceitful;
whose lips are venomous; whose actions are useless, unjust, rotten,
deadly; whose soul is without God; whose inward parts are full of
wickedness; whose eyes are on the watch for deception; whose minds are
prepared for insult; whose every part, in short, is framed for endless
deeds of wickedness? If every soul is capable of such abominations (and
the Apostle declares this boldly), it is surely easy to see what the
result would be, if the Lord were to permit human passion to follow its
bent. No ravenous beast would rush so furiously, no stream, however
rapid and violent, so impetuously burst its banks. In the elect, God
cures these diseases in the mode which will shortly be explained; in
others, he only lays them under such restraint as may prevent them from
breaking forth to a degree incompatible with the preservation of the
established order of things. Hence, how much soever men may disguise
their impurity, some are restrained only by shame, others by a fear of
the laws, from breaking out into many kinds of wickedness. Some aspire
to an honest life, as deeming it most conducive to their interest, while
others are raised above the vulgar lot, that, by the dignity of their
station, they may keep inferiors to their duty. Thus God, by his
providence, curbs the perverseness of nature, preventing it from
breaking forth into action, yet without rendering it inwardly pure.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23"></span>4. The objection, however, is not yet
solved. For we must either put Cataline on the same footing with
Camillus, or hold Camillus to be an example that nature, when carefully
cultivated, is not wholly void of goodness. I admit that the specious
qualities which Camillus possessed were divine gifts, and appear
entitled to commendation when viewed in themselves. But in what way will
they be proofs of a virtuous nature? Must we not go back to the mind,
and from it begin to reason thus? If a natural man possesses such
integrity of manners, nature is not without the faculty of studying
virtue. But what if his mind was depraved and perverted, and followed
anything rather than rectitude? Such it undoubtedly was, if you grant
that he was only a natural man. How then will you laud the power of
human nature for good, if, even where there is the highest semblance of
integrity, a corrupt bias is always detected? Therefore, as you would
not commend a man for virtue whose vices impose upon you by a show of
virtue, so you will not attribute a power of choosing rectitude to the
human will while rooted in depravity (see August. lib. 4, Cont. Julian).
Still, the surest and easiest answer to the objection is, that those are
not common endowments of nature, but special gifts of God, which he
distributes in divers forms, and, in a definite measure, to men
otherwise profane. For which reason, we hesitate not, in common
language, to say, that one is of a good, another of a vicious nature;
though we cease not to hold that both are placed under the universal
condition of human depravity. All we mean is that God has conferred on
the one a special grace which he has not seen it meet to confer on the
other. When he was pleased to set Saul over the kingdom, he made him as
it were a new man. This is the thing meant by Plato, when, alluding to a
passage in the Iliad, he says, that the children of kings are
distinguished at their birth by some special qualities—God, in kindness
to the human race, often giving a spirit of heroism to those whom he
destines for empire. In this way, the great leaders celebrated in
history were formed. The same judgment must be given in the case of
private individuals. But as those endued with the greatest talents were
always impelled by the greatest ambitions (a stain which defiles all
virtues and makes them lose all favour in the sight of God), so we
cannot set any value on anything that seems praiseworthy in ungodly men.
We may add, that the principal part of rectitude is wanting, when there
is no zeal for the glory of God, and there is no such zeal in those whom
he has not regenerated by his Spirit. Nor is it without good cause said
in Isaiah, that on Christ should rest “the spirit of knowledge, and of
the fear of the Lord,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23.1"></span>[Isa.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p23.1"></span>); for by this we are taught that all who are
strangers to Christ are destitute of that fear of God which is the
beginning of wisdom (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p23.2"></span>[Ps.
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p23.2"></span>). The virtues which deceive us by an empty
show may have their praise in civil society and the common intercourse
of life, but before the judgment-seat of God they will be of no value to
establish a claim of righteousness.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24"></span>5. When the will is enchained as the
slave of sin, it cannot make a movement towards goodness, far less
steadily pursue it. Every such movement is the first step in that
conversion to God, which in Scripture is entirely ascribed to divine
grace. Thus Jeremiah prays, “Turn thou me, and I shall be turned,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>[Jer.
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p24.1"></span>). Hence, too, in the same chapter,
describing the spiritual redemption of believers, the Prophet says, “The
Lord has redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of him that was
stronger than he,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p24.2"></span>[Jer.
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p24.2"></span>); intimating how close the fetters are with
which the sinner is bound, so long as he is abandoned by the Lord, and
acts under the yoke of the devil. Nevertheless, there remains a will
which both inclines and hastens on with the strongest affection towards
sin; man, when placed under this bondage, being deprived not of will,
but of soundness of will. Bernard says not improperly, that all of us
have a will; but to will well is proficiency, to will ill is defect.
Thus simply to will is the part of man, to will ill the part of corrupt
nature, to will well the part of grace. Moreover, when I say that the
will, deprived of liberty, is led or dragged by necessity to evil, it is
strange that any should deem the expression harsh, seeing there is no
absurdity in it, and it is not at variance with pious use. It does,
however, offend those who know not how to distinguish between necessity
and compulsion. Were any one to ask them, Is not God necessarily good,
is not the devil necessarily wicked, what answer would they give? The
goodness of God is so connected with his Godhead, that it is not more
necessary to be God than to be good; whereas the devil, by his fall, was
so estranged from goodness, that he can do nothing but evil. Should any
one give utterance to the profane jeer (see Calvin Adv. Pighium), that
little praise is due to God for a goodness to which he is forced, is it
not obvious to every man to reply, It is owing not to violent impulse,
but to his boundless goodness, that he cannot do evil? Therefore, if the
free will of God in doing good is not impeded, because he necessarily
must do good; if the devil, who can do nothing but evil, nevertheless
sins voluntarily; can it be said that man sins less voluntarily because
he is under a necessity of sinning? This necessity is uniformly
proclaimed by Augustine, who, even when pressed by the invidious cavil
of Celestius, hesitated not to assert it in the following terms: “Man
through liberty became a sinner, but corruption, ensuing as the penalty,
has converted liberty into necessity,” (August. lib. de Perf. Justin).
Whenever mention is made of the subject, he hesitates not to speak in
this way of the necessary bondage of sin (August. de Nature et Gratia,
et alibi). Let this, then, be regarded as the sum of the distinction.
Man, since he was corrupted by the fall, sins not forced or unwilling,
but voluntarily, by a most forward bias of the mind; not by violent
compulsion, or external force, but by the movement of his own passion;
and yet such is the depravity of his nature, that he cannot move and act
except in the direction of evil. If this is true, the thing not
obscurely expressed is, that he is under a necessity of sinning.
Bernard, assenting to Augustine, thus writes: “Among animals, man alone
is free, and yet sin intervening, he suffers a kind of violence, but a
violence proceeding from his will, not from nature, so that it does not
even deprive him of innate liberty,” (Bernard, Sermo. super Cantica,
81). For that which is voluntary is also free. A little after he adds,
“Thus, by some means strange and wicked, the will itself, being
deteriorated by sin, makes a necessity; but so that the necessity, in as
much as it is voluntary, cannot excuse the will, and the will, in as
much as it is enticed, cannot exclude the necessity.” For this necessity
is in a manner voluntary. He afterwards says that “we are under a yoke,
but no other yoke than that of voluntary servitude; therefore, in
respect of servitude, we are miserable, and in respect of will,
inexcusable; because the will, when it was free, made itself the slave
of sin.” At length he concludes, “Thus the soul, in some strange and
evil way, is held under this kind of voluntary, yet sadly free
necessity, both bond and free; bond in respect of necessity, free in
respect of will: and what is still more strange, and still more
miserable, it is guilty because free, and enslaved because guilty, and
therefore enslaved because free.” My readers hence perceive that the
doctrine which I deliver is not new, but the doctrine which of old
Augustine delivered with the consent of all the godly, and which was
afterwards shut up in the cloisters of monks for almost a thousand
years. Lombard, by not knowing how to distinguish between necessity and
compulsion, gave occasion to a pernicious error.16  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26"></span>6. On the other hand, it may be proper to
consider what the remedy is which divine grace provides for the
correction and cure of natural corruption. Since the Lord, in bringing
assistance, supplies us with what is lacking, the nature of that
assistance will immediately make manifest its converse—viz. our penury.
When the Apostle says to the Philippians, “Being confident of this very
thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will perform it until
the day of Jesus Christ,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>[Phil.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.1"></span>),
there cannot be a doubt, that by the good work thus begun, he means the
very commencement of conversion in the will. God, therefore, begins the
good work in us by exciting in our hearts a desire, a love, and a study
of righteousness, or (to speak more correctly) by turning, training, and
guiding our hearts unto righteousness; and he completes this good work
by confirming us unto perseverance. But lest any one should cavil that
the good work thus begun by the Lord consists in aiding the will, which
is in itself weak, the Spirit elsewhere declares what the will, when
left to itself, is able to do. His words are, “A new heart also will I
give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away
the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.2"></span>[Ezek.
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#027)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.2"></span>).
How can it be said that the weakness of the human will is aided so as to
enable it to aspire effectually to the choice of good, when the fact is,
that it must be wholly transformed and renovated? If there is any
softness in a stone; if you can make it tender, and flexible into any
shape, then it may be said, that the human heart may be shaped for
rectitude, provided that which is imperfect in it is supplemented by
divine grace. But if the Spirit, by the above similitude, meant to show
that no good can ever be extracted from our heart until it is made
altogether new, let us not attempt to share with Him what He claims for
himself alone. If it is like turning a stone into flesh when God turns
us to the study of rectitude, everything proper to our own will is
abolished, and that which succeeds in its place is wholly of God. I say
the will is abolished, but not in so far as it is will, for in
conversion everything essential to our original nature remains: I also
say, that it is created anew, not because the will then begins to exist,
but because it is turned from evil to good. This, I maintains is wholly
the work of God, because, as the Apostle testifies, we are not
“sufficient of ourselves to think any thing as of ourselves,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.3"></span>[2 Cor.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.3"></span>).
Accordingly, he elsewhere says, not merely that God assists the weak or
corrects the depraved will, but that he worketh in us to will (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.4"></span>[Phil.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.4"></span>). From this it is easily inferred, as I have
said, that everything good in the will is entirely the result of grace.
In the same sense, the Apostle elsewhere says, “It is the same God which
worketh all in all,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.5"></span>[I Cor.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.5"></span>). For he is not there treating of universal
government, but declaring that all the good qualities which believers
possess are due to God. In using the term “all,” he certainly makes God
the author of spiritual life from its beginning to its end. This he had
previously taught in different terms, when he said that there is “one
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.6"></span>[1 Cor.
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p26.6"></span>);
thus plainly extolling the new creation, by which everything of our
common nature is destroyed. There is here a tacit antithesis between
Adam and Christ, which he elsewhere explains more clearly when he says,
“We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which
God has before ordained that we should walk in them,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.7"></span>[Eph.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.7"></span>). His meaning is to show in this way that
our salvation is gratuitous because the beginning of goodness is from
the second creation which is obtained in Christ. If any, even the
minutest, ability were in ourselves, there would also be some merit. But
to show our utter destitution, he argues that we merit nothing, because
we are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has prepared;
again intimating by these words, that all the fruits of good works are
originally and immediately from God. Hence the Psalmist, after saying
that the Lord “has made us,” to deprive us of all share in the work,
immediately adds, “not we ourselves.” That he is speaking of
regeneration, which is the commencement of the spiritual life, is
obvious from the context, in which the next words are, “we are his
people, and the sheep of his pasture,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.8"></span>[Psalm
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p26.8"></span>). Not contented with simply giving God the
praise of our salvation, he distinctly excludes us from all share in it,
just as if he had said that not one particle remains to man as a ground
of boasting. The whole is of God.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p27"></span>7. But perhaps there will be some who,
while they admit that the will is in its own nature averse to
righteousness, and is converted solely by the power of God, will yet
hold that, when once it is prepared, it performs a part in acting. This
they found upon the words of Augustine, that grace precedes every good
work; the will accompanying, not leading; a handmaid, and not a guide
(August. ad Bonifac. <span id="iv.ii.iv-p27.1"></span>Ep. 106<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p27.1"></span>). The words thus not improperly used by this
holy writer, Lombard preposterously wrests to the above effect (Lombard,
lib. 2, Dist. 25). But I maintain, that as well in the words of the
Psalmist which I have quoted, as in other passages of Scripture, two
things are clearly taught—viz. that the Lord both corrects, or rather
destroys, our depraved will, and also substitutes a good will from
himself. In as much as it is prevented by grace, I have no objection to
your calling it a handmaid; but in as much as when formed again, it is
the work of the Lord, it is erroneous to say, that it accompanies
preventing grace as a voluntary attendant. Therefore, Chrysostom is
inaccurate in saying, that grace cannot do any thing without will, nor
will any thing without grace (Serm. de Invent. Sanct. Crucis); as if
grace did not, in terms of the passage lately quoted from Paul, produce
the very will itself. The intention of Augustine, in calling the human
will the handmaid of grace, was not to assign it a kind of second place
to grace in the performance of good works. His object merely was to
refute the pestilential dogma of Pelagius, who made human merit the
first cause of salvation. As was sufficient for his purpose at the time,
he contends that grace is prior to all merit, while, in the meantime, he
says nothing of the other question as to the perpetual effect of grace,
which, however, he handles admirably in other places. For in saying, as
he often does, that the Lord prevents the unwilling in order to make him
willing, and follows after the willing that he may not will in vain, he
makes Him the sole author of good works. Indeed, his sentiments on this
subject are too clear to need any lengthened illustration. “Men,” says
he, “labour to find in our will something that is our own, and not
God’s; how they can find it, I wot not,” (August. de Remiss. Peccat.,
lib. 2 c. 18). In his First Book against Pelagius and Celestius,
expounding the saying of Christ, “Every man therefore that has heard,
and has learned of the Father, cometh unto me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p27.2"></span>[John
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p27.2"></span>), he says, “The will is aided not only so as
to know what is to be done, but also to do what it knows.” And thus,
when God teaches not by the letter of the Law, but by the grace of the
Spirit, he so teaches, that every one who has learned, not only knowing,
sees, but also willing, desires, and acting, performs.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p28"></span>8. Since we are now occupied with the
chief point on which the controversy turns, let us give the reader the
sum of the matter in a few, and those most unambiguous, passages of
Scripture; thereafter, lest any one should charge us with distorting
Scripture, let us show that the truth, which we maintain to be derived
from Scripture, is not unsupported by the testimony of this holy man (I
mean Augustine). I deem it unnecessary to bring forward every separate
passage of Scripture in confirmation of my doctrine. A selection of the
most choice passages will pave the way for the understanding of all
those which lie scattered up and down in the sacred volume. On the other
hand, I thought it not out of place to show my accordance with a man
whose authority is justly of so much weight in the Christian world. It
is certainly easy to prove that the commencement of good is only with
God, and that none but the elect have a will inclined to good. But the
cause of election must be sought out of man; and hence it follows that a
right will is derived not from man himself, but from the same good
pleasure by which we were chosen before the creation of the world.
Another argument much akin to this may be added. The beginning of right
will and action being of faith, we must see whence faith itself is. But
since Scripture proclaims throughout that it is the free gift of God, it
follows, that when men, who are with their whole soul naturally prone to
evil, begin to have a good will, it is owing to mere grace. Therefore,
when the Lord, in the conversion of his people, sets down these two
things as requisite to be done—viz. to take away the heart of stone, and
give a heart of flesh, he openly declares, that, in order to our
conversion to righteousness, what is ours must be taken away, and that
what is substituted in its place is of himself. Nor does he declare this
in one passage only. For he says in Jeremiah “I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever;” and a little after
he says, “I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart
from me,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p28.1"></span>[Jer.
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p28.1"></span>).
Again, in Ezekiel, “I will give them one heart, and I will put a new
spirit within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh,
and will give them an heart of flesh,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p28.2"></span>[Ezek.
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p28.2"></span>). He could not more clearly claim to
himself, and deny to us, everything good and right in our will, than by
declaring, that in our conversion there is the creation of a new spirit
and a new heart. It always follows, both that nothing good can proceed
from our will until it be formed again, and that after it is formed
again in so far as it is good, it is of God, and not of us.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29"></span>9. With this view, likewise the prayers
of the saints correspond. Thus Solomon prays that the Lord may “incline
our hearts unto him, to walk in his ways, and keep his commandments”
(<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29.1"></span>[1 Kings
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#058)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p29.1"></span>); intimating that our heart is perverse, and
naturally indulges in rebellion against the Divine law, until it be
turned. Again, it is said in the Psalms, “Incline my heart unto thy
testimonies,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29.2"></span>[Ps.
119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p29.2"></span>). For we should always note the antithesis
between the rebellious movement of the heart, and the correction by
which it is subdued to obedience. David feeling for the time that he was
deprived of directing grace, prays, “Create in me a clean heart, O God;
and renew a right spirit within me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p29.3"></span>[Ps.
51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p29.3"></span>). Is not this an acknowledgment that all the
parts of the heart are full of impurity, and that the soul has received
a twist, which has turned it from straight to crooked? And then, in
describing the cleansing, which he earnestly demands as a thing to be
created by God, does he not ascribe the work entirely to Him? If it is
objected, that the prayer itself is a symptom of a pious and holy
affection, it is easy to reply, that although David had already in some
measure repented, he was here contrasting the sad fall which he had
experienced with his former state. Therefore, speaking in the person of
a man alienated from God, he properly prays for the blessings which God
bestows upon his elect in regeneration. Accordingly, like one dead, he
desires to be created anew, so as to become, instead of a slave of
Satan, an instrument of the Holy Spirit. Strange and monstrous are the
longings of our pride. There is nothing which the Lord enjoins more
strictly than the religious observance of his Sabbath, in other words
resting from our works; but in nothing do we show greater reluctance
than to renounce our own works, and give due place to the works of God.
Did not arrogance stand in the way, we could not overlook the clear
testimony which Christ has borne to the efficacy of his grace. “I,” said
he, “am the true vine, and my Father is the husband man.” “As the branch
cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can
ye, except ye abide in me,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29.4"></span>[John
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29.4"></span>).
If we can no more bear fruit of ourselves than a vine can bud when
rooted up and deprived of moisture, there is no longer any room to ask
what the aptitude of our nature is for good. There is no ambiguity in
the conclusion, “For without me ye can do nothing.” He says not that we
are too weak to suffice for ourselves; but, by reducing us to nothing,
he excludes the idea of our possessing any, even the least ability. If,
when engrafted into Christ, we bear fruit like the vine, which draws its
vegetative power from the moisture of the ground, and the dew of heaven,
and the fostering warmth of the sun, I see nothing in a good work, which
we can call our own, without trenching upon what is due to God. It is
vain to have recourse to the frivolous cavil, that the sap and the power
of producing are already contained in the vine, and that, therefore,
instead of deriving everything from the earth or the original root, it
contributes something of its own. Our Saviour’s words simply mean, that
when separated from him, we are nothing but dry, useless wood, because,
when so separated, we have no power to do good, as he elsewhere says,
“Every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted
up,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29.5"></span>[Mt.
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p29.5"></span>). Accordingly, in the passage already quoted
from the Apostle Paul, he attributes the whole operation to God, “It is
God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iv-p29.6"></span>[Phil.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p29.6"></span>). The first part of a good work is the will,
the second is vigorous effort in the doing of it.17  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) God is the author of both. It is,
therefore, robbery from God to arrogate anything to ourselves, either in
the will or the act. Were it said that God gives assistance to a weak
will, something might be left us; but when it is said that he makes the
will, every thing good in it is placed without us. Moreover, since even
a good will is still weighed down by the burden of the flesh, and
prevented from rising, it is added, that, to meet the difficulties of
the contest, God supplies the persevering effort until the effect is
obtained. Indeed, the Apostle could not otherwise have said, as he
elsewhere does, that “it is the same God which worketh all in all,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iv-p30.1"></span>[1 Cor.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p30.1"></span>); words comprehending, as we have already
observed (sec. 6), the whole course of the spiritual life. For which
reason, David, after praying, “Teach me thy way, O Lord, I will walk in
thy truths” adds, “unite my heart to fear thy name,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p30.2"></span>[Ps.
86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p30.2"></span>); by these words intimating, that even those
who are well-affected are liable to so many distractions that they
easily become vain, and fall away, if not strengthened to persevere. And
hence, in another passage, after praying, “Order my steps in thy word,”
he requests that strength also may be given him to carry on the war,
“Let not any iniquity have dominion over me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p30.3"></span>[Ps.
119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p30.3"></span>). In this way, the Lord both begins and
perfects the good work in us, so that it is due to Him, first, that the
will conceives a love of rectitude, is inclined to desire, is moved and
stimulated to pursue it; secondly, that this choice, desire, and
endeavour fail not, but are carried forward to effect; and, lastly, that
we go on without interruption, and persevere even to the end.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p31"></span>10. This movement of the will is not of
that description which was for many ages taught and believed—viz. a
movement which thereafter leaves us the choice to obey or resist it, but
one which affects us efficaciously. We must, therefore, repudiate the
oft-repeated sentiment of Chrysostom, “Whom he draws, he draws
willingly;” insinuating that the Lord only stretches out his hand, and
waits to see whether we will be pleased to take his aid. We grant that,
as man was originally constituted, he could incline to either side, but
since he has taught us by his example how miserable a thing free will is
if God works not in us to will and to do, of what use to us were grace
imparted in such scanty measure? Nay, by our own ingratitude, we obscure
and impair divine grace. The Apostle’s doctrine is not, that the grace
of a good will is offered to us if we will accept of it, but that God
himself is pleased so to work in us as to guide, turn, and govern our
heart by his Spirit, and reign in it as his own possession. Ezekiel
promises that a new spirit will be given to the elect, not merely that
they may be able to walk in his precepts, but that they may really walk
in them (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p31.1"></span>[Ezek.
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p31.1"></span>; 36:27). And the only meaning which can be
given to our Saviour’s words, “Every man, therefore, that has heard and
learned of the Father, cometh unto me,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p31.2"></span>[John
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p31.2"></span>), is, that the grace of God is effectual in
itself. This Augustine maintains in his book De Prædestinatione Sancta.
This grace is not bestowed on all promiscuously, according to the common
brocard (of Occam, if I mistake not), that it is not denied to any one
who does what in him lies. Men are indeed to be taught that the favour
of God is offered, without exception, to all who ask it; but since those
only begin to ask whom heaven by grace inspires, even this minute
portion of praise must not be withheld from him. It is the privilege of
the elect to be regenerated by the Spirit of God, and then placed under
his guidance and government. Wherefore Augustine justly derides some who
arrogate to themselves a certain power of willing, as well as censures
others who imagine that that which is a special evidence of gratuitous
election is given to all (August. de Verbis Apost. Serm. 21). He says,
“Nature is common to all, but not grace;” and he calls it a showy
acuteness “which shines by mere vanity, when that which God bestows, on
whom he will is attributed generally to all.” Elsewhere he says, “How
came you? By believing. Fear, lest by arrogating to yourself the merit
of finding the right way, you perish from the right way. I came, you
say, by free choice, came by my own will. Why do you boast? Would you
know that even this was given you? Hear Christ exclaiming, ‘No man
comets unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him.’ ” And
from the words of John (6:44), he infers it to be an incontrovertible
fact, that the hearts of believers are so effectually governed from
above, that they follow with undeviating affection. “Whosoever is born
of God does not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p31.3"></span>[I John
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p31.3"></span>).
That intermediate movement which the sophists imagine, a movement which
every one is free to obey or to reject, is obviously excluded by the
doctrine of effectual perseverance.17  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p33"></span>11. As to perseverance, it would
undoubtedly have been regarded as the gratuitous gift of God, had not
the very pernicious error prevailed, that it is bestowed in proportion
to human merit, according to the reception which each individual gives
to the first grace. This having given rise to the idea that it was
entirely in our own power to receive or reject the offered grace of God,
that idea is no sooner exploded than the error founded on it must fall.
The error, indeed, is twofold. For, besides teaching that our gratitude
for the first grace and our legitimate use of it is rewarded by
subsequent supplies of grace, its abettors add that, after this, grace
does not operate alone, but only co-operates with ourselves. As to the
former, we must hold that the Lord, while he daily enriches his
servants, and loads them with new gifts of his grace, because he
approves of and takes pleasure in the work which he has begun, finds
that in them which he may follow up with larger measures of grace. To
this effect are the sentences, “To him that has shall be given.” “Well
done, good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things,” (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p33.1"></span>[Matt.
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p33.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.iv-p33.2"></span>[Luke
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#017),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#026)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p33.2"></span>).
But here two precautions are necessary. It must not be said that the
legitimate use of the first grace is rewarded by subsequent measures of
grace, as if man rendered the grace of God effectual by his own
industry, nor must it be thought that there is any such remuneration as
to make it cease to be the gratuitous grace of God. I admit, then, that
believers may expect as a blessing from God, that the better the use
they make of previous, the larger the supplies they will receive of
future grace; but I say that even this use is of the Lord, and that this
remuneration is bestowed freely of mere good will. The trite distinction
of operating and co-operating grace is employed no less sinistrously
than unhappily. Augustine, indeed, used it, but softened it by a
suitable definition—viz. that God, by co-operating, perfects what he
begins by operating,—that both graces are the same, but obtain different
names from the different manner in which they produce their effects.
Whence it follows, that he does not make an apportionment between God
and man, as if a proper movement on the part of each produced a mutual
concurrence. All he does is to mark a multiplication of grace. To this
effect, accordingly, he elsewhere says, that in man good will precedes
many gifts from God; but among these gifts is this good will itself.
(*August. Enchiridion ad Laurent*. cap. 32). Whence it follows, that
nothing is left for the will to arrogate as its own. This Paul has
expressly stated. For, after saying, “It is God which worketh in you
both to will and to do,” he immediately adds, “of his good pleasure,”
(<span id="iv.ii.iv-p33.3"></span>[Phil.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p33.3"></span>); indicating by this expression, that the
blessing is gratuitous. As to the common saying, that after we have
given admission to the first grace, our efforts co-operate with
subsequent grace, this is my answer:—If it is meant that after we are
once subdued by the power of the Lord to the obedience of righteousness,
we proceed voluntarily, and are inclined to follow the movement of
grace, I have nothing to object. For it is most certain, that where the
grace of God reigns, there is also this readiness to obey. And whence
this readiness, but just that the Spirit of God being everywhere
consistent with himself, after first begetting a principle of obedience,
cherishes and strengthens it for perseverance? If, again, it is meant
that man is able of himself to be a fellow-labourer with the grace of
God, I hold it to be a most pestilential delusion.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p34"></span>12. In support of this view, some make an
ignorant and false application of the Apostle’s words: “I laboured more
abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which was with
me,” (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p34.1"></span>[1 Cor.
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p34.1"></span>). The meaning they give them is, that as
Paul might have seemed to speak somewhat presumptuously in preferring
himself to all the other apostles, he corrects the expression so far by
referring the praise to the grace of God, but he, at the same time,
calls himself a co-operator with grace. It is strange that this should
have proved a stumbling-block to so many writers, otherwise respectable.
The Apostle says not that the grace of God laboured with him so as to
make him a co-partner in the labour. He rather transfers the whole merit
of the labour to grace alone, by thus modifying his first expression,
“It was not I,” says he, “that laboured, but the grace of God that was
present with me.” Those who have adopted the erroneous interpretation
have been misled by an ambiguity in the expression, or rather by a
preposterous translation, in which the force of the Greek article is
overlooked. For to take the words literally, the Apostle does not say
that grace was a fellow-worker with him, but that the grace which was
with him was sole worker. And this is taught not obscurely, though
briefly, by Augustine when he says, “Good will in man precedes many
gifts from God, but not all gifts, seeing that the will which precedes
is itself among the number.” He adds the reason, “for it is written,
‘the God of my mercy shall prevent me,’ (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p34.2"></span>[Ps.
59:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#010)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p34.2"></span>), and ‘Surely goodness and mercy shall
follow me,’ (<span id="iv.ii.iv-p34.3"></span>[Ps.
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p34.3"></span>); it prevents him that is unwilling, and
makes him willing; it follows him that is willing, that he may not will
in vain.” To this Bernard assents, introducing the Church as praying
thus, “Draw me, who am in some measure unwilling, and make me willing;
draw me, who am sluggishly lagging, and make me run,” (Serm. 2 in
Cantic).

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p35"></span>13. Let us now hear Augustine in his own
words, lest the Pelagians of our age, I mean the sophists of the
Sorbonne, charge us after their wont with being opposed to all
antiquity. In this indeed they imitate their father Pelagius, by whom of
old a similar charge was brought against Augustine. In the second
chapter of his Treatise De Correptione et Gratis, addressed to
Valentinus, Augustine explains at length what I will state briefly, but
in his own words, that to Adam was given the grace of persevering in
goodness if he had the will; to us it is given to will, and by will
overcome concupiscence: that Adam, therefore, had the power if he had
the will, but did not will to have the power, whereas to us is given
both the will and the power; that the original freedom of man was to be
able not to sin, but that we have a much greater freedom—viz. not to be
able to sin. And lest it should be supposed, as Lombard erroneously does
(lib. 2 Dist. 25), that he is speaking of the perfection of the future
state, he shortly after removes all doubt when he says, “For so much is
the will of the saints inflamed by the Holy Spirit, that they are able,
because they are willing; and willing, because God worketh in them so to
will.” For if, in such weakness (in which, however, to suppress pride,
“strength” must be made “perfect,”) their own will is left to them, in
such sense that, by the help of God, they are able, if they will, while
at the same time God does not work in them so as to make them will;
among so many temptations and infirmities the will itself would give
way, and, consequently, they would not be able to persevere. Therefore,
to meet the infirmity of the human will, and prevent it from failing,
how weak soever it might be, divine grace was made to act on it
inseparably and uninterruptedly. Augustine (ibid. cap. 14). next
entering fully into the question, how our hearts follow the movement
when God affects them, necessarily says, indeed, that the Lord draws men
by their own wills; wills, however, which he himself has produced. We
have now an attestation by Augustine to the truth which we are specially
desirous to maintain—viz. that the grace offered by the Lord is not
merely one which every individual has full liberty of choosing to
receive or reject, but a grace which produces in the heart both choice
and will: so that all the good works which follow after are its fruit
and effect; the only will which yields obedience being the will which
grace itself has made. In another place, Augustine uses these words,
“Every good work in us is performed only by grace,” (August. <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p35.1"></span>Ep. 105<span id="iv.ii.iv-p35.1"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p36"></span>14. In saying elsewhere that the will is
not taken away by grace, but out of bad is changed into good, and after
it is good is assisted,—he only means, that man is not drawn as if by an
extraneous impulse17  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) without
the movement of the heart, but is inwardly affected so as to obey from
the heart. Declaring that grace is given specially and gratuitously to
the elect, he writes in this way to Boniface: “We know that Divine grace
is not given to all men, and that to those to whom it is given, it is
not given either according to the merit of works, or according to the
merit of the will, but by free grace: in regard to those to whom it is
not given, we know that the not giving of it is a just judgment from
God,” (August. ad Bonifac. <span id="iv.ii.iv-p37.1"></span>Ep. 106<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p37.1"></span>). In the same epistle, he argues strongly
against the opinion of those who hold that subsequent grace is given to
human merit as a reward for not rejecting the first grace. For he
presses Pelagius to confess that gratuitous grace is necessary to us for
every action, and that merely from the fact of its being truly grace, it
cannot be the recompense of works. But the matter cannot be more briefly
summed up than in the eighth chapter of his Treatise De Correptione et
Gratia, where he shows, *First*, that human will does not by liberty
obtain grace, but by grace obtains liberty. *Secondly*, that by means of
the same grace, the heart being impressed with a feeling of delight, is
trained to persevere, and strengthened with invincible fortitude.
*Thirdly*, that while grace governs the will, it never falls; but when
grace abandons it, it falls forthwith. *Fourthly*, that by the free
mercy of God, the will is turned to good, and when turned, perseveres.
*Fifthly*, that the direction of the will to good, and its constancy
after being so directed, depend entirely on the will of God, and not on
any human merit. Thus the will (free will, if you choose to call it so),
which is left to man, is, as he in another place (<span
id="iv.ii.iv-p37.2"></span>Ep. 46<span id="iv.ii.iv-p37.2"></span>)
describes it, a will which can neither be turned to God, nor continue in
God, unless by grace; a will which, whatever its ability may be, derives
all that ability from grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](inst037.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p25"></span>69 169 The French adds, “Qui a esté une
peste mortelle ˆ l’Eglise, d’estimer que l’homme pouvoit eviter le peché
pource qu’il peche franchement;” Which has been a deadly pest to the
Church—viz. that man could avoid sin, because he sins frankly.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](inst037.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p29.7"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p30"></span>70 170 French, “La premiere partie des
bonnes œuvres est la volonté; l’autre est de s’efforcer a l’executer et
le pouvoir faire.”—The first part of good works is the will; the second
is the attempt to execute it, and the power to do so.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](inst037.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p31.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p32"></span>71 171 The French is, “Nous voyons que ce
mouvement sans vertu, lequel imaginent les sophistes, est exclus;
J’entend ce qu’ils disent, qu Dieu offre seulement sa grace, a telle
condition que chacun la refuse ou accepte selon que bon lui semble.
Telle reverie di-je, qui n’est ne chair ne poisson, est exclue, quand il
est dit que Dieu nous fait tellement perseverer que nous sommes hors de
danger de decliver.”—We see that this movement without virtue, which the
sophists imagine, is excluded, I mean their dogma, that God only offers
his grace on such conditions that each may refuse or accept it as seems
to him good. Such a reverie, I say, which is neither fish nor flesh, is
excluded, when it is said that God makes us so persevere that we are in
no danger of declining.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](inst037.htm#fr_165) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p37"></span>72 172 French, “Come une pierre;”—like a
stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 4. - HOW GOD WORKS IN THE HEARTS OF MEN.](inst038)
