[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst067)  [Next](inst069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xvi"></span>

### <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 15.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p1"></span>THE BOASTED MERIT OF WORKS SUBVERSIVE
BOTH OF THE GLORY OF GOD, IN BESTOWING RIGHTEOUSNESS, AND OF THE
CERTAINTY OF SALVATION.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p2"></span>The divisions of this chapter are,—I. To
the doctrine of free justification is opposed the question, Whether or
not works merit favor with God, sec. 1. This question answered, sec. 2
and 3. II. An exposition of certain passages of Scripture produced in
support of the erroneous doctrine of merit, sec. 4 and 5. III. Sophisms
of Semipelagian Schoolmen refuted, sec. 6 and 7. IV. Conclusion, proving
the sufficiency of the orthodox doctrine, sec. 8.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p3"></span>*Sections*.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p4"></span>1. After a brief recapitulation, the
question, Whether or not good works merit favor with God, considered.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p5"></span>2. First answer, fixing the meaning of
the term Merit. This term improperly applied to works, but used in a
good sense, as by Augustine, Chrysostom, Bernard.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p6"></span>3. A second answer to the question.
First by a negative, then by a concession. In the rewarding of works
what to be attributed to God, and what to man. Why good works please
God, and are advantageous to those who do them. The ingratitude of
seeking righteousness by works. This shown by a double similitude.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p7"></span>4. First objection taken from
Ecclesiasticus. Second objection from the Epistle to the Hebrews. Two
answers to both objections. A weak distinction refuted.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p8"></span>5. A third and most complete answer,
calling us back to Christ as the only foundation of salvation. How
Christ is our righteousness. Whence it is manifest that we have all
things in Christ and he nothing in us.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p9"></span>6. We must abhor the sophistry which
destroys the merit of Christ, in order to establish that of man. This
impiety refuted by clear passages of Scripture.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p10"></span>7. Errors, of the younger Sophists
extracted from Lombard. Refuted by Augustine. Also by Scripture.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p11"></span>8. Conclusion, showing that the
foundation which has been laid is sufficient for doctrine, exhortation,
and comfort. Summery of the orthodox doctrine of Justification.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p12"></span>1. The principal point in this subject
has been now explained: as justifications if dependent upon works,
cannot possibly stand in the sight of God, it must depend solely on the
mercy of God and communion with Christ, and therefore on faith alone.
But let us carefully attend to the point on which the whole subject
hinges, lest we get entangled in the common delusion, not only of the
vulgar, but of the learned. For the moment the question is raised as to
the justification by faith or works, they run off to those passages
which seem to ascribe some merit to works in the sight of God, just as
if justification by works were proved whenever it is proved that works
have any value with God. Above we have clearly shown that justification
by works consists only in a perfect and absolute fulfillment of the law,
and that, therefore, no man is justified by works unless he has reached
the summit of perfection, and cannot be convicted of even the smallest
transgression. But there is another and a separate question, Though
works by no means suffice to justify, do they not merit favor with God?

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p13"></span>2. First, I must premise with regard to
the term Merit, that he, whoever he was, that first applied it to human
works, viewed in reference to the divine tribunal, consulted very ill
for the purity of the faith. I willingly abstain from disputes about
words, but I could wish that Christian writers had always observed this
soberness—that when there was no occasion for it, they had never thought
of using terms foreign to the Scriptures—terms which might produce much
offense, but very little fruit. I ask, what need was there to introduce
the word Merit, when the value of works might have been fully expressed
by another term, and without offense? The quantity of offense contained
in it the world shows to its great loss. It is certain that, being a
high sounding term, it can only obscure the grace of God, and inspire
men with pernicious pride. I admit it was used by ancient ecclesiastical
writers, and I wish they had not by the abuse of one term furnished
posterity with matter of heresy, although in some passages they
themselves show that they had no wish to injure the truth. For Augustine
says, “Let human merits, which perished by Adam, here be silent, and let
the grace of God reign by Jesus Christ,” (August. de Prædest. Sanct).
Again, “The saints ascribe nothing to their merits; every thing will
they ascribe solely to thy mercy, O God,” (August. in <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p13.1"></span>[Psal.
139](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p13.1"></span>). Again, “And when a man sees that
whatever good he has he has not of himself, but of his God, he sees that
every thing in him which is praised is not of his own merits, but of the
divine mercy,” (August. in <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p13.2"></span>[Psal.
88](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p13.2"></span>). You see how he denies man the power of
acting aright, and thus lays merit prostrate. Chrysostom says, “If any
works of ours follow the free calling of God, they are return and debt;
but the gifts of God are grace, and beneficence, and great liberality.”
But to say nothing more of the name, let us attend to the thing. I
formerly quoted a passage from Bernard: “As it is sufficient for merit
not to presume on merit, so to be without merit is sufficient for
condemnation,” (Bernard in Cantic. Serm. 98). He immediately adds an
explanation which softens the harshness of the expression, when he says,
“Hence be careful to have merits; when you have them, know that they
were given; hope for fruit from the divine mercy, and you have escaped
all the perils of poverty, ingratitude, and presumption. Happy the
Church which neither wants merit without presumption, nor presumption
without merit.” A little before he had abundantly shown that he used the
words in a sound sense, saying, “Why is the Church anxious about merits?
God has furnished her with a firmer and surer ground of boasting. God
cannot deny himself; he will do what he has promised. Thus there is no
reason for asking by what merits may we hope for blessings; especially
when you hear, ‘Thus saith the Lord God; I do not this for your sakes, O
house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake,’ (<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p13.3"></span>[Ezek.
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p13.3"></span>). It suffices for merit to know that
merits suffice not.”

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p14"></span>3. What all our works can merit
Scripture shows when it declares that they cannot stand the view of God,
because they are full of impurity; it next shows what the perfect
observance of the law (if it can any where be found) will merit when it
enjoins, “So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all those things which
are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that
which was our duty to do,” (<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p14.1"></span>[Luke
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p14.1"></span>); because we make no free-offering to God,
but only perform due service by which no favor is deserved. And yet
those good works which the Lord has bestowed upon us he counts ours
also, and declares, that they are not only acceptable to him, but that
he will recompense them. It is ours in return to be animated by this
great promise, and to keep up our courage, that we may not weary in
well-doing, but feel duly grateful for the great kindness of God. There
cannot be a doubt, that every thing in our works which deserves praise
is owing to divine grace, and that there is not a particle of it which
we can properly ascribe to ourselves. If we truly and seriously
acknowledge this, not only confidence, but every idea of merit vanishes.
I say we do not, like the Sophists share the praise of works between God
and man, but we keep it entire and unimpaired for the Lord. All we
assign to man is that, by his impurity he pollutes and contaminates the
very works which were good. The most perfect thing which proceeds from
man is always polluted by some stain. Should the Lord, therefore, bring
to judgment the best of human works, he would indeed behold his own
righteousness in them; but he would also behold man’s dishonor and
disgrace. Thus good works please God, and are not without fruit to their
authors, since, by way of recompense, they obtain more ample blessings
from God, not because they so deserve, but because the divine benignity
is pleased of itself to set this value upon them. Such, however is our
malignity, that not contented with this liberality on the part of God,
which bestows rewards on works that do not at all deserve them, we with
profane ambition maintain that that which is entirely due to the divine
munificence is paid to the merit of works. Here I appeal to every man’s
common sense. If one who by another’s liberality possesses the usufruct
of a field, rear up a claim to the property of it, does he not by his
ingratitude deserve to lose the possession formerly granted? In like
manner, if a slave, who has been manumitted, conceals his humble
condition of freedman, and gives out that he was free-born, does he not
deserve to be reduced to his original slavery? A benefit can only be
legitimately enjoyed when we neither arrogate more to our selves than
has been given, nor defraud the author of it of his due praise; nay,
rather when we so conduct ourselves as to make it appear that the
benefit conferred still in a manner resides with him who conferred it.
But if this is the moderation to be observed towards men, let every one
reflect and consider for himself what is due to God.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p15"></span>4. I know that the Sophists abuse some
passages in order to prove that the Scriptures use the term *merit* with
reference to God. They quote a passage from Ecclesiasticus: “Mercy will
give place to every man according to the merit of his works,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.1"></span>[Ecclesiasticus
16:14](../../../bib/apo/sir016.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.1"></span>); and from the Epistle to the Hebrews: “To
do good and communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased,” (<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.2"></span>[Heb.
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.2"></span>). I now renounce my right to repudiate the
authority of Ecclesiasticus; but I deny that the words of
Ecclesiasticus, whoever the writer may have been, are faithfully quoted.
The Greek is as follows: Πάσῃ ἑλεημοσύνῃ ποιήσει τόπον̀ ἕκαστος γάρ κατὰ
τὰ ἔργα αὑτου̑ εὑρήσει. “He will make room for all mercy: for each shall
find according to his works.” That this is the genuine reading, and has
been corrupted in the Latin version, is plain, both from the very
structure of the sentence, and from the previous context. In the Epistle
to the Hebrews there is no room for their quibbling on one little word,
for in the Greek the Apostle simply says, that *such sacrifices are
pleasing* and acceptable to God. This alone should amply suffice to
quell and beat down the insolence of our pride, and prevent us from
attaching value to works beyond the rule of Scripture. It is the
doctrine of Scripture, moreover, that our good works are constantly
covered with numerous stains by which God is justly offended and made
angry against us, so far are they from being able to conciliate him, and
call forth his favor towards us; and yet because of his indulgence, he
does not examine them with the utmost strictness, he accepts them just
as if they were most pure; and therefore rewards them, though
undeserving, with innumerable blessings, both present and future. For I
admit not the distinction laid down by otherwise learned and pious men,
that good works merit the favors which are conferred upon us in this
life, whereas eternal life is the reward of faith only. The recompense
of our toils, and crown of our contest, our Lord almost uniformly places
in heaven. On the other hand, to attribute to the merit of works, so as
to deny it to grace, that we are loaded with other gifts from the Lord,
is contrary to the doctrine of Scripture. For though Christ says, “Unto
every one that has shall be given;” “thou hast been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee ruler over many things,” (<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.3"></span>[Matt.
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.3"></span>), he, at the same time, shows that all
additional gifts to believers are of his free benignity: “Ho, every one
that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come
ye, buy, and eat: yea, come, buy wine and milk, without money and
without price,” (<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.4"></span>[Isaiah
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p15.4"></span>). Therefore, every help to salvation
bestowed upon believers, and blessedness itself, are entirely the gift
of God, and yet in both the Lord testifies that he takes account of
works, since to manifest the greatness of his love toward us, he thus
highly honors not ourselves only, but the gifts, which he has bestowed
upon us.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p16"></span>5. Had these points been duly handled
and digested in past ages, never could so many tumults and dissensions
have arisen. Paul says, that in the architecture of Christian doctrine,
it is necessary to retain the foundation which he had laid with the
Corinthians, “Other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid,
which is Jesus Christ,” (<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p16.1"></span>[1 Cor.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p16.1"></span>). What then is our foundation in Christ?
Is it that he begins salvation and leaves us to complete it? Is it that
he only opened up the way, and left us to follow it in our own strength?
By no means, but as Paul had a little before declared, it is to
acknowledge that he has been given us for righteousness. No man,
therefore, is well founded in Christ who has not entire righteousness in
him, since the Apostle says not that he was sent to assist us in
procuring, but was himself to be our righteousness. Thus, it is said
that God “has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world,” not
according to our merit, but “according to the good pleasure of his
will;” that in him “we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins;” that peace has been made “through the blood of his
cross;” that we are reconciled by his blood; that, placed under his
protection, we are delivered from the danger of finally perishing; that
thus ingrafted into him we are made partakers of eternal life, and hope
for admission into the kingdom of God.43  <span
id="fr_425"></span>[426](#fn_425) Nor is this all. Being admitted to
participation in him, though we are still foolish, he is our wisdom;
though we are still sinners he is our righteousness; though we are
unclean, he is our purity; though we are weak, unarmed, and exposed to
Satan, yet ours is the power which has been given him in heaven and in
earth, to bruise Satan under our feet, and burst the gates of hell
(<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.4"></span>[Mt.
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.4"></span>); though we still bear about with us a
body of death, he is our life; in short, all things of his are ours, we
have all things in him, he nothing in us. On this foundation, I say, we
must be built, if we would grow up into a holy temple in the Lord.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p18"></span>6. For a long time the world has been
taught very differently. A kind of good works called *moral* has been
found out, by which men are rendered agreeable to God before they are
ingrafted into Christ; as if Scripture spoke falsely when it says, “He
that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son of God has not
life,” (<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p18.1"></span>[1 John
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p18.1"></span>). How can they produce the materials of
life if they are dead? Is there no meaning in its being said that
“whatsoever is not of faith is sin?” (<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p18.2"></span>[Rom.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p18.2"></span>); or can good fruit be produced from a bad
tree? What have these most pestilential Sophists left to Christ on which
to exert his virtue? They say that he merited for us the first grace,
that is, the occasion of meriting, and that it is our part not to let
slip the occasion thus offered. O the daring effrontery of impiety! Who
would have thought that men professing the name of Christ would thus
strip him of his power, and all but trample him under foot? The
testimony uniformly borne to him in Scripture is that whose believeth in
him is justified; the doctrine of these men is, that the only benefit
which proceeds from him is to open up a way for each to justify himself.
I wish they could get a taste of what is meant by these passages: “He
that hath the Son hath life.” “He that hearth my word, and believeth in
him that sent me,” “is passed from death unto life.” Whose believeth in
him “is passed from death unto life.” “Being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.” “He that keepeth
his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him.” God “has raised us up
together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ.” “Who
has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us into
the kingdom of his dear Son.”43  <span id="fr_426"></span>[427](#fn_426)
There are similar passages without number. Their meaning is not, that by
faith in Christ an opportunity is given us of procuring justifications
or acquiring salvation, but that both are given us. Hence, so soon as
you are ingrafted into Christ by faith, you are made a son of God, an
heir of heaven, a partaker of righteousness, a possessor of life, and
(the better to manifest the false tenets of these men) you have not
obtained an opportunity of meriting, but all the merits of Christ, since
they are communicated to you.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p20"></span>7. In this way the schools of Sorbonne,
the parents of all heresies, have deprived us of justification by faith,
which lies at the root of all godliness. They confess, indeed, in word,
that men are justified by a formed faith, but they afterwards explain
this to mean that of faith they have good works which avail to
justification, so that they almost seem to use the term faith in
mockery, because they were unable, without incurring great obloquy, to
pass it in silence, seeing it is so often repeated by Scripture. And yet
not contented with this, they by the praise of good works transfer to
man what they steal from God. And seeing that good works give little
ground for exultation, and are not even properly called merits, if they
are regarded as the fruits of divine grace, they derive them from the
power of free-will; in other words extract oil out of stone. They deny
not that the principal cause is in grace; but they contend that there is
no exclusion of free-will through which all merit comes. This is the
doctrine, not only of the later Sophists, but of Lombard their
Pythagoras (Sent. Lib. 2, Dist. 28), who, in comparison of them, may be
called sound and sober. It was surely strange blindness, while he had
Augustine so often in his mouth, not to see how cautiously he guarded
against ascribing a single particle of praise to man because of good
works. Above, when treating of free-will, we quoted some passages from
him to this effect, and similar passages frequently occur in his
writings (see in <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p20.1"></span>[Psal.
104](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p20.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p20.2"></span>Ep.
105<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p20.2"></span>), as when he forbids us ever to
boast of our merits, because they themselves also are the gifts of God,
and when he says that all our merits are only of grace, are not provided
by our sufficiency, but are entirely the production of grace, &c. It is
less strange that Lombard was blind to the light of Scripture, in which
it is obvious that he had not been a very successful student.43  <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) Still there cannot be a stronger
declaration against him and his disciples than the words of the Apostles
who, after interdicting all Christians from glorying, subjoins the
reason why glorying is unlawful: “For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we
should walk in them,” (<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p21.1"></span>[Eph.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p21.1"></span>). Seeing, then, that no good proceeds from
us unless in so far as we are regenerated—and our regeneration is
without exception wholly of God—there is no ground for claiming to
ourselves one iota in good works. Lastly, while these men constantly
inculcate good works, they, at the same time, train the conscience in
such a way as to prevent it from venturing to confide that works will
render God favorable and propitious. We, on the contrary, without any
mention of merit, give singular comfort to believers when we teach them
that in their works they please, and doubtless are accepted of God. Nay,
here we even insist that no man shall attempt or enter upon any work
without faith, that is, unless he previously have a firm conviction that
it will please God.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p22"></span>8. Wherefore, let us never on any
account allow ourselves to be drawn away one nail’s breadth43  <span
id="fr_428"></span>[429](#fn_428) from that only foundation. After it is
laid, wise architects build upon it rightly and in order. For whether
there is need of doctrine or exhortation, they remind us that “for this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works
of the devil;” that “whosoever is born of God does not commit sin;” that
“the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of
the Gentiles;” that the elect of God are vessels of mercy, appointed “to
honor,” purged, “sanctified, and meet for the Master’s use, and prepared
unto every good work.” The whole is expressed at once, when Christ thus
describes his disciples, “If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.”43  <span
id="fr_429"></span>[430](#fn_429) He who has denied himself has cut off
the root of all evils so as no longer to seek his own; he who has taken
up his cross has prepared himself for all meekness and endurance. The
example of Christ includes this and all offices of piety and holiness.
He obeyed his Father even unto death; his whole life was spent in doing
the works of God; his whole soul was intent on the glory of his Father;
he laid down his life for the brethren; he did good to his enemies, and
prayed for them. And when there is need of comfort, it is admirably
afforded in these words: “We are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted but not
forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in the body
the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made
manifest in our body.” “ For if we be dead with him we shall also live
with him; if we suffer, we shall also reign with him;” by means of “the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death;”
the Father having predestinated us “to be conformed to the image of his
Son, that he might be the first-born among many brethren.” Hence it is,
that “neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth,
nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord;”43  <span
id="fr_430"></span>[431](#fn_430) nay, rather all things will work
together for our good. See how it is that we do not justify men before
God by works, but say, that all who are of God are regenerated and made
new creatures, so that they pass from the kingdom of sin into the
kingdom of righteousness. In this way they make their calling sure, and,
like trees, are judged by their fruits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_425"></span>[426](inst068.htm#fr_425) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p17"></span>32 432 1. Cor. 1:30; <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.1"></span>[Eph.
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.2"></span>[Col.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#014),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.3"></span>[John
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p17.3"></span>; 10:28.

<span id="fn_426"></span>[427](inst068.htm#fr_426) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p19"></span>33 433 <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.1"></span>[John
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.2"></span>[John
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.3"></span>[Rom.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.4"></span>[John
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.5"></span>[Eph.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.5"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.6"></span>[Col.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p19.6"></span>

<span id="fn_427"></span>[428](inst068.htm#fr_427) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p21"></span>34 434 French, “d’autant qu’il n’y
estoit gueres exercité;”—inasmuch as he was little versant in it.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[429](inst068.htm#fr_428) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p23"></span>35 435 French, “ne fust ce que de la
pointe d’une sepingle;”—were it only a pin’s point.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[430](inst068.htm#fr_429) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p24"></span>36 436 <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.1"></span>[John
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.2"></span>[1
Pet. 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.3"></span>[2
Tim. 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.4"></span>[Luke
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[431](inst068.htm#fr_430) <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p24.5"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p25"></span>37 437 <span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.1"></span>[2 Cor.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.2"></span>[2
Tim. 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.3"></span>[Phil.
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.4"></span>[Rom.
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#029),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#039)<span
id="iv.iii.xvi-p25.4"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 16. - REFUTATION OF THE CALUMNIES BY WHICH IT IS
ATTEMPTED TO THROW ODIUM ON THIS DOCTRINE.](inst069)
