[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](inst042)  [Next](inst044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Institutes of the Christian Religion*, by John Calvin, tr. Henry
Beveridge \[1845\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii.x"></span>

### <span id="iv.ii.x-p0.1"></span>CHAPTER 9.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p1"></span>CHRIST, THOUGH KNOWN TO THE JEWS UNDER THE
LAW, YET ONLY MANIFESTED UNDER THE GOSPEL.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p2"></span>There are three principal heads in this
chapter. I. Preparatory to a consideration of the knowledge of Christ,
and the benefits procured by him; the 1st and 2nd sections are occupied
with the dispensation of this knowledge, which, after the manifestation
of Christ in the flesh, was more clearly revealed than under the Law.
II. A refutation of the profane dream of Servetus, that the promises are
entirely abrogated, sec. 3. Likewise, a refutation of those who do not
properly compare the Law with the Gospel, sec. 4. III. A necessary and
brief exposition of the ministry of John Baptist, which occupies an
intermediate place between the law and the Gospel.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p3"></span>*Sections.*

<span id="iv.ii.x-p4"></span>1. The holy fathers under the Law saw the
day of Christ, though obscurely. He is more fully revealed to us under
the Gospel. A reason for this, confirmed by the testimony of Christ and
his Apostles.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p5"></span>2. The term Gospel, used in its most
extensive sense, comprehends the attestations of mercy which God gave to
the fathers. Properly, however, it means the promulgation of grace
exhibited in the God-man Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p6"></span>3. The notion of Servetus, that the
promises are entirely abolished, refuted. Why we must still trust to the
promises of God. Another reason. Solution of a difficulty.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p7"></span>4. Refutation of those who do not properly
compare the Law and the Gospel. Answer to certain questions here
occurring. The Law and the Gospel briefly compared.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p8"></span>5. Third part of the chapter. Of the
ministry of John the Baptist.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p9"></span>1. Since God was pleased (and not in vain)
to testify in ancient times by means of expiations and sacrifices that
he was a Father, and to set apart for himself a chosen people, he was
doubtless known even then in the same character in which he is now fully
revealed to us. Accordingly Malachi, having enjoined the Jews to attend
to the Law of Moses (because after his death there was to be an
interruption of the prophetical office), immediately after declares that
the Sun of righteousness should arise (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p9.1"></span>[Mal.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.1"></span>);
thus intimating, that though the Law had the effect of keeping the pious
in expectation of the coming Messiah, there was ground to hope for much
greater light on his advent. For this reason, Peter, speaking of the
ancient prophets, says, “Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us, they did minister the things which are now
reported unto you by them that have preached the gospel unto you, with
the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p9.2"></span>[1 Pet.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.2"></span>).
Not that the prophetical doctrine was useless to the ancient people, or
unavailing to the prophets themselves, but that they did not obtain
possession of the treasure which God has transmitted to us by their
hands. The grace of which they testified is now set familiarly before
our eyes. They had only a slight foretaste; to us is given a fuller
fruition. Our Saviour, accordingly, while he declares that Moses
testified of him, extols the superior measure of grace bestowed upon us
(<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.3"></span>[John
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.3"></span>).
Addressing his disciples, he says, “Blessed are your eyes, for they see,
and your ears, for they hear. For verily I say unto you, That many
prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye
see, and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and
have not heard them,” (<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.4"></span>[Mt.
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.4"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.5"></span>[Luke
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.5"></span>).
It is no small commendation of the gospel revelation, that God has
preferred us to holy men of old, so much distinguished for piety. There
is nothing in this view inconsistent with another passage, in which our
Saviour says, “Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it
and was glad,” (<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.6"></span>[John
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.6"></span>).
For though the event being remote, his view of it was obscure, he had
full assurance that it would one day be accomplished; and hence the joy
which the holy patriarch experienced even to his death. Nor does John
Baptist, when he says, “No man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him,”
(<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.7"></span>[John
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.7"></span>),
exclude the pious who had previously died from a participation in the
knowledge and light which are manifested in the person of Christ; but
comparing their condition with ours, he intimates that the mysteries
which they only beheld dimly under shadows are made clear to us; as is
well explained by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, in these
words, “God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time
past unto the fathers by the prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son,” (<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.8"></span>[Heb.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.8"></span>).
Hence, although this only begotten Son, who is now to us the brightness
of his Father’s glory and the express image of his person, was formerly
made known to the Jews, as we have elsewhere shown from Paul, that he
was the Deliverer under the old dispensation; it is nevertheless true,
as Paul himself elsewhere declares, that “God, who commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p9.9"></span>[2 Cor.
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#006)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.9"></span>);
because, when he appeared in this his image, he in a manner made himself
visible, his previous appearance having been shadowy and obscure. More
shameful and more detestable, therefore, is the ingratitude of those who
walk blindfold in this meridian light. Accordingly, Paul says that “the
god of this world has blinded their minds, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ should shine unto them,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p9.10"></span>[2 Cor.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span id="iv.ii.x-p9.10"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.x-p10"></span> 2. By the Gospel, I understand the clear
manifestation of the mystery of Christ. I confess, indeed, that inasmuch
as the term Gospel is applied by Paul to the doctrine of faith (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p10.1"></span>[2 Tim.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010)<span id="iv.ii.x-p10.1"></span>),
it includes all the promises by which God reconciles men to himself, and
which occur throughout the Law. For Paul there opposes faith to those
terrors which vex and torment the conscience when salvation is sought by
means of works. Hence it follows that *Gospel*, taken in a large sense,
comprehends the evidences of mercy and paternal favour which God
bestowed on the Patriarchs. Still, by way of excellence, it is applied
to the promulgation of the grace manifested in Christ. This is not only
founded on general use, but has the sanction of our Saviour and his
Apostles. Hence it is described as one of his peculiar characteristics,
that he preached the Gospel of the kingdom (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p10.2"></span>[Mt.
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)<span id="iv.ii.x-p10.2"></span>;
9:35; <span id="iv.ii.x-p10.3"></span>[Mark
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014)<span id="iv.ii.x-p10.3"></span>).
Mark, in his preface to the Gospel, calls it “*The beginning of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ.*” There is no use of collecting passages to
prove what is already perfectly known. Christ at his advent “brought
life and immortality to light through the Gospel,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p10.4"></span>[2 Tim.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#010)<span id="iv.ii.x-p10.4"></span>).
Paul does not mean by these words that the Fathers were plunged in the
darkness of death before the Son of God became incarnate; but he claims
for the Gospel the honourable distinction of being a new and
extraordinary kind of embassy, by which God fulfilled what he had
promised, these promises being realised in the person of the Son. For
though believers have at all times experienced the truth of Paul’s
declaration, that “all the promises of God in him are yea and amen,”
inasmuch as these promises were sealed upon their hearts; yet because he
has in his flesh completed all the parts of our salvation, this vivid
manifestation of realities was justly entitled to this new and special
distinction. Accordingly, Christ says, “Hereafter ye shall see heaven
open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of
man.” For though he seems to allude to the ladder which the Patriarch
Jacob saw in vision, he commends the excellence of his advent in this,
that it opened the gate of heaven, and gave us familiar access to it.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p11"></span>3. Here we must guard against the
diabolical imagination of Servetus, who, from a wish, or at least the
pretence of a wish, to extol the greatness of Christ, abolishes the
promises entirely, as if they had come to an end at the same time with
the Law. He pretends, that by the faith of the Gospel all the promises
have been fulfilled; as if there was no distinction between us and
Christ. I lately observed that Christ had not left any part of our
salvation incomplete; but from this it is erroneously inferred, that we
are now put in possession of all the blessings purchased by him; thereby
implying, that Paul was incorrect in saying, “We are saved by hope,”
(<span id="iv.ii.x-p11.1"></span>[Rom.
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span id="iv.ii.x-p11.1"></span>).
I admit, indeed, that by believing in Christ we pass from death unto
life; but we must at the same time remember the words of John, that
though we know we are “the sons of God,” “it does not yet appear what we
shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him;
for we shall see him as he is,” (<span id="iv.ii.x-p11.2"></span>[1 John
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="iv.ii.x-p11.2"></span>).
Therefore, although Christ offers us in the Gospel a present fulness of
spiritual blessings, fruition remains in the keeping of hope,22  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) until we are divested of corruptible
flesh, and transformed into the glory of him who has gone before us.
Meanwhile, in leaning on the promises, we obey the command of the Holy
Spirit, whose authority ought to have weight enough with us to silence
all the barkings of that impure dog. We have it on the testimony of
Paul, that “Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p12.1"></span>[1 Tim.
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="iv.ii.x-p12.1"></span>);
for which reason, he glories in being “an apostle of Jesus Christ,
according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p12.2"></span>[2 Tim.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.x-p12.2"></span>).
And he elsewhere reminds us, that we have the same promises which were
given to the saints in ancient time (<span id="iv.ii.x-p12.3"></span>[2
Cor. 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ii.x-p12.3"></span>). In fine, he makes the sum of our felicity
consist in being sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise. Indeed we have
no enjoyment of Christ, unless by embracing him as clothed with his own
promises. Hence it is that he indeed dwells in our hearts and yet we are
as pilgrims in regard to him, because “we walk by faith, not by sight,”
(<span id="iv.ii.x-p12.4"></span>[2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)<span id="iv.ii.x-p12.4"></span>).
There is no inconsistency in the two things—viz. that in Christ we
possess every thing pertaining to the perfection of the heavenly life,
and yet that faith is only a vision “of things not seen,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p12.5"></span>[Heb.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span id="iv.ii.x-p12.5"></span>).
Only there is this difference to be observed in the nature or quality of
the promises, that the Gospel points with the finger to what the Law
shadowed under types.

<span id="iv.ii.x-p13"></span>4. Hence, also, we see the error of those
who, in comparing the Law with the Gospel, represent it merely as a
comparison between the merit of works, and the gratuitous imputation of
righteousness. The contrast thus made is by no means to be rejected,
because, by the term Law, Paul frequently understands that rule of holy
living in which God exacts what is his due, giving no hope of life
unless we obey in every respect; and, on the other hand, denouncing a
curse for the slightest failure. This Paul does when showing that we are
freely accepted of God, and accounted righteous by being pardoned,
because that obedience of the Law to which the reward is promised is
nowhere to be found. Hence he appropriately represents the righteousness
of the Law and the Gospel as opposed to each other. But the Gospel has
not succeeded the whole Law in such a sense as to introduce a different
method of salvation. It rather confirms the Law, and proves that every
thing which it promised is fulfilled. What was shadow, it has made
substance. When Christ says that the Law and the Prophets were until
John, he does not consign the fathers to the curse, which, as the slaves
of the Law, they could not escape. He intimates that they were only
imbued with the rudiments, and remained far beneath the height of the
Gospel doctrine. Accordingly Paul, after calling the Gospel “the power
of God unto salvation to every one that believeth,” shortly after adds,
that it was “witnessed by the Law and the Prophets,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p13.1"></span>[Rom.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)<span id="iv.ii.x-p13.1"></span>;
3:21). And in the end of the same Epistle, though he describes “the
preaching of Jesus Christ” as “the revelation of the mystery which was
kept secret since the world began,” he modifies the expression by
adding, that it is “now made manifest” “by the scriptures of the
prophets,” (<span id="iv.ii.x-p13.2"></span>[Rom.
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#026)<span id="iv.ii.x-p13.2"></span>).
Hence we infer, that when the whole Law is spoken of, the Gospel differs
from it only in respect of clearness of manifestation. Still, on account
of the inestimable riches of grace set before us in Christ, there is
good reason for saying, that by his advent the kingdom of heaven was
erected on the earth (<span id="iv.ii.x-p13.3"></span>[Mt.
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.x-p13.3"></span>).

<span id="iv.ii.x-p14"></span>5. John stands between the Law and the
Gospel, holding an intermediate office allied to both. For though he
gave a summary of the Gospel when he pronounced Christ to be “the Lamb
of God who taketh away the sin of the world,” yet, inasmuch as he did
not unfold the incomparable power and glory which shone forth in his
resurrection, Christ says that he was not equal to the Apostles. For
this is the meaning of the words: “Among them that are born of woman,
there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding, he
that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p14.1"></span>[Mt.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span
id="iv.ii.x-p14.1"></span>). He is not there commending the persons of
men, but after preferring John to all the Prophets, he gives the first
place to the preaching of the Gospel, which is elsewhere designated by
the kingdom of heaven. When John himself, in answer to the Jews, says
that he is only “a voice,” (<span id="iv.ii.x-p14.2"></span>[John
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023)<span id="iv.ii.x-p14.2"></span>),
as if he were inferior to the Prophets it is not in pretended humility
but he means to teach that the proper embassy was not entrusted to him,
that he only performed the office of a messenger, as had been foretold
by Malachi, “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophets before the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord,” (<span
id="iv.ii.x-p14.3"></span>[Mal.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii.x-p14.3"></span>).
And, indeed, during the whole course of his ministry, he did nothing
more than prepare disciples for Christ. He even proves from Isaiah that
this was the office to which he was divinely appointed. In this sense,
he is said by Christ to have been “a burning and a shining light,”
(<span id="iv.ii.x-p14.4"></span>[John
5:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="iv.ii.x-p14.4"></span>),
because full day had not yet appeared. And yet this does not prevent us
from classing him among the preachers of the gospel, since he used the
same baptism which was afterwards committed to the Apostles. Still,
however, he only began that which had freer course under the Apostles,
after Christ was taken up into the heavenly glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](inst043.htm#fr_219) <span
id="iv.ii.x-p11.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p12"></span>26 226 “Sub custodia spei.”—French, “sous
la garde, et comme sous le cachet d’espoir;” under the guard, and as it
were, under the seal of hope.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: CHAPTER 10. - THE RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE OLD TESTAMENT AND THE
NEW.](inst044)
