[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090071)  [Next](0090073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_151"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>The Vision of Paul.</span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.ii-p3.1"></span>Here Begins the Vision of Saint Paul the
Apostle.</span>

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span>“But I will come to visions and revelations
of the Lord:  I know a man in Christ fourteen years ago (whether in the
body, I know not; or out of the body, I know not, God knoweth) snatched
up in this manner to the third heaven:  and I know such a man, whether
in the body or out of the body I know not, God knoweth; how that he was
snatched up into Paradise and heard secret words which it is not lawful
for men to speak; on behalf of such a one will I glory; but on mine own
behalf I will not glory, save in my infirmities.”—[2 Cor. xii.
1-5](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)<span id="vi.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>1.  At what time was this revelation made? 
In the consulship of Theodosius Augustus the Younger and Cynegius, <span
id="fr_3901"></span>[3902](#fn_3901) a certain nobleman then living in
Tharsus, in the house which was that of Saint Paul, an angel appearing
in the night revealed to him, saying that he should open the foundations
of the house and should publish what he found, but he thought that these
things were dreams.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>2.  But the angel coming for the third time
beat him and forced him to open the foundation.  And digging he found a
marble box, inscribed on the sides; there was the revelation of Saint
Paul, and his shoes in which he walked teaching the word of God.  But he
feared to open that box and brought it to the judge; when he had
received it, the judge, because it was sealed with lead, sent it to the
Emperor Theodosius, fearing lest it might be something else; which when
he had received the emperor opened it, and found the revelation of Saint
Paul; a copy of it he sent to Jerusalem, and retained the original
himself.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>3.  While I was in the body in which I was
snatched up to the third heaven, the word of the Lord came to me
saying:  speak to the people:  until when will ye transgress, and heap
sin upon sin, and tempt the Lord who made you?  Ye are the sons of God,
doing the works of the devil in the faith of Christ, on account of the
impediments of the world.  Remember therefore and know that while every
creature serves God, the human race alone sins.  But it reigns over
every creature and sins more than all nature.

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>4.  For indeed the sun, the great light,
often addressed the Lord saying:  Lord God Almighty, I look out upon the
impieties and injustices of men; permit me and I shall do unto them what
are my powers, that they may know that thou art God alone.  And there
came a voice saying to him:  I know all these things, for mine eye sees
and ear hears, but my patience bears them until they shall be converted
and repent.  But if they do not return to me I will judge them all.

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span>5.  For sometimes the moon and stars
addressed the Lord saying:  Lord God Almighty, to us thou hast given the
power of the night; till when shall we look down upon the impieties and
fornications and homicides done by the sons of men?  Permit us to do
unto them according to our powers, that they may know that thou art God
alone.  And there came a voice unto them saying:  I know all these
things, and mine eye looks forth and ear hears, but my patience bears
with them until they shall be converted and repent.  But if they do not
return unto me I will judge them.

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>6.  And frequently also the sea exclaimed
saying:  Lord God Almighty, men have defiled thy holy name in me; permit
me to arise and cover every wood and orchard and the whole world, until
I blot out all the sons of men from before thy face, that they may know
that thou art God alone.  And the voice came again and said:  I know all
things; mine eye seeth everything, and mine ear heareth, but my patience
bears with them until they be converted and repent.  But if they do not
return, I will judge them.  Sometimes the waters <span
id="fr_3902"></span>[3903](#fn_3902) also spoke against the sins of men
saying:  Lord God Almighty, <span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_152"></span>all the sons of men have defiled thy holy
name.  And there came a voice saying:  I know all things before they
come to pass, for mine eye seeth and mine ear heareth all things, but my
patience bears with them until they be converted.  But if not I will
judge them.  Frequently also the earth <span
id="fr_3903"></span>[3904](#fn_3903) too exclaimed to the Lord against
the sons of men saying:  Lord God Almighty, I above every other creature
of thine am harmed, supporting the fornications, adulteries, homicides,
thefts, perjuries and magic and ill-doings of men and all the evil they
do, so that the father rises up against the son, and the son upon the
father, the alien against the alien, so that each one defiles his
neighbour’s wife.  The father ascends upon the bed of his own son, and
the son likewise ascends the couch of his own father; and in all these
evils, they who offer the sacrifice to thy name have defiled thy holy
place.  Therefore I am injured above every creature, desiring not to
shew my power to myself, and my fruits to the sons of men.  Permit me
and I will destroy the virtue of my fruits.  And there came a voice and
said:  I know all things, and there is none who can hide himself from
his sin.  Moreover I know their impieties, but my holiness suffers them
until they be converted and repent.  But if they do not return unto me I
will judge them.

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>7.  Behold, ye sons of men, the creature is
subject to God, but the human race alone sins.  For this cause,
therefore, ye sons of men, bless the Lord God unceasingly, every hour
and every day: but more especially when the sun has set: <span
id="fr_3904"></span>[3905](#fn_3904)   for at that hour all the angels
proceed to the Lord to worship him and to present the works of men,
which every man has wrought from the morning till the evening, whether
good or evil.  And there is a certain angel who proceeds rejoicing
concerning the man in whom he dwells.  When therefore the sun <span
id="fr_3905"></span>[3906](#fn_3905) has set in the first hour of night,
in the same hour the angel of every people and every man and woman, who
protect and preserve them, because man is the image of God:  similarly
also in the matin hour which is the twelfth of the night, all the angels
of men and women, go up to God to worship God, and present every work
which each man has wrought, whether good or evil.  Moreover every day
and night the angels show to God an account <span
id="fr_3906"></span>[3907](#fn_3906) of all the acts of the human race. 
To you, therefore, I say, ye sons of men, bless the Lord God without
fail all the days of your life.

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span>8.  Therefore at the appointed hour all the
angels whatever, rejoicing at once together, proceed before God that
they may meet to worship at the hour determined.  And behold suddenly it
became the hour of meeting, and the angels came to worship in the
presence of God, and the spirit proceeded to meet them:  and there came
a voice and said:  Whence come ye, our angels, bearing the burdens of
tidings?

<span id="vi.ii-p19"></span>9.  They answered and said:  We come from
those who have renounced this world for the sake of thy holy name,
wandering as pilgrims, and in caves of the rocks, and weeping every hour
in which they inhabited the earth, and hungering and thirsting because
of thy name, with their loins girded, having in their hands the incense
of their hearts, and praying and blessing every hour, and restraining
and overcoming themselves, weeping and wailing above the rest that
inhabit the earth.  And we indeed, their angels, mourn along with them: 
whither therefore it shall please thee, command us to go and minister,
lest others also do it, but the destitute above the rest who are on
earth.  And there came the voice of God to them saying:  Know ye that
now henceforward my grace is appointed unto you, and my help, who is my
well-beloved Son, shall be present with them, guiding them every hour;
ministering also to them, never deserting them, since their place is his
habitation.

<span id="vi.ii-p20"></span>10.  When therefore these angels had
retired, behold other angels came to adore in the presence of honour, in
the assembly, who wept; and the spirit of God proceeded to meet them,
and there came the voice of God and said:  Whence come ye, our angels,
bearing the burdens of the ministry of the tidings of the world?  They
answered and said in the presence of God:  We have arrived from those
who called upon thy name, and the impediments of the world made them
wretched, devising many occasions every hour, not even making one pure
prayer, nor out of their whole heart, in all the time of their life;
what need, therefore, is there to be present with men who are sinners? 
And there came the voice of God to them:  It is necessary that ye should
minister to them, until they be converted and repent:  but if they do
not return to me I will judge them.  Know therefore, sons of men, that
whatever things are wrought by you, these angels relate to God, whether
good or evil.

<span id="vi.ii-p21"></span><span id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_153"></span>11.  And the angel answered and said unto
me:  Follow me, and I will show you the place of the just where they are
led when they are deceased, and after these things taking thee into the
abyss, I will show thee the souls of sinners and what sort of place they
are led into when they have deceased.  And I proceeded back after the
angel, and he led me into heaven, and I looked back upon the firmament,
and I saw in the same place power, and there was there oblivion which
deceives and draws down to itself the hearts of men, and the spirit of
detraction, and the spirit of fornication, and the spirit of madness,
and the spirit of insolence, and there were there the princes of vices: 
these I saw under the firmament of heaven:  and again I looked back, and
I saw angels without mercy, having no pity, whose countenance was full
of madness, and their teeth sticking out beyond the mouth:  their eyes
shone like the morning star of the east, and from the hairs of their
head sparks of fire went out, or from their mouth.  And I asked the
angel saying:  Sir, who are those?  And the angel answered and said unto
me:  These are those who are destined to the souls of the impious in the
hour of need, who did not believe that they had the Lord for their
helper, nor hoped in him.

<span id="vi.ii-p22"></span>12.  And I looked on high and I saw other
angels whose countenance shone as the sun, their loins girded with
golden girdles, having palms in their hands, and the sign of God,
clothed with garments in which was written the name of the Son of God,
filled moreover with all meekness and pity; and I asked the angels
saying:  Who are these, Lord, in so great beauty and pity?  And the
angel answered and said unto me:  These are the angels of justice who
are sent to lead up the souls of the just, in the hour of need, who
believed that they had the Lord for their helper.  And I said to him: 
Do the just and sinners necessarily meet witnesses when they have died? 
And the angel answered and said to me:  There is one way by which all
pass over to God, but the just having their helper with them are not
confounded when they go to appear in the sight of God.

<span id="vi.ii-p23"></span>13.  And I said to the angel:  I wished to
see the souls of the just and of sinners going out of the world.  And
the angel answered and said unto me:  Look down upon the earth.  And I
looked down from heaven upon the earth, and saw the whole world, and it
was nothing in my sight and I saw the sons of men as though they were
naught, and a-wanting, and I wondered and said to the angel:  Is this
the greatness of men?  And the angel answered and said unto me:  It is,
and these are they who do evil from morning till evening.  And I looked
and saw a great cloud of fire spread over the whole world, and I said to
the angel:  What is this, my Lord? and he said to me:  This is injustice
stirred up by the princes of sinners.

<span id="vi.ii-p24"></span>14.  I indeed when I had heard this sighed
and wept, and said to the angel:  I wished to see the souls of the just
and of sinners, and to see in what manner they go out of the body.  And
the angel answered and said unto me:  Look again upon the earth.  And I
looked and saw all the world, and men were as naught and a-wanting:  and
I looked carefully and saw a certain man about to die, and the angel
said to me:  This one whom thou seest is a just man.  And I looked again
and saw all his works, whatever he had done for the sake of God’s name,
and all his desires, both what he remembered, and what he did not
remember; they all stood in his sight in the hour of need; and I saw the
just man advance and find refreshment and confidence, and before he went
out of the world the holy and the impious angels both attended:  and I
saw them all, but the impious found no place of habitation in him, but
the holy took possession of his soul, guiding it till it went out of the
body:  and they roused the soul saying:  Soul, know thy body whence thou
goest out, for it is necessary that thou shouldst return to the same
body on the day of the resurrection, that thou mayest receive the things
promised to all the just.  Receiving therefore the soul from the body,
they immediately kissed it as familiarly known to them, saying to it: 
Do manfully, for thou hast done the will of God while placed in the
earth.  And there came to meet him the angel who watched him every day,
and said to him:  Do manfully, soul; for I rejoice in thee, because thou
hast done the will of God on earth:  for I related to God all thy works,
such as they were.  Similarly also the spirit proceeded to meet him and
said:  Soul, fear not, nor be disturbed, until thou comest into a place
which thou hast never known, but I will be a helper unto thee:  for I
found in thee a place of refreshment in the time when I dwelt in thee,
while I was on earth.  And his spirit strengthened him, and his angel
received him, and led him into heaven:  and an angel said:  Whither
runnest thou, O soul, and dost thou dare to enter into heaven?  Wait and
let us see if there is anything of ours in thee:  and behold <span
id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_154"></span>we find
nothing in thee.  I see also thy divine helper and angel, and the spirit
is rejoicing along with thee, because thou hast done the will of God on
earth.  And they led him along till he should worship in the sight of
God.  And when they had ceased, immediately Michael and all the army of
angels, with one voice, adored the footstool of his feet, and his doom,
saying at the same time to the soul:  This is your God of all things,
who made you in his own image and likeness.  Moreover the angel returns
and points him out saying:  God, remember his labours:  for this is the
soul, whose works I related to thee, doing according to thy judgment. 
And the spirit said likewise:  I am the spirit of vivification inspiring
him:  for I had refreshment in him, in the time when I dwelt in him,
doing according to thy judgment.  And there came the voice of God and
said:  In as much as this man did not vex me, neither will I vex him;
for according as he had pity, I also will have pity.  Let him therefore
be handed over to Michael, the angel of the Covenant, and let him lead
him into the Paradise of joy, that he himself may become co-heir with
all the saints.  And after these things I heard the voices of a thousand
thousand angels, and archangels, and cherubim, and twenty-four elders
saying hymns, and glorifying the Lord and crying:  thou art just, O
Lord, and just are thy judgments, and there is no acceptance of persons
with thee, but thou rewardest unto every man according to thy judgment. 
And the angel answered and said unto me:  Hast thou believed and known,
that whatever each man of you has done, he sees in the hour of need? 
And I said:  Yes, sir.

<span id="vi.ii-p25"></span>15.  And he saith to me:  Look again down on
the earth, and watch the soul of an impious man going out of the body,
which vexed the Lord day and night, saying:  I know nothing else in this
world, I eat and drink, and enjoy what is in the world; for who is there
who has descended into hell, and ascending has declared to us that there
is judgment there!  And again I looked carefully, and saw all the scorn
of the sinner, and all that he did, and they stood together before him
in the hour of need:  and it was done to him in that hour, in which he
was threatened about his body at the judgment, and I said:  It were
better for him if he had not been born.  And after these things, there
came at the same time, the holy angels, and the malign, and the soul of
the sinner and the holy angels did not find a place in it.  Moreover the
malign angels cursed it; and when they had drawn it out of the body, the
angels admonished it a third time, saying:  O wretched soul, look upon
thy flesh, whence thou camest out:  for it is necessary that thou
shouldst return to thy flesh in the day of resurrection, that thou
mayest receive the due for thy sins and thy impieties.

<span id="vi.ii-p26"></span>16.  And when they had led it forth, the
customary angel preceded it, and said to it:  O wretched soul, I am the
angel belonging to thee, relating daily to the Lord thy malign works,
whatever thou didst by night or day:  and if it were in my power, not
for one day would I minister to thee, but none of these things was I
able to do:  the judge is pitiful and just, and he himself commanded us
that we should not cease to minister to the soul, till you should
repent, but thou hast lost the time of repentance.  I indeed was strange
to thee and thou to me.  Let us go on then to the just judge:  I will
not dismiss thee, before I know from to-day why I was strange to thee. 
And the spirit confounded him, and the angel troubled him.  When,
therefore, they had arrived at the power, when he started to enter
heaven, a labour was imposed upon him, above all other labour:  error
and oblivion and murmuring met him, and the spirit of fornication, and
the rest of the powers, and said to him:  Whither goest thou, wretched
soul, and darest thou to rush into heaven? hold, that we may see if we
have our qualities in thee, since we do not see that thou hast a holy
helper.  And after that I heard voices in the height of heaven saying: 
Present that wretched soul to God, that it may know that it is God that
it despised.  When, therefore, it had entered heaven, all the angels saw
it, a thousand thousand exclaimed with one voice, all saying:  Woe to
thee, wretched soul, for the sake of thy works which thou didst on
earth; what answer art thou about to give to God when thou shalt have
approached to adore him?  The angel who was with it answered and said: 
Weep with me, my beloved, for I have not found rest in this soul.  And
the angels answered him and said:  Let such a soul be taken away from
the midst of ours, for from the time he entered, the stink of him
crosses to us angels.  And after these things it was presented, that it
might worship in the sight of God, and an angel of God showed him God
who made him after his own image and likeness.  Moreover his angel ran
before him saying:  Lord God Almighty, I am the angel of this soul,
whose works I presented to thee day and night, not doing according to
thy judg<span id="page_155">p. 155</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_155"></span>ment.  And the spirit likewise said:  I am
the spirit who dwelt in it from the time it was made, in itself moreover
I know it, and it has not followed my will:  judge it, Lord, according
to thy judgment.  And there came the voice of God to it and said:  Where
is thy fruit which thou has made worthy of the goods which thou hast
received?  Have I put a distance of one day between thee and the just
man?  Did I not make the sun to arise upon thee as upon the just?  But
the soul was silent, having nothing to answer:  and again there came a
voice saying:  Just is the judgment of God, and there is no acceptance
of persons with God, for whoever shall have done mercy, on them shall he
have mercy, and whoever shall not have pitied neither shall God pity
him.  Let him therefore be handed over to the angel Tartaruch, who is
set over the punishments, and let him place him in outer darkness, where
there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, and let him be there till the
great day of judgment.  And after these things I heard the voice of
angels and archangels saying:  Thou art just, Lord, and thy judgment is
just.

<span id="vi.ii-p27"></span>17.  And again I saw, and behold a soul
which was led forward by two angels, weeping and saying:  Have pity on
me, just God, God the judge, for to-day is seven days since I went out
of my body, and I was handed over to these two angels, and they led me
through to those places, which I had never seen.  And God, the just
judge, saith to him:  What hast thou done? for thou never didst mercy,
wherefore thou wast handed over to such angels as have no mercy, and
because thou didst not do uprightly, so neither did they act piously
with thee in the hour of thy need.  Confess therefore thy sins which
thou didst commit when placed in the world.  And he answered and said: 
Lord, I did not sin.  And the Lord, the just Lord, was angered in fury
when it said:  I did not sin, because it lied; and God said:  Dost thou
think thou art still in the world? if any one of you, sinning there,
conceal and hide his sin from his neighbour, here indeed nothing
whatever shall be hid:  for when the souls come to adore in sight of the
throne, both the good works and the sins of each one are made manifest. 
And hearing these things the soul was silent, having no answer.  And I
heard the Lord God, the just judge, again saying:  Come, angel of this
soul, and stand in the midst.  And the angel of the sinful soul came,
having in his hands a manuscript, and said:  These, Lord, in my hands,
are all the sins of this soul from his youth till to-day, from the tenth
year of his birth:  and if thou command, Lord, I will also relate his
acts from the beginning of his fifteenth year.  And the Lord God, the
just judge, said:  I say unto thee, angel, I do not expect of thee an
account of him since he began to be fifteen years old, but state his
sins for five years before he died and before he came hither.  And again
God, the just judge, said:  For by myself I swear, and by my holy
angels, and by my virtue, that if he had repented five years before he
died, on account of one year’s life, oblivion would now be thrown over
all the evils which he sinned before, and he would have indulgence and
remission of sins:  now indeed he shall perish.  And the angel of the
sinful soul answered and said:  Lord, command that angel to exhibit
those souls.

<span id="vi.ii-p28"></span>18.  And in that same hour the souls were
exhibited in the midst, and the soul of the sinner knew them; and the
Lord said to the soul of the sinner:  I say unto thee, soul, confess thy
work which thou wroughtest in these souls, whom thou seest, when they
were in the world.  And he answered and said:  Lord, it is not yet a
full year since I slew this one and poured his blood upon the ground,
and with another (a woman) I committed fornication:  not this alone, but
I also greatly harmed her in taking away her goods.  And the Lord God,
the just judge, said:  Either thou didst not know that he who does
violence to another, if he dies first who sustains the violence, is kept
in this place until the doer of hurt dies, and then both stand in the
presence of the judge, and now each receives according to his deed.  And
I heard a voice of one saying:  Let that soul be delivered into the
hands of Tartarus, and led down into hell:  he shall lead him into the
lower prison and he shall be put in torments, and left there till the
great day of judgment.  And again I heard a thousand thousand angels
saying hymns to the Lord, and crying:  Thou art just, O Lord, and just
are thy judgments.

<span id="vi.ii-p29"></span>19.  The angel answered and said unto me: 
Hast thou perceived all these things? and I said, Yes, sir.  And he said
to me:  Follow me again, and I will take thee, and show thee the places
of the just.  And I followed the angel, and he raised me to the third
heaven, and placed me at the entry of the door:  and looking carefully I
saw, and the door was of gold, and two columns of gold, full above of
golden letters, and the angel tuned again to me and said:  Blessed wert
thou, if thou hadst entered into these doors, for it is not allowed to
any to enter except only to those who have <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_156"></span>goodness and innocence of
body in all things.  And I asked the angel about everything and said: 
Sir, tell me on what account these letters are put upon those tables? 
The angel answered and said unto me:  These are the names of the just,
serving God with their whole heart, who dwell on the earth.  And again I
said:  Sir, therefore their names and countenance and the likeness of
these who serve God are in heaven, and are known to the angels:  for
they know who are the servants of God with all their heart, before they
go out of the world.

<span id="vi.ii-p30"></span>20.  And when I had entered the interior of
the gate of Paradise, <span id="fr_3907"></span>[3908](#fn_3907) there
came out to meet me an old man whose countenance shone as the sun; and
when he had embraced me he said:  Hail, Paul, beloved of God.  And he
kissed me with a cheerful countenance.  He wept, and I said to him: 
Brother, why dost thou weep?  And again sighing and lamenting he said: 
We are hurt by men, and they vex us greatly; for many are the good
things which the Lord has prepared, and great is his promise, but many
do not perceive them.  And I asked the angel, and said:  Sir, who is
this?  And he said to me:  This is Enoch, the scribe of righteousness. 
And I entered into the interior of that place, and immediately I saw the
sun, <span id="fr_3908"></span>[3909](#fn_3908) and coming it saluted me
laughing and rejoicing.  And when it had seen (me), it turned away and
wept, and said to me:  Paul, would that thou shouldst receive thy
labours which thou hast done in the human race.  For me, indeed, I have
seen the great and many good things, which God has prepared for the
just, and the promises of God are great, but many do not perceive them;
but even by many labours scarcely one or two enters into these places.

<span id="vi.ii-p33"></span>21.  And the angel answered and said to
me, <span id="fr_3909"></span>[3910](#fn_3909) Whatever I now show thee
here, and whatever thou shalt hear, tell it not to any one in the
earth.  And he led me and shewed me:  and there I heard words which it
is not lawful for a man to speak.  And again he said, For now follow me,
and I will shew thee what thou oughtest to narrate in public and relate.

<span id="vi.ii-p35"></span>And he took me down from the third heaven,
and led me into the second heaven, and again he led me on to the
firmament and from the firmament he led me over the doors of heaven: 
the beginning of its foundation was on the river which waters all the
earth.  And I asked the angel and said, Lord, what is this river of
water? and he said to me, This is Oceanus!  And suddenly I went out of
heaven, and I understood that it is the light of heaven which lightens
all the earth.  For the land there is seven times brighter <span
id="fr_3910"></span>[3911](#fn_3910) than silver.  And I said, Lord,
what is this place?  And he said to me, This is the land of promise. 
Hast thou never heard what is written:  Blessed are the meek:  for they
shall inherit the earth?  The souls therefore of the just, when they
have gone out of the body, are meanwhile dismissed to this place.  And I
said to the angel, Then this land will be manifested before the time? 
The angel answered and said to me, When Christ, whom thou preachest,
shall come to reign, then, by the sentence of God, <span
id="fr_3911"></span>[3912](#fn_3911) the first earth will be dissolved
and this land of promise will then be revealed, and it will be like dew
or cloud, and then the Lord Jesus Christ, the King Eternal, will be
manifested and will come with all his saints to dwell in it, and he will
reign over them a thousand years, and they will eat of the good things
which I shall now show unto thee.

<span id="vi.ii-p38"></span>22.  And I looked around upon that land and
I saw a river flowing of milk and honey, and there were trees planted by
the bank of that river, full of fruit:  moreover each single tree bore
twelve fruits in the year, having various and diverse fruits:  and I saw
the created things which are in that place and all the work of God, and
I saw there palms of twenty cubits, but others of ten cubits:  and that
land was seven times brighter than silver.  And there were trees full of
fruits from the roots to the highest branches, of ten thousand fruits of
palms upon ten thousand fruits.  The grape-vines moreover had ten
thousand plants. <span id="fr_3912"></span>[3913](#fn_3912)   Moreover
in the single vines there were ten thousand thousand bunches and in each
of these a thousand single grapes:  moreover these single trees bore a
thousand fruits.  And I said to the angel, Why does each tree bear a
thousand fruits?  The angel answered and said unto me, Because the Lord
God gives an abounding flood of gifts to the worthy, because they also
of their own will afflicted themselves when they were placed in the
world doing all things on account of his holy name.  And again I said to
the angel, Sir, are these the only promises which the Most Holy God
makes?  And he answered and said to me:  No! there are seven times
greater than these.  But I say unto <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>
<span id="vi.ii-Page_157"></span>thee that when the just go out of the
body they shall see the promises and the good things which God has
prepared for them.  Till then, they shall sigh, and lament saying:  Have
we emitted any word from our mouth to vex our neighbour even on one
day?  I asked and said again:  Are these alone the promises of God?  And
the angel answered and said unto me:  These whom you now see are the
souls of the married <span id="fr_3913"></span>[3914](#fn_3913) and
those who kept the chastity of their nuptials, containing themselves. 
But to the virgins and those who hunger and thirst after righteousness
and those who afflicted themselves for the sake of the name of God, God
will give seven times greater than these, which I shall now show thee.

<span id="vi.ii-p41"></span>And then he took me up from that place where
I saw these things and behold, a river, and its waters were greatly
whiter than milk, and I said to the angel, What is this?  And he said to
me:  This is the Acherousian Lake where is the City of Christ, but not
every man is permitted to enter that city; for this is the journey which
leads to God, and if anyone is a fornicator and impious, and is
converted and shall repent and do fruits worthy of repentance, at first
indeed when he shall have gone out of the body, he is led and adores
God, and thence by command of the Lord he is delivered to the angel
Michael and he baptizes him in the Acherousian Lake—thus he leads them
into the City of Christ alongside of those who have never sinned.  But I
wondered and blessed the Lord God for all the things which I saw.

<span id="vi.ii-p42"></span>23.  And the angel answered and said unto
me:  Follow me and I will lead thee into the City of Christ.  And he was
standing on the Acherousian Lake and he put me into a golden ship <span
id="fr_3914"></span>[3915](#fn_3914) and angels as it were three
thousand were saying hymns before me till I arrived at the City of
Christ.  Moreover those who inhabited the City of Christ greatly
rejoiced over me as I went to them, and I entered and saw the City of
Christ, and it was all of gold, and twelve walls encircled it, and
twelve interior towers, and each wall had between them single stadia in
the circuit:  And I said to the angel, Sir, how much is a stadium?  The
angel answered and said to me:  As much as there is between the Lord God
and the men who are on the earth, for the City of Christ is alone
great.  And there were twelve gates in the circuit of the city, of great
beauty, and four rivers which encircled it.  There was, moreover, a
river of honey and a river of milk, and a river of wine and a river of
oil.  And I said to the angel:  What are these rivers surrounding that
city?  And he saith to me:  These are the four rivers which flow
sufficiently for those who are in this land of promise, of which the
names <span id="fr_3915"></span>[3916](#fn_3915) are:  the river of
honey is called Fison, and the river of milk Euphrates, and the river of
oil Gion, and the river of wine Tigris, such therefore they are for
those who when placed in the world did not use the power of these
things, but they hungered for these things and afflicted themselves for
the sake of the Lord God:  so that when these enter into this city, the
Lord will assign them these things on high above all measure.

<span id="vi.ii-p45"></span>24.  I indeed entering the gates saw trees
great and very high before the doors of the city, having no fruit but
leaves only, and I saw a few men scattered in the midst of the trees,
and they lamented greatly when they saw anyone enter the city.  And
those trees were sorry for them and humbled themselves and bowed down
and again erected themselves.  And I saw and wept with them and I asked
the angel and said:  Sir, who are these who are not admitted to enter
into the City of Christ?  And he said to me:  These are they who
zealously abstained day and night in fasts, but they had a proud heart
above other men, glorifying and praising themselves and doing nothing
for their neighbours.  For they gave some friendly greeting, but to
others they did not even say hail! and indeed they shewed hospitality to
those only whom they wished, and if they did anything whatever for their
neighbour they were immoderately puffed up.  And I said:  What then,
Sir?  Did their pride prevent them from entering into the City of
Christ?  And the angel answered and said unto me:  Pride is the root of
all evils.  Are they better than the Son of God who came to the Jews
with much humility?  And I asked him and said:  Why is it that the trees
humble themselves and erect themselves again?  And the angel answered
and said to me:  The whole time which these men passed on earth
zealously serving God, on account of the confusion and reproaches of men
at the time, they blushed and humiliated themselves, but they were not
saddened. nor did they repent that they should recede from their pride
which was in them.  This is why the trees humble themselves, and again
<span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_158"></span>are
raised up.  And I asked and said:  For what cause were they admitted to
the doors of the city?  The angel answered and said unto me:  Because of
the great goodness of God, and because there is the entry of his holy
men entering into this city:  for this cause they are left in this
place, but when Christ the King Eternal enters with his saints, as he
enters just men may pray for these, and then they may enter into the
city along with them:  but yet none of them is able to have assurance
such as they have who humbled themselves, serving the Lord God all their
lives.

<span id="vi.ii-p46"></span>25.  But I went on while the angel
instructed me, and he carried me to the river of honey, and I saw there
Isaiah and Jeremiah <span id="fr_3916"></span>[3917](#fn_3916) and
Ezekiel and Amos, and Micah and Zechariah, the minor and major prophets,
and they saluted me in the city.  I said to the angel:  What way is
this?  And he said to me:  This is the way of the prophets, every one
who shall have afflicted his soul and not done his own will because of
God, when he shall have gone out of the world and have been led to the
Lord God and adored him, then by the command of God he is handed over to
Michael, and he leads him into the city to this place of the prophets,
and they salute him as their friend and neighbour because he did the
will of God.

<span id="vi.ii-p48"></span>26.  Again he led me where there is a river
of milk, and I saw in that place all the infants whom Herod slew because
of the name of Christ, and they saluted me, and the angel said to me: 
All who keep their chastity with purity, when they shall have come out
of the body, after they adore the Lord God are delivered to Michael and
are led to the infants and they salute them, saying that they are our
brothers and friends and members; in themselves they shall inherit the
promises of God.

<span id="vi.ii-p49"></span>27.  Again he took me up and carried me to
the north of the city and led me where there was a river of wine, and
there I saw Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, Lot and Job and other
saints, <span id="fr_3917"></span>[3918](#fn_3917) and they saluted me: 
and I asked and said:  What is this place, my Lord?  The angel answered
and said to me:  All who are receivers of pilgrims, when they go out of
the world, first adore the Lord God, and are delivered to Michael and by
this way are led into the city, and all the just salute him as son and
brother, and say unto him:  Because thou hast observed humanity and the
receiving of pilgrims, come, have an inheritance in the city of the Lord
our God:  every just man shall receive good things of God in the city,
according to his own action.

<span id="vi.ii-p51"></span>28.  And again he carried me near the river
of oil on the east of the city.  And I saw there men rejoicing and
singing psalms, and I said:  Who are those, my Lord?  And the angel
saith to me:  Those are they who devoted themselves to God with their
whole heart and had no pride in themselves.  For all those who rejoice
in the Lord God and sing psalms to the Lord with their whole heart are
here led into this city.

<span id="vi.ii-p52"></span>29.  And he carried me into the midst of the
city near the twelve walls. <span id="fr_3918"></span>[3919](#fn_3918)  
But there was in this place a higher wall, and I asked and said:  Is
there in the City of Christ a wall which in honour exceeds this place? 
And the angel answering said to me:  There is a second better than the
first, and similarly a third than the second, as each exceeds the other,
unto the twelfth wall.  And I said:  Tell me, Sir, why one exceeds
another in glory?  And the angel answered and said unto me:  All who
have in themselves even a little detraction or zeal or pride, something
of his glory would be made void even if he were in the city of Christ: 
look backward!

<span id="vi.ii-p54"></span>And turning round I saw golden thrones
placed in each gate, and on them men having golden diadems and
gems: <span id="fr_3919"></span>[3920](#fn_3919)   and I looked
carefully and I saw inside between the twelve men thrones placed in
another rank which appeared of much glory, so that no one is able to
recount their praise.  And I asked the angel and said:  My lord, who is
on the throne?  And the angel answered and said unto me:  Those thrones
belong to those who had goodness and understanding of heart and made
themselves fools for the sake of the Lord God, nor knew new Scriptures
nor psalms, but, mindful of one chapter of the commands of God, and
hearing what it contained they wrought thereby in much diligence and had
a right zeal before the Lord God, and the admiration of them will seize
all the saints in presence of the Lord God, for talking with one another
they say, Wait and see the unlearned who know nothing more:  by which
means they merited so great and such a garment and so great glory on
account of their innocence.

<span id="vi.ii-p56"></span>And I saw in the midst of this city a great
<span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_159"></span>altar, very high, and there was one standing
near the altar whose countenance shone as the sun, and he held in his
hands a psaltery and harp, and he sang psalms, saying Halleluia!  And
his voice filled the whole city:  at the same time when all they who
were on the towers and gates heard him they responded Halleluia! so that
the foundations of the city were shaken:  and I asked the angel and
said, Sir, who is this of so great power?  And the angel said to me: 
This is David:  this is the city of Jerusalem, for when Christ the King
of Eternity shall come with the assurance of His kingdom, he again shall
go before him that he may sing psalms, and all the just at the same time
shall sing psalms responding Halleluia!  And I said, Sir, how did David
alone above the other saints make a beginning of psalm-singing?  And the
angel answered and said unto me:  Because Christ the Son of God sits at
the right hand of His Father, and this David sings psalms before him in
the seventh heaven, and as is done in the heavens so also below, because
the host may not be offered to God without David, but it is necessary
that David should sing psalms in the hour of the oblation of the body
and blood of Christ:  as it is performed in heaven so also on earth.

<span id="vi.ii-p57"></span>30.  And I said to the angel:  Sir, what is
Alleluia?  And the angel answered and said to me:  You ask questions
about everything.  And he said to me, Alleluia is said in the Hebrew
language of God and angels, for the meaning of Alleluia is this:  *tecel
cat. marith macha*. <span id="fr_3920"></span>[3921](#fn_3920)   And I
said, Sir, what is *tecel cat. marith macha*?  And the angel answered
and said unto me:  *Tecel cat. marith macha* is:  Let us all bless him
together.  I asked the angel and said, Sir, do all who say Alleluia
bless the Lord?  And the angel answered and said to me:  It is so, and
again, therefore, if any one sing Alleluia and those who are present do
not sing at the same time, they commit sin because they do not sing
along with him.  And I said:  My lord, does he also sin if he be
hesitating or very old?  The angel answered and said unto me:  Not so,
but he who is able and does not join in the singing, know such as a
despiser of the Word, and it would be proud and unworthy that he should
not bless the Lord God his maker.

<span id="vi.ii-p59"></span>31.  Moreover when he had ceased speaking to
me, he led me outside the city through the midst of the trees and far
from the places of the land of the good, and put me across the river of
milk and honey:  and after that he led me over the ocean which supports
the foundations of heaven.

<span id="vi.ii-p60"></span>The angel answered and said unto me:  Dost
thou understand why thou goest hence?  And I said:  Yes, sir.  And he
said to me:  Come and follow me, and I will show thee the souls of the
impious and sinners, that thou mayest know what manner of place it is. 
And I proceeded with the angel and he carried me by the setting of the
sun, and I saw the beginning of heaven founded on a great river of
water, and I asked:  What is this river of water?  And he said to me: 
This is Ocean which surrounds all the Earth.  And when I was at the
outer limit of Ocean I looked, and there was no light in that place, but
darkness and sorrow and sadness:  and I sighed.

<span id="vi.ii-p61"></span>And I saw there a fervent river of fire, and
in it a multitude of men and women immersed up to the knees, and other
men up to the navel, others even up to the lips, others moreover up to
the hair.  And I asked the angel and said:  Sir, who are those in the
fiery river?  And the angel answered and said to me:  They are neither
hot nor cold, because they were found neither in the number of the just
nor in the number of the impious. <span
id="fr_3921"></span>[3922](#fn_3921)   For those spent the time of their
life on earth passing some days in prayer, but others in sins and
fornications, until their death.  And I asked him and said:  Who are
these, Sir, immersed up to their knees in fire?  He answered and said to
me:  These are they who when they have gone out of church throw
themselves into strange conversations to dispute.  Those indeed who are
immersed up to the navel are those who, when they have taken the body
and blood of Christ go and fornicate and did not cease from their sins
till they died.  Those who are immersed up to the lips are the
detractors of each other when they assemble in the church of God:  those
up to the eyebrows are those who nod approval of themselves and plot
spite against their neighbour. <span
id="fr_3922"></span>[3923](#fn_3922)

<span id="vi.ii-p64"></span>32.  And I saw on the north a place of
various and diverse punishments full of men and women, <span
id="fr_3923"></span>[3924](#fn_3923) and a river of fire ran down into
it.  Moreover I observed and I saw pits great in depth, and in them
several souls together, and the depth of that place was as it were three
thousand cubits, and I saw them groaning <span id="page_160">p.
160</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_160"></span>and weeping and saying: 
Have pity on us, O Lord! and none had pity on them.  And I asked the
angel and said:  Who are these, Sir?  And the angel answered and said
unto me:  These are they who did not hope in the Lord, that they would
be able to have him as their helper.  And I asked and said:  Sir, if
these souls remain for thirty or forty generations thus one upon
another, if they were sent deeper, the pits I believe would not hold
them.  And he said to me:  The Abyss has no measure, for beyond <span
id="fr_3924"></span>[3925](#fn_3924) this it stretches down below him
who is down in it:  and so it is, that if perchance anyone should take a
stone and throw it into a very deep well and after many hours it should
reach the bottom, such is the abyss.  For when the souls are thrown in
there, they hardly reach the bottom in fifty years.

<span id="vi.ii-p67"></span>33.  I, indeed, when I heard this, wept and
groaned over the human race.  The angel answered and said unto me:  Why
dost thou weep?  Art thou more pitiful than God?  For though God is
good, He knows also that there are punishments, and He patiently bears
with the human race, dismissing each one to work his own will in the
time in which he dwells on the earth.

<span id="vi.ii-p68"></span>34.  I further observed the fiery river and
saw there a man being tortured by Tartaruchian angels having in their
hands an iron with three hooks with which they pierced the bowels of
that old man:  and I asked the angel, and said:  Sir, who is that old
man on whom such torments are imposed?  And the angel answered and said
to me:  He whom you see was a presbyter who did not perform well his
ministry:  when he had been eating and drinking and committing
fornication he offered the host to the Lord at his holy altar.

<span id="vi.ii-p69"></span>35.  And I saw not far away another old man
led on by malign angels running with speed, and they pushed him into the
fire up to his knees, and they struck him with stones and wounded his
face like a storm, and did not allow him to say:  Have pity on me!  And
I asked the angel and he said to me:  He whom you see was a bishop, and
did not perform well his episcopate, who indeed accepted the great name
but did not enter into the witness of him who gave him the name in all
his life, seeing that he did not do just judgment, and did not pity
widows and orphans, but now he receives retribution according to his
iniquity and his works.

<span id="vi.ii-p70"></span>36.  And I saw another man in the fiery
river up to his knees.  Moreover his hands were stretched out and
bloody, and worms proceeded from his mouth and nostrils and he was
groaning and weeping, and crying he said:  Have pity on me! for I am
hurt above the rest who are in this punishment.  And I asked, Sir, who
is this?  And he said to me:  This man whom thou seest, was a deacon who
devoured the oblations and committed fornications and did not right in
the sight of God, for this cause he unceasingly pays this penalty.

<span id="vi.ii-p71"></span>And I looked closely and saw alongside of
him another <span id="fr_3925"></span>[3926](#fn_3925) man whom they
delivered up with haste and cast into the fiery river, and he was (in
it) up to the knees:  and there came the angel who was set over the
punishments having a great fiery razor, and with it he cut the lips of
that man and the tongue likewise.  And sighing, I lamented and asked: 
Who is that, sir.  And he said to me, He whom thou seest was a reader
and read to the people, but he himself did not keep the precepts of
God:  now he also pays the proper penalty.

<span id="vi.ii-p73"></span>37.  And I saw another multitude of pits in
the same place, and in the midst of it a river full of a multitude of
men and women, <span id="fr_3926"></span>[3927](#fn_3926) and
worms <span id="fr_3927"></span>[3928](#fn_3927) consumed them.  But I
lamented and sighing asked the angel and said:  Sir, who are these?  And
he said to me:  These are those who exacted interest <span
id="fr_3928"></span>[3929](#fn_3928) on interest and trusted in their
riches and did not hope in God that He was their helper.

<span id="vi.ii-p77"></span>And after that I looked and saw another
place, very narrow, and it was like a wall, and fire round about it. 
And I saw inside men and women gnawing <span
id="fr_3929"></span>[3930](#fn_3929) their tongues, and I asked:  Sir,
who are these.  And he said to me:  These are they who in church
disparage the Word of God, not attending to it, but as it were make
naught of God and His angels:  for that cause they now likewise pay the
proper penalty.

<span id="vi.ii-p79"></span>38.  And I observed and saw another old man
down in a pit and his countenance was like blood, and I asked and said,
Sir, what is this place?  And he said to me:  Into that pit stream all
the punishments.  And I saw men and women immersed up to the lips and I
asked, Sir, who are these?  And he said to me:  These are the magicians
who prepared for men and women evil magic arts and did not find how to
stop them till they died.

<span id="vi.ii-p80"></span>And again I saw men and women with very
<span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_161"></span>black
faces in a pit of fire, <span id="fr_3930"></span>[3931](#fn_3930) and I
sighed and lamented and asked, Sir, who are these?  And he said to me: 
These are fornicators and adulterers who committed adultery having wives
of their own:  likewise also the women committed adultery having
husbands of their own:  therefore they unceasingly suffer penalties.

<span id="vi.ii-p82"></span>39.  And I saw there girls having
black <span id="fr_3931"></span>[3932](#fn_3931) raiment, and four
terrible angels having in their hands burning chains, and they put them
on the necks of the girls and led them into darkness:  and I, again
weeping, asked the angel:  Who are these, Sir?  And he said to me: 
These are they who, when they were virgins, defiled their virginity
unknown to their parents; for which cause they unceasingly pay the
proper penalties.

<span id="vi.ii-p84"></span>And again I observed there men and women
with hands cut and their feet placed naked in a place of ice and snow,
and worms devoured them.  But seeing them I lamented and asked:  Sir,
who are these?  And he said to me:  These are they who harmed orphans
and widows and the poor, <span id="fr_3932"></span>[3933](#fn_3932) and
did not hope in the Lord, for which cause they unceasingly pay the
proper penalties.

<span id="vi.ii-p86"></span>And I observed and saw others hanging over a
channel of water, and their tongues were very dry, and many fruits were
placed in their sight, and they were not permitted to take of them, and
I asked:  Sir, who are these?  And he said to me:  These are they who
break their fast <span id="fr_3933"></span>[3934](#fn_3933) before the
appointed hour, for this cause they unceasingly pay these penalties.

<span id="vi.ii-p88"></span>And I saw other men and women hanging by
their eyebrows and their hair, <span
id="fr_3934"></span>[3935](#fn_3934) and a fiery river drew them, and I
said:  Who are these, my Lord?  And he said to me: <span
id="fr_3935"></span>[3936](#fn_3935)   These are they who join
themselves not to their own husbands and wives but to whores, and
therefore they unceasingly pay the proper penalties.

<span id="vi.ii-p91"></span>And I saw other men and women covered with
dust, and their countenance was like blood, and they were in a pit of
pitch and sulphur and running down into a fiery river, and I asked: 
Sir, who are these? <span id="fr_3936"></span>[3937](#fn_3936)   And he
said to me:  These are they who committed the iniquity of Sodom and
Gomorrah, the male with the male, for which reason they unceasingly pay
the penalties.

<span id="vi.ii-p93"></span>40.  And <span
id="fr_3937"></span>[3938](#fn_3937) I observed and saw men and women
clothed in bright garments, having their eyes blind, placed in a pit,
and I asked:  Sir, who are these?  And he said to me:  These are of the
people who did alms, and knew not the Lord God, for which reason they
unceasingly pay the proper penalties.  And I observed and saw other men
and women on an obelisk of fire, and beasts tearing them in pieces, and
they were not allowed to say, Lord have pity on us!  And I saw the
angel <span id="fr_3938"></span>[3939](#fn_3938) of penalties putting
heavy punishments on them and saying:  Acknowledge the Son of God; for
this was predicted to you, when the divine Scriptures were read to you,
and you did not attend; for which cause God’s judgment is just, for your
actions have apprehended you and brought you into these penalties.  But
I sighed and wept, and I asked and said:  Who are these men and women
who are strangled in fire and pay their penalties?  And he answered me: 
These are women who defiled the image of God when bringing forth infants
out of the womb, and these are the men who lay with them.  And their
infants addressed the Lord God and the angels who were set over the
punishments, saying: <span id="fr_3939"></span>[3940](#fn_3939)   Cursed
be the hour to our parents, for they defiled the image of God, having
the name of God but not observing His precepts:  they gave us for food
to dogs and to be trodden down of swine:  others they threw into the
river.  But their infants <span id="fr_3940"></span>[3941](#fn_3940)
were handed over to the angels of Tartarus who were set over the
punishments, that they might lead them to a wide place of mercy:  but
their fathers and mothers were tortured in a perpetual punishment.

<span id="vi.ii-p98"></span>And after that I saw men and women clothed
with rags full of pitch and fiery sulphur, and dragons were coiled about
their necks and shoulders and feet, and angels having fiery horns
restrained them and smote them, and closed their nostrils, saying to
them:  Why did ye not know the time in which it was right to repent and
serve God, and did not do it?  And I asked:  Sir, who are these?  And he
said to me:  These are they who seem to give up the world for God, <span
id="fr_3941"></span>[3942](#fn_3941) putting on our garb, but the
impediments of the world made them wretched, not main<span
id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_162"></span>taining
*agapæ*, and they did not pity widows and orphans:  they did not receive
the stranger and the pilgrim, nor did they offer the oblations, and they
did not pity their neighbour.  Moreover their prayer did not even on one
day ascend pure to the Lord God, but many impediments of the world
detained them, and they were not able to do right in the sight of God,
and the angels enclosed them in the place of punishments.  Moreover they
saw those who were in punishments and said to them:  We indeed when we
lived in the world neglected God, and ye also did likewise:  as we also
truly when we were in the world knew that ye were sinners.  But ye
said:  These are just and servants of God, now we know why ye were
called by the name of the Lord:  for which cause they also pay their own
penalties.

<span id="vi.ii-p100"></span>And sighing I wept and said:  Woe unto men,
woe unto sinners! why were they born?  And the angel answered and said
unto me:  Why dost thou lament? <span
id="fr_3942"></span>[3943](#fn_3942)   Art thou more pitiful than the
Lord God who is blessed forever, who established judgment and sent forth
every man to choose good and evil in his own will and do what pleases
him?  Then I lamented again very greatly, and he said to me:  Dost thou
lament when as yet thou hast not seen greater punishments?  Follow me
and thou shalt see seven times greater than these.

<span id="vi.ii-p102"></span>41.  And he carried me south and placed me
above a well, and I found it sealed with seven seals:  and answering,
the angel who was with me said to the angel of that place:  Open the
mouth of the well that Paul, the well-beloved of God, may see, for
authority is given him that he may see all the pains of hell.  And the
angel said to me:  Stand afar off that thou mayest be able to bear the
stench of this place.  When therefore the well was opened, immediately
there arose from it a certain hard and malign stench, which surpasses
all punishments:  and I looked into the well and I saw fiery masses
glowing in every part, and narrow places, and the mouth of the well was
narrow so as to admit one man only.  And the angel answered and said
unto me:  If any man shall have been put into this well of the abyss and
it shall have been sealed over him, no remembrance of him shall ever be
made in the sight of the Father and His Son and the holy angels.  And I
said:  Who are these, Sir, who are put into this well?  And he said to
me:  They are whoever shall not confess that Christ has come in the
flesh and that the Virgin Mary brought him forth, and whoever says that
the bread and cup of the Eucharist of blessing are not this body and
blood of Christ.

<span id="vi.ii-p103"></span>42.  And I looked to the south in the west
and I saw there a <span id="fr_3943"></span>[3944](#fn_3943) restless
worm and in that place there was gnashing of teeth:  moreover the worms
were one cubit long, and had two heads, and there I saw men and women in
cold and gnashing of teeth.  And I asked and said, Sir, who are these in
this place?  And he said to me:  These are they who say that Christ did
not rise from the dead and that this flesh will not rise again.  And I
asked and said:  Sir, is there no fire nor heat in this place?  And he
said to me:  In this place there is nothing else but cold and
snow: <span id="fr_3944"></span>[3945](#fn_3944)   and again he said to
me:  Even if the sun should rise upon them, they do not become warm on
account of the superabundant cold of that place and the snow.

<span id="vi.ii-p106"></span>But hearing these things I stretched out my
hands and wept, and sighing again, I said:  It were better for us if we
had not been born, <span id="fr_3945"></span>[3946](#fn_3945) all of us
who are sinners.

<span id="vi.ii-p108"></span>43.  But when those who were in the same
place saw me weeping with the angel, they themselves cried out and wept
saying, Lord God have mercy upon us!  And after these things I saw the
heavens open, and Michael <span id="fr_3946"></span>[3947](#fn_3946) the
archangel descending from heaven, and with him was the whole army of
angels, and they came to those who were placed in punishment and seeing
him, again weeping, they cried out and said, Have pity on us!  Michael
the archangel, have pity on us and on the human race, for on account of
thy prayers the earth standeth.  We now see the judgment and acknowledge
the Son of God!  It was impossible for us before these things to pray
for this, before we entered into this place:  for we heard that there
was a judgment before we went out of the world, but impediments and the
life of the world did not allow us to repent.  And Michael answered and
said:  Hear Michael speaking!  I am he who stands in the sight of God
every hour:  As the Lord liveth, in whose sight I stand, I do not
intermit one day or one night praying incessantly for the human race,
and I indeed pray for those who are on the earth:  but they do not cease
doing iniquity and fornications, and they do not bring to me any good
while they are placed on earth:  and ye have con<span id="page_163">p.
163</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_163"></span>sumed in vanity the time in
which ye ought to have repented.  But I have always prayed thus and I
now beseech that God may send dew and send forth rains upon the earth,
and now I desire until the earth produce its fruits and verily I say,
that if any have done but a little good, I will agonise for him,
protecting him till he have escaped the judgment of penalties.  Where
therefore are your prayers?  Where are your penances?  Ye have lost your
time contemptuously.  But now weep and I will weep with you and the
angels who are with me with the well-beloved Paul, if perchance the
merciful God will have pity and give you refreshment.  But hearing these
words they cried out and wept greatly, and all said with one voice: 
Have pity on us, Son of God!  And I, Paul, sighed and said:  O Lord God!
have pity on thy creature, have pity on the sons of men, have pity on
thine image.

<span id="vi.ii-p110"></span>44.  And I looked and saw the heaven move
like a tree shaken by the wind.  Suddenly, moreover, they threw
themselves on their faces in the sight of the throne.  And I saw
twenty-four elders and twenty-four thousand adoring God, and I saw an
altar and veil and throne, and all were rejoicing; and the smoke of a
good odour was raised near the altar of the throne of God, and I heard
the voice of one saying:  For the sake of what do ye our angels and
ministers intercede?  And they cried out saying:  We intercede seeing
thy many kindnesses to the human race.  And after these things I saw the
Son of God descending from heaven, and a diadem was on his head.  And
seeing him those who were placed in punishment exclaimed all with one
voice saying:  Have pity, Son of the High God!  Thou art He who shewest
refreshment for all in the heavens and on earth, and on us likewise have
pity, for since we have seen Thee, we have refreshment.  And a voice
went out from the Son of God through all the punishments saying:  And
what work have ye done that ye demand refreshment from me?  My blood was
poured out for your sakes, and not even so did ye repent:  for your
sakes I wore the crown of thorns on my head:  for you I received buffets
on my cheeks, and not even so did ye repent.  I asked water when hanging
on the cross and they gave me vinegar mixed with gall, with a spear they
opened my right side, for my name’s sake they slew my prophets and just
men, and in all these things I gave you a place of repentance and ye
would not.  Now, however, for the sake of Michael the archangel of my
covenant and the angels who are with him, and because of Paul the
well-beloved, whom I would not vex, for the sake of your brethren who
are in the world and offer oblations, and for the sake of your sons,
because my precepts are in them, and more for the sake of mine own
kindness, on the day on which I rose from the dead, I give to you all
who are in punishment a night and a day of refreshment forever.  And
they all cried out and said, We bless thee, Son of God, that Thou hast
given us a night and a day of respite.  For better to us is a
refreshment of one day above all the time of our life which we were on
earth, and if we had plainly known that this was intended for those who
sin, we would have worked no other work, we would have done no business,
and we would have done no iniquity:  what need had we for pride in the
world?  For here our pride is crushed which ascended from our mouth
against our neighbour:  our plagues and excessive straitness and the
tears and the worms which are under us, these are much worse to us than
the pains which we have left behind us.  When they said thus, the malign
angels of the penalties were angered with them, saying:  How long do ye
lament and sigh? for ye had no pity.  For this is the judgment of God
who had no pity.  But ye received this great grace of a day and a
night’s refreshment on the Lord’s Day for the sake of Paul the
well-beloved of God who descended to you.

<span id="vi.ii-p111"></span>45.  And after that the angel said to me: 
Hast thou seen all these things?  And I said:  Yes, Sir.  And he said to
me:  Follow me and I will lead thee into Paradise, that the just who are
there may see thee, for lo! they hope to see thee, and they are ready to
come to meet thee in joy and gladness.  And I followed the angel by the
impulse of the Holy Spirit, and he placed me in Paradise and said to
me:  This is Paradise in which Adam and his wife erred.  Moreover I
entered Paradise and saw the beginning of waters, and there was an angel
making a sign to me and he said to me:  Observe, said he, the waters,
for this is the river of Physon which surrounds all the land of Evilla,
and the second is Geon which surrounds all the land of Egypt and
Ethiopia, and the third is Thigris which is over against the Assyrians,
and another is Eufrates which waters all the land of Mesopotamia.  And
when I had gone inside I saw a tree planted from whose roots water
flowed out, and from this beginning there were four rivers.  And the
spirit of God rested on that tree, and when the Spirit blew, the waters
flowed forth, <span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_164"></span>and I said:  My Lord, is it this tree itself
which makes the waters flow?  And he said to me:  That from the
beginning, before the heavens and earth were manifested, and all things
here invisible, the Spirit of God was borne upon the waters, but from
the time when the command of God made the heavens and earth to appear,
the Spirit rested upon this tree:  wherefore whenever the Spirit blows,
the waters flow forth from the tree.  And he held me by the hand and led
me near the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and he said:  This is
the tree by which death entered into the world, and receiving of it
through his wife Adam ate and death entered into the world.  And he
shewed me another tree in the midst of Paradise, and saith to me:  This
is the tree of life.

<span id="vi.ii-p112"></span>46.  While I was yet looking upon the tree,
I saw a virgin coming from afar and two hundred angels before her saying
hymns, and I asked and said:  Sir, who is she who comes in so great
glory?  And he said to me:  This is Mary the Virgin, the Mother of the
Lord.  And coming near she saluted me and said:  Hail, Paul!
well-beloved of God and angels and men.  For all the saints prayed my
Son Jesus who is my Lord that thou mightest come hither in the body that
they might see thee before thou goest out of the world.  And the Lord
said to them:  Bear and be patient:  yet a little and ye shall see him
and he shall be with you for ever:  and again they all said to him
together:  Do not vex us, for we desire to see him in the flesh, for by
him Thy name was greatly glorified in the world, and we have seen that
he endured all the labours whether of the greater or of the less.  This
we learn from those who come hither.  For when we say:  Who is he who
directed you in the world? they reply to us:  There is one in the world
whose name is Paul, he preaches and announces Christ, and we believe
that many have entered into the kingdom through the virtue and sweetness
of his speeches.  Behold all the just men are behind me coming to meet
thee, Paul, and I first come for this cause to meet them who did the
will of my Son and my Lord Jesus Christ, I first advance to meet them
and do not send them away to be as wanderers until they meet in peace.

<span id="vi.ii-p113"></span>47.  When she had thus spoken, I saw three
coming from afar, very beautiful in the likeness of Christ, and their
forms were shining, and their angels, and I asked:  Sir, who are these? 
And he said to me:  Dost thou not know those?  And I said:  No, Sir. 
And he answered:  These are the fathers of the people, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob.  And coming near they saluted me, and said:  Hail, Paul,
well-beloved of God and men; blessed is he who suffers violence for the
Lord’s sake.  And Abraham answered me and said:  This is my son Isaac,
and Jacob my well-beloved, and we have known the Lord and followed him;
blessed are all they who believed in thy word, that they may be able to
inherit the Kingdom of God by labour, by renunciation, and
sanctification, and humility, and charity, and meekness, and right faith
in the Lord; and we also have had devotion to the Lord whom thou
preachest in the testament, that we might assist those who believed in
him with their whole soul, and might minister unto them as fathers
minister to their children.

<span id="vi.ii-p114"></span>When they had thus spoken, I saw other
twelve coming from afar in honour, and I asked:  Sir, who are these? 
And he said:  These are the patriarchs.  And coming near they saluted me
and said:  Hail, Paul, well-beloved of God and men:  the Lord did not
vex us, that we might see thee yet in the body, before thou goest out of
the world.  And each one of them reminded me of his name in order, from
Ruben to Benjamin:  and Joseph said to me:  I am he who was sold; but I
say to thee, Paul, that all the things, whatever my brothers did to me,
in nothing did I act maliciously with them, nor in all the labour which
they imposed on me, nor in any point was I hurt by them on that account
from morning till evening:  blessed is he who receives some hurt on
account of the Lord, and bears it, for the Lord will repay it to him
manifold, when he shall have gone out of the world.

<span id="vi.ii-p115"></span>48.  When he had spoken thus far, I saw
another beautiful one coming from afar, and his angels saying hymns, and
I asked:  Sir, who is this that is beautiful of countenance?  And he
saith to me:  Dost thou not know him?  And I said:  No, Sir.  And he
said to me:  This is Moses the law-giver, to whom God gave the law.  And
when he had come near me, he immediately wept, and after that he saluted
me:  and I said to him:  What dost thou lament? for I have heard that
thou excellest every man in meekness.  And he answered saying:  I weep
for those whom I planted with toil, because they did not bear fruit, nor
did any profit by them; and I saw all the sheep whom I fed, that they
were scattered and become as if they had no shepherd, and because all
the toils which I <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="vi.ii-Page_165"></span>endured for the sake of the sons of Israel
were accounted as naught, and how greatsoever virtues I did in the midst
of them these they did not understand, and I wonder that strangers and
uncircumcised and idol-worshippers have been converted and have entered
into the promises of God, but Israel has not entered; and now I say unto
thee, brother Paul, that in that hour when the people hanged Jesus whom
thou preachest, that the Father, the God of all, who gave me the law,
and Michael and all the angels and archangels, and Abraham and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the just wept over the Son of God hanging on the
cross.  In that hour all the saints attended on me looking (upon me) and
they said to me:  See, Moses, what men of thy people have done to the
Son of God.  Wherefore thou art blessed, Paul, and blessed the
generation and race which believed in thy word.

<span id="vi.ii-p116"></span>49.  When he had spoken thus far, there
came other twelve, and seeing me said:  Art thou Paul the glorified in
heaven and on earth?  And I answered and said:  What are ye?  The first
answered and said:  I am Esaias whom Manasses cut asunder with a wooden
saw.  And the second said likewise:  I am Jeremias who was stoned by the
children of Israel and slain.  And the third said:  I am Ezekiel whom
the children of Israel dragged by the feet over a rock in a mountain
till they knocked out my brains, and we endured all these toils, wishing
to save the children of Israel:  and I say unto thee that after the
toils which they laid upon me, I cast myself on my face in the sight of
the Lord praying for them, bending my knees until the second hour of the
Lord’s day, till Michael came and lifted me up from the earth.  Blessed
art thou, Paul, and blessed the nation which believed through thee.

<span id="vi.ii-p117"></span>And as these passed by, I saw another,
beautiful of countenance, and I asked:  Sir, Who is this?  Who when he
had seen me, rejoiced and said to me:  This is Lot <span
id="fr_3947"></span>[3948](#fn_3947) who was found just in Sodom.  And
approaching <span id="fr_3948"></span>[3949](#fn_3948) he saluted me and
said:  Blessed art thou, Paul, and blessed the generation to which thou
didst minister.  And I answered and said to him:  Art thou Lot who wast
found just in Sodom?  And he said:  I entertained angels, as travellers,
and when they of the city wished to violate them, I offered them my two
virgin daughters who had not yet known men, and gave them to them
saying:  use them as ye will, but only to these men ye shall do no evil;
for this cause they entered under the roof of my house.  For this cause,
therefore, we ought to be confident and know that if anyone shall have
done anything, God shall repay him manifold when they shall come to
him.  Blessed art thou, Paul, and blessed the nation which believed in
thy word.

<span id="vi.ii-p120"></span>When, therefore, he had ceased talking to
me, I saw another coming from a distance, very beautiful of countenance,
and smiling, and his angels saying hymns:  and I said to the angel who
was with me:  Has then each of the just an angel for companion?  And he
said to me:  Each one of the saints has his own (angel) assisting him,
and saying a hymn, and the one does not depart from the other.  And I
said:  Who is this, Sir?  And he said:  This is Job.  And approaching,
he saluted me and said:  Brother Paul, thou hast great praise with God
and men.  And I am Job, who laboured much for a period of thirty years
from a plague in the blood; and verily in the beginning, the wounds
which went forth from my body were like grains of wheat.  But on the
third day, they became as the foot of an ass; worms moreover which fell
four digits in length:  and on the third (day) the devil appeared and
said to me:  Say something against God and die.  I said to him:  If such
be the will of God that I should remain under a plague all the time of
my life till I die, I shall not cease from blessing the Lord, and I
shall receive more reward.  For I know that the labours of that world
are nothing to the refreshment which is afterwards:  for which cause
blessed art thou, Paul, and blessed the nation which believed through
thee.

<span id="vi.ii-p121"></span>50.  When he had spoken thus far, another
came calling from afar and saying:  Blessed art thou, Paul, and blessed
am I because I saw thee, the beloved of the Lord.  And I asked the
angel:  Sir, who is this?  And he answered and said unto me:  This is
Noe in the time of the deluge.  And immediately we saluted each other: 
and greatly rejoicing he said to me:  Thou art Paul the most beloved of
God.  And I asked him:  Who art thou?  And he said:  I am Noe, who was
in the time of the deluge.  And I say to thee, Paul, that working for a
hundred years, I made the ark, not putting off the tunic with which I
was clad, nor did I cut the hair of my head.  Till then also I cherished
continence, not approaching my own wife:  in those hundred years not a
hair of my head grew in length, nor did my garments <span
id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span id="vi.ii-Page_166"></span>become
soiled:  and I besought men at all times saying:  Repent, for a deluge
of waters will come upon you.  But they laughed at me, and mocked my
words; and again they said to me:  But this is the time of those who are
able to play and sin freely, desiring her with whom it is possible to
commit fornication frequently:  for God does not regard this, and does
not know what things are done by us men, and there is no flood of waters
straightway coming upon this world.  And they did not cease from their
sins, till God destroyed all flesh which had the breath of life in it. 
Know then that God loveth one just man more than all the world of the
impious.  Wherefore, blessed art thou, Paul, and blessed is the nation
which believes through thee.

<span id="vi.ii-p122"></span>51.  And turning round, I saw other just
ones coming from afar, and I asked the angel:  Sir, who are those?  And
he answered me:  These are Elias and Eliseus. <span
id="fr_3949"></span>[3950](#fn_3949)   And they saluted me:  and I said
to them:  Who are ye?  And one of them answered and said:  I am Elias,
the prophet of God; I am Elias who prayed, and because of my word, the
heaven did not rain for three years and six months, on account of the
unrighteousness of men.  God is just and true, who doeth the will of his
servants:  for the angels often besought the Lord for rain, and he
said:  Be patient till my servant Elias shall pray and petition for this
and I will send rain on the earth. <span
id="fr_3950"></span>[3951](#fn_3950)

<span id="vi.ii-p127"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.ii-p127.1"></span>The End of the Vision of Saint Paul.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3901"></span>[151:3902](0090072.htm#fr_3901) <span
id="vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span> Theodosius the younger and Cynegius,
Consuls, 388 <span class="sc"><span id="vi.ii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_3902"></span>[151:3903](0090072.htm#fr_3902) <span
id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span> The waters (not in Greek version); rivers
in Syriac.

<span id="fn_3903"></span>[152:3904](0090072.htm#fr_3903) <span
id="vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span> The earth (not in Greek version, but in
Syriac).

<span id="fn_3904"></span>[152:3905](0090072.htm#fr_3904) <span
id="vi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span> *Cf.* Test. of Abraham, Rec. B, iv.

<span id="fn_3905"></span>[152:3906](0090072.htm#fr_3905) <span
id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span> *Cf.* Test. of Abraham, Rec. B, § 4.

<span id="fn_3906"></span>[152:3907](0090072.htm#fr_3906) <span
id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span> *Cf.* Test. of Abraham, Rec. A, § 12.

<span id="fn_3907"></span>[156:3908](0090072.htm#fr_3907) <span
id="vi.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p31"></span> *Cf.* Ascension of [Isaiah ix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009)<span id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3908"></span>[156:3909](0090072.htm#fr_3908) <span
id="vi.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p32"></span> And the sun.  Not in Greek:  *Elias* in
Syriac.

<span id="fn_3909"></span>[156:3910](0090072.htm#fr_3909) <span
id="vi.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p34"></span> (Not in Syriac.)

<span id="fn_3910"></span>[156:3911](0090072.htm#fr_3910) <span
id="vi.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p36"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter. 15.

<span id="fn_3911"></span>[156:3912](0090072.htm#fr_3911) <span
id="vi.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p37"></span> *Cf.* Enoch.

<span id="fn_3912"></span>[156:3913](0090072.htm#fr_3912) <span
id="vi.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p39"></span> *Cf.*Papias. ap. Iren. *Hær*. v. 33. 3, 4.

<span id="fn_3913"></span>[157:3914](0090072.htm#fr_3913) <span
id="vi.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p40"></span> (In Syriac, but not in Greek version.)

<span id="fn_3914"></span>[157:3915](0090072.htm#fr_3914) <span
id="vi.ii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p43"></span> The Greek has not the golden ship, the
angels or the walls.  They are given in the Syriac.

<span id="fn_3915"></span>[157:3916](0090072.htm#fr_3915) <span
id="vi.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p44"></span> Not in the Greek, but given in the Syriac. 
*Cf.* [Genesis ii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#011)<span
id="vi.ii-p44.1"></span> ff.

<span id="fn_3916"></span>[158:3917](0090072.htm#fr_3916) <span
id="vi.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p47"></span> Names not in the Greek.  Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel, Moses and all the Prophets in the Syriac.

<span id="fn_3917"></span>[158:3918](0090072.htm#fr_3917) <span
id="vi.ii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p50"></span> Names not in the Greek or Syriac.

<span id="fn_3918"></span>[158:3919](0090072.htm#fr_3918) <span
id="vi.ii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p53"></span> Not in Greek, which here has the altar in
the city and David.  The Syriac is the same as the Latin.

<span id="fn_3919"></span>[158:3920](0090072.htm#fr_3919) <span
id="vi.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p55"></span> Not in the Greek.  *Cf.* Ascension of
[Isaiah viii. 36](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#036)<span
id="vi.ii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3920"></span>[159:3921](0090072.htm#fr_3920) <span
id="vi.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p58"></span> These letters are unintelligible.  In the
Greek version, the interpretation of Alleluia is given as *thebel
marematha*, which is also unintelligible.  In the Syriac the
interpretation of Alleluia is correctly given.

<span id="fn_3921"></span>[159:3922](0090072.htm#fr_3921) <span
id="vi.ii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p62"></span> Not in Greek or Syriac.

<span id="fn_3922"></span>[159:3923](0090072.htm#fr_3922) <span
id="vi.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p63"></span> Not in the Greek or Syriac.

<span id="fn_3923"></span>[159:3924](0090072.htm#fr_3923) <span
id="vi.ii-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p65"></span> The Greek has here *thieves* and
*slanderers*.

<span id="fn_3924"></span>[160:3925](0090072.htm#fr_3924) <span
id="vi.ii-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p66"></span> Passage probably corrupt.

<span id="fn_3925"></span>[160:3926](0090072.htm#fr_3925) <span
id="vi.ii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p72"></span> Not in the Greek but in the Syriac.

<span id="fn_3926"></span>[160:3927](0090072.htm#fr_3926) <span
id="vi.ii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p74"></span> Not in the Greek.  The Syraic has simply
those who trusted in their riches.

<span id="fn_3927"></span>[160:3928](0090072.htm#fr_3927) <span
id="vi.ii-p74.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p75"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 27.

<span id="fn_3928"></span>[160:3929](0090072.htm#fr_3928) <span
id="vi.ii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p76"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 31.

<span id="fn_3929"></span>[160:3930](0090072.htm#fr_3929) <span
id="vi.ii-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p78"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 29.

<span id="fn_3930"></span>[161:3931](0090072.htm#fr_3930) <span
id="vi.ii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p81"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 24.  Not in the
Greek.  The Syraic has darkness the torment of patriarchs, bishops, etc.

<span id="fn_3931"></span>[161:3932](0090072.htm#fr_3931) <span
id="vi.ii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p83"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter xxi. 30.  Not in
Syriac.

<span id="fn_3932"></span>[161:3933](0090072.htm#fr_3932) <span
id="vi.ii-p84.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p85"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 30.  Not in the Greek.

<span id="fn_3933"></span>[161:3934](0090072.htm#fr_3933) <span
id="vi.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p87"></span> Not in the Greek.

<span id="fn_3934"></span>[161:3935](0090072.htm#fr_3934) <span
id="vi.ii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p89"></span> Not in the Greek.

<span id="fn_3935"></span>[161:3936](0090072.htm#fr_3935) <span
id="vi.ii-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p90"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 24.

<span id="fn_3936"></span>[161:3937](0090072.htm#fr_3936) <span
id="vi.ii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p92"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 32.  Not in the Greek.

<span id="fn_3937"></span>[161:3938](0090072.htm#fr_3937) <span
id="vi.ii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p94"></span> Not in the Greek.  Whole section omitted in
the Syriac.

<span id="fn_3938"></span>[161:3939](0090072.htm#fr_3938) <span
id="vi.ii-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p95"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter xxi. 23.

<span id="fn_3939"></span>[161:3940](0090072.htm#fr_3939) <span
id="vi.ii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p96"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 26.

<span id="fn_3940"></span>[161:3941](0090072.htm#fr_3940) <span
id="vi.ii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p97"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter.  Fragments 4, 5.

<span id="fn_3941"></span>[161:3942](0090072.htm#fr_3941) <span
id="vi.ii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p99"></span> Not in the Greek.

<span id="fn_3942"></span>[162:3943](0090072.htm#fr_3942) <span
id="vi.ii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p101"></span> Not in the Greek.

<span id="fn_3943"></span>[162:3944](0090072.htm#fr_3943) <span
id="vi.ii-p103.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p104"></span> *Cf.* Rev. of Peter, 27.

<span id="fn_3944"></span>[162:3945](0090072.htm#fr_3944) <span
id="vi.ii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p105"></span> Not in the Greek.

<span id="fn_3945"></span>[162:3946](0090072.htm#fr_3945) <span
id="vi.ii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p107"></span> *Cf.* Esdras, Ante-Nicene Lib., vol. xvi.,
p. 469.

<span id="fn_3946"></span>[162:3947](0090072.htm#fr_3946) <span
id="vi.ii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p109"></span> *Gabriel* in the Greek version.

<span id="fn_3947"></span>[165:3948](0090072.htm#fr_3947) <span
id="vi.ii-p117.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p118"></span> Lot and Job, in the Syriac but not in the
Greek.

<span id="fn_3948"></span>[165:3949](0090072.htm#fr_3948) <span
id="vi.ii-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p119"></span> For *adproprians* read *adpropinquans*.

<span id="fn_3949"></span>[166:3950](0090072.htm#fr_3949) <span
id="vi.ii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p123"></span> Elias and Eliseus.  Latin and Syriac.  The
Greek has Enoch and Elijah.

<span id="fn_3950"></span>[166:3951](0090072.htm#fr_3950) <span
id="vi.ii-p123.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p124"></span> The Latin version here breaks off
abruptly, as does also the Greek.  In the Syriac as translated by the
Rev. J. Perkins, D.D. (*cf.* Journal of Sacred Literature, N. S., vi.,
1865, p. 399), the narrative runs as follows:  “And often the angels
asked that he would give them rain, and he gave not, until I called upon
him again; then he gave unto them.  But blessed art thou, O Paul, that
thy generation, and those thou teachest, are the sons of the Kingdom. 
And know thou, O Paul, that every man who believes through thee hath a
great blessing, and a blessing is reserved for him.”  Then he departed
from me.

<span id="vi.ii-p125"></span>And the angel who was with me led me forth,
and said unto me:  “Lo, unto thee is given this mystery and revelation;
as thou pleasest, make it known unto the sons of men.”  And I, Paul,
returned unto myself, and I knew all that I had seen; and in life I had
not rest that I might reveal this mystery, but I wrote it and deposited
it under the ground and the foundation of a certain faithful man with
whom I used to be, in Tarsus, a city of Cilicia.  And when I was
released from this life of time and stood before my Lord, thus said He
unto me:  “Paul, have we shown all these things unto thee, that thou
shouldst deposit them under the foundation of a house?  Then send, and
disclose, concerning this Revelation that men may read it, and turn to
the way of truth, that they also may not come to these bitter torments.”

<span id="vi.ii-p126"></span>Then follows the story of the discovery of
the Revelation at Tarsus in the reign of Theodosius as given at the
beginning of the Greek and Latin versions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Apocalypse of the Virgin.](0090073)
