[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090006)  [Next](0090008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.i"></span> <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_35"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> aim of the following introductory
paragraphs is neither to furnish a detailed restatement of facts already
known, nor to offer an independent contribution to the discussion of the
problems that arise, although in other circumstances such an attempt
might be made with advantage.  All that is needed and practicable here
is to describe briefly, if possible, the nature of the connection
between the English treatise forming the next part of this volume and
the ancient work known as the *Diatessaron* of Tatian; and then to
indicate in a few words some of the more important or interesting
features of the work itself, and some of the historical and other
problems that are in one way or another connected with it.

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>1  *The Text Translated*.—What is offered to
the reader is a translation into English of an Arabic text, published at
Rome in 1888, in a volume entitled in Arabic *Diatessaron, which
Titianus Compiled from the Four Gospels*, with the alternative Latin
title, *Tatiani Evangeliorum Harmoniæ, Arabice*.  The Roman volume
consists of two parts—the text, covering a little over 209 very clearly
printed Arabic pages, and a Latin half, comprising a scholarly
introduction (pp. v.–xv.), a Latin translation (pp. 1–99), and a table
showing the order in which the passages taken from the gospels occur in
the text.  The editor is P. Agostino Ciasca, a well known Orientalist,
“scriptor” at the Vatican Library.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>2  *Former Translations*.—In his Introduction
(p. xiv. f.) Ciasca explains that in his translation he aimed at
preserving *quantum*, *salva fidelitate, integrum fuit, indolem
stylumque Clementinæ Vulgate*.  This Latin version was in its turn
translated into English by the Rev. J. Hamlyn Hill, B.D., and published
in 1894 in a volume entitled *The Earliest Life of Christ*, with an
interesting introduction and a number of valuable appendices.  The <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p5.1"></span>ms.</span> of Mr. Hill’s
translation of the Latin of Ciasca was compared with the Arabic original
by Mr. G. Buchanan Gray, M.A., lecturer in Hebrew and the Old Testament
in Mansfield College, Oxford.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>3  *The Present Translation*.—The translation
offered here is quite independent of either of these two.  Ciasca’s
Latin was seldom consulted, except when it was thought the Arabic might
perhaps be obscured by a misprint.  After the translation was completed,
Hill’s English was compared with it to transfer Mr. Hill’s valuable
system of references to the margin of this work, and to lessen the risk
of oversights passing the last revision unnoticed.  In two or three
cases this process led to the adoption of a different construction, and
in a few of the more awkward passages a word was borrowed as being less
harsh than that which had originally been written.  Speaking generally,
the present version appears to differ from Mr. Hill’s in adhering more
closely to the original. <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>4  *The Arabic Text*.—Only two Arabic <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> are known to exist. 
Ciasca tells us (p. xiv.) that he took as the basis of his text that
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p8.2"></span>ms.</span> which is more
careful in its orthography, the Cod. Vat. Arab. No. 14.  He, however,
printed at the foot of the page the variants of the other <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p8.3"></span>ms.</span>, and supplied from it
two lacunæ in the Cod. Vat., <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)
substituted its readings for those of the Cod. Vat. where he thought
them preferable, and followed its testimony in omitting two important
passages. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)   Here and there Ciasca
has emended the text, but he does not profess to have produced a
critical edition. <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>5  *The Arabic <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>mss.</span>*—Unfortunately, the present writer
has not had an opportunity of examining these two <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p12.2"></span>mss.</span>; but they have been described at some
length by Ciasca; Codex XIV. in Pitra’s *Analecta Sacra*, iv., 465 ff.,
and the other codex in the volume with which we are dealing, p. vi. ff. 
I. The former, which we shall call the Vatican <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p12.3"></span>ms.</span> (in Ciasca’s footnotes it is called
A), was brought to the Vatican from the East by Joseph S. Assemani <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) about <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1719.  It was described by Stephen E.
Assemani, <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) Rosenmüller, and
Akerblad, <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) and then at length by
<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="iv.i-Page_36"></span>Ciasca,
to whose account the reader must be referred for the details.  It
consists of 123 folios, of which the first seven are somewhat spoiled,
and of which two are missing, <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) and
is supposed by Ciasca, from the character of the writing, and from the
presence of certain Coptic letters <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24)
by the first hand, to have been written in Egypt.  S. Assemani assigned
it to the twelfth century, and Ciasca accepts his verdict, while
Akerblad says the thirteenth or fourteenth century.  The text of the
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>ms.</span> is pretty fully
vocalised, but there are few diacritical points.  There are marginal
notes, some of them by a later hand, <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) which Ciasca classifies as (1)
emendations, (2) restorations, (3) explanations.  II. The second <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>ms.</span>, which we shall call
the Borgian (in Ciasca’s footnotes it is called B), was brought to the
Borgian Museum from Egypt in August, 1886.  It has at the end the
following inscription in Arabic:  “A present from Halim Dos Ghali, the
Copt, the Catholic, to the Apostolic See, in the year of Christ
1886.” <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)   Antonius Morcos, Visitor
Apostolic of the Catholic Copts, when, in the beginning of 1886, he was
shown and informed about the Vatican <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>ms.</span>, told of this other one and was the
means of its being sent to Rome.  The Borgian <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p19.2"></span>ms.</span>, which Ciasca refers to the fourteenth
century, consists of 355 folios.  Folios 1–85 <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) contain an anonymous preface on the
gospels, briefly described by Ciasca, who, however, does not say whether
it appears to have been originally written in Arabic or to have been
translated into that language.  With folios 96*b*, 97*a*, which are
reproduced in phototype in Ciasca’s edition, begins the Introductory
Note given in full at the beginning of the present translation.  The
text of the *Diatessaron* ends on folio 353*a*, but is followed by
certain appendices, for which see below, §55, 17, note.  This <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p20.1"></span>ms.</span> is complete, and has,
as we shall see, <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) in some respects a
better text, though it is worse in its orthography than the Vatican
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p21.1"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>6  *Condition of the Arabic Text*.—Ciasca’s
text does not profess to be critically determined, for which purpose a
more careful study of each of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p22.1"></span>mss.</span> and an estimate of their respective
texts would be indispensable.  Although the Borgian <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p22.2"></span>ms.</span> is supposed by Ciasca
to be a century or two later than the Vatican <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p22.3"></span>ms.</span> it is clearly not a copy of the
latter, for not only does it sometimes offer more original readings,
but, as we shall see, its text in some points coincides more exactly in
scope with the original work.  The list of various readings supplied by
Ciasca, <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) which is equal to about a
fifth or a quarter of the text itself, ought to yield, on being
analysed, some canons of criticism.  The footnotes of the present
edition are enough to show that a number of the peculiar features of
Ciasca’s text do not belong to the original Arabic <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p23.1"></span>ms.</span>; and further study
would dispose of still more.  On the other hand, there are unfortunately
some indications <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) that the common
ancestor of both <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p24.1"></span>mss.</span>, though perhaps less than two
centuries removed from the original, was not the original itself, and
therefore emendation may be necessary even where both <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p24.2"></span>mss.</span> agree.  From first
to last it has to be borne in mind that a great deal of work was done at
Arabic versions of the gospels, <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) and
the text of the copy from which our two <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p25.1"></span>mss.</span> are descended may already have
suffered from contact with other versions; while the special activity of
the thirteenth century may have left its mark in some places on the text
of the Borgian <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p25.2"></span>ms.</span>,
supposing it to be chronologically the later.

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span>7  *Origin of the Arabic Text*.—If some of
the uncouthness of the Arabic text is due to corruption in the course of
transmission, much is also due to its being not an original work, but a
translation.  That it is, in the main, a translation from Syriac is too
obvious to need proof. <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)   The
Introductory Notice and Subscription to the Borgian <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p27.1"></span>ms.</span>, moreover, expressly
state that the work was translated by one Abu’l Faraj ‘Abdulla
ibn-at-Tayyib, <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) an “excellent and
learned priest,” and the inferiority of parts of the translation, <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) and entire absence of any confirmatory
evidence, <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) hardly suffice to refute
this assertion.  Still, the Borgian <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p30.1"></span>ms.</span> is a late witness, and although it
most probably preserves a genuine tradition as to the author of our
work, its statement need not therefore necessarily be correct in every
point.

<span id="iv.i-p31"></span>8  *The Arabic Editor and his
Method*.—Ibn-at-Tayyib (d. 1043) is a well known man, a Nestorian monk
and scholar, secretary to Elias I., Patriarch of Nisibis (for references
to sources see, e.g., Ciasca’s Introduction, p. xi. f. and
Steinschneider’s long note in his *<span
id="iv.i-p31.1"></span>Polemische und apologetische Lit. in Arabische
Sprache*, pp. 52–55).  As we are here concerned with him <span
id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span id="iv.i-Page_37"></span>simply as a
link in the chain connecting our present work with its original source,
the only point of interest for us is the method he followed in producing
it.  Did he prepare an independent translation or did he make use of
existing Arabic versions, his own or others’?  Until this question which
space forbids us to discuss here, has been more thoroughly
investigated, <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) it must suffice to
say that in view of the features in the present text that have not yet
been shown to exist in any other Arabic version, it is still at least a
tenable hypothesis that Ibn-at-Tayyib’s <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p32.10"></span>ms.</span> constituted to a considerable extent
a real translation rather than a sort of Arabic parallel to the Codex
Fuldensis (see below, 12).

<span id="iv.i-p33"></span>9  *The Syriac Text Translated*—The eleventh
century <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p33.1"></span>ms.</span> of
Ibn-at-Tayyib, could we reach it, would bring us face to face with the
more interesting question of the nature of his Syriac original.  The
Subscription to the Borgian <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p33.2"></span>ms.</span> states, probably copying the statement
from its exemplar, that this was a. Syriac <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p33.3"></span>ms.</span> in the handwriting of ‘Isa ibn-‘Ali al
Motatabbib, pupil of Honain ibn Ishak.  This Honain was a famous Arabic
physician and medical writer of Bagdad (d. 873), whose school produced
quite a number of translations and translators, among whom Ibn-‘Ali,
supposed to be identical with the Syriac lexicographer of the same name,
is known to have had a high place.  The Syriac <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p33.4"></span>ms.</span>, therefore, that Ibn-at-Tayyib
translated takes us back to about the year 900.  But the Subscription to
each of our <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p33.5"></span>mss. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) </span> states that the work ended is the
gospel called *Diatessaron*, compiled from the four gospels by Titianus;
while the Introductory Note to the Borgian <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p34.1"></span>ms.</span> adds that this Titianus was a Greek. 
The next step, therefore, is to inquire whether any traces exist of such
a Syriac work, or any statements by which we can check the account just
given of it.

<span id="iv.i-p35"></span>10  *Other Traces of a Syriac Text*.—No copy
of a Syriac *Diatessaron* has yet been shown to have survived. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)   A number of quotations <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) from such a work have, however, been
found in a Syriac commentary on the New Testament by Isho‘dad of Merv
(*circ*. 852), a contemporary of Honain, Ibn-‘Ali’s teacher. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)   The value of these extracts is
apparent, for they take us back one generation earlier than
Ibn-at-Tayyib’s Syriac exemplar.  More important still, they do not
entirely agree with the text of our Arabic version.  To solve the
problem thus raised, we must examine some of the statements about the
*Diatessaron* to be found in ecclesiastical writers.

<span id="iv.i-p39"></span>11  *Statements about the Diatessaron*.—One
of the most widely known is that of Isho‘dad himself, who, in his
Preface to the Gospel of Mark, says:  “Tatian, disciple of Justin, the
philosopher and martyr, selected from the four gospels, and combined and
composed a gospel, and called it *Diatessaron*, i.e., the Combined,…and
upon this gospel Mar Ephraem commented.” <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)   Dionysius Bar Salibi (twelfth century)
repeats each of these phrases, adding, “Its commencement was, ‘In the
beginning was the Word.’” <span id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)   These
statements identify the author of the *Diatessaron* with a man otherwise
known, and tell us that the great Syrian father Ephraem (d. 373) wrote a
commentary on it.  Unfortunately, no Syriac <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p41.1"></span>ms.</span> of Ephraem’s work is known to have
survived; <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) but quotations from it,
or allusions to it, are being found in other Syriac writers.  One
further reference will suffice for the present.  Theodoret, Bishop of
Cyrrhus, four hundred years before Isho‘dad, wrote thus in his book on
Heresies (written in 453):  “Tatian the Syrian.…This \[writer\] also
composed the gospel which is called *Diatessaron*, cutting out the
genealogies and whatever other passages show that the Lord was born of
the seed of David ac<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_38"></span>cording to the flesh.” <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)   Before examining the testimonials we
have now adduced, we must notice certain more remote sources of
information.

<span id="iv.i-p44"></span>12  *Non-Syriac Texts of the
Diatessaron*.—Although Ephraem’s Syriac commentary on the *Diatessaron*
is for the present lost, there is an Armenian version of it <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) extant in two <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p45.1"></span>mss.</span> dating from about the time of Bar
Salibi and our Vat. <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p45.2"></span>ms. <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46)  </span>
A Latin translation of this work, published in 1876 by Moesinger, <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) formed the main basis of Zahn’s
attempt <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) to reconstruct the
*Diatessaron*.  Appendix X in Hill’s *Diatessaron* (pp. 334–377)
contains an English translation of the texts commented on by Ephraem,
made from Moesinger’s Latin, but collated with the Armenian by Professor
J. Armitage Robinson, of Cambridge.  A comparison of this document with
our Arabic text shows a remarkable agreement in the order and contents,
but just as remarkable a lack of agreement in the kind of text
presented.  The same phenomenon is met with when we compare our Arabic
text with a document that carries us back three hundred years before the
time of Isho‘dad, and therefore more than six hundred years before the
Armenian <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p48.2"></span>mss.</span>—the
Codex Fuldensis of the Vulgate. <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)  
This <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p49.1"></span>ms.</span> contains
an arrangement of the gospel matter that its discoverer and publisher,
Bishop Victor of Capua (d. 554), rightly concluded must represent the
*Diatessaron* of Tatian, but for the text of which was apparently
substituted that of the Vulgate. <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50)  
We are now ready to weigh the testimony we have gathered. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51)

<span id="iv.i-p52"></span>13  *Accretions to the Diatessaron*.—The
statements we are to consider are:  (1) Bar Salibi’s, that Tatian’s
*Diatessaron* began with “In the beginning was the Word”; <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) (2) Theodoret’s, that Tatian cut out the
genealogies; and (3) the same writer’s, that Tatian also cut out
“whatever other passages show that the Lord was born of the seed of
David according to the flesh.”  Of these statements 1 conflicts with the
Arabic text, which begins with Mark, and the Codex Fuldensis, which
begins with Luke, but agrees with the Ephraem source; the same is true
of 2; while 3 conflicts with all three texts.  Our limits do not admit
of our discussing these points in detail.  It must suffice to say (1)
that, although a more careful examination at firsthand of the
introductory notices in the two Arabic <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p53.1"></span>mss.</span> seems needed before one can venture
to propound a complete theory, a comparison of the two texts, and a
consideration of the descriptions given by Ciasca and Lagarde, <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) make it almost certain that the genuine
Arabic text of Ibn-at-Tayyib began with [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p54.2"></span>. 
Similarly the first four verses of Luke (on which see also below, § 1.
6, note) were probably not in the original text of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p54.3"></span>ms.</span> that Victor found,
for they are not mentioned in the (old) table of contents.  We seem thus
to detect a process of gradual accretion of material drawn from the
ordinary gospel text.  (2) The genealogies illustrate the same process. 
In the Vatican <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p54.4"></span>ms.</span>
they form part of the text. <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)   But
in the Borgian <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p55.1"></span>ms.</span>,
although they precede the Subscription, and therefore *may* have been
already in the ninth century Syriac <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p55.2"></span>ms.</span> used by Ibn-at-Tayyib, they are still
placed by themselves, after a blank space, at the end of the volume,
with a title of their own. <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55)   Here,
therefore, we actually see stages of the process of accretion.  (3) It
is therefore possible that the same account must also be given of 3,
although in this case we have no direct proof.

<span id="iv.i-p57"></span>14  *Passages Lost from the Diatessaron*.—If
the Diatessaron has thus been growing so as to represent the ordinary
text of the canonical gospels more completely, we have also evidence
that suggests that it has been at some time or times purged of certain
features that are lacking in these canonical gospels.  For one case of
this kind see below, §4, 36, note.

<span id="iv.i-p58"></span>15  *Presentation of the Text of the
Diatessaron*.—We have observed already that the Latin, Armenian, and
Arabic *Diatessarons* correspond pretty closely in subject matter and
arrangement, but differ markedly in text.  The Codex Fuldensis is really
a <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p58.1"></span>ms.</span> of the
Vulgate, although the text that Victor found was probably somewhat
different.  The Armenian text differs materially from the ordinary
Syriac version of the New Testament (the Peshitta), showing a marked
connection with another type of Syriac text represented now by the
Curetonian and Sinaitic (Lewis) <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p58.2"></span>mss.</span>  The Arabic text, on the other hand,
almost systematically represents the Peshitta.  The explanation of the
condition of text in the Codex Fuldensis is obvious.  On the other hand,
the relationship of the Armenian and Arabic texts to the original
*Diatessaron* must be determined by weighing <span id="page_39">p.
39</span> <span id="iv.i-Page_39"></span>very multifarious evidence that
cannot be even cited here (see above 6 ff.).  The two texts depend, as
we have seen, on late <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p58.3"></span>mss.</span> but all the earlier references and
quotations go to show that the Armenian text <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56) stands much more closely related to the
original than does the Arabic.

<span id="iv.i-p60"></span>16  *Checkered History of the
Diatessaron*.—What use the Arabic edition of Ibn-at-Tayyib was put to
when made we do not know.  ‘Abd Isho‘ (d. 1318) speaks in the highest
terms of Tatian’s work, saying, “…With all diligence he attended to the
utmost degree to the right order of those things which were said and
done by the Saviour; of his own he did not add a single saying.” <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57)   But the leaders of the Syrian church
had not always thought so.  Theodoret (*loc. cit*.) some nine hundred
years earlier had written thus:  “…Even those that follow the apostolic
doctrines, not perceiving the mischief of the composition,” used “the
book too simply as an abridgment.”  A few years earlier Rabbula, Bishop
of Edessa (d. 435), had said: <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58)  
“Let the presbyters and deacons give heed that in all the churches there
be provided and read a copy of the Distinct Gospel,” i.e., not the
harmonized or mixed gospel.  But obviously these men were trying to
suppress traditional practice due to very different views.  Theodoret
(*loc. cit*.) found more than two hundred copies of the work “held in
respect in the churches”; and the *Doctrine of Addai* (Edessa, third to
fourth century) seems simply to identify the *Diatessaron* and the New
Testament. <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)   Outside of the Syriac
speaking churches we find no signs of any such use of the
*Diatessaron*.  It would seem, therefore, that at a quite early stage
the *Diatessaron* was very widely if not universally read in the Syriac
churches, and commented on by scholars as the gospel; that in time it
fell under the condemnation of some at least of the church leaders, who
made violent efforts to suppress it; that it could not be suppressed;
that a commentary on it was (perhaps in the fifth century <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) ) translated into Armenian; that it was
still discussed by commentators, and new Syriac <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p64.1"></span>mss.</span> of it made in the ninth century, and
thought worth the labor of reproduction in Arabic in the beginning of
the eleventh century; that <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p64.2"></span>mss.</span> of the Armenian volume continued to
be made down to the very end of the twelfth century, and of the Arabic
edition down to the fourteenth century; but that this long life was
secured at the expense of a more or less rapid assimilation of the text
to that of the great Syriac Bible which from the fourth century onwards
became more and more exclusively used—the Peshitta.

<span id="iv.i-p65"></span>17  *The Author of the Diatessaron*.—The
*Diatessaron* is such an impersonal work that we do not need to know
very much about its compiler. <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)   It
will suffice here to say that he tells us himself that he was born “in
the land of the Assyrians,” and brought up a heathen.  After travelling
in search of knowledge, he settled at Rome, where he became a pupil of
Justin Martyr, professed Christianity, and wrote in Greek his *Address
to the Greeks*, <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) translated in vol.
iii. of the *Ante-Nicene Christian Library*.  He was too independent in
his attitude to maintain a permanent popularity, and after Justin’s
death left Rome and returned to Mesopotamia.  It was probably here that
he issued in Syriac his most important work, the *Diatessaron*, which
won such a warm place in the heart of the Syrian church.  Among the
Greek scholars, however, he became more and more regarded as a heretic,
Encratite (ascetic), and Gnostic.

<span id="iv.i-p68"></span>18  *The Diatessaron as a Harmony*.—Not very
much need be said on this subject, as every reader can collect the facts
for himself.  In its present form the Harmony draws from all the four
canonical gospels, and from very little else.  Opinions differ as to
whether it originally indicated the gospel from which any given piece
was drawn, and some uncertainty must remain in special cases as to what
gospel actually has been drawn upon.  Professor G. F. Moore, in a very
interesting article on the *Diatessaron*, <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) having counted the references in the
Arabic <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p69.1"></span>mss.</span>, states
that the Arabic text contains 50 percent of Mark, 66 percent of Luke,
76.5 percent of Matthew, and 96 percent of John.  The summation of his
figures gives the following result:  out of a total of 3780 verses in
the four gospels, the *Diatessaron* quotes 2769 and omits 1011.  As to
the order in which the whole is arranged, Moore thinks that Matthew has
chiefly been followed; while Zahn regards the Fourth Gospel as
normative.  For a specimen of the way in which words and phrases from
the different gospels are woven together, we may refer to § 52, 35 ff.,
and the notes thereon.  In the Arabic <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p69.2"></span>mss.</span>, and probably in the Syriac exemplar,
the work is divided into fifty-four almost equal chapters, followed by
one short one—a feature that agrees well with what we have learned of
the work as being of old the lectionary of the Syrian church.

<span id="iv.i-p70"></span><span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="iv.i-Page_40"></span>19  *Problems Connected with the
Diatessaron*.—The *Diatessaron* opens up a very wide field of study.  A
few points may be here enumerated (see also above, 8, and note there). 
In what language was it written?  On the view favoured by an increasing
majority of scholars, that it was written in Syriac, was it a
translation or simply a compilation?  What precisely is its relation to
the Syriac versions and the “Western” text generally?  Then there is its
bearing on the date and formation of the canonical gospels; the
phenomenon of its so long supplying the place of those gospels; the
analogy it presents to the Pentateuch, according to the critical view of
the origin of the latter.  These and other issues make the *Diatessaron*
an important and interesting study.

<span id="iv.i-p71"></span>20  *The Present Translation*.—The work of
translation has been found much more tedious than was anticipated,
notwithstanding the fact that considerably more than half of it is the
work of my wife, which I have simply revised with special attention to
the many obscurities dealt with in the footnotes.  We have, however,
worked so much together that it is very doubtful whether any one could
assign the various parts to their respective sources.  My wife also
verified the Arabic references to the gospels printed on the margin to
the right of the text, <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) and prepared
the Index to these references—an extremely laborious and perplexing
piece of work.  This Index is inserted merely for the practical purpose
of enabling the reader to find any given gospel piece in the
Diatessaron.  When a verse is not found in the Index, an equivalent
passage from some of the other gospels should be looked for.  On the
margin to the left of the text are indicated the pages of the Arabic
text and the sections and verses in Hill’s version. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)

<span id="iv.i-p74"></span>The aim has been to make a literal
translation.  As two freer translations already exist, it seemed best to
incline to the side of being overliteral.  If, however, features due
simply to *Arabic* idiom have been preserved, this is an oversight. 
Uniformity could only have been secured by devoting a much longer time
to the work than the editor was able to allow.  The difficulties are due
to the corrupt state of the Arabic text, <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) and to the awkward reproduction <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67) or actual misunderstanding <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) of the Syriac original by the author or
authors of the Arabic translation.  It has been impossible to maintain
consistency in dealing with these phenomena.  If any rendering seem
strange, it will be well to consult the Syriac versions before deciding
that it is wrong.  A good deal of attention, too, has to be paid to the
usage of the Arabic text, which, though it has many points of contact
with other Arabic versions of the gospels, e.g., the <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p77.1"></span>ms.</span> described by
Gildemeister (*<span id="iv.i-p77.2"></span>De evangg. in arab. e simp.
Syr*., 1865), is as yet for us (see above, 8) a distinct version,
possessed of an individuality of its own, one pronounced feature being
its very close adherence to its Syriac original.  Another revision of
the present translation, in the light of a fuller study of these
features, would doubtless lead to changes both in the text and in the
footnotes.  The latter aim at preventing misunderstanding and giving
some examples of the peculiarities of the text, and of the differences
between the <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p77.3"></span>mss.</span> 
To have dealt systematically with the text and various readings would
have required much more time and space than was available.  The
consequence of this incompleteness has been some uncertainty at times
what text to translate.  As already stated (paragraphs 4 and 6),
Ciasca’s printed text neither represents any one <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p77.4"></span>ms.</span> nor professes to be based in its
eclecticism on any systematic critical principles.  On the whole Ciasca
has here been followed somewhat mechanically in deciding what to exhibit
in the text and what to relegate to the footnotes.  As a rule
conjectural emendations have not been admitted into the *text* except
where the <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p77.5"></span>ms.</span>
readings would hardly bear translation.  Italics in the text denote
words supplied for the sake of English idiom; in the footnotes,
quotations from the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p77.6"></span>mss.</span>  It is to be noted that many
linguistic usages said, for shortness, in the footnotes to be
characteristic of the present work, i.e., as compared with ordinary
Arabic, are common in Arabic versions.  “Syriac versions” means the
three (Pesh., Cur., Sin.), or as many of them as contain the passage in
question; if the Peshitta alone is quoted, it may be assumed that Cur.
and Sin. are missing or diverge.

<span id="iv.i-p78"></span>In conclusion we may say that an effort has
been made to preserve even the order of words; but it must be emphasized
that it is very doubtful whether it is wise for any one to use the
Arabic *Diatessaron* for critical purposes who is not acquainted with
Arabic and Syriac.  The tenses, e.g., are much vaguer in Arabic than in
Greek and English, and are, moreover, in this work often accommodated to
Syriac idiom.  The Greek and the Revised Version have been <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="iv.i-Page_41"></span>used to
determine in almost every case how the vague Arabic tenses and
conjunctions should be rendered.  It is therefore only where it
*differs* from these that our translation can be quoted without
investigation as giving positive evidence.

<span id="iv.i-p79"></span>This is not a final translation.  Few books
have had a more remarkable literary history than the *Diatessaron*, and
that history is by no means done.  Much careful argument will yet be
devoted to it, and perhaps discoveries as important as any hitherto made
are yet to shed light on the problems that encircle it.  If our work can
help any one to take a step in advance, we shall not regret the toil.

<span id="iv.i-p80"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p80.1"></span>Oxford</span>, 21st December, 1895.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[35:17](0090007.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span> For further explanation of the method
followed see 20.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[35:18](0090007.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.i-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span> See notes to § 7, 47, and § 52, 36, of the
present translation.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[35:19](0090007.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span> See below, 12, (2).

<span id="fn_19"></span>[35:20](0090007.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> See also below, 6, and 20.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[35:21](0090007.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.i-p12.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span> *Bibl. Or.*, i., 619.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[35:22](0090007.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span> Mai, *Vet. script. nova. collect*., iv., 14.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[35:23](0090007.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span> *cf*. Zahn, *<span
id="iv.i-p15.1"></span>Forschungen*, i., 294 ff.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[36:24](0090007.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span> See below, § 7, 47, note, and § 52, 36,
note.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[36:25](0090007.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span> See below, § 28, 43, note.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[36:26](0090007.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span> See below, foot-notes, *passim*.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[36:27](0090007.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iv.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span> The first leaf bears a more pretentious
Latin inscription, quoted by Ciasca, p. vi.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[36:28](0090007.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.i-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span> Can this be a misprint for 95?

<span id="fn_28"></span>[36:29](0090007.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span> See below, 13.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[36:30](0090007.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.i-p22.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span> He does not state, in so many words, that
the list is absolutely exhaustive.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[36:31](0090007.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iv.i-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span> See, e.g., below, § 13, 42, note, and § 14,
43, note.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[36:32](0090007.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iv.i-p24.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span> See the valuable article of Guidi, “Le
traduzioni degli Evangelii in arabo e in etiopico” (*Atti della R.
Accademia dei Lincei; Classe di Scienze Morali, Storiche e
filologiche*.  *Serie Quarta*, 1888, *Parte Prima*—*Memorie*, pp.
5–38).  Some of his results are briefly stated in Scrivener, *A Plain
Introd. to the Crit. of the N.T*., 4th ed., ii., 162.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[36:33](0090007.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span> *cf.*the foot-notes *passim*, e.g., § 13,
14, § 14, 24.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[36:34](0090007.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iv.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span> See below, note to Subscription.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[36:35](0090007.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iv.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p29"></span> See a glaring case in § 52, 11.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36:36](0090007.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p30"></span> The references to the readings of the
*Diatessaron* in Ibn-at-Tayyib’s own commentary on the gospels (see next
note) are remarkably impersonal for one who had made or was to make a
translation of it.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37:37](0090007.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iv.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p32"></span> A specially important part of the general
question is this, What are the mutual relations of the following:  (1) a
supposed version of at least Matthew and John made from the Syriac by
Ibn-at-Tayyib, mentioned by Ibn-al-‘Assal in the Preface to his
scholarly recension of the gospels (<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p32.1"></span>ms.</span> numbered Or. 3382 in Brit. Mus., folio
384*b*) and used by him in determining his text; (2) the gospel text
interwoven with the commentary of Ibn-at-Tayyib on the gospels, a
commentary which De Slane says the author wrote in Syriac and then
translated into Arabic; (3) our present work.  Of <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p32.2"></span>mss.</span> testifying to No. 1 we have some
dating from the time of Ibn-al-‘Assal himself; of No. 2 we have, in
addition to others, an eleventh-century <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p32.3"></span>ms.</span> in Paris, described by De Slane
(catalogue No. 85) as being “<span id="iv.i-p32.4"></span>un volume
dépareillé du <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p32.5"></span>ms.</span>
original de l’ouvrage”; of No. 3 we have of course the Vatican and
Borgian <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p32.6"></span>mss.</span>  What
is the mutual relation of these texts; were any two of them identical? 
The Brit. Mus. <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p32.7"></span>ms.</span>
of the second has many points of contact with the third, but is dated
1805 <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p32.8"></span>a.d</span>.  Does the
older Paris <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p32.9"></span>ms.</span>
stand more or less closely related?  Did Ibn-at-Tayyib himself really
translate any or all of these texts, or did he simply select or edit
them?  Space does not permit us to point out, far less to discuss, the
various possibilities.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[37:38](0090007.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.i-p33.6"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p34"></span> The text is given below in full at its
proper place.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[37:39](0090007.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p36"></span> Prof. Gottheil, indeed, announced in 1892 in
the *Journal of Biblical Literature* (vol. xi., pt. i., p. 71) that he
had been privately informed of the existence of a complete copy of the
Syriac *Diatessaron.*  Unfortunately, however, as he has kindly informed
me, he has reluctantly come to the conclusion that the <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p36.1"></span>ms.</span> in question, which is
not yet accessible, is “nothing more than the commentary of Isho‘dad”
mentioned in the text.  A similar rumor lately circulated probably
originated simply in the pamphlet of Goussen mentioned in the next
note.  S. Bäumer, on the other hand, in his article, “<span
id="iv.i-p36.2"></span>Tatians Diatessaron, seine bisher. Lit. u. die
Reconstruction des Textes nach einer neuentdeckten Handschrift” <span
id="iv.i-p36.3"></span>(*Literarischer* *Handweiser*, 1890, 153–169)
which the present writer has not been able to see, perhaps refers simply
to the Borgian <span class="sc"><span id="iv.i-p36.4"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_39"></span>[37:40](0090007.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.i-p36.5"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p37"></span> Attention was called to these by Profs.
Isaac H. Hall and R. J. H. Gottheil (*Journ. of Bibl. Lit*., x., 153
ff.; xi., 68 ff.); then by Prof. J. R. Harris (*Contemp. Rev*., Aug.,
1895, p. 271 ff., and, more fully, *Fragments of the Com. of Ephr. Syr.
on the Diatess*., London, 1895) and by Goussen (*Studia Theologica*,
fasc. i., Lips., 1895).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[37:41](0090007.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p38"></span> Prof. Harris promises an edition of this
commentary.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[37:42](0090007.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p40"></span> Harris, *Fragments*, p. 14, where the Syriac
text is quoted.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[37:43](0090007.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p41"></span> *Bib. Or*., ii., 159 f.  Most of them are
repeated again by Bar Hebræus (d. 1286), although some confusion is
produced by his interweaving some phrases from Eusebius of Cæsarea. 
(*Bib. Or*., i., 57 f., and a longer quotation in English in *Contemp.
Rev*., Aug., 1895, p. 274 f.)

<span id="fn_43"></span>[37:44](0090007.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.i-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p42"></span> Lagarde’s statement (*<span
id="iv.i-p42.1"></span>Nachrichten von der Königl. Gesellsch. der Wiss.,
etc., zu Göttingen,* 1891, No. 4, p. 153) that a <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p42.2"></span>ms.</span> had been discovered, appears to have
been unfounded.  Prof. Rahlfs of Göttingen kindly tells me that he
believes this is so.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[38:45](0090007.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.i-p42.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p43"></span> Migne, *Patrol. græc*., tom. lxxxiii., col.
369, 372.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[38:46](0090007.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iv.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p45"></span> Published at Venice in 1836.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[38:47](0090007.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iv.i-p45.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p46"></span> The two Armenian <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p46.1"></span>mss.</span> are dated <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.i-p46.2"></span>a.d</span>. 1195.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[38:48](0090007.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.i-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p47"></span> *Evangelii Concordantis Expositio, facta* *a
S. Ephraemo* (Ven., 1876).

<span id="fn_48"></span>[38:49](0090007.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p48"></span> *<span id="iv.i-p48.1"></span>Forschungen
zur Geschichte des neutestamentlichen Kanons*, I. Theil.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[38:50](0090007.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.i-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p49"></span> Edited by Ernestus Ranke, Marb. and Lips.,
1868.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[38:51](0090007.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.i-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p50"></span> For other forms of the *Diatessaron*, of no
critical importance, see S. Hemphill*, The Diatessaron of Tatian*
(London, 1888), Appendix D and the refs. there.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[38:52](0090007.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p51"></span> Further references, chiefly repetitions in
one form or another of the statements we have quoted, may be found in a
convenient form in Harnack, *<span id="iv.i-p51.1"></span>Gesch. d.
altchrist. Lit. bis. Euseb*<span id="iv.i-p51.2"></span>., 493–496;
*cf*. also the works mentioned by Hill (*op. cit*.) p. 378 f.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[38:53](0090007.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p53"></span> *cf*. the words of Aphraates, senior
contemporary of Ephraem:  “As it is written in the beginning of the
Gospel of our Vivifier:  In the beginning was the Word.”  (*Patrol.
Syr.*, pars i., tom. i., 21, lines 17–19).

<span id="fn_53"></span>[38:54](0090007.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.i-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p54"></span> *<span id="iv.i-p54.1"></span>Nachrichten
von der Königl. Gesellsch. der Wiss*., etc., March 17, 1886, No. 4, p.
151 ff.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[38:55](0090007.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.i-p54.5"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p55"></span> See notes to § 1, 81, and § 4, 29.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[38:56](0090007.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.i-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p56"></span> See note to § 55, 17.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[39:57](0090007.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iv.i-p58.4"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p59"></span> The Armenian version of Ephraem is supposed
to date from the fifth century.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[39:58](0090007.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iv.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p61"></span> Mai, *Script. vet. nov.  Coll*., x., 191.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[39:59](0090007.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iv.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p62"></span> Overbeck, S. *Ephraemi*, etc., *Opera
Selecta*, p. 220, lines 3–5.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[39:60](0090007.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iv.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p63"></span> Phillips, *Doct. Add*., p. 36, 15–17 \[E.
Tr. p. 34\].

<span id="fn_60"></span>[39:61](0090007.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iv.i-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p64"></span> Moesinger, *Evang. Concord*., etc., p. xi.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[39:62](0090007.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iv.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p66"></span> The latest discussion of the question
whether this really was Tatian is Mr. Rendel Harris’s article in the
*Contemp. Rev*., Aug., 1895.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[39:63](0090007.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iv.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p67"></span> Best ed. by Eduard Schwartz, in *<span
id="iv.i-p67.1"></span>Texte und Untersuchungen*, IV. Band, Heft 1.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[39:64](0090007.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iv.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p69"></span> “Tatian’s *Diatessaron* and the Analysis of
the Pentateuch,” *Journ. of Bibl. Lit*., vol. ix., 1890, pt. ii.,
201–215.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[40:65](0090007.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iv.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p72"></span> The refs., except where the foot-notes
indicate otherwise, are to the verses of the English or Greek Bible. 
The numbers of the Arabic verse refs. (which follow the Vulgate and
therefore in one or two passages differ from the English numbers by one)
may, however, have been occasionally retained through oversight.  It is
only the name of the gospel that can possibly be ancient.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[40:66](0090007.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iv.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p73"></span> It may be mentioned that it has been found
very convenient to mark these figures on the margin of the Arabic text. 
An English index (that given here, or that in Hill’s volume) can then be
used for the Arabic text also.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[40:67](0090007.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iv.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p75"></span> e.g., § 8, 10.  For a list of suggested
emendations see at end of Index.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[40:68](0090007.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iv.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p76"></span> e.g., § 52, 11.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[40:69](0090007.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iv.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p77"></span> e.g., § 45, 33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introductory Notes.](0090008)
