[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090296)  [Next](0090298) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>21.  The Fourth Gospel Speaks of Only One
Shoe, the Others of Both.  The Significance of This.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxi-p2"></span>As to the shoes, too, which are spoken
of in the three Gospels, we have a question to consider; we must compare
them with the single shoe named by the disciple John.  “I am not
worthy,” we read there, “to untie the latchet of His shoe.”  Perhaps he
was conquered by the grace of God, and received the gift of doing that
which of himself he would not have been worthy to do, of untying,
namely, the latchet of one of the shoes, namely, after he had seen the
Saviour’s sojourn among men, of which he bears witness.  But he did not
know the things which were to follow, namely, whether Jesus was to come
to that place also, to which he was to go after being beheaded in
prison, or whether he was to look for another; and hence he alludes
enigmatically to that doubt which was afterwards cleared <span
id="page_369">p. 369</span> <span id="xv.iii.v.xxi-Page_369"></span>up
to us, and says, “I am not worthy to untie His shoe-latchet.”  If any
one considers this to be a superfluous speculation, he can combine in
one the speech about the shoes and that about the shoe, as if John said,
I am by no means worthy to loose His shoestring, not even at the
beginning, the string of one of His shoes.  Or the following may be a
way to combine what is said in the Four.  If John understands about
Jesus’ sojourn here, but is in doubt about the future, then he says with
perfect truth that he is not worthy to loose the latchet of His shoes;
for though he loosed that of one shoe, he did not loose both.  And on
the other hand, what he says about the latchet of the shoe is quite true
also; since as we saw he is still in doubt whether Jesus is He that was
to come, or whether another is to be looked for, in that other region.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](0090298)
