[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090276)  [Next](0090278) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.i"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p1"></span> <span class="c10"><span
id="xv.iii.v.i-p1.1"></span>Sixth Book.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.i-p2.1"></span>1.  The Work is Taken Up After a Violent
Interruption, Which Has Driven the Writer from Alexandria.  He Addresses
Himself to It Again, with Thanks for His Deliverance, and Prayer for
Guidance.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p3"></span>When a house is being built which is to
be made as strong as possible, the building takes place in fine weather
and in calm, so that nothing may hinder the structure from acquiring the
needed solidity.  And thus it turns out so strong and stable that it is
able to withstand the rush of the flood, and the dashing of the river,
and all the agencies accompanying a storm which are apt to find out what
is rotten in a building and to show what parts of it have been properly
put together.  And more particularly should that house which is capable
of sheltering the speculations of truth, the house of reason, as it
were, in promise or in letters, be built at a time when God can add His
free co-operation to the projector of so noble a work, when the soul is
quiet and in the enjoyment of that peace which passes all understanding,
when she is turned away from all disturbance and not buffeted by any
billows.  This, it appears to me, was well understood by the servants of
the prophetic spirit and the ministers of the Gospel message; they made
themselves worthy to receive that peace which is in secret from Him who
ever gives it to them that are worthy and who said, <span
id="fr_4806"></span>[4807](#fn_4806) “Peace I leave with you, My peace I
give unto you; not as the world giveth give I unto you.”  And look if
some similar lesson is not taught under the surface with regard to David
and Solomon in the narrative about the temple.  David, who fought the
wars of the Lord and stood firm against many enemies, his own and those
of Israel, desired to build a temple for God.  But God, through Nathan,
prevents him from doing so, and Nathan says to him, <span
id="fr_4807"></span>[4808](#fn_4807) “Thou shalt not build me an house,
because thou art a man of blood.”  But Solomon, on the other hand, saw
God in a dream, and in a dream received wisdom, for the reality of the
vision was kept for him who said, “Behold a greater than Solomon is
here.”  The time was one of the profoundest peace, so that it was
possible for every man to rest under his own vine and his own fig-tree,
and Solomon’s very name was significant of the peace which was in his
days, for Solomon means peaceful; and so he was at liberty to build the
famous temple of God.  About the time of Ezra, also, when “truth
conquers wine and the hostile king and women,” <span
id="fr_4808"></span>[4809](#fn_4808) the temple of God is restored
again.  All this is said by way of apology to you, reverend Ambrosius. 
It is at your sacred encouragement that I have made up my mind to build
up in writing the tower of the Gospel; and I have therefore sate down to
count the cost, <span id="fr_4809"></span>[4810](#fn_4809) if I have
sufficient to finish it, lest I should be mocked by the beholders,
because I laid the foundation but was not able to finish the work.  The
result of my counting, it is true, has been that I do not possess what
is required to finish it; yet I have put my trust in God, who enriches
us <span id="fr_4810"></span>[4811](#fn_4810) with all wisdom and all
knowledge.  If we strive to keep His spiritual laws we believe that He
does enrich us; He will supply what is necessary so that we shall get on
with our building, and shall even come to the parapet of the structure. 
That parapet it is which keeps from falling those who go up on the house
of the Word; for people only fall off those houses which have no
parapet, so that the buildings themselves are to blame for their fall
and for their death.  We proceeded as far as the fifth volume in spite
of the obstacles presented by the storm in Alexandria, and spoke what
was given us to speak, for Jesus rebuked the winds and the waves of the
sea.  We emerged from the storm, we were brought out of Egypt, that God
delivering <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.i-Page_350"></span>us who led His people forth from there. 
Then, when the enemy assailed us with all bitterness by his new
writings, so directly hostile to the Gospel, and stirred up against us
all the winds of wickedness in Egypt, I felt that reason called me
rather to stand fast for the conflict, and to save the higher part in
me, lest evil counsels should succeed in directing the storm so as to
overwhelm my soul, rather to do this than to finish my work at an
unsuitable season, before my mind had recovered its calm.  Indeed, the
ready writers who usually attended me brought my work to a stand by
failing to appear to take down my words.  But now that the many fiery
darts directed against me have lost their edge, for God extinguished
them, and my soul has grown accustomed to the dispensation sent me for
the sake of the heavenly word, and has learned from necessity to
disregard the snares of my enemies, it is as if a great calm had settled
on me, and I defer no longer the continuation of this work.  I pray that
God will be with me, and will speak as a teacher in the porch of my
soul, so that the building I have begun of the exposition of the Gospel
of John may arrive at completion.  May God hear my prayer and grant that
the body of the whole work may now be brought together, and that no
interruption may intervene which might prevent me from following the
sequence of Scripture.  And be assured that it is with great readiness
that I now make this second beginning and enter on my sixth volume,
because what I wrote before at Alexandria has not, I know not by what
chance, been brought with me.  I feared I might neglect this work, if I
were not engaged on it at once, and therefore thought it better to make
use of this present time and begin without delay the part which
remains.  I am not certain if the part formerly written will come to
light, and would be very unwilling to waste time in waiting to see if it
does.  Enough of preamble, let us now attend to our text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4806"></span>[349:4807](0090277.htm#fr_4806) <span
id="xv.iii.v.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p4"></span> [John xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4807"></span>[349:4808](0090277.htm#fr_4807) <span
id="xv.iii.v.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p5"></span> [1 Chr.
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009)<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4808"></span>[349:4809](0090277.htm#fr_4808) <span
id="xv.iii.v.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p6"></span> <span id="xv.iii.v.i-p6.1"></span>3
Esdras iv. 37, 41, 47.

<span id="fn_4809"></span>[349:4810](0090277.htm#fr_4809) <span
id="xv.iii.v.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p7"></span> [Luke xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#028)<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4810"></span>[349:4811](0090277.htm#fr_4810) <span
id="xv.iii.v.i-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p8"></span> [1 Cor. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005)<span id="xv.iii.v.i-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](0090278)
