[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090277)  [Next](0090279) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>2.  How the Prophets and Holy Men of the
Old Testament Knew the Things of Christ.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p2"></span>“And this is the witness of
John.” <span id="fr_4811"></span>[4812](#fn_4811)   This is the second
recorded testimony of John the Baptist to Christ.  The first begins with
“This was He of whom I said, He that cometh after me,” and goes down to
“The only-begotten Son of God who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath
declared him.”  Heracleon supposes the words, “No one has seen God at
any time,” etc., to have been spoken, not by the Baptist, but by the
disciple.  But in this he is not sound.  He himself allows the words,
“Of his fulness we all received, and grace for grace; for the law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ,” to have been
spoken by the Baptist.  And does it not follow that the person who
received of the fulness of Christ, and a second grace in addition to
that he had before, and who declared the law to have been given by
Moses, but grace and truth to have come through Jesus Christ, is it not
clear that this is the person who understood, from what he received from
the fulness of Christ, how “no one hath seen God at any time,” and how
“the only-begotten who is in the bosom of the Father” had delivered the
declaration about God to him and to all those who had received of His
fulness?  He was not declaring here for the first time Him that is in
the bosom of the Father, as if there had never before been any one fit
to receive what he told His Apostles.  Does he not teach us that he was
before Abraham, and that Abraham rejoiced and was glad to see his day? 
The words “Of his fulness all we received,” and “Grace for grace,” show,
as we have already made clear, that the prophets also received their
gift from the fulness of Christ and received a second grace in place of
that they had before; for they also, led by the Spirit, advanced from
the introduction they had in types to the vision of truth.  Hence not
all the prophets, but many of them, <span
id="fr_4812"></span>[4813](#fn_4812) desired to see the things, which
the Apostles saw.  For if there was a difference among the prophets,
those who were perfect and more distinguished of them did not desire to
see what the Apostles saw, but actually beheld them, while those who
rose less fully than these to the height of the Word were filled with
longing for the things which the Apostles knew through Christ.  The word
“saw” we have not taken in a physical sense, and the word “heard” we
have taken to refer to a spiritual communication; only he who has ears
is prepared to hear the words of Jesus—a thing which does not happen too
frequently.  There is the further point, that the saints before the
bodily advent of Jesus had an advantage over most believers in their
insight into the mysteries of divinity, since the Word of God was their
teacher before He became flesh, for He was always work<span
id="page_351">p. 351</span> <span id="xv.iii.v.ii-Page_351"></span>ing ,
in imitation of His Father, of whom He says, “My father worketh
hitherto.”  On this point we may adduce the words He addresses to the
Sadducees, who do not believe the doctrine of the resurrection.  “Have
you not read,” He says, <span id="fr_4813"></span>[4814](#fn_4813) “what
is said by God at the Bush, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob; He is not the God of the dead but of the
living.”  If, then, God is not ashamed to be called the God of these
men, and if they are counted by Christ among the living, and if all
believers are sons of Abraham, <span
id="fr_4814"></span>[4815](#fn_4814) since all the Gentiles are blessed
with faithful Abraham, who is appointed by God to be a father of the
Gentiles, can we hesitate to admit that those living persons made
acquaintance with the learning of living men, and were taught by Christ
who was born before the daystar, <span
id="fr_4815"></span>[4816](#fn_4815) before He became flesh?  And for
this cause they lived, because they had part in Him who said, “I am the
life,” and as the heirs of so great promises received the vision, not
only of angels, but of God in Christ.  For they saw, it may be, the
image of the invisible God, <span id="fr_4816"></span>[4817](#fn_4816)
since he who hath seen the Son hath seen the Father, and so they are
recorded to have known God, and to have heard God’s words worthily, and,
therefore, to have seen God and heard Him.  Now, I consider that those
who are fully and really sons of Abraham are sons of his actions,
spiritually understood, and of the knowledge which was made manifest to
him.  What he knew and what he did appears again in those who are his
sons, as the Scripture teaches those who have ears to hear, <span
id="fr_4817"></span>[4818](#fn_4817) “If ye were the children of
Abraham, ye would do the works of Abraham.”  And if it is a true
proverb <span id="fr_4818"></span>[4819](#fn_4818) which says, “A wise
man will understand that which proceeds from his own mouth, and on his
lips he will bear prudence,” then we must at once repudiate some things
which have been said about the prophets, as if they were not wise men,
and did not understand what proceeded from their own mouths.  We must
believe what is good and true about the prophets, that they were sages,
that they did understand what proceeded from their mouths, and that they
bore prudence on their lips.  It is clear indeed that Moses understood
in his mind the truth (real meaning) of the law, and the higher
interpretations of the stories recorded in his books.  Joshua, too,
understood the meaning of the allotment of the land after the
destruction of the nine and twenty kings, and could see better than we
can the realities of which his achievements were the shadows.  It is
clear, too, that Isaiah saw the mystery of Him who sat upon the throne,
and of the two seraphim, and of the veiling of their faces and their
feet, and of their wings, and of the altar and of the tongs.  Ezekiel,
too, understood the true significance of the cherubim and of their
goings, and of the firmament that was above them, and of Him that sat on
the throne, than all which what could be loftier or more splendid?  I
need not enter into more particulars; the point I aim at establishing is
clear enough already, namely, that those who were made perfect in
earlier generations knew not less than the Apostles did of what Christ
revealed to them, since the same teacher was with them as He who
revealed to the Apostles the unspeakable mysteries of godliness.  I will
add but a few points, and then leave it to the reader to judge and to
form what views he pleases on this subject.  Paul says in his Epistle to
the Romans, <span id="fr_4819"></span>[4820](#fn_4819) “Now, to him who
is able to establish you according to my Gospel, according to the
revelation of the mystery which hath been kept in silence through times
eternal, but is now made manifest by the prophetic Scriptures and the
appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ.”  For if the mystery concealed of
old is made manifest to the Apostles through the prophetic writings, and
if the prophets, being wise men, understood what proceeded from their
own mouths, then the prophets knew what was made manifest to the
Apostles.  But to many it was not revealed, as Paul says, <span
id="fr_4820"></span>[4821](#fn_4820) “In other generations it was not
made known to the sons of men as it hath now been revealed unto His holy
Apostles and prophets by the Spirit, that the Gentiles are fellow-heirs
and members of the same body.”  Here an objection may be raised by those
who do not share the view we have propounded; and it becomes of
importance to define what is meant by the word “revealed.”  It is
capable of two meanings:  firstly, that the thing in question is
understood, but secondly, if a prophecy is spoken of, that it is
accomplished.  Now, the fact that the Gentiles were to be fellow-heirs
and members of the same <span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-Page_352"></span>body, and partakers of the promise, was
known to the prophets to this extent, that they knew the Gentiles were
to fellow-heirs and members of the same body, and partakers of the
promise in Christ.  When this should be, and why, and what Gentiles were
spoken of, and how, though strangers from the covenants, and aliens to
the promises, they were yet to be members of one body and sharers of the
blessings; all this was known to the prophets, being revealed to them. 
But the things prophesied belong to the future, and are not revealed to
those who know them, but do not witness their fulfilment, as they are to
those who have the event before their eyes.  And this was the position
of the Apostles.  Thus, I conceive, they knew the events no more than
the fathers and the prophets did; and yet it is truly said of them that
“what to other generations was not revealed was now revealed to the
Apostles and prophets, that the Gentiles were fellow-heirs and members
of the same body, and partakers in the promise of Christ.”  For, in
addition to knowing these mysteries, they saw the power at work in the
accomplished fact.  The passage, “Many prophets and righteous men
desired to see the things ye see and did not see them; and to hear the
things ye hear and did not hear them,” may be interpreted in the same
way.  They also desired to see the mystery of the incarnation of the Son
of God, and of His coming down to carry out the design of His suffering
for the salvation of many, actually put in operation.  This may be
illustrated from another quarter.  Suppose one of the Apostles to have
understood the “unspeakable words which it is not lawful for a man to
utter,” <span id="fr_4821"></span>[4822](#fn_4821) but not to witness
the glorious bodily appearing of Jesus to the faithful. which is
promised, although He desired to see it and suppose another had not only
not <span id="fr_4822"></span>[4823](#fn_4822) marked and seen what that
Apostle marked and saw, but had a much feebler grasp of the divine hope,
and yet is present at the second coming of our Saviour, which the
Apostle, as in the parallel above, had desired, but had not seen.  We
shall not err from the truth if we say that both of these have seen what
the Apostle, or indeed the Apostles, desired to see, and yet that they
are not on that account to be deemed wiser or more blessed than the
Apostles.  In the same way, also, the Apostles are not to be deemed
wiser than the fathers, or than Moses and the prophets, than those in
fact who, for their virtue, were found worthy of epiphanies and of
divine manifestations and of revelations of mysteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4811"></span>[350:4812](0090278.htm#fr_4811) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p3"></span> [John i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4812"></span>[350:4813](0090278.htm#fr_4812) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p4"></span> [Matt. xiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4813"></span>[351:4814](0090278.htm#fr_4813) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p5"></span> [Mark xii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#020)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4814"></span>[351:4815](0090278.htm#fr_4814) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p6"></span> [Rom. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4815"></span>[351:4816](0090278.htm#fr_4815) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p7"></span> [Ps. cv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4816"></span>[351:4817](0090278.htm#fr_4816) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p8"></span> [Col.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015), [John
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#019)<span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4817"></span>[351:4818](0090278.htm#fr_4817) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p9"></span> [John viii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4818"></span>[351:4819](0090278.htm#fr_4818) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p10"></span> [Prov. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#023)<span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4819"></span>[351:4820](0090278.htm#fr_4819) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p11"></span> [Rom.
16.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4820"></span>[351:4821](0090278.htm#fr_4820) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p12"></span> [Ephes. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4821"></span>[352:4822](0090278.htm#fr_4821) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p13"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4822"></span>[352:4823](0090278.htm#fr_4822) <span
id="xv.iii.v.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p14"></span> Lommatzsch omits <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p14.1"></span>οὐ</span> before <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.v.ii-p14.2"></span>ἠκριβωκότα</span>, but
it is necessary to the sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0090279)
