[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090444)  [Next](0090446) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>4.  Spiritual Epileptics.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p2"></span>But since our present object is not to
make inquiry about every case, but about the passage before us, let us,
adopting a figurative interpretation, consider who we may say the
lunatic was, and who was his father who prayed for him, and what is
meant by the sufferer falling not constantly but oft-times, sometimes
into the fire, and sometimes into the water, and what is meant by the
fact that he could not be healed by the disciples but by Jesus Himself. 
For if every sickness and every infirmity, which our Saviour then healed
among the people, refers to different disorders in souls, it is also in
accordance with reason that by the paralytics are symbolised the palsied
in soul, who keep it lying paralysed in the body; but by those who are
blind are symbolised those who are blind in respect of things seen by
the soul alone, and these are really blind; and by the deaf are
symbolised those who are deaf in regard to the reception of the word of
salvation.  On the same principle it will be necessary that the matters
regarding the epileptic should be investigated.  Now this affection
attacks the sufferers at considerable intervals, during which he who
suffers from it seems in no way to differ from the man in good health,
at the season when the epilepsy is not working on him.  Similar
disorders you may find in certain souls, which are often supposed to be
healthy in point of temperance and the other virtues; then, sometimes,
as if they were seized with a kind of epilepsy arising from their
passions, they fall down from the position in which they seemed to
stand, and are drawn away by the deceit of this world and other lusts. 
Perhaps, therefore, you would not err if you said, that such persons, so
to speak, are epileptic spiritually, having been cast down by “the
spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places,” <span
id="fr_5863"></span>[5864](#fn_5863) and are often ill, at the time when
the passions attack their soul; at one time falling into the fire of
burnings, when, according to what is said in Hosea, they become
adulterers, like a pan heated for the cooking from the burning
flame; <span id="fr_5864"></span>[5865](#fn_5864) and, at another time,
into the water, when the king of all the dragons in the waters casts
them down from the sphere where they appeared to breath freely, so that
they come into the depths of the waves of the sea of human life.  This
interpretation of ours in regard to the lunatic will be supported by him
who says in the Book of Wisdom with reference to the even temperament of
the just man, “The discourse of a pious man is always wisdom,” but, in
regard to what we have said, “The fool changes as the moon.” <span
id="fr_5865"></span>[5866](#fn_5865)   And sometimes even in the case of
such you may see impulses which might carry away in praise of them those
who do not attend to their want of ballast, so that they would say that
it was as full moon in their case, or almost full moon.  And you might
see again the light that seemed to be in them dim<span id="page_478">p.
478</span> <span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-Page_478"></span>inishing ,—as it was
not the light of day but the light of night,—fading to so great an
extent, that the light which appeared to be seen in them no longer
existed.  But whether or not those who first gave their names to things,
on account of this gave the name of lunacy to the disease epilepsy, you
will judge for yourself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5863"></span>[477:5864](0090445.htm#fr_5863) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p3"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5864"></span>[477:5865](0090445.htm#fr_5864) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p4"></span> [Hos. vii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#004)<span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5865"></span>[477:5866](0090445.htm#fr_5865) <span
id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p5"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
27.11](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.ii.vi.iv-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](0090446)
