[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090243)  [Next](0090245) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>5.  He (This One) Was in the Beginning with
God.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.v-p2"></span>To those who fail to distinguish with
care the different propositions of the context the Evangelist may appear
to be repeating himself.  “He was in the beginning with God” may seem to
add nothing to “And the Word was with God.”  We must observe more
carefully.  In the statement “The Word was with God” we are not told
anything of the when or the where; that is added in the fourth axiom. 
There are four axioms, or, as some call them, propositions, the fourth
being “He was in the beginning with God.”  Now “The Word was with God”
is not the same thing as “He was,” etc.; for here we are told, not only
that He was with God, but when and where He was so:  “He was in the
beginning with God.”  The “He,” too, used as it is for a demonstration,
will be considered to refer to the Word, or by a less careful enquirer,
to God.  What was noted before is now summed up in this designation
“He,” the notion of the Logos and that of God; and as the argument
proceeds the different notions are collected in one; for the notion God
is not included in the notion Logos, nor the notion Logos in that of
God.  And perhaps the proposition before us is a summing up in one of
the three which have preceded.  Taking the statement that the <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="xv.iii.ii.v-Page_328"></span>Word
was in the beginning, we have not yet learned that He was with God, and
taking the statement that the Word was with God it is not yet clear to
us that He was with God in the beginning; and taking the statement that
the Word was God, it has neither been shown that He was in the
beginning, nor that He was with God.

<span id="xv.iii.ii.v-p3"></span>Now when the Evangelist says, “He was
in the beginning with God,” if we apply the pronoun “He” to the Word and
to God (as He is God) and consider that “in the beginning” is conjoined
with it, and “with God” added to it, then there is nothing left of the
three propositions that is not summed up and brought together in this
one.  And as “in the beginning” has been said twice, we may consider if
there are not two lessons we may learn.  First, that the Word was in the
beginning, as if He was by Himself and not with any one, and secondly,
that He was in the beginning with God.  And I consider that there is
nothing untrue in saying of Him both that He was in the beginning, and
in the beginning with God, for neither was He with God alone, since He
was also in the beginning, nor was He in the beginning alone and not
with God, since “He was in the beginning with God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](0090245)
