[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090089)  [Next](0090091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span
id="xi.ii-Page_220"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>The Narrative of Zosimus Concerning the Life of
the Blessed.</span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>I.  About that time there was in the desert a
certain man named Zosimus, who for forty years ate no bread, and drank
no wine, and saw not the face of man.  This man was entreating God that
he might see the way of life of the blessed, and behold an angel of the
Lord was sent saying to him, Zosimus, man of God, behold I am sent by
the Most High, the God of all, to tell thee that thou shalt journey to
the blessed, but shalt not dwell with them.  But exalt not thy heart,
saying, For forty years I have not eaten bread, for the word of God is
more than bread, and the spirit of God is more than wine.  And as for
thy saying, I have not seen the face of man, behold the face of the
great king is nigh thee.  Zosimus said, I know that the Lord can do
whatsoever he will.  The angel said to him, Know this also, that thou
art not worthy of one of their delights, but arise and set out.

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span>II.  And I, Zosimus, issuing from my cave
with God leading me, set out not knowing which way I went, and after I
had travelled forty days my spirit grew faint and my body failed, and
being exhausted I sat down, and continued praying in that place for
three days.  And, behold, there came a beast from the desert, whose name
is the camel, and placing its knees on the ground, it received me upon
its neck and went into the desert and set me down.  There there was much
howling of wild beasts, and gnashing of teeth, and deadly poison.  And
becoming afraid, I prayed to the Lord, and there came in that place a
great earthquake with noise, and a storm of wind blew and lifted me from
the earth, and exalted me on its wing, and I was praying and journeying
till it set me upon a place beside a river, and the name of the river is
Eumeles.  And behold when I desired to cross the river, some one cried
as if from the water, saying, Zosimus, man of God, thou canst not pass
through me, for no man can divide my waters:  but look up from the
waters to the heaven.  And looking up I saw a wall of cloud stretching
from the waters to the heaven, and the cloud said, Zosimus, man of God,
through me no bird passes out of this world, nor breath of wind, nor the
sun itself, nor can the tempter in this world pass through me.

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span>III.  And I was astonished at these words,
and at the voice that spake these things to me.  And as I prayed, behold
two trees sprang up out of the earth, fair and beautiful, laden with
fragrant fruits.  And the tree on this side bent down and received me on
its top, and was lifted up exceedingly above the middle of the river,
and the other tree met me and received me in its branches and bending
down set me on the ground; and both trees were lifted up and set me away
from the river on the other side.  In that place I rested three days,
and arising again I went forward, whither I knew not, and that place was
filled with much fragrance, and there was no mountain on either hand,
but the place was level and flowery, all crowned with garlands, and all
the land beautiful.

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>IV.  And I saw there a naked man sitting, and
said in myself, Surely this is not the tempter.  And I remembered the
voice of the cloud that it said to me, Not even the tempter in this
world passes through me.  And thus taking courage I said to him, Hail,
brother.  And he answering said to me, The grace of my God be with
thee.  Again I said to him, Tell me, man of God, who thou art?  He
answered and said to me, Who art thou rather?  And I answered and told
him all concerning myself, and that I had prayed to God and he had
brought me into that place.  He answered and said to me, I also know
that thou art a man of God, for if not, thou couldst not have passed
through the cloud and the river and the air.  For the breadth of the
river is about thirty thousand paces, and the cloud reaches to heaven,
and the depth of the river to the abyss.

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span><span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span
id="xi.ii-Page_221"></span>V.  And having ended this discourse the man
spoke again, Hast thou come hither out of the vanity of the world?  I
said to him, Wherefore art thou naked?  He said, How knowest thou that I
am naked?  Thou wearest skins of the cattle of the earth, that decay
together with thy body, but look up to the height of heaven and behold
of what nature my clothing is.  And looking up into heaven I saw his
face as the face of an angel, and his clothing as lightning, which
passes from the east to the west, and I was greatly afraid, thinking
that it was the son of God, and trembled, falling upon the ground.  And
giving me his hand he raised me up, saying, Arise, I also am one of the
blessed.  Come with me, that I may lead thee to the elders.  And laying
hold of my hand he walked about with me and led me toward a certain
crowd, and there were in that crowd elders like sons of God, and young
men were standing beside the elders.  And as I came near to them, they
said, This man has come hither out of the vanity of the world; come, let
us beseech the Lord and he will reveal to us this mystery.  Surely the
end is not at hand, that the man of vanity is come hither?  Then they
arose and besought the Lord with one accord, and behold two angels came
down from heaven and said, Fear not the man, for God has sent him, that
he may remain seven days and learn your ways of life, and then he shall
go forth and depart to his own place.  The angels of God having said
this ascended into heaven before our eyes.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>VI.  Then the elders of the blessed gave me
over to one of the attendants, saying, Keep him for seven days.  So the
attendant receiving me led me to his cave, and we sat under a tree
partaking of food.  For from the sixth hour even to the sixth, then we
ate, and the water came out from the root of the tree sweeter than
honey, and we drank our fill, and again the water sank down into its
place.  And all the country of those there heard of me, that there had
come thither a man out of the vanity of the world, and all the country
was stirred up, and they came to see me because it seemed strange to
them.  Therefore they were asking me all things and I was answering
them, and I became faint in spirit and in body, and besought the man of
God that served me, and said, I beseech thee, brother, if any come to
see me, tell them He is not here, so that I may rest a little.  And the
man of God cried out saying, Woe is me, that the story of Adam is summed
up in me, for Satan deceived him through Eve, and this man by his
flattery desires to make me a liar while he is here.  Take me away from
hence, for I shall flee from the place.  For behold he wishes to sow in
me seeds of the world of vanity.  And all the multitude and the elders
rose up against me, and said, Depart from us, man; we know not whence
thou art come to us.  But I lamented with great lamentation, and my
senses left me, and I cried out to the elders, saying, Forgive me, my
lords, and the elders stilled them and made quietness.  Then I related
to them all from the beginning till that time, and said, I besought the
Lord to come to you, and he deemed me worthy.  And the elders said, And
now what wilt thou we should do to thee?  I said to them, I desire to
learn of you your way of life.

<span id="xi.ii-p9"></span>VII.  And they rejoiced with great joy, and
taking up tables of stone they wrote on them with their nails, thus,
Hear, ye sons of men, hear ye us who are become blessed, that we also
are of you; for when the prophet Jeremiah proclaimed that the city of
Jerusalem should be delivered into the hands of the destroyers, he rent
his garments, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and sprinkled dust upon
his head, and took earth upon his bed, and told all the people to turn
from their wicked way.  And our father Rechab, the son of Aminadab,
heard him and said to us, Ye sons and daughters of Rechab, hearken to
your father, and put off your garments from your body, and drink no
vessel of wine, and eat no bread from the fire, and drink not strong
drink and honey until the Lord hear your entreaty.  And we said, All
that he has commanded us we shall do and hearken.  So we cast away our
clothing from our bodies, and we ate no bread from the fire, and drank
no vessel of wine nor honey nor strong drink, and we lamented with a
great lamentation and besought the Lord, and he heard our prayer and
turned away his anger from the city of Jerusalem, and there came to the
city of Jerusalem mercy from the Lord, and he pitied its people, and
turned away his deadly anger.

<span id="xi.ii-p10"></span>VIII.  And after these things the king of
the city of Jerusalem died, and there arose another king.  And all the
people gathered to him and informed him concerning us, and said, There
are certain of thy people, who have changed their way from us. 
Therefore the king summoned them, and asked them wherefore they had done
this; and he sent for us and asked, Who are ye and of what worship and
of what country?  And we said to him, We are the sons of thy servant,
and our father is Rechab the son of Jonadab, and when Jeremiah the
prophet preached in the <span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="xi.ii-Page_222"></span>days of thy father the king, he proclaimed
death to the city of Jerusalem, saying, Yet three days and all the city
shall be put to death.  And the king thy father hearing this repented of
his sins, and issued a command to all to turn aside from their wicked
way.  And our father thy servant hearing it charged us, saying, Drink no
vessel of wine, and eat no bread from the fire, until the Lord shall
hear your entreaty.  And we hearkened to the commandment of our father,
and made naked our bodies, we drank no wine and ate no bread, and we
prayed to the Lord for the city of Jerusalem, and the Lord pitied his
people and turned away his anger, and we saw it and our soul was
rejoiced, and we said, It is good for us to be so.

<span id="xi.ii-p11"></span>IX.  And the king said to us, Ye have done
well.  Now therefore mingle with my people, and eat bread and drink
wine, and glorify your Lord, and ye shall be serving God and the king. 
But we said, We will not disobey God.  Then the king was enraged and set
us in prison, and we passed that night there.  And behold a light shone
in the building, and an angel uncovered the prison and laid hold of the
crowns of our heads, and took us out of the prison, and set us beside
the water of the river, and said to us, Whithersoever the water goes, go
ye also.  And we travelled with the water and with the angel.  When
therefore he had brought us to this place, the river was dried up and
the water was swallowed up by the abyss, and he made a wall round this
country, and there came a wall of cloud, and shadowed above the water;
and he did not scatter us over all the earth, but gave to us this
country.

<span id="xi.ii-p12"></span>X.  Hear, ye sons of men, hear the way of
life of the blessed.  For God placed us in this land, for we are holy
but not immortal.  For the earth produces most fragrant fruit, and out
of the trunks of the trees comes water sweeter than honey, and these are
our food and drink.  We are also praying night and day, and this is all
our occupation.  Hear, ye sons of men; with us there is no vine, nor
ploughed field, nor works of wood or iron, nor have we any house or
building, nor fire nor sword, nor iron wrought or unwrought, nor silver
nor gold, nor air too heavy or too keen.  Neither do any of us take to
themselves wives, except for so long as to beget two children, and after
they have produced two children they withdraw from each other and
continue in chastity, not knowing that they were ever in the intercourse
of marriage, but being in virginity as from the beginning.  And the one
child remains for marriage, and the other for virginity.

<span id="xi.ii-p13"></span>XI.  And there is no count of time, neither
weeks nor months nor years, for all our day is one day.  In our caves
lie the leaves of trees, and this is our couch under the trees.  But we
are not naked of body, as ye wrongly imagine, for we have the garment of
immortality and are not ashamed of each other.  At the sixth hour of
every day we eat, for the fruit of the tree falls of itself at the sixth
hour, and we eat and drink our fill, and again the water sinks into its
place.  We also know you who are there in the world, and who are in
sins, and your works, for every day the angels of the Lord come and tell
them to us, and the number of your years.  But we pray for you to the
Lord, because we also are of you and of your race, except that God has
chosen us, and has set us in this place without sin.  And the angels of
God dwell with us every day, and tell us all things concerning you, and
we rejoice with the angels over the works of the just, but over the
works of sinners we mourn and lament, praying to the Lord that he may
cease from his anger and spare your offences.

<span id="xi.ii-p14"></span>XII.  But when the time of the forty days
comes, all the trees cease from their fruits, and the manna that he gave
to our fathers rains down from heaven, and the manna is sweeter than
honey.  Thus we know that the season of the year is changed.  But when
the time of the holy passover comes, then again the trees put forth
fragrant fruit, and thus we know that it is the beginning of the year. 
But the feast of the resurrection of the Lord is performed with much
watching, for we continue watching for three days and three nights.

<span id="xi.ii-p15"></span>XIII.  We know also the time of our end, for
we have no torment nor disease nor pain in our bodies, nor exhaustion
nor weakness, but peace and great patience and love.  For our soul is
not troubled by the angels to go forth, for the angels rejoice when they
receive our souls, and the souls also rejoice with the angels when they
behold them; as a bride receives the bridegroom, so our soul receives
the announcement of the holy angels, saying nothing more than only this,
The Lord calls thee.  Then the soul quits the body and goes to the
angels, and the angels seeing the soul coming forth spotless rejoice,
and spreading out their robes receive it.  Then the angels call it
blessed, saying, Blessed art then, O soul, because the will of the Lord
is fulfilled in thee.

<span id="xi.ii-p16"></span>XIV.  The time of our life is this.  If one
quits the body in his youth, the days of his life here are three hundred
and sixty years, and he that quits the body in old age, the <span
id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span id="xi.ii-Page_223"></span>days of his
life here are six hundred and eighty-eight years.  And the day of our
completion is made known to us by the angels, and when the angels of God
come to take us, we go with them, and the elders, seeing the angels,
gather together all the people and we depart together with the angels,
singing psalms, until the angels arrive at the place of our abode.  And
because we have no tools, the angels of God themselves make the grave
for our body, and thus he that is called by God goes down, and all
salute him from small to great, sending him on his way and bidding him
farewell.  Then the soul quits the body and the angels receive it, but
we see the shape of the soul as a shape of light, perfect in all the
body apart from the distinction of male and female.

<span id="xi.ii-p17"></span>XV.  Then the angels taking it up sing a
song and hymn, making melody to God, and again other troops of angels
come in haste to meet them, saluting the soul that is coming and
entering into the firmaments.  And when it has come to the place where
it is to worship God, the son of God himself, together with the angels,
receives the soul of the blessed one and bears it to the undefiled
father of the ages, and again, when the angels sing above, we being
below listen to them, and again we sing and they listen in heaven above,
and thus between us and the angels there arises a giving of praise in
hymns.  But when the soul of the blessed one, falling upon its face,
worships the Lord, then we also falling down worship the Lord in that
same hour, and when the Lord raises it up then we also arise; and when
it goes to its appointed place, we also go into the church, fulfilling
the eucharist of the Lord.

<span id="xi.ii-p18"></span>Having written these things, and all the
life of the blessed, we gave them to our brother Zosimus, and escorted
him as far as the place of trees beside the river Eumeles.

<span id="xi.ii-p19"></span>XVI.  And I, Zosimus, besought again the
blessed ones to make entreaty for me to the Lord that the trees might
receive me to take me across.  And they all cried to the Lord and said,
O God that hast shown us thy marvels and hast made thy servant Zosimus
to come to us out of the world of vanity, set him again in his own place
with peace, and command these trees to bow down and take up thy servant
and set him on the further side.  And as they finished their prayer, the
trees straightway bent down before them, and received me as on the
second day before; and being set on the other side of the river I cried
with a loud voice and said, Men of righteousness, who are brothers of
the holy angels, grant me your prayer in peace, for behold I depart from
you.  And making prayer they all cried out, saying, Peace, peace be with
you, brother.

<span id="xi.ii-p20"></span>XVII.  Then I prayed to the Lord, and there
came to me a storm of wind, and received me upon its wings, and carried
me to the place where it found me sitting, and left me there in peace. 
And raising its voice the wind said to me, Blessed art thou, Zosimus,
that thou hast been numbered with the blessed.  And the beast from the
desert, whose name is the camel, came and received me upon its neck and
carried me eighty and five stations, and set me in the place where it
found me praying, and left me in peace, crying and saying, Blessed art
thou, Zosimus, that thou hast been numbered with the blessed.

<span id="xi.ii-p21"></span>XVIII.  But seeing me thus praised, Satan
desired to tempt me and throw his dart at me from his station, but an
angel of God came and said to me, Zosimus, behold Satan is coming to
tempt thee, but the Lord will fight for thee, for the glory of thy faith
must bind <span id="fr_3995"></span>[3996](#fn_3995) Satan.  And an
angel of God appeared, crying and saying, Welcome, blessed one of
Christ.  Come and I shall lead thee to the cave that is the
dwelling-place of thy body, for thy cave shall be a testimony of the
desert, a healing of the sick that come to it, a place of trial and
touch-stone of demons.  And laying hold of my hand he strengthened me,
and led me for forty days to the cave where I had dwelt.  And there was
there a table of righteousness, and I spent the night with the angels of
God.  And I placed the tablets that were given me by the holy blessed
ones on the step of the altar in my cave.

<span id="xi.ii-p23"></span>XIX.  And, behold, when the angels of God
ascended, the Devil came, having a fierce shape, and possessed with
anger and gall, and said to me, I knew that God would do with thee as
with the blessed ones, and that they shall be free from sin and be above
the angels, and therefore I brought in an evil design, and entered into
the vessel of the serpent, an evil-doer added to evil-doer.  And by this
I made the first man Adam to transgress and taste of the tree of life,
since God had commanded him not to eat of it, that he might remain equal
in glory to God and the holy angels; and thou again hast gone and
brought this commandment, but now that they may not be without sin, I
shall show thee how I shall destroy thee and all those that receive this
commandment, so that they may not be without sin, and the book that thou
hast brought.

<span id="xi.ii-p24"></span><span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="xi.ii-Page_224"></span>XX.  Saying these things the Devil departed
from me, and after eight days he brought with him one thousand three
hundred and sixty demons, and dragged me from the cave as I prayed, and
they beat me, tossing me about between them, for forty days.  And after
the forty days the devil lamented before me and said, Woe is me that
through one man I have lost the world, for he has vanquished me by his
prayer.  And he began to run from me, but I laying hold of him stayed
him and said, Thou shalt not run away and flee from me until thou
swearest to me never again to tempt man.  And lamenting with great and
violent lamentation he swore to me by the firmament of heaven, So long
as thy dwelling is here, and after thee, I will not come upon this
place.  Then I let him go, sending him and the demons with him into
eternal fire.  Then the angel came, who had companied with me at the
table, and led me into my cave with great glory.

<span id="xi.ii-p25"></span>XXI.  After this I lived thirty-six years,
and communicated the way of life of the blessed to the fathers in the
desert.  But the Devil wept because of the tables of the life of the
blessed, saying, If this get abroad in the world, I shall be mocked, and
these will remain without sin and I alone in folly.  And after the
completion of the thirty-six years, the angels of God came to me as to
the blessed.

<span id="xi.ii-p26"></span>And all the monks were gathered together and
all who heard it, and this testament was read to all of them, and in
such life he gave up his soul to God.

<span id="xi.ii-p27"></span>XXII.  And I, Cryseos, <span
id="fr_3996"></span>[3997](#fn_3996) being one of those in the desert,
spread it abroad and gave it to all that were willing to learn it and
profit by it.  Therefore the angels of God helped to bury the body of
Zosimus as a precious gift, and we saw the soul of the blessed one
shining seven times brighter than the sun.  And straightway upon that
place there came up seven palm-trees and overshadowed the cave.  There
came up also a fountain of water in that place, holy water, and unto
this day a healing and salvation to all the sick that come to it.  Peace
be to all that have heard the memorial of the holy Zosimus; the Lord is
the advocate and helper of all to the endless ages of ages.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3995"></span>[223:3996](0090090.htm#fr_3995) <span
id="xi.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p22"></span> Text corrupt; “bind” is conjectural.

<span id="fn_3996"></span>[224:3997](0090090.htm#fr_3996) <span
id="xi.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p28"></span> The name is corrupt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistles of Clement.](0090091)
