[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090280)  [Next](0090282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.v"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.v-p1.1"></span>5.  There Were Two Embassies to John the
Baptist; The Different Characters of These.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.v-p2"></span>Here the enquiry suggests itself whether
the second testimony is concluded, and whether there is a third,
addressed to those who were sent from the Pharisees.  They wished to
know why he baptized, if he was neither the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the
prophet; and he said: <span id="fr_4834"></span>[4835](#fn_4834)   “I
baptize with water; but there standeth one among you whom you know not,
He that cometh after me, the latchet of whose shoe I am not worthy to
unloose.”  Is this a third testimony, or is this which they were to
report to the Pharisees a part of the second?  As far as the words allow
me to conjecture I should say that the word to the emissaries of the
Pharisees was a third testimony.  It is to be observed, however, that
the first testimony asserts the divinity of the Saviour, while the
second disposes of the suspicion of those who were in doubt whether John
could be the Christ, and the third declares one who was already present
with men although they saw Him not, and whose coming was no longer in
the future.  Before going on to the subsequent testimonies in which he
points out Christ and witnesses to Him, let us look at the second and
third, word for word, and let us, in the first place, observe that there
are two embassies to the Baptist, one “from Jerusalem” from the Jews,
who send priests and levites, to ask him, “Who art thou?” the second
sent by the Pharisees, <span id="fr_4835"></span>[4836](#fn_4835) who
were in doubt about the answer which had been made to the priests and
levites.  Observe how what is said by the first envoys is in keeping
with the character of priests and levites, and shows gentleness and a
willingness to learn.  “Who art thou?” they say, and “What then? art
thou Elijah?” and “Art thou that prophet?” and then, “Who art thou, that
we may give an answer to them that sent us?  What sayest thou of
thyself?”  There is nothing harsh or arrogant in the enquiries of these
men; everything agrees well with the character of true and careful
servants of God; and they raise no difficulties about the replies made
to them.  Those, on the contrary, who are sent from the Pharisees assail
the Baptist, as it were, with arrogant and unsympathetic words:  “Why
then baptizest thou if thou be not the Christ nor Elijah nor the
prophet?”  This mission is sent scarcely for the sake of information, as
in the former case of the priests and levites, but rather to debar the
Baptist from baptizing, as if it were thought that no one was entitled
to baptize but Christ and Elijah and the prophet.  The student who
desires to understand the Scripture must always proceed in this careful
way; he must ask with regard to each speech, who is the speaker and on
what occasion it was spoken.  Thus only can we discern how speech
harmonizes with the character of the speaker, as it does all through the
sacred books.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4834"></span>[354:4835](0090281.htm#fr_4834) <span
id="xv.iii.v.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.v-p3"></span> [John i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025)<span id="xv.iii.v.v-p3.1"></span>
sqq.

<span id="fn_4835"></span>[354:4836](0090281.htm#fr_4835) <span
id="xv.iii.v.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.v-p4"></span> [John
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#024)<span
id="xv.iii.v.v-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](0090282)
