[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090292)  [Next](0090294) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>17.  Of the Testimony of John to Jesus in
Matthew’s Gospel,</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xvii-p2"></span>These, then, are the parallel
passages of the four; let us try to see as clearly as we can what is the
purport of each and wherein they differ from each other.  And we will
begin with Matthew, who is reported by tradition to have published his
Gospel before the others, to the Hebrews, those, namely, of the
circumcision who believed.  I, he says, baptize you with water unto
repentance, purifying you, as it were, and turning you away from evil
courses and calling you to repentance; for I am come to make ready for
the Lord a people prepared for Him, and by my baptism of repentance to
prepare the ground for Him who is to come after me, and who will thus
benefit you much more effectively and powerfully than my strength
could.  For His baptism is not that of the body only; He fills the
penitent with the Holy Ghost, and His diviner fire does away with
everything material and consumes everything that is earthy, not only
from him who admits it to his life, but even from him who hears of it
from those who have it.  So much stronger than I is He who is coming
after me, that I am not able to bear even the outskirts of the powers
round Him which are furthest from Him (they are not open and exposed, so
that any one could see them), nor even to bear those who support them. 
I know not of which I should speak.  Should I speak of my own great
weakness, which is not able to bear even these things about Christ which
in comparison with the greater things in Him are least, or should I
speak of His transcendent Deity, greater than all the world?  If I who
have received such grace, as to be thought worthy of prophecy predicting
my arrival in this human life, in the words, “The <span id="page_367">p.
367</span> <span id="xv.iii.v.xvii-Page_367"></span>voice of one crying
in the wilderness,” and “Behold I send my messenger before thy face;” if
I whose birth Gabriel who stands before God announced to my father so
advanced in years, so much against his expectation, I at whose name
Zacharias recovered his voice and was enabled to use it to prophesy, I
to whom my Lord bears witness that among them that are born of women
there is none greater than I, I am not able so much as to bear His
shoes!  And if not His shoes, what can be said about His garments?  Who
is so great as to be able to guard His coat?  Who can suppose that He
can understand the meaning contained in His tunic which is without seam
from the top because it is woven throughout?  It is to be observed that
while the four represent John as declaring himself to have come to
baptize with water, Matthew alone adds the words “to repentance,”
teaching that the benefit of baptism is connected with the intention of
the baptized person; to him who repents it is salutary, but to him who
comes to it without repentance it will turn to greater condemnation. 
And here we must note that as the wonderful works done by the Saviour in
the cures He wrought, which are symbolical of those who at any time are
set free by the word of God from any sickness or disease, though they
were done to the body and brought a bodily relief, yet also called those
who were benefited by them to an exercise of faith, so the washing with
water which is symbolic of the soul cleansing herself from every stain
of wickedness, is no less in itself to him who yields himself to the
divine power of the invocation of the Adorable Trinity, the beginning
and source of divine gifts; for “there are diversities of gifts.”  This
view receives confirmation from the narrative recorded in the Acts of
the Apostles, which shows the Spirit to have descended so manifestly on
those who receive baptism, after the water had prepared the way for him
in those who properly approached the rite.  Simon Magus, astonished at
what he saw, desired to receive from Peter this gift, but though it was
a good thing he desired, he thought to attain it by the mammon of
unrighteousness.  We next remark in passing that the baptism of John was
inferior to the baptism of Jesus which was given through His disciples. 
Those persons in the Acts <span id="fr_4909"></span>[4910](#fn_4909) who
were baptized to John’s baptism and who had not heard if there was any
Holy Ghost are baptized over again by the Apostle.  Regeneration did not
take place with John, but with Jesus through His disciples it does so,
and what is called the laver of regeneration takes place with renewal of
the Spirit; for the Spirit now comes in addition since it comes from God
and is over and above the water and does not come to all after the
water.  So far, then, our examination of the statements in the Gospel
according to Matthew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4909"></span>[367:4910](0090293.htm#fr_4909) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xvii-p3"></span> [Acts xix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#002)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](0090294)
