[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090237)  [Next](0090239) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p1.1"></span>42.  Of the Various Ways in Which Christ
is the Logos.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p2"></span>As, then, from His activity in
enlightening the world whose light He is, Christ is named the Light of
the World, and as from His making those who sincerely attach themselves
to Him put away their deadness and rise again and put on newness of
life, He is called the Resurrection, so from an activity of another kind
He is called Shepherd and Teacher, King and Chosen Shaft, and Servant,
and in addition to these Paraclete and Atonement and Propitiation.  And
after the same fashion He is also called the Logos, <span
id="fr_4645"></span>[4646](#fn_4645) because He takes away from us all
that is <span id="page_320">p. 320</span> <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-Page_320"></span>irrational, and makes us truly
reasonable, so that we do all things, even to eating and drinking, to
the glory of God, and discharge by the Logos to the glory of God both
the commoner functions of life and those which belong to a more advanced
stage.  For if, by having part in Him, we are raised up and enlightened,
herded also it may be and ruled over, then it is clear that we become in
a divine manner reasonable, when He drives away from us what in us is
irrational and dead, since He is the Logos (reason) and the
Resurrection.  Consider, however, whether all men have in some way part
in Him in His character as Logos.  On this point the Apostle teaches us
that He is to be sought not outside the seeker, and that those find Him
in themselves who set their heart on doing so; “Say not <span
id="fr_4646"></span>[4647](#fn_4646) in thy heart, Who shall ascend into
heaven?  That is to bring Christ down; or, Who shall descend into the
abyss?  That is to bring Christ up from the dead.  But what saith the
Scripture?  The Word is very nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart,”
as if Christ Himself were the same thing as the Word said to be sought
after.  But when the Lord Himself says <span
id="fr_4647"></span>[4648](#fn_4647) “If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their sin,”
the only sense we can find in His words is that the Logos Himself says
that those are not chargeable with sin to whom He (reason) has not fully
come, but that those, if they sin, are guilty who, having had part in
Him, act contrary to the ideas by which He declares His full presence in
us.  Only when thus read is the saying true:  “If I had not come and
spoken to them, they had not had sin.”  Should the words be applied, as
many are of opinion that they should, to the visible Christ, then how is
it true that those had no sin to whom He did not come?  In that case all
who lived before the advent of the Saviour will be free from sin, since
Jesus, as seen in flesh, had not yet come.  And more—all those to whom
He has never been preached will have no sin, and if they have no sin,
then it is clear they are not liable to judgment.  But the Logos in man,
in which we have said that our whole race had part, is spoken of in two
senses; first, in that of the filling up of ideas which takes place,
prodigies excepted, in every one who passes beyond the age of boyhood,
but secondly, in that of the consummation, which takes place only in the
perfect.  The words, therefore, “If I had not come and spoken to them,
they would not have had sin, but now they have no cloak for their sin,”
are to be understood in the former sense; but the words, <span
id="fr_4648"></span>[4649](#fn_4648) “All that ever came before me are
thieves and robbers, and the sheep did not hear them,” in the latter. 
For before the consummation of reason comes, there is nothing in man but
what is blameworthy; all is imperfect and defective, and can by no means
command the obedience of those irrational elements in us which are
tropically spoken of as sheep.  And perhaps the former meaning is to be
recognized in the words “The Logos was made flesh,” but the second in
“The Logos was God.”  We must accordingly look at what there is to be
seen in human affairs between the saying, “The Word (reason) was made
flesh” and “The Word was God.”  When the Word was made flesh can we say
that it was to some extent broken up and thinned out, and can we say
that it recovered from that point onward till it became again what it
was at first, God the Word, the Word with the Father; the Word whose
glory John saw, the verily only-begotten, as from the Father.  But the
Son may also be the Logos (Word), because He reports the secret things
of His Father who is intellect in the same way as the Son who is called
the Word.  For as with us the word is a messenger of those things which
the mind perceives, so the Word of God, knowing the Father, since no
created being can approach Him without a guide, reveals the Father whom
He knows.  For no one knows the Father save the Son, <span
id="fr_4649"></span>[4650](#fn_4649) and he to whomsoever the Son
reveals Him, and inasmuch as He is the Word He is the Messenger of Great
Counsel, <span id="fr_4650"></span>[4651](#fn_4650) who has the
government upon His shoulders; for He entered on His kingdom by enduring
the cross.  In the Apocalypse, <span
id="fr_4651"></span>[4652](#fn_4651) moreover, the Faithful and True
(the Word), is said to sit on a white horse, the epithets indicating, I
consider, the clearness of the voice with which the Word of truth speaks
to us when He sojourns among us.  This is scarcely the place to show how
the word “horse” is often used in passages spoken for our encouragement
in sacred learning.  I only cite two of these:  “A horse is deceitful
for safety,” <span id="fr_4652"></span>[4653](#fn_4652) and “Some trust
in chariots and some in horses, but we will rejoice in the name of the
Lord our God.” <span id="fr_4653"></span>[4654](#fn_4653)   Nor must we
leave unnoticed a passage in the forty-fourth Psalm, <span
id="fr_4654"></span>[4655](#fn_4654) frequently quoted by many writers
as if they understood it:  “My heart <span id="page_321">p. 321</span>
<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-Page_321"></span>hath belched forth a good word,
I speak my works to the King.”  Suppose it is God the Father who speaks
thus; what is His heart, that the good word should appear in accordance
with His heart?  If, as these writers suppose, the Word (Logos) needs no
interpretation, then the heart is to be taken in the natural sense too. 
But it is quite absurd to suppose God’s heart to be a part of Him as
ours is of our body.  We must remind such writers that as when the hand
of God is spoken of, and His arm and His finger, we do not read the
words literally but enquire in what sound sense we may take them so as
to be worthy of God, so His heart is to be understood of His rational
power, by which He disposes all things, and His word of that which
announces what is in this heart of His.  But who is it that announces
the counsel of the Father to those of His creatures who are worthy and
who have risen above themselves, who but the Saviour?  That “belched
forth” is not, perhaps, without significance; a hundred other terms
might have been employed; “My heart has produced a good word,” it might
have been said, or “My heart has spoken a good word.”  But in belching,
some wind that was hidden makes its way out to the world, and so it may
be that the Father gives out views of truth not continuously, but as it
were after the fashion of belching, and the word has the character of
the things thus produced, and is called, therefore, the image of the
invisible God.  We may enter our agreement, therefore, with the ordinary
acceptation of these words, and take them to be spoken by the Father. 
It is not, however, a matter of course, that it is God Himself who
announces these things.  Why should it not be a prophet?  Filled with
the Spirit and unable to contain himself, he brings forth a word about
his prophecy concerning Christ:  “My heart hath belched forth a good
word, I speak my works to the King, my pen is the tongue of a ready
writer.  Excellent in beauty is He beyond the sons of men.”  Then to the
Christ Himself:  “Grace is poured out on Thy lips.”  If the Father were
the speaker, how could He go on after the words, “Grace is poured out on
thy lips,” to say, “Therefore God hath blessed thee for ever,” and a
little further on, “Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the
oil of gladness above thy fellows.”  Some of those who wish to make the
Father the speaker may appeal to the words, “Hear, O daughter, and
behold and incline thine ear, and forget thy people and thy father.” 
The prophet, it may be said, could not address the Church in the words,
“Hear, O daughter.”  It is not difficult, however, to show that changes
of person occur frequently in the Psalms, so that these words, “Hear, O
daughter,” might be from the Father, in this passage, though the Psalm
as a whole is not.  To our discussion of the Word we may here add the
passage, <span id="fr_4655"></span>[4656](#fn_4655) “By the word of the
Lord were the heavens founded, and all the power of them by the breath
of His mouth.”  Some refer this to the Saviour and the Holy Spirit.  The
passage, however, does not necessarily imply any more than that the
heavens were founded by the reason (logos) of God, as when we say that a
house is built by the plan (logos) of the architect, or a ship by the
plan (logos) of the shipbuilder.  In the same way the heavens were
founded (made solid) by the Word of God, for they are <span
id="fr_4656"></span>[4657](#fn_4656) of a more divine substance, which
on this account is called solid; <span
id="fr_4657"></span>[4658](#fn_4657) it has little fluidity for the most
part, nor is it easily melted like other parts of the world, and
specially the lower parts.  On account of this difference the heavens
are said in a special manner to be constituted by the Word of God.

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p16"></span>The saying then stands, first, “In
the beginning was the Logos;” we are to place that full in our view; but
the testimonies we cited from the Proverbs led us to place wisdom first,
and to think of wisdom as preceding the Word which announces her.  We
must observe, then, that the Logos is in the beginning, that is, in
wisdom, always.  Its being in wisdom, which is called the beginning,
does not prevent it from being with God and from being God, and it is
not simply with God, but is in the beginning, in wisdom, with God.  For
he goes on:  “He was in the beginning with God.”  He might have said,
“He was with God;” but as He was in the beginning, so He was with God in
the beginning, and “All things were made by Him,” being in the
beginning, for God made all things, as David tells us, in wisdom.  And
to let us understand that the Word has His own definite place and sphere
as one who has life in Himself (and is a distinct person), we must also
speak about powers, not about power.  “Thus saith the Lord of powers,
(A.V. hosts)” we frequently read; there are certain creatures, rational
and divine, which are called powers:  and of these Christ was the
highest and best, and is called not only the wisdom of God but <span
id="page_322">p. 322</span> <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-Page_322"></span>also His power.  As, then, there are
several powers of God, each of them in its own form, and the Saviour is
different from these, so also Christ, even if that which is Logos in us
is not in respect of form outside of us, will be understood from our
discussion up to this point to be the Logos, who has His being in the
beginning, in wisdom.  This for the present may suffice, on the word: 
“In the beginning was the Logos.”

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p17"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4645"></span>[319:4646](0090238.htm#fr_4645) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p3"></span> It is impossible to render by any
one English word the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p3.1"></span>λογος</span> as used by Origen in the
following discussion.  We shall therefore in many passages leave it
untranslated.

<span id="fn_4646"></span>[320:4647](0090238.htm#fr_4646) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p4"></span> [Rom. x.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4647"></span>[320:4648](0090238.htm#fr_4647) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p5"></span> [John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4648"></span>[320:4649](0090238.htm#fr_4648) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p6"></span> [John x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#008)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4649"></span>[320:4650](0090238.htm#fr_4649) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p7"></span> [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4650"></span>[320:4651](0090238.htm#fr_4650) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p8"></span> [Isa.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4651"></span>[320:4652](0090238.htm#fr_4651) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p9"></span> [Rev.
19.11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4652"></span>[320:4653](0090238.htm#fr_4652) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p10"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4653"></span>[320:4654](0090238.htm#fr_4653) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p11"></span> [Ps. xx.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4654"></span>[320:4655](0090238.htm#fr_4654) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p12"></span> [Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4655"></span>[321:4656](0090238.htm#fr_4655) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p13"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4656"></span>[321:4657](0090238.htm#fr_4656) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p14"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p14.1"></span>τυγχάνομτας</span>.

<span id="fn_4657"></span>[321:4658](0090238.htm#fr_4657) <span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p15.1"></span>στερεός</span>, of which the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.i.xlii-p15.2"></span>στερἑωμα</span>,
firmament, is made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](0090239)
