[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090241)  [Next](0090243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>3.  Various Relations of the Logos to
Men.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p2"></span>Now it is possible that some may
dislike what we have said representing the Father as the one true God,
but admitting other beings besides the true God, who have become gods by
having a share of God.  They may fear that the glory of Him who
surpasses all creation may be lowered to the level of those other beings
called gods.  We drew this distinction between Him and them that we
showed God the Word to be to all the other gods the minister of their
divinity.  To this we must add, in order to obviate objections, that the
reason which is in every reasonable creature occupied the same relation
to the reason who was in the beginning with God, and is God the Word, as
God the Word occupies to God.  As the Father who is Very God and the
True God is to His image and to the images of His image—men are said to
be according to the image, not to be images of God—so He, the Word, is
to the reason (word) in every man.  Each fills the place of a
fountain—the Father is the fountain of divinity, the Son of reason.  As,
then, there are many gods, but to us there is but one God the Father,
and many Lords, but to us there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, so there are
many <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>Λόγοι</span>, but we, for our <span
id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iii-Page_324"></span>part, pray that that one <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p2.2"></span>Λόγος</span> may be
with us who was in the beginning and was with God, God the Logos.  For
whoever does not receive this Logos who was in the beginning with God,
or attach himself to Him as He appeared in flesh, or take part in some
of those who had part in this Logos, or whoever having had part in Him
falls away from Him again, he will have his portion in what is called
most opposite to reason.  What we have drawn out from the truths with
which we started will now be clear enough.  First, we spoke about God
and the Word of God, and of Gods, either, that is, beings who partake in
deity or beings who are called Gods and are not.  And again of the Logos
of God and of the Logos of God made flesh, and of logoi, or beings which
partake in some way of the Logos, of second logoi or of third, thought
to be logoi, in addition to that Logos that was before them all, but not
really so.  Irrational Reasons these may be styled; beings are spoken of
who are said to be Gods but are not, and one might place beside these
Gods who are no Gods, Reasons which are no Reasons.  Now the God of the
universe is the God of the elect, and in a much greater degree of the
Saviours of the elect; then He is the God of these beings who are truly
Gods, and then He is the God, in a word, of the living and not of the
dead.  But God the Logos is the God, perhaps, of those who attribute
everything to Him and who consider Him to be their Father.  Now the sun
and the moon and the stars were connected, according to the accounts of
men of old times, with beings who were not worthy to have the God of
gods counted their God.  To this opinion they were led by a passage in
Deuteronomy which is somewhat on this wise: <span
id="fr_4666"></span>[4667](#fn_4666)   “Lest when thou liftest up thine
eyes to heaven, and seest the sun and the moon and the whole host of
heaven, thou wander away and worship them and serve them which the Lord
thy God hath appointed to all the peoples.  But to you the Lord thy God
hath not so given them.”  But how did God appoint the sun and the moon
and all the host of heaven to all the nations, if He did not give them
in the same way to Israel also, to the end that those who could not rise
to the realm of intellect, might be inclined by gods of sense to
consider about the Godhead, and might of their own free will connect
themselves with these and so be kept from falling away to idols and
demons?  Is it not the case that some have for their God the God of the
universe, while a second class, after these, attach themselves to the
Son of God, His Christ, and a third class worship the sun and the moon
and all the host of heaven, wandering, it is true, from God, but with a
far different and a better wandering than that of those who invoke as
gods the works of men’s hands, silver and gold,—works of human skill. 
Last of all are those who devote themselves to the beings which are
called gods but are no gods.  In the same way, now, some have faith in
that Reason which was in the beginning and was with God and was God; so
did Hosea and Isaiah and Jeremiah and others who declared that the Word
of the Lord, or the Logos, had come to them.  A second class are those
who know nothing but Jesus Christ and Him crucified, considering that
the Word made flesh is the whole Word, and knowing only Christ after the
flesh.  Such is the great multitude of those who are counted believers. 
A third class give themselves to logoi (discourses) having some part in
the Logos which they consider superior to all other reason: these are
they who follow the honourable and distinguished philosophical schools
among the Greeks.  A fourth class besides these are they who put their
trust in corrupt and godless discourses, doing away with Providence,
which is so manifest and almost visible, and who recognize another end
for man to follow than the good.  It may appear to some that we have
wandered from our theme, but to my thinking the view we have reached of
four things connected with the name of God and four things connected
with the Logos comes in very well at this point.  There was God with the
article and God without the article, then there were gods in two orders,
at the summit of the higher order of whom is God the Word, transcended
Himself by the God of the universe.  And, again, there was the Logos
with the article and the Logos without the article, corresponding to God
absolutely and a god; and the Logoi in two ranks.  And some men are
connected with the Father, being part of Him, and next to these, those
whom our argument now brings into clearer light, those who have come to
the Saviour and take their stand entirely in Him.  And third are those
of whom we spoke before, who reckon the sun and the moon and the stars
to be gods, and take their stand by them.  And in the fourth and last
place those who submit to soulless and dead idols.  To all this we find
analogies in what concerns the Logos.  Some are adorned with the Word
Himself; some with what is next to Him and appears to be <span
id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span id="xv.iii.ii.iii-Page_325"></span>the
very original Logos Himself, those, namely, who know nothing but Jesus
Christ and Him crucified, and who behold the Word as flesh.  And the
third class, as we described them a little before.  Why should I speak
of those who are thought to be in the Logos, but have fallen away, not
only from the good itself, but from the very traces of it and from those
who have a part in it?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4666"></span>[324:4667](0090242.htm#fr_4666) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p3"></span> [Deut. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019)<span
id="xv.iii.ii.iii-p3.1"></span>, quoted apparently from memory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](0090243)
