[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090305)  [Next](0090307) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p1.1"></span>30.  Of What John Learned from Jesus When
Mary Visited Elisabeth in the Hill Country.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p2"></span>“The next day John seeth Jesus coming
unto him.” <span id="fr_4947"></span>[4948](#fn_4947)   The mother of
Jesus had formerly, as soon as she conceived, stayed with the mother of
John, also at that time with child, and the Former then communicated to
the Formed with some exactness His own image, and caused him to be
conformed to His glory.  And from this outward similarity it came that
with those who did not distinguish between the image itself and that
which was according to the image, John was thought to be Christ <span
id="fr_4948"></span>[4949](#fn_4948) and Jesus was supposed <span
id="fr_4949"></span>[4950](#fn_4949) to be John risen from the dead.  So
now Jesus, after the testimonies of John to Him which we have examined,
is Himself seen by the Baptist coming to him.  It is to be noticed that
on the former occasion, when the voice of Mary’s salutation came to the
ears of Elisabeth, the babe John leaped in the womb of his mother, who
then received the Holy Spirit, as it were, from the ground.  For it came
to pass, we read, <span id="fr_4950"></span>[4951](#fn_4950) “when
Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and
Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit, and she lifted up her voice
with a loud cry and said,” etc.  On this occasion, similarly, John sees
Jesus coming to him and says, “Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away
the sin of the world.”  For with regard to matters of great moment one
is first instructed by hearing and afterwards one sees them with one’s
own eyes.  That John was helped to the shape he was to wear by the Lord
who, still in the process of formation and in His mother’s womb,
approached Elisabeth, will be clear to any one who has grasped our proof
that John is a voice but that Jesus is the Word, for when Elisabeth was
filled with the Holy Spirit at the salutation of Mary there was a great
voice in her, as the words themselves bear; for they say, “And she spake
out with a loud voice.”  Elisabeth, it is plain, did this, “and she
spake.”  For the voice of Mary’s salutation coming to the ears of
Elisabeth filled John with itself; hence John leaps, and his mother
becomes, as it were, the mouth of her son and a prophetess, crying out
with a loud voice and saying, “Blessed art thou among women, and blessed
is the fruit of thy womb.”  Now we see clearly how it was with Mary’s
hasty journey to the hill country, and her entrance into the house of
Zacharias, and the greeting with which she salutes Elisabeth; it was
that she might communicate some of the power she derived from Him she
had conceived, to John, yet in his mother’s womb, and that John too
might communicate to his mother some of the prophetic grace which had
come to him, that all these things were done.  And most rightly was it
in the hill country that these transactions took place, since no great
thing can be entertained by those who are low and may be thence called
valleys.  Here, then, after the testimonies of John,—the first, when he
cried and spoke about His deity; the second, addressed to the priests
and levites who were sent by the Jews from Jerusalem; and the third, in
answer to the sharper questions of those from the Pharisees,—Jesus is
seen by the witness-bearer coming to him while he is still advancing and
growing better.  This advance and improvement is symbolically indicated
in the phrase, “On the morrow.”  For Jesus came in the consequent
illumination, as it were, and on the day after what had preceded, not
only known as standing in the midst even of those who knew Him not, but
now plainly seen advancing to him who had formerly made such
declarations about Him.  On the first day the testimonies take place,
and on the second Jesus comes to John.  On the third John, standing with
two of his disciples and looking upon Jesus as He walked, said, “Behold
the Lamb of God,” thus urging those who were there to follow the Son of
God.  On the fourth day, too, He was minded to go forth into Galilee,
and He who came forth to seek that which was lost finds Philip and says
to him, “Follow Me.”  And on that day, after the fourth, which is the
sixth from the beginning of those we have enumerated, the marriage takes
place in Cana of Galilee, which we shall have to consider when we get to
the passage.  Note this, too, that Mary being the greater comes to
Elisabeth, who is the less, and the Son of God comes to the Baptist;
which should encourage us to render help without delay to those who are
in a lower position, and to cultivate for ourselves a moderate station.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4947"></span>[375:4948](0090306.htm#fr_4947) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p3"></span> [John i.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4948"></span>[375:4949](0090306.htm#fr_4948) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p4"></span> [Luke iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#014)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4949"></span>[375:4950](0090306.htm#fr_4949) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p5"></span> [Matt. xiv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#002)<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4950"></span>[375:4951](0090306.htm#fr_4950) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p6"></span> [Luke
1:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#042)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xxx-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXI](0090307)
