[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090160)  [Next](0090162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span
id="xii.v-Page_249"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xii.v-p1.1"></span>Introductory Notice.</span>

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>\[*From Vol. VII., p. 515 of the Ante-Nicene
Fathers*.\]

<span id="xii.v-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p4.1"></span>The</span> first certain reference which is made
by any early writer to this so-called Epistle of Clement is found in
these words of Eusebius (*Hist. Eccl*., iii. 38):  “We must know that
there is also a second Epistle of Clement.  But we do not regard it as
being equally notable with the former, since we know of none of the
ancients that have made use of it.”  Several critics in modern times
have endeavoured to vindicate the authenticity of this epistle.  But it
is now generally regarded. as one of the many writings which have been
falsely ascribed to Clement.  Besides the want of external evidence,
indicated even by Eusebius in the above extract, the diversity of style
clearly points to a different writer from that of the first epistle.  A
commonly accepted opinion among critics at the present day is, that this
is not an epistle at all, but a fragment of one of the many homilies
falsely ascribed to Clement.  There can be no doubt, however, that in
the catalogue of writings contained in the Alexandrian <span
class="sc"><span id="xii.v-p4.2"></span>ms.</span> it is both styled an
epistle, and, as well as the other which accompanies it, is attributed
to Clement.  As the <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p4.3"></span>ms.</span> is certainly not later than the fifth
century, the opinion referred to must by that time have taken firm root
in the Church; but in the face of internal evidence, and in want of all
earlier testimony, such a fact goes but a small way to establish its
authenticity.

<span id="xii.v-p5"></span> ————————————

<span id="xii.v-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p6.1"></span>The</span> second epistle differs from the first
in several respects.  The range of Scriptural quotation is wider, the
quotations of the first epistle being taken mainly from the Septuagint
version of the Old Testament.  The attitude of the writer is in
accordance with this fact; it is distinctively Gentile.  For example,
Chapter XII. contains a report of words purporting to have been spoken
by the Lord; these, Clemens Alexandrinus states, are taken from the
Apocryphal Gospel according to the Egyptians, not now extant.  The
reference in Chapter XIV. to the spiritual church, recalling [Eph. i.
3-5](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)<span id="xii.v-p6.2"></span>, is
parallel to the Pastor of Hermas, Vision II. 4.  These passages help to
determine the date; for the quotation from the Apocryphal Gospel would
not have been made after the four gospels of the New Testament obtained
exclusive authority—toward the close of the second century; while
similarity of idea and exposition would seem to make the second epistle
and the Pastor of Hermas somewhat contemporaneous.

<span id="xii.v-p7"></span>The conclusion of the second epistle, as in
the recently discovered <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p7.1"></span>ms.</span>, goes to establish the speculation
made before this <span class="sc"><span
id="xii.v-p7.2"></span>ms.</span> was discovered, that it is a homily to
be read in churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Epistle of Clement.](0090162)
