[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090333)  [Next](0090335) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>19.  Various Views of Heracleon on
Purging of the Temple.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p2"></span>Let us see what Heracleon makes of
this.  He says that the ascent to Jerusalem signifies the Lord’s going
up from material things to the spiritual place, which is a likeness of
Jerusalem.  And he considers that the words are, “He found in the
temple,” and not “in the sanctuary,” <span
id="fr_5081"></span>[5082](#fn_5081) because the Lord is not to be
understood as instrumental in that call only, which takes place where
the spirit is not.  He considers the temple to be the Holy of Holies,
into which none but the High-Priest enters, and there I believe he says
that the spiritual go; while the court of the temple, where the levites
also enter, is a symbol of these psychical ones who are saved, but
outside the Pleroma.  Then those who are found in the temple selling
oxen and sheep and doves, and the money-changers sitting, he took to
represent those who attribute nothing to grace, but regard the entrance
of strangers to the temple as a matter of merchandise and gain, and who
minister the sacrifices for the worship of God, with a view to their own
gain and love of money.  And the scourge which Jesus made of small cords
and did not receive from another, he expounds in a way of his own,
saying that the scourge is an image of the power and energy of the Holy
Spirit, driving out by His breath those who are bad.  And he declares
that the scourge and the linen and the napkin and other things of such a
kind are symbolic of the power and energy of the Holy Spirit.  Then he
assumes what is not written, as that the scourge was tied to a piece of
wood, and this wood he takes to be a type of the cross; on this wood the
gamblers, merchants, and all evil was nailed up and done away.  In
searching into the act of Jesus, and discussing the composition of the
scourge out of two substances, he romances in an extraordinary way; He
did not make it, he says, of dead leather.  He wished to make the Church
no longer a den of robbers, but the house of His Father.  We must here
say what is most necessary on the divinity, as referred to in
Heracleon’s text.  If Jesus calls the temple at Jerusalem the house of
His Father, and that temple was made in honour of Him who made heaven
and earth, why are we not at once told that He is the Son of no one else
than the Maker of heaven and earth, that He is the Son of God?  To this
house of the Father of Jesus, as being the house of prayer, the Apostles
of Christ also, as we find in their “Acts,” are told <span
id="fr_5082"></span>[5083](#fn_5082) by the angel to go and to stand
there and preach all the words of this life.  But they came to the house
of prayer, through the Beautiful Gate, to pray there, a thing they <span
id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-Page_400"></span>would not have done had they not
known Him to be the same with the God worshipped by those who had
dedicated that temple.  Hence, too, they say, those who obeyed God
rather than men, Peter and the Apostles, “The God <span
id="fr_5083"></span>[5084](#fn_5083) of our Fathers raised up Jesus,
whom ye slew, hanging Him on a tree;” for they know that by no other God
was Jesus raised from the dead but the God of the fathers, whom Jesus
also extols as the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, who are not dead
but living.  How, too, could the disciples, if the house was not that of
the same God with the God of Christ, have remembered the saying in the
sixty-ninth Psalm, “The zeal of thy house shall devour Me;” for thus it
is found in the prophet, and not “hath devoured Me.”  Now Christ is
zealous principally for that house of God which is in each of us; He
does not wish that it should be a house of merchandise, nor that the
house of prayer should be a den of robbers; for He is the Son of a
jealous God.  We ought to give a liberal interpretation to such
utterances of Scripture; they speak of human things, but in the way of
metaphor, to show that God desires that nothing foreign should be mixed
up with His will in the soul of all men, indeed, but principally of
those who are minded to accept the message of our most divine faith. 
But we must remember that the sixty-ninth Psalm, which contains the
words, “The zeal of thy house shall devour me,” and a little further on,
“They gave Me gall for My drink and for My thirst they gave Me vinegar,”
both texts being recorded in the Gospels, that that Psalm is spoken in
the person of the Christ, and nowhere shows any change of person.  It
shows a great want of observation on Heracleon’s part that he considers
the words, “The zeal of thy house shall devour Me,” to be spoken in the
person of those powers which were cast out and destroyed by the Saviour;
he fails to see the connection of the prophecy in the Psalm.  For if
these words are understood as spoken by the expelled and destroyed
powers, it follows that he must take the words, “They gave Me vinegar to
drink,” which are a part of the same psalm, to be also spoken by those
powers.  What misled him was probably that he could not understand how
the “shall devour Me” could be spoken by Christ, since He did not
appreciate the way in which anthropopathic statements are applied to God
and to Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5081"></span>[399:5082](0090334.htm#fr_5081) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p3.1"></span>ἐν τῶ ἱερῷ</span>, not <span
class="Greek"><span id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p3.2"></span>τῷ ναῷ</span>.  The
latter is Neander’s correction for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p3.3"></span>τῶν ἄνω</span>, “the things above.” 
Heracleon’s point is that the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p3.4"></span>ἰερόν</span>, the Holy of Holies,
represents the spiritual realm; and that Jesus entered it as being, as
well as the <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p3.5"></span>ναος</span>, in need of His saving work.

<span id="fn_5082"></span>[399:5083](0090334.htm#fr_5082) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p3.6"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p4"></span> [Acts v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5083"></span>[400:5084](0090334.htm#fr_5083) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p5"></span> [Acts
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xix-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](0090335)
