[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090330)  [Next](0090332) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>16.  The Story of the Purging of the
Temple Spiritualized.  Taken Literally, It Presents Some Very Difficult
and Unlikely Features.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p2"></span>We shall, however, expound according
to the strength that is given to us the reasons which move us to
recognize here a harmony; and in doing so we entreat Him who gives to
every one that asks and strives acutely to enquire, and we knock that by
the keys of higher knowledge the hidden things of Scripture may be
opened to us.  And first, let us fix our attention on the words of John,
beginning, “And Jesus went up to Jerusalem.” <span
id="fr_5055"></span>[5056](#fn_5055)   Now Jerusalem, as the Lord
Himself teaches in the Gospel according to Matthew, <span
id="fr_5056"></span>[5057](#fn_5056) “is the city of the great King.” 
It does not lie in a depression, or in a low situation, but is built on
a high mountain, and there are mountains round about it, <span
id="fr_5057"></span>[5058](#fn_5057) and the participation of it is to
the same place, <span id="fr_5058"></span>[5059](#fn_5058) and thither
the tribes of the Lord went up, a testimony for Israel.  But that city
also is called Jerusalem, to which none of those upon the earth ascends,
nor goes in; but every soul that possesses by nature some elevation and
some acuteness to perceive the things of the mind is a citizen of that
city.  And it is possible even for a dweller in Jerusalem to be in sin
(for it is possible for even the acutest minds to sin), should they not
turn round quickly after their sin, when they have lost their power of
mind and are on the point not only of dwelling in one of those strange
cities of Judæa, but even of being inscribed as its citizens.  Jesus
goes up to Jerusalem, after bringing help to those in Cana of Galilee,
and then going down to Capernaum, that He may do in Jerusalem the things
which are written.  He found in the temple, certainly, which is said to
be the house of the Father of the Saviour, that is, in the church or in
the preaching of the ecclesiastical and sound word, some who were making
His Father’s house a house of merchandise.  And at all times Jesus finds
some of this sort in the temple.  For in that which is called the
church, which is the house of the living God, the pillar and ground of
the truth, <span id="fr_5059"></span>[5060](#fn_5059) when are there not
some money-changers sitting who need the strokes of the scourge Jesus
made of small cords, and dealers in small coin who require to have their
money poured out and their tables overturned?  When are there not those
who are inclined to merchandise, but <span id="page_394">p. 394</span>
<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-Page_394"></span>need to be held to the plough
and the oxen, that having put their hand to it and not turning round to
the things behind them, they may be fit for the kingdom of God?  When
are there not those who prefer the mammon of unrighteousness to the
sheep which give them the material for their true adornment?  And there
are always many who look down on what is sincere and pure and unmixed
with any bitterness or gall, and who, for the sake of miserable gain,
betray the care of those tropically called doves.  When, therefore, the
Saviour finds in the temple, the house of His Father, those who are
selling oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting, He
drives them out, using the scourge of small cords which He has made,
along with the sheep and oxen of their trade, and pours out their stock
of coin, as not deserving to be kept together, so little is it worth. 
He also overturns the tables in the souls of such as love money, saying
even to those who sell doves, “Take these things hence,” that they may
no longer traffic in the house of God.  But I believe that in these
words He indicated also a deeper truth, and that we may regard these
occurrences as a symbol of the fact that the service of that temple was
not any longer to be carried on by the priests in the way of material
sacrifices, and that the time was coming when the law could no longer be
observed, however much the Jews according to the flesh desired it.  For
when Jesus casts out the oxen and sheep, and orders the doves to be
taken away, it was because oxen and sheep and doves were not much longer
to be sacrificed there in accordance with Jewish practices.  And
possibly the coins which bore the stamp of material things and not of
God were poured out by way of type; because the law which appears so
venerable, with its letter that kills, was, now that Jesus had come and
had used His scourge to the people, to be dissolved and poured out, the
sacred office (episcopate) being transferred to those from the Gentiles
who believed, and the kingdom of God being taken away from the
Jews <span id="fr_5060"></span>[5061](#fn_5060) and given to a nation
bringing forth the fruits of it.  But it may also be the case that the
natural temple is the soul skilled in reason, which, because of its
inborn reason, is higher than the body; to which Jesus ascends from
Capernaum, the lower-lying place of less dignity, and in which, before
Jesus’ discipline is applied to it, are found tendencies which are
earthly and senseless and dangerous, and things which have the name but
not the reality of beauty, and which are driven away by Jesus with His
word plaited out of doctrines of demonstration and of rebuke, to the end
that His Father’s house may no longer be a house of merchandize but may
receive, for its own salvation and that of others, that service of God
which is performed in accordance with heavenly and spiritual laws.  The
ox is symbolic of earthly things, for he is a husbandman.  The sheep, of
senseless and brutal things, because it is more servile than most of the
creatures without reason.  Of empty and unstable thoughts, the dove.  Of
things that are thought good but are not, the small change.  If any one
objects to this interpretation of the passage and says that it is only
pure animals that are mentioned in it, we must say that the passage
would otherwise have an unlikely air.  The occurence is necessarily
related according to the possibilities of the story.  It could not have
been narrated that a herd of any other animals than pure ones had found
access to the temple, nor could any have been sold there but those used
for sacrifice.  The Evangelist makes use of the known practice of the
merchants at the times of the Jewish feasts; they did bring in such
animals to the outer court; this practice, with a real occurrence He
knew of, were His materials.  Any one, however, who cares to do so may
enquire whether it is in agreement with the position held by Jesus in
this world, since He was reputed to be the Son of a carpenter, to
venture upon such an act as to drive out a crowd of merchants from the
temple?  They had come up to the feast to sell to a great number of the
people, the sheep, several myriads in number, which they were to
sacrifice according to their fathers’ houses.  To the richer Jews they
had oxen to sell, and there were doves for those who had vowed such
animals, and many no doubt bought these with a view to their good cheer
at the festival.  And did not Jesus do an unwarrantable thing when He
poured out the money of the money-changers, which was their own, and
overthrew their tables?  And who that received a blow from the scourge
of small cords at the hands of One held in but slight esteem, was driven
out of the temple, would not have attacked Him and raised a cry and
avenged himself with his own hand, especially when there was such a
multitude present who might all feel themselves insulted by Jesus in the
same way?  To think, moreover, of the Son of God taking the small cords
in His hands <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-Page_395"></span>and plaiting a scourge out of them
for this driving out from the temple, does it not bespeak audacity and
temerity and even some measure of lawlessness?  One refuge remains for
the writer who wishes to defend these things and is minded to treat the
occurrence as real history, namely, to appeal to the divine nature of
Jesus, who was able to quench, when He desired to do so, the rising
anger of His foes, by divine grace to get the better of myriads, and to
scatter the devices of tumultuous men; for “the Lord scatters the
counsels of the nations <span id="fr_5061"></span>[5062](#fn_5061) and
brings to naught devices of the peoples, but the counsel of the Lord
abideth for ever.”  Thus the occurrence in our passage, if it really
took place, was not second in point of the power it exhibits to any even
of the most marvellous works Christ wrought, and claimed no less by its
divine character the faith of the beholders.  One may show it to be a
greater work than that done at Cana of Galilee in the turning of water
into wine; for in that case it was only soulless matter that was
changed, but here it was the soul and will of thousands of men.  It is,
however, to be observed that at the marriage the mother of Jesus is said
to be there, and Jesus to have been invited and His disciples, but that
no one but Jesus is said to have descended to Capernaum.  His disciples,
however, appear afterwards as present with Him; they remembered that
“the zeal of thine house shall devour me.”  And perhaps Jesus was in
each of the disciples as He ascended to Jerusalem, whence it is not
said, Jesus went up to “Jerusalem and His disciples,” but He went down
to Capernaum, “He and His mother and His brothers and His disciples.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5055"></span>[393:5056](0090331.htm#fr_5055) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p3"></span> [John ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5056"></span>[393:5057](0090331.htm#fr_5056) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p4"></span> [Matt. v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5057"></span>[393:5058](0090331.htm#fr_5057) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p5"></span> [Ps. cxxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#002)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5058"></span>[393:5059](0090331.htm#fr_5058) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p6"></span> [Ps.
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#004)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5059"></span>[393:5060](0090331.htm#fr_5059) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p7"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5060"></span>[394:5061](0090331.htm#fr_5060) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p8"></span> [Matt. xxi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5061"></span>[395:5062](0090331.htm#fr_5061) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p9"></span> [Ps. xxxiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#010)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](0090332)
