[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090088)  [Next](0090090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.i"></span> <span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="xi.i-Page_219"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>The Narrative of Zosimus.</span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xi.i-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xi.i-p5.1"></span>The</span> Greek text of this work is printed for
the first time in the same part of “Texts and Studies” as the Acts of
Xanthippe and Polyxena.  The sources for it are two manuscripts—one in
Paris, belonging to the twelfth century, and the other in Oxford, dating
from the fifteenth or sixteenth.  The latter, however, only extends to
the close of c. viii., the copy used by the scribe having been
imperfect.  There are versions of the work in Slavonic, Syriac,
Ethiopic, and Arabic; in the former of these the Blessed Ones are called
the Brachmani.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>From two passages in the poems of Commodian
(c. 250 <span class="sc"><span id="xi.i-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>) it
would seem that the work was known in his day, and the canon of
Nicephoras (c. 850 <span class="sc"><span
id="xi.i-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span>) places it among certain apocryphal
books which are to be rejected.  At the same time, it is doubtful
whether, in its present form, it can be put as far back as the earlier
of these dates.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>It professes to be the account of a visit to
the Makares, or Blessed Ones, given by a hermit, Zosimus, who was
privileged to visit them.  For forty years he had abstained from bread
and wine and from seeing the face of man, always praying to be permitted
to see the life of the Blessed.  With the second chapter the narrative
begins in the first person, and is continued in this up to c. xxi., just
where the angels come to receive the soul of Zosimus, and the work is
then finished off by one of the hermits who were present at his last
moments.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>While the style is inelegant and sometimes
obscure, the matter of the book is very interesting, and shows
considerable powers of imagination.  The land of the Blessed is reached
by means of a camel, which comes from the desert, and then by a storm of
wind, which carries Zosimus along with it.  He is addressed by the river
to which he comes, as well as by the wall of cloud which rises above it,
and is finally lifted across it by two trees.  The origin of the Blessed
Ones is noteworthy, as connecting the story with early literature on the
Lost Tribes.  They are the descendants of Rechab in the days of Jeremiah
the prophet, who, for refusing to give up their observances, are cast
into prison by the king.  From this they are delivered by an angel, and
brought to the place they now inhabit,—a level land covered with
flowers,—a view of Paradise which continues all through the Middle
Ages.  The chapters (x.–xv.) in which the Blessed describe their life
and death are of special merit, and form the best part of the whole.  In
striking contrast to its lofty tone is the appearance of Satan with his
1360 demons, whom Zosimus finally overcomes and drives away.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>To the various accounts of the Earthly
Paradise, the story of Zosimus forms an important addition; on these it
may, either directly or indirectly, have had considerable influence,
although the difficulty of assigning a definite date to it makes this
very uncertain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Narrative of Zosimus Concerning the Life of the
Blessed.](0090090)
