[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090313)  [Next](0090315) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>38.  The World, of Which the Sin is
Taken Away, is Said to Be the Church.  Reasons for Not Agreeing with
This Opinion.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p2"></span>The reader will do well to
consider what was said above and illustrated from various quarters on
the question what is meant in Scripture by the word “world”; and I think
it proper to repeat this.  I am aware that a certain scholar understands
by the world the Church alone, since the Church is the adornment of the
world, <span id="fr_4982"></span>[4983](#fn_4982) and is said to be the
light of the world.  “You,” he says, <span
id="fr_4983"></span>[4984](#fn_4983) “are the light of the world.”  Now,
the adornment of the world is the Church, Christ being her adornment,
who is the first light of the world.  We must consider if Christ is said
to be the light of the same world as His disciples.  When Christ is the
light of the world, perhaps it is meant that He is the light of the
Church, but when His disciples are the light of the world, perhaps they
are the light of others who call on the Lord, others in addition to the
Church, as Paul says on this point in the beginning of his first Epistle
to the Corinthians, where he writes, “To the Church of God, with all who
call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.”  Should any one consider
that the Church is called the light of the world, meaning thereby of the
rest of the race of men, including unbelievers, this may be true if the
assertion is taken prophetically and theologically; but if it is to be
taken of the present, we remind him that the light of a thing
illuminates that thing, and would ask him to show how the remainder of
the race is illuminated by the Church’s presence in the world.  If those
who hold the view in question cannot show this, then let them consider
if our interpretation is not a sound one, that the light is the Church,
and the world those others who call on the Name.  The words which follow
the above in Matthew will point out to the careful enquirer the proper
interpretation.  “You,” it is said, “are the salt of the earth,” the
rest of mankind being conceived as the earth, and believers are their
salt; it is because they believe that the earth is preserved.  For the
end will come if the salt loses its savour, and ceases to salt and
preserve the earth, since it is clear that if iniquity is multiplied and
love waxes cold upon the earth, <span
id="fr_4984"></span>[4985](#fn_4984) as the Saviour Himself uttered an
expression of doubt as to those who would witness His coming,
saying, <span id="fr_4985"></span>[4986](#fn_4985) “When the Son of man
cometh, shall He find faith upon the earth?” then the end of the age
will come.  Supposing, then, the Church to be called the world, since
the Saviour’s light shines on it—we have to ask in connection with the
text, “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world,”
whether the world here is to be taken intellectually of the Church, and
the taking away of sin is limited to the Church.  In that case what are
we to make of the saying of the same disciple with regard to the
Saviour, as the propitiation for sin?  “If any man sin,” we read, “we
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and He is
the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the
sins of the whole world?”  Paul’s dictum appears to me to be to the same
effect, when he says, <span id="fr_4986"></span>[4987](#fn_4986) “Who is
the Saviour of all men, especially of the faithful.”  Again, Heracleon,
dealing with our passage, declares, without any proof or any citation of
witnesses to that effect, that the words, “Lamb of God,” are spoken by
John as a prophet, but the words, “who taketh away the sin of the
world,” by John as more than a prophet.  The former expression he
considers to be used of His body, but the latter of Him who was in that
body, because the lamb is an imperfect member of the genus sheep; the
same being true of the body as compared with the dweller in it.  Had he
meant to attribute perfection to the body he would have spoken of a ram
as about to be sacrificed.  After the careful discussions given above, I
do not think it necessary to enter into repetitions on this passage, or
to controvert Heracleon’s careless utterances.  One point only may be
noted, that as the world was scarcely able to contain Him who had
emptied Himself, it required a lamb and not a ram, that its sin might be
taken away.

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p8"></span> ————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4982"></span>[380:4983](0090314.htm#fr_4982) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>κοσμος</span> means both “ornament”
and “world.”

<span id="fn_4983"></span>[380:4984](0090314.htm#fr_4983) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p4"></span> [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4984"></span>[380:4985](0090314.htm#fr_4984) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p5"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4985"></span>[380:4986](0090314.htm#fr_4985) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p6"></span> [Luke xviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4986"></span>[380:4987](0090314.htm#fr_4986) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p7"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xxxviii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book X](0090315)
