[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090393)  [Next](0090395) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>17.  Exposition of the Details in the
Narrative.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p2"></span>Now bring together from the Gospels
those who call Him Son of David, as she, and the blind men in
Jericho; <span id="fr_5497"></span>[5498](#fn_5497) and who call Him Son
of God, and that without the addition “truly” like the demoniacs who
say, “What have we to do with Thee, Thou Son of God;” <span
id="fr_5498"></span>[5499](#fn_5498) and who call Him so with the
addition “truly,” like those in the boat who worshipped Him saying,
“Truly Thou art the Son of God.” <span
id="fr_5499"></span>[5500](#fn_5499)   For the bringing together of
these passages will, I think, be useful to you with a view to seeing the
difference of those who come (to Jesus); some indeed come as to Him “who
was born of the seed of David according to the flesh;” <span
id="fr_5500"></span>[5501](#fn_5500) but others come to Him who “was
declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of
holiness;” <span id="fr_5501"></span>[5502](#fn_5501) and of these some
with the “truly,” and some without it.  Further, observe, that the
Canaanitish woman besought Him not about a son, whom she does not seem
to have brought forth at all, but about a daughter who was terribly
vexed with a demon; but another mother receives back alive her son who
was being carried forth dead. <span id="fr_5502"></span>[5503](#fn_5502)
  And again the ruler of the synagogue makes supplication for a daughter
twelve years old, as being dead, <span
id="fr_5503"></span>[5504](#fn_5503) but the nobleman about a son as
being still sick, and at the point of death. <span
id="fr_5504"></span>[5505](#fn_5504)   The daughter, accordingly, who
was distressed by a demon, and the dead son sprang from two mothers; and
the dead daughter, and the son who was sick unto death, sprang from two
fathers, of whom the one was a ruler of the synagogue, and the other was
a nobleman.  And I am persuaded these things contain reasons concerning
the diverse kinds of souls which Jesus vivifies and heals.  And all the
cures that He works among the people, especially those recorded by the
Evangelists, took place at that time, that those who would not otherwise
have believed unless they saw signs and wonders might believe; <span
id="fr_5505"></span>[5506](#fn_5505) for the things aforetime were
symbols of the things that are ever being accomplished by the power of
Jesus; for there is no time when each of the things which are written is
not done by the power of Jesus according to the desert of each.  The
Canaanitish woman, therefore, because of her race was not worthy even to
receive an answer from Jesus, who acknowledged that He had not been sent
by the Father <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-Page_446"></span>for any other thing than to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel, <span id="fr_5506"></span>[5507](#fn_5506)
—a lost race of souls possessed of clear vision; but, because of her
resolution and of having worshipped Jesus as Son of God, she obtains an
answer, which reproaches her with baseness of birth and exhibits the
measure of her worthiness, namely, that she was worthy of crumbs as the
little dogs, but not of the loaves.  But when she with intensified
resolution, accepting the saying of Jesus, puts forth the claim to
obtain crumbs even as a little dog, and acknowledges that the masters
are of a nobler race, then she gets a second answer, which bears
testimony to her faith as great, and a promise that it shall be done
unto her as she wills. <span id="fr_5507"></span>[5508](#fn_5507)   And
corresponding, I think, “to the Jerusalem above, which is free, the
mother” <span id="fr_5508"></span>[5509](#fn_5508) of Paul and those
like to him, must we conceive of the Canaanitish woman, the mother of
her who was terribly distressed with a demon, who was the symbol of the
mother of such a soul.  And consider whether it is not according to
sound reason that there are also many fathers and many mothers
corresponding to the fathers of Abraham to whom the patriarch went
away, <span id="fr_5509"></span>[5510](#fn_5509) and to Jerusalem the
“mother,” as Paul says, concerning himself and those like to him.  And
it is probable that she of whom the Canaanitish woman was a symbol came
out of the borders of Tyre and Sidon, of which the places on earth were
types, and came to the Saviour and besought Him and even now beseeches
Him saying, “Have mercy on me, O Lord, Thou Son of David, my daughter is
terribly vexed with a demon.” <span id="fr_5510"></span>[5511](#fn_5510)
  Then also to those without and to the disciples when necessary He
answers and says, “I was not sent;” <span
id="fr_5511"></span>[5512](#fn_5511) teaching us that there are some
lost souls pre-eminently intellectual and clear of vision, figuratively
called sheep of the house of Israel; which things, I think, the simpler
who are of opinion that they are spoken in regard to the Israel which is
after the flesh will of necessity admit, namely, that our Saviour was
sent by the Father to no others than to those lost Jews.  But we, who
can truthfully boast that “if we have once known Christ after the flesh,
but now no longer do we know Him so,” <span
id="fr_5512"></span>[5513](#fn_5512) are assured that it is
pre-eminently the work of the Word to save the more intelligent, for
these are more akin to Him than those who are duller.  But since the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, with the exception of “the remnant
according to the election of grace,” <span
id="fr_5513"></span>[5514](#fn_5513) disbelieved the Word, on this
account “God chose the foolish things of the world,” <span
id="fr_5514"></span>[5515](#fn_5514) namely, that which was not Israel,
nor clear of vision, that He might put to shame the wise ones of Israel;
and He called “the things which are not,” <span
id="fr_5515"></span>[5516](#fn_5515) handing over to them an intelligent
nation who were able to admit “the foolishness of the preaching,” <span
id="fr_5516"></span>[5517](#fn_5516) and of His good pleasure saved
those who believe in this, that He might refute “the things which are,”
having perfected praise for Himself, “out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings,” <span id="fr_5517"></span>[5518](#fn_5517) when they became
hostile to truth.  Now, the Canaanitish woman, having come, worshipped
Jesus as God, saying, “Lord, help me,” but He answered and said, “It is
not possible to take the children’s bread and cast it to the little
dogs.” <span id="fr_5518"></span>[5519](#fn_5518)   But some one might
inquire also into the meaning of this saying, since,—inasmuch as there
was a measure of loaves such that both the children and the dogs of the
household could not eat loaves, unless the dogs ate other loaves than
those which were well made,—it was not possible according to right
reason for the well-made loaf of the children to be given as food to the
little dogs.  But no such thing appears in the case of the power of
Jesus, for of this it was possible both for the children and those
called little dogs to partake.  Consider, then, whether perhaps with
reference to the saying, “It is not possible to take the bread of
children,” we ought to say that, “He who emptied Himself and took upon
Him the form of a servant,” <span id="fr_5519"></span>[5520](#fn_5519)
brought a measure of power such as the world was capable of receiving,
of which power also He was conscious that a certain quantity went forth
from Him as is plain from the words, “Some one did touch Me, for I
perceived that power had gone forth from Me.” <span
id="fr_5520"></span>[5521](#fn_5520)   From this measure of power, then,
He dispensed, giving a larger portion to those who were pre-eminent and
who were called sons, but a smaller portion to those who were not such,
as to the little dogs.  But though these things were so, nevertheless
where there was great faith, to her, who because of her base birth in
Canaanitish land was a little dog, He gave as to a child the bread of
the children.  And perhaps, also, of the words of Jesus there are some
loaves which it is possible to give to the more rational, as to children
only; and other words, as it were, crumbs from the great house and table
of the well<span id="page_447">p. 447</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-Page_447"></span>born and the masters, which may be
used by some souls, like the dogs.  And according to the law of Moses it
is written about certain things, “Ye shall cast them to the dogs,” <span
id="fr_5521"></span>[5522](#fn_5521) and it was a matter of care to the
Holy Spirit to give instruction about certain foods that they should be
left to the dogs.  Let others, then, who are strangers to the doctrine
of the Church, assume that souls pass from the bodies of men into the
bodies of dogs, according to their varying degree of wickedness; but we,
who do not find this at all in the divine Scripture, say that the more
rational condition changes into one more irrational, undergoing this
affection in consequence of great slothfulness and negligence.  But,
also, in the same way, a will which was more irrational, because of its
neglect of reason, sometimes turns and becomes rational, so that that
which at one time was a dog, loving to eat of the crumbs that fell from
the table of its masters, comes into the condition of a son.  For virtue
contributes greatly to the making of one a son of God, but wickedness,
and mad fury in wanton discourses and shamelessness, contribute to the
giving of a man the name of dog according to the word of the
Scripture. <span id="fr_5522"></span>[5523](#fn_5522)   And the like you
will also understand in the case of the other names which are applied to
animals without reason.  Only, he who is reproached as a dog and yet is
not indignant at being called unworthy of the bread of children and with
all forbearance repeats the saying of that Canaanitish woman, “Yea,
Lord, for even the little dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their
masters’ <span id="fr_5523"></span>[5524](#fn_5523) table,” will obtain
the very gentle answer of Jesus saying to him, “Great is thy
faith,”—when he has received so great faith—and saying, “Be it done unto
thee even as thou wilt,” <span id="fr_5524"></span>[5525](#fn_5524) so
that he himself may be healed, and if he has produced any fruit which
stands in need of healing, that this, too, may be cured.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5497"></span>[445:5498](0090394.htm#fr_5497) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p3"></span> [Matt. xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5498"></span>[445:5499](0090394.htm#fr_5498) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p4"></span> [Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5499"></span>[445:5500](0090394.htm#fr_5499) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p5"></span> [Matt. xiv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#033)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5500"></span>[445:5501](0090394.htm#fr_5500) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p6"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5501"></span>[445:5502](0090394.htm#fr_5501) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p7"></span> [Rom. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5502"></span>[445:5503](0090394.htm#fr_5502) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p8"></span> [Luke vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5503"></span>[445:5504](0090394.htm#fr_5503) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p9"></span> [Matt. ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5504"></span>[445:5505](0090394.htm#fr_5504) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p10"></span> [John iv.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5505"></span>[445:5506](0090394.htm#fr_5505) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p11"></span> [John iv.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#048)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5506"></span>[446:5507](0090394.htm#fr_5506) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p12"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5507"></span>[446:5508](0090394.htm#fr_5507) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p13"></span> [Matt. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5508"></span>[446:5509](0090394.htm#fr_5508) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p14"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5509"></span>[446:5510](0090394.htm#fr_5509) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p15"></span> [Gen. xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#015)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5510"></span>[446:5511](0090394.htm#fr_5510) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p16"></span> [Matt. xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5511"></span>[446:5512](0090394.htm#fr_5511) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p17"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5512"></span>[446:5513](0090394.htm#fr_5512) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p18"></span> [2 Cor. v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5513"></span>[446:5514](0090394.htm#fr_5513) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p19"></span> [Rom. xi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#005)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5514"></span>[446:5515](0090394.htm#fr_5514) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p20"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5515"></span>[446:5516](0090394.htm#fr_5515) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p21"></span> [1 Cor. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5516"></span>[446:5517](0090394.htm#fr_5516) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p22"></span> [1 Cor. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5517"></span>[446:5518](0090394.htm#fr_5517) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p23"></span> [Ps. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5518"></span>[446:5519](0090394.htm#fr_5518) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p24"></span> [Matt.
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5519"></span>[446:5520](0090394.htm#fr_5519) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p25"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5520"></span>[446:5521](0090394.htm#fr_5520) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p26"></span> [Luke viii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#046)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5521"></span>[447:5522](0090394.htm#fr_5521) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p27"></span> [Exod. xxii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5522"></span>[447:5523](0090394.htm#fr_5522) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p28"></span> [2 Sam. xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5523"></span>[447:5524](0090394.htm#fr_5523) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p29"></span> [Matt. xv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5524"></span>[447:5525](0090394.htm#fr_5524) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p30"></span> [Matt. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xvii-p30.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](0090395)
