[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090085)  [Next](0090087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.i"></span> <span id="page_203">p. 203</span> <span
id="x.i-Page_203"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="x.i-p1.1"></span>The Acts of Xanthippe and Polyxena.</span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="x.i-p3"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="x.i-p3.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="x.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="x.i-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="x.i-p5.1"></span>The</span> original Greek text of this work is
edited for the first time in Text and Studies, Vol. II., No. 3 (1893),
by Montague Rhodes James, M.A., from the only <span class="sc"><span
id="x.i-p5.2"></span>ms.</span> known to him, a Paris one of the
eleventh century.  References to these Acts are not common in works
dealing with the saints of the early church, and few writers seem to
have known the work itself.

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>In substance the Acts are a religious novel,
similar in form, and to some extent in matter, to the Greek romances by
Achilles Tatius, Heliodorus, and others, and based upon the belief that
St. Paul actually did visit Spain, according to the intention expressed
by him in [Romans xv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#024)<span
id="x.i-p6.1"></span>.  The editor of the Greek text is inclined to
assign its composition to about the middle of the third century,
reasoning from its relations to the Acts of Paul, and those of other
apostles, which its author apparently knew and made use of.  Thus a
knowledge of the Acts of Paul and Thecla may be inferred from c. xxvi.,
of the Acts of Peter from c. xxiv., and of those of Andrew from cc.
xxviii.–xxxi.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>The first and longest part of the story (from
c. i. to xxi.) gives an account of the conversion of Xanthippe, wife of
Probus, a man of rank in Spain.  In this part the narrative is less
prominent than the speeches and prayers, which are numerous, and of
considerable length.  With c. xxii. a new section of the story begins,
of which no previous warning has been given except in the title,
containing the adventures of Polyxena, the sister of Xanthippe, who is
carried off in the latter’s absence.  The rest of the story is much more
diversified than the early part, being full of incident and introducing
a great variety of persons—the apostles Peter, Philip, and Andrew, an
ass-driver, the Jewess Rebecca, a wicked prefect and his kind-hearted
son, and finally Onesimus, who brings Polyxena back to Spain.

<span id="x.i-p8"></span>This difference in the character of the
narrative in the two parts causes also some difference in the language,
which in the earlier section is more diffuse and more difficult of exact
translation than in the later one.  The meaning of some words is also
doubtful:  those translated “lamp-stand” and “destroyer,” towards the
end of c. xxi., are so rendered in accordance with suggestions by his
Exc. M. Gennadius, who also characterises the language of the text as
full of errors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Life and Conduct of the Holy Women, Xanthippe, Polyxena, and
Rebecca.](0090087)
