[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090240)  [Next](0090242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>2.  In What Way the Logos is God.  Errors
to Be Avoided on This Question.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p2"></span>We next notice John’s use of the
article in these sentences.  He does not write without care in this
respect, nor is he unfamiliar with the niceties of the Greek tongue.  In
some cases he uses the article, and in some he omits it.  He adds the
article to the Logos, but to the name of God he adds it sometimes only. 
He uses the article, when the name of God refers to the uncreated cause
of all things, and omits it when the Logos is named God.  Does the same
difference which we observe between God with the article and God without
it prevail also between the Logos with it and without it?  We must
enquire into this.  As the God who is over all is God with the article
not without it, so “the Logos” is the source of that reason (Logos)
which dwells in every reasonable creature; the reason which is in each
creature is not, like the former called *par excellence* The Logos.  Now
there are many who are sincerely concerned about religion, and who fall
here into great perplexity.  They are afraid that they may be
proclaiming two Gods, and their fear drives them into doctrines which
are false and wicked.  Either they deny that the Son has a distinct
nature of His own besides that of the Father, and make Him whom they
call the Son to be God all but the name, or they deny the divinity of
the Son, giving Him a separate existence of His own, and making His
sphere of essence fall outside that of the Father, so that they are
separable from each other.  To such persons we have to say that God on
the one hand is Very God (Autotheos, God of Himself); and so the Saviour
says in His prayer to the Father, <span
id="fr_4664"></span>[4665](#fn_4664) “That they may know Thee the only
true God;” but that all beyond the Very God is made God by participation
in His divinity, and is not to be called simply God (with the article),
but rather God (without article).  And thus the first-born of all
creation, who is the first to be with God, and to attract to Himself
divinity, is a being of more exalted rank than the other gods beside
Him, of whom God is the God, as it is written, <span
id="fr_4665"></span>[4666](#fn_4665) “The God of gods, the Lord, hath
spoken and called the earth.”  It was by the offices of the first-born
that they became gods, for He drew from God in generous measure that
they should be made gods, and He communicated it to them according to
His own bounty.  The true God, then, is “The God,” and those who are
formed after Him are gods, images, as it were, of Him the prototype. 
But the archetypal image, again, of all these images is the Word of God,
who was in the beginning, and who by being with God is at all times God,
not possessing that of Himself, but by His being with the Father, and
not continuing to be God, if we should think of this, except by
remaining always in uninterrupted contemplation of the depths of the
Father.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4664"></span>[323:4665](0090241.htm#fr_4664) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p3"></span> [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4665"></span>[323:4666](0090241.htm#fr_4665) <span
id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p4"></span> [Ps. l.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#001)<span id="xv.iii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](0090242)
