[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090000)  [Next](0090002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="ii-Page_v"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="ii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="ii-p3"></span>*The Ante-Nicene Fathers*, which seemed many
years ago to have completed its task, now presents itself once more and
ventures to solicit the renewal of the favour with which it was formerly
received by the theological world.  The publishers and the editor, who
now stands, he well knows how unworthily, in the place of Principal
Donaldson and Professor Roberts, believe that the volume now added to
the series will be found most interesting in itself and not unworthy to
stand beside its predecessors.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>This volume consists of two distinct parts.  The
first is a collection of recently discovered additions to early
Christian literature.  The period which has elapsed since the last
volumes of this series were published has been singularly rich in such
discoveries.  A portion of a gospel has been recovered which was read in
the latter part of the second century in certain Christian churches and
purports to be the work of the Apostle Peter.  A harmony of the four
canonical gospels has also been brought to our knowledge, which was made
in the same century, and which, in a considerable district of Eastern
Christendom, supplanted these gospels themselves.  Another work bearing
the name of the Apostle Peter, his Apocalypse, which once appeared to
have some claim to a place in the canon, has also been found.  The
Epistles of Clement, which formerly broke off abruptly, have recovered
their concluding portions, and the earliest public appeal to the head of
the state on behalf of Christianity is also now in our possession.  The
circumstances of these various discoveries, and also of others of a
similar nature, are stated in the introductions prefixed by the writers
in this volume to the various pieces, and it will be seen that scholars
of many lands have taken part in them.  English scholarship, it is well
known, has distinguished itself highly in this field.  Many of the
pieces now given first saw the light in the *Cambridge Texts and
Studies*, a publication of singular interest and enduring value, without
which the present volume would not have come into existence.  The editor
of the *Texts and Studies*, Professor Armitage Robinson, has taken a
very kind interest in the present publication and has himself
contributed translations of two pieces.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>The history of the discussions awakened by these
discoveries cannot yet be written, but it is not too early to place the
English reader in possession of the documents thus restored to the
Christian community.  The reader of former volumes of *The Ante-Nicene
Fathers* has already become acquainted with a number of uncanonical
gospels, of apocalypses, and of early Christian apologies.  In each of
these classes of Christian literature he is now presented with pieces
not less interesting than any known before.  A glance at the table of
contents will show the principle according to which the various works
have been arranged.  It may be stated that the *Diatessaron* of Tatian
is here for the first time translated into English from the Arabic.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>The second part of this volume contains portions
of two of the most important commentaries of Origen.  When *The
Ante-Nicene Fathers* came to a close it was felt that more should have
been done for a father who occupies a position of such singular
importance in the history both of Scripture exegesis and of Christian
thought.  It is believed that the present translations will be welcomed
by many who feel that growing interest in Origen which now appears in
many quarters, and that they will be acceptable to all who care to know
the varieties of treatment the Scriptures have met with in the church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Gospel of Peter.](0090002)
