[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090288)  [Next](0090290) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p1.1"></span>13.  John I. 24, 25.  Of the Baptism of
John, that of Elijah, and that of Christ.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p2"></span>And they that were sent were of the
Pharisees.  And they asked him, and said unto him, <span
id="fr_4888"></span>[4889](#fn_4888) “Why baptizest thou then, if thou
art not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?”  Those who sent from
Jerusalem the priests and levites who asked John these questions, having
learned who John was not, and who he was, preserve a decent silence, as
if tacitly assenting and indicating that they ac<span id="page_362">p.
362</span> <span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-Page_362"></span>cepted what was
said, and saw that baptism was suited to a voice crying in the
wilderness for the preparing of the way of the Lord.  But the Pharisees
being, as their name indicates, a divided and seditious set of people,
show that they do not agree with the Jews of the metropolis and with the
ministers of the service of God, the priests and levites.  They send
envoys who deal in rebukes, and so far as their power extends debar him
from baptizing; their envoys ask, Why baptizest thou, then, if thou art
not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?  And if we were to stitch
together into one statement what is written in the various Gospels, we
should say that at this time they spoke as is here reported, but that at
a later time, when they wished to received baptism, they heard the
address of John: <span id="fr_4889"></span>[4890](#fn_4889)  
“Generations of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to
come?  Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance.”  This is what
the Baptist says in Matthew, when he sees many of the Pharisees and
Sadducees coming to his baptism, without, it is clear, having the fruits
of repentance, and pharisaically boasting in themselves that they had
Abraham for their father.  For this they are rebuked by John, who has
the zeal of Elijah according to the communication of the Holy Spirit. 
For that is a rebuking word, “Think not to say within yourselves, We
have Abraham for our father,” and that is the word of a teacher, when he
speaks of those who for their stony hearts are called unbelieving
stones, and says that by the power of God these stones may be changed
into children of Abraham; for they were present to the eyes of the
prophet and did not shrink from his divine glance.  Hence his words:  “I
say unto you that God is able of these stones to raise up children to
Abraham.”  And since they came to his baptism without having done fruits
meet for repentance, he says to them most appropriately, “Already is the
axe laid to the root of the tree; every tree that bringeth not forth
good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.”  This is as much as to
say to them:  Since you have come to baptism without having done fruits
meet for repentance, you are a tree that does not bring forth good fruit
and which has to be cut down by the most sharp and piercing axe of the
Word which is living and powerful and sharper than every two-edged
sword.  The estimation in which the Pharisees held themselves is also
set forth by Luke in the passage: <span
id="fr_4890"></span>[4891](#fn_4890)   “Two men went up to the temple to
pray, the one a Pharisee and the other a publican.  And the Pharisee
stood and prayed thus with himself:  God, I thank Thee that I am not as
other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
publican.”  The result of this speech is that the publican goes down to
his house justified rather than the Pharisee, and the lesson is drawn,
that every one who exalts himself is abased.  They came, then, in the
character in which the Saviour’s reproving words described them, as
hypocrites to John’s baptism, nor does it escape the Baptist’s
observation that they have the poison of vipers under their tongue and
the poison of asps, for “the poison of asps is under their
tongue.” <span id="fr_4891"></span>[4892](#fn_4891)   The figure of
serpents rightly indicates their temper, and it is plainly revealed in
their better question:  “Why baptizest thou then, if thou art not the
Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?”  To these I would fain reply, if
it be the case that the Christ and Elijah and the prophet baptize, but
that the voice crying in the wilderness has no authority to do so, “Most
harshly, my friends, do you question the messenger sent before the face
of Christ to prepare His way before Him.  The mysteries which belong to
this point are all hidden to you; for Jesus being, whether you will or
not, the Christ, did not Himself baptize but His disciples, He who was
Himself the prophet.  And how have you come to believe that Elijah who
is to come will baptize?”  He did not baptize the logs upon the altar in
the times of Ahab, <span id="fr_4892"></span>[4893](#fn_4892) though
they needed such a bath to be burned up, what time the Lord appeared in
fire.  No, he commands the priests to do this for him, and that not only
once; for he says, “Do it a second time,” upon which they did it a
second time, and “Do it a third time,” and they did it a third time. 
If, then, he did not at that time himself baptize but left the work to
others, how was he to baptize at the time spoken of by Malachi?  Christ,
then, does not baptize with water, but His disciples.  He reserves for
Himself to baptize with the Holy Spirit and with fire.  Now Heracleon
accepts the speech of the Pharisees as distinctly implying that the
office of baptizing belonged to the Christ and Elijah and to every
prophet, for he uses these words, “Whose office alone it is to
baptize.”  He is refuted by what we have just said, and especially by
the consideration that he takes the word “prophet” in a general
sense; <span id="fr_4893"></span>[4894](#fn_4893) for he can<span
id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-Page_363"></span>not
show that any of the prophets baptized.  He adds, not incorrectly, that
the Pharisees put the question from malice, and not from a desire to
learn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4888"></span>[361:4889](0090289.htm#fr_4888) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p3"></span> [John
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4889"></span>[362:4890](0090289.htm#fr_4889) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p4"></span> [Matt.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#008)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4890"></span>[362:4891](0090289.htm#fr_4890) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p5"></span> [Luke
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4891"></span>[362:4892](0090289.htm#fr_4891) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p6"></span> [Ps. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4892"></span>[362:4893](0090289.htm#fr_4892) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p7"></span> [1 Kings xviii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#033)<span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p7.1"></span> sq.

<span id="fn_4893"></span>[362:4894](0090289.htm#fr_4893) <span
id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.v.xiii-p8"></span> By not noticing the difference
between “a prophet” and “the prophet.”  *Vide supra*, p. 356.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV](0090290)
