[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090381)  [Next](0090383) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>5.  The Disciples in Conflict.  Jesus Walks
Upon the Waters.</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p2"></span>The reason why we have taken up this
subject is the passage under discussion which tells that Jesus separated
the disciples from the multitudes, and constrained them to enter into
the boat and to go before Him unto the other side until He Himself
should send the multitudes away; <span
id="fr_5378"></span>[5379](#fn_5378) for the multitudes were not able to
go away to the other side, as they were not in the mystic sense Hebrews,
which are by interpretation, “dwelling on the other side.”  But this was
the work of the disciples of Jesus—I mean to go away to the other side,
and to pass beyond things seen and material, as temporal, and to go on
to things unseen and eternal.  To be dismissed by Jesus was a sufficient
act of kindness bestowed on the multitudes by Jesus; for just because
they were multitudes they were not able to go away to the other side;
and this kind of dismissal no one has the power to effect save Jesus
only, and it is not possible for any one to be dismissed unless he has
first eaten of the loaves which Jesus blesses.  Nor is it possible for
any one to eat of the loaves of blessing of Jesus unless he has done as
Jesus commanded and sat down upon the grass as we have told.  Nor again
was it possible for the multitudes to do this unless they had followed
Jesus from their own cities, when He withdrew into a desert place
apart.  And at first, when He was asked by the disciples to send away
the multitudes, He did not send them away until He had fed them with the
loaves of blessing; but now He sends them away, having first constrained
the disciples to enter into the boat; and He sends them away, while they
were somewhere below,—for the desert was below,—but He Himself went up
into the mountain to pray. <span id="fr_5379"></span>[5380](#fn_5379)  
And you must observe this, that immediately after the five thousand had
been fed, Jesus constrained the disciples to embark into the boat, and
to go before Him unto the other side.  Only, the disciples were not able
to go before Jesus to the other side; but, when they had got as far as
the middle of the sea, and the boat was distressed “because the wind was
contrary to them,” <span id="fr_5380"></span>[5381](#fn_5380) they were
afraid when about the fourth watch of the night Jesus came to them.  And
if Jesus had not gone up into the boat neither would the wind which was
contrary to the disciples who were sailing have ceased, nor would those
who were sailing have gone across and come to the other side.  And,
perhaps, wishing to teach them by experience that it was not possible
apart from Him to go to the other side He constrained them to enter into
the boat and go before Him to the other side; but, when they were not
able to advance farther than the middle of the sea, He appeared to them,
and did what is written, <span id="fr_5381"></span>[5382](#fn_5381) and
showed that he who arrives at the other side reaches it because Jesus
sails along with him.  But what is the boat into which Jesus constrained
the disciples to enter?  Is it perhaps the conflict of temptations and
difficulties into which any <span id="page_435">p. 435</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-Page_435"></span>one is constrained by the Word, and
goes unwillingly, as it were, when the Saviour wishes to train by
exercise the disciples in this boat which is distressed by the waves and
the contrary wind?  But since Mark has made a slight change in the
reading, and for “Straightway He constrained the disciples to enter into
the boat and to go before Him to the other side,” has written, “And
straightway He constrained His disciples to enter into the boat and to
go before Him unto the other side unto Bethsaida,” <span
id="fr_5382"></span>[5383](#fn_5382) we must attend to the word, “He
constrained,” when first we have seen to the slight variation in Mark
who indicates something more definite by the addition of the pronoun;
for the same thing is not expressed by the words, straightway “He
constrained the disciples.”  Something more than “the” disciples simply
is written in Mark, namely, “His” disciples.  Perhaps, therefore, to
attend to the expression, the disciples who found it hard to tear
themselves away from Jesus, and could not be separated from Him by any
ordinary cause, wished to be present with Him; but He having judged that
they should make trial of the waves and of the contrary wind, which
would not have been contrary if they had been with Jesus, put on them
the necessity of being separated from Him and entering into the boat. 
The Saviour then compels the disciples to enter into the boat of
temptations and to go before Him to the other side, and through victory
over them to go beyond critical difficulties; but when they had come
into the midst of the sea, and of the waves in the temptations, and of
the contrary winds which prevented them from going away to the other
side, they were not able, struggling as they were without Jesus, to
overcome the waves and the contrary wind and reach the other side. 
Wherefore the Word, taking compassion upon them who had done all that
was in their power to reach the other side, came to them walking upon
the sea, which for Him had no waves or wind that was able to oppose if
He so willed; for it is not written, “He came to them walking upon the
waves,” but, “upon the waters;” <span
id="fr_5383"></span>[5384](#fn_5383) Just as Peter, who at first when
Jesus said to him, “Come,” went down from the boat and walked not upon
“the waves,” but upon “the waters” <span
id="fr_5384"></span>[5385](#fn_5384) to come to Jesus; but when he
doubted he saw that the wind was strong, which was not strong to him who
laid aside his little faith and his doubting.  But, when Jesus went up
with Peter into the boat, the wind ceased, as it had no power to
energise against the boat when Jesus had gone up into it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5378"></span>[434:5379](0090382.htm#fr_5378) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p3"></span> [Matt. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#022)<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5379"></span>[434:5380](0090382.htm#fr_5379) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p4"></span> [Matt. xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#023)<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5380"></span>[434:5381](0090382.htm#fr_5380) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p5"></span> [Matt. xiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#024)<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5381"></span>[434:5382](0090382.htm#fr_5381) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p6"></span> [Matt. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5382"></span>[435:5383](0090382.htm#fr_5382) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p7"></span> [Mark vi.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#045)<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5383"></span>[435:5384](0090382.htm#fr_5383) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p8"></span> [Matt. xiv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5384"></span>[435:5385](0090382.htm#fr_5384) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p9"></span> [Matt. xiv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#029)<span id="xvi.ii.iv.v-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](0090383)
