[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090186)  [Next](0090188) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.iv"></span> <span id="page_263">p. 263</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_263"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c10"><span
id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>The Apology of Aristides the
Philosopher.</span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="xiii.iv-p2.1"></span>Translated from the Syriac.</span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span> ————————————

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.iv-p4.1"></span>Aristedes.</span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>Here follows the defence which Aristides
the philosopher made before Hadrian the King on behalf of reverence for
God.

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span>…All-powerful Cæsar Titus Hadrianus
Antoninus, venerable and merciful, from Marcianus Aristides, an Athenian
philosopher. <span id="fr_4426"></span>[4427](#fn_4426)

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span>I.  I, O King, by the grace of God came
into this world; and when I had considered the heaven and the earth and
the seas, and had surveyed the sun and the rest of creation, I marvelled
at the beauty of the world.  And I perceived that the world and all that
is therein are moved by the power of another; and I understood that he
who moves them is God, who is hidden in them, and veiled by them.  And
it is manifest that that which causes motion is more powerful than that
which is moved.  But that I should make search concerning this same
mover of all, as to what is his nature (for it seems to me, he is indeed
unsearchable in his nature), and that I should argue as to the constancy
of his government, so as to grasp it fully,—this is a vain effort for
me; for it is not possible that a man should fully comprehend it.  I
say, however, concerning this mover of the world, that he is God of all,
who made all things for the sake of mankind.  And it seems to me that
this is reasonable, that one should fear God and should not oppress man.

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span>I say, then, that God is not born, not
made, an ever-abiding nature without beginning and without <span
id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span id="xiii.iv-Page_264"></span>end,
immortal, perfect, and incomprehensible.  Now when I say that he is
“perfect,” this means that there is not in him any defect, and he is not
in need of anything but all things are in need of him.  And when I say
that he is “without beginning,” this means that everything which has
beginning has also an end, and that which has an end may be brought to
an end.  He has no name, for everything which has a name is kindred to
things created.  Form he has none, nor yet any union of members; for
whatsoever possesses these is kindred to things fashioned.  He is
neither male nor female. <span id="fr_4427"></span>[4428](#fn_4427)  
The heavens do not limit him, but the heavens and all things, visible
and invisible, receive their bounds from him.  Adversary he has none,
for there exists not any stronger than he.  Wrath and indignation he
possesses not, for there is nothing which is able to stand against him. 
Ignorance and forgetfulness are not in his nature, for he is altogether
wisdom and understanding; and in Him stands fast all that exists.  He
requires not sacrifice and libation, nor even one of things visible; He
requires not aught from any, but all living creatures stand in need of
him.

<span id="xiii.iv-p14"></span>II.  Since, then, we have addressed you
concerning God, so far as our discourse can bear upon him, let us now
come to the race of men, that we may know which of them participate in
the truth of which we have spoken, and which of them go astray from it.

<span id="xiii.iv-p15"></span>This is clear to you, O King, that there
are four classes of men in this world:—Barbarians and Greeks, Jews and
Christians.  The Barbarians, indeed, trace the origin of their kind of
religion from Kronos and from Rhea and their other gods; the Greeks,
however, from Helenos, who is said to be sprung from Zeus.  And by
Helenos there were born Aiolos and Xuthos; and there were others
descended from Inachos and Phoroneus, and lastly from the Egyptian
Danaos and from Kadmos and from Dionysos.

<span id="xiii.iv-p16"></span>The Jews, again, trace the origin of their
race from Abraham, who begat Isaac, of whom was born Jacob.  And he
begat twelve sons who migrated from Syria to Egypt; and there they were
called the nation of the Hebrews, by him who made their laws; and at
length they were named Jews.

<span id="xiii.iv-p17"></span><span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_265"></span>The Christians, then, trace the beginning
of their religion from Jesus the Messiah; and he is named the Son of God
Most High.  And it is said that God came down from heaven, and from a
Hebrew virgin assumed and clothed himself with flesh; and the Son of God
lived in a daughter of man.  This is taught in the gospel, as it is
called, which a short time ago was preached among them; and you also if
you will read therein, may perceive the power which belongs to it.  This
Jesus, then, was born of the race of the Hebrews; and he had twelve
disciples in order that the purpose of his incarnation <span
id="fr_4428"></span>[4429](#fn_4428) might in time be accomplished.  But
he himself was pierced by the Jews, and he died and was buried; and they
say that after three days he rose and ascended to heaven.  Thereupon
these twelve disciples went forth throughout the known parts of the
world, and kept showing his greatness with all modesty and uprightness. 
And hence also those of the present day who believe that preaching are
called Christians, and they are become famous.

<span id="xiii.iv-p19"></span>So then there are, as I said above, four
classes of men:—Barbarians and Greeks, Jews and Christians.

<span id="xiii.iv-p20"></span>Moreover the wind is obedient to God, and
fire to the angels; the waters also to the demons and the earth to the
sons of men. <span id="fr_4429"></span>[4430](#fn_4429)

<span id="xiii.iv-p22"></span>III.  Let us begin, then, with the
Barbarians, and go on to the rest of the nations one after another, that
we may see which of them hold the truth as to God and which of them hold
error.

<span id="xiii.iv-p23"></span>The Barbarians, then, as they did not
apprehend God, went astray among the elements, and began to worship
things created instead of their Creator; <span
id="fr_4430"></span>[4431](#fn_4430) and for this end they made images
and shut them up in shrines, and lo! they worship them, guarding them
the while with much care, lest their gods be stolen by robbers.  And the
Barbarians did not observe that that which acts as guard is greater than
that which is guarded, and that everyone who creates is greater than
that which is created.  If it be, then, that their gods are too feeble
to see to their own safety, how will they take thought for the safety of
men?  Great then is the error into which the Barbarians wandered in
worshipping lifeless images which can do nothing to help them.  And I am
led to wonder, O King, at their philosophers, how that even they went
astray, and gave the name of gods to images which were made in honour of
the elements; and that their sages did not perceive that the elements
also are dissoluble and perishable.  For if a small part of an element
is dissolved or destroyed, the whole of it may be dissolved and
destroyed.  If then the elements themselves are dis<span
id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span id="xiii.iv-Page_266"></span>solved
and destroyed and forced to be subject to another that is more stubborn
than they, and if they are not in their nature gods, why, forsooth, do
they call the images which are made in their honour, God?  Great, then,
is the error which the philosophers among them have brought upon their
followers.

<span id="xiii.iv-p25"></span>IV.  Let us turn now, O King, to the
elements in themselves, that we may make clear in regard to them, that
they are not gods, but a created thing, liable to ruin and change, which
is of the same nature as man; whereas God is imperishable and unvarying,
and invisible, while yet He sees, and overrules, and transforms all
things.

<span id="xiii.iv-p26"></span>Those then who believe concerning the
earth that it is a god have hitherto deceived themselves, since it is
furrowed and set with plants and trenched; and it takes in the filthy
refuse of men and beasts and cattle.  And at times it becomes
unfruitful, for if it be burnt to ashes it becomes devoid of life, for
nothing germinates from an earthen jar.  And besides if water be
collected upon it, it is dissolved together with its products.  And it
is trodden under foot of men and beast, and receives the blood<span
id="page_267">p. 267</span> <span id="xiii.iv-Page_267"></span>stains of
the slain; and it is dug open, and filled with the dead, and becomes a
tomb for corpses.  But it is impossible that a nature, which is holy and
worthy and blessed and immortal, should allow of anyone of these
things.  And hence it appears to us that the earth is not a god but a
creation of God.

<span id="xiii.iv-p27"></span>V.  In the same way, again, those erred
who believed the waters to be gods.  For the waters were created for the
use of man, and are put under his rule in many ways.  For they suffer
change and admit impurity, and are destroyed and lose their nature while
they are boiled into many substances.  And they take colours which do
not belong to them; they are also congealed by frost and are mingled and
permeated with the filth of men and beasts, and with the blood of the
slain.  And being checked by skilled workmen through the restraint of
aqueducts, they flow and are diverted against their inclination, and
come into gardens and other places in order that they may be collected
and issue forth as a means of fertility for man, and that they may
cleanse away every impurity and fulfil the service man requires from
them.  Wherefore it is impossible that the waters should be a god, but
they are a work of God and a part of the world.

<span id="xiii.iv-p28"></span>In like manner also they who believed that
fire is a god erred to no slight extent.  For it, too, was created for
the service of men, and is subject to them in many ways:—in the
preparation of meat, and as a means of casting metals, and for other
ends whereof your Majesty is aware.  At the same time it is quenched and
extinguished in many ways.

<span id="xiii.iv-p29"></span>Again they also erred who believed the
motion of the winds to be a god.  For it is well known to us that those
winds are under the dominion of another, at times their motion
increases, and at times it fails and ceases at the command of him who
controls them.  For they were created by God for the sake of men, in
order to supply the necessity of trees and fruits and seeds; and to
bring over the sea ships which convey for men necessaries and goods from
places where they are found to places where they are not found; and to
govern the quarters of the world.  And as for itself, at times it
increases and again abates; and in one place brings help and in another
causes disaster at the bidding of him who rules it.  And mankind too are
able by known means to confine and keep it in check in order that it may
fulfil for them the service they require from it.  And of itself it has
not any authority at all.  And hence it is impossible that the winds
should be called gods, but rather a thing made by God.

<span id="xiii.iv-p30"></span>VI.  So also they erred who believed that
the sun <span id="page_268">p. 268</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_268"></span>is a god.  For we see that it is moved by
the compulsion of another, and revolves and makes its journey, and
proceeds from sign to sign, rising and setting every day, so as to give
warmth for the growth of plants and trees, and to bring forth into the
air where with it (sunlight) is mingled every growing thing which is
upon the earth.  And to it there belongs by comparison a part in common
with the rest of the stars in its course; and though it is one in its
nature it is associated with many parts for the supply of the needs of
men; and that not according to its own will but rather according to the
will of him who rules it.  And hence it is impossible that the sun
should be a god, but the work of God; and in like manner also the moon
and the stars.

<span id="xiii.iv-p31"></span>VII.  And those who believed of the men of
the past, that some of them were gods, they too were much mistaken.  For
as you yourself allow, O King, man is constituted of the four elements
and of a soul and a spirit (and hence he is called a microcosm), <span
id="fr_4431"></span>[4432](#fn_4431) and without anyone of these parts
he could not consist.  He has a beginning and an end, and he is born and
dies.  But God, as I said, has none of these things in his nature, but
is uncreated and imperishable.  And hence it is not possible that we
should set up man to be of the nature of God:—man, to whom at times when
he looks for joy, there comes trouble, and when he looks for laughter
there comes to him weeping,—who is wrathful and covetous and envious,
with other defects as well.  And he is destroyed in many ways by the
elements and also by the animals.

<span id="xiii.iv-p33"></span>And hence, O King, we are bound to
recognize the error of the Barbarians, that thereby, since they did not
find traces of the true God, they fell aside from the truth, and went
after the desire of their imagination, serving the perishable elements
and lifeless images, and through their error not apprehending what the
true God is.

<span id="xiii.iv-p34"></span>VIII.  Let us turn further to the Greeks
also, that we may know what opinion they hold as to the true God.  The
Greeks, then, because they are more subtle than the Barbarians, have
gone further astray than the Barbarians; inasmuch as they have
introduced many fictitious gods, and have set up some of them as males
and some as females; and in that some of their gods were found who were
adulterers, and did murder, and were deluded, and envious, and wrathful
and passionate, and parricides, and thieves, and <span id="page_269">p.
269</span> <span id="xiii.iv-Page_269"></span>robbers.  And some of
them, they say, were crippled and limped, and some were sorcerers, and
some actually went mad, and some played on lyres, and some were given to
roaming on the hills, and some even died, and some were struck dead by
lightning, and some were made servants even to men, and some escaped by
flight, and some were kidnapped by men, and some, indeed, were lamented
and deplored by men.  And some, they say, went down to Sheol, and some
were grievously wounded, and some transformed themselves into the
likeness of animals to seduce the race of mortal women, and some
polluted themselves <span id="fr_4432"></span>[4433](#fn_4432) by lying
with males.  And some, they say, were wedded to their mothers and their
sisters and their daughters.  And they say of their gods that they
committed adultery with the daughters of men; and of these there was
born a certain race which also was mortal.  And they say that some of
the females disputed about beauty, and appeared before men for
judgment.  Thus, O King, have the Greeks put forward foulness, and
absurdity, and folly about their gods and about themselves, in that they
have called those that are of such a nature gods, who are no gods.  And
hence mankind have received incitements to commit adultery and
fornication, and to steal and to practise all that is offensive and
hated and abhorred.  For if they who are called their gods practised all
these things which are written above, how much more should men practise
them—men, who believe that their gods themselves practised them.  And
owing to the foulness of this error there have happened to mankind
harassing wars, and great famines, and bitter captivity, and complete
desolation.  And lo! it was by reason of this alone that they suffered
and that all these things came upon them; and while they endured those
things they did not perceive in their mind that for their error those
things came upon them.

<span id="xiii.iv-p36"></span>IX.  Let us proceed further to their
account of their gods that we may carefully demonstrate all that is said
above.  First of all, the Greeks bring forward as a god Kronos, that is
to say Chiun <span id="fr_4433"></span>[4434](#fn_4433) (Saturn).  And
his worshippers sacrifice their children to him, and they burn some of
them alive in his honour.  And they say that he took to him among his
wives Rhea, and begat many children by her.  By her too he begat Dios,
who is called Zeus.  And at length he (Kronos) went mad, and through
fear of an oracle that had been made known to him, he began to devour
his sons.  And from him Zeus was stolen away without his knowledge; and
at length Zeus bound him, and mutilated the signs of his manhood, and
flung them into the sea.  And hence, as they say in fable, there was
engendered Aphrodite, who is called Astarte.  And he (Zeus) cast out
Kronos fettered <span id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_270"></span>into darkness.  Great then is the error and
ignominy which the Greeks have brought forward about the first of their
gods, in that they have said all this about him, O King.  It is
impossible that a god should be bound or mutilated; and if it be
otherwise, he is indeed miserable.

<span id="xiii.iv-p38"></span>And after Kronos they bring forward
another god Zeus.  And they say of him that he assumed the sovereignty,
and was king over all the gods.  And they say that he changed himself
into a beast and other shapes in order to seduce mortal women, and to
raise up by them children for himself.  Once, they say, he changed
himself into a bull through love of Europe and Pasiphae. <span
id="fr_4434"></span>[4435](#fn_4434)   And again he changed himself into
the likeness of gold through love of Danae, and to a swan through love
of Leda, and to a man through love of Antiope, and to lightning through
love of Luna, <span id="fr_4435"></span>[4436](#fn_4435) and so by these
he begat many children.  For by Antiope, they say, that he begat Zethus
and Amphion, and by Luna Dionysos, by Alcmena Hercules, and by Leto,
Apollo and Artemis, and by Danae Perseus, and by Leda, Castor and
Polydeuces, and Helene and Paludus, <span
id="fr_4436"></span>[4437](#fn_4436) and by Mnemosyne he begat nine
daughters whom they styled the Muses, and by Europe, Minos and
Rhadamanthos and Sarpedon.  And lastly he changed himself into the
likeness of an eagle through his passion for Ganydemos (Ganymede) the
shepherd.

<span id="xiii.iv-p42"></span>By reason of these tales, O King, much
evil has arisen among men, who to this day are imitators of their gods,
and practise adultery and defile themselves with their mothers and their
sisters, and by lying with males, and some make bold to slay even their
parents.  For if he who is said to be the chief and king of their gods
do these things how much more should his worshippers imitate him?  And
great is the folly which the Greeks have brought forward in their
narrative concerning him.  For it is impossible that a god should
practise adultery or fornication or come near to lie with males, or kill
his parents; and if it be otherwise, he is much worse than a destructive
demon.

<span id="xiii.iv-p43"></span>X.  Again they bring forward as another
god Hephaistos.  And they say of him, that he is lame, and a cap is set
on his head, and he holds in his hands firetongs and a hammer; and he
follows the craft of iron working, that thereby he may procure the
necessaries of his livelihood.  Is then this god so very needy?  But it
cannot be that a god should be needy or lame, else he is very worthless.

<span id="xiii.iv-p44"></span>And further they bring in another god and
call him Hermes.  And they say that he is a thief, <span
id="fr_4437"></span>[4438](#fn_4437) a lover of avarice, and greedy for
gain, and a magician <span id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_271"></span>and mutilated and an athlete, and an
interpreter of language.  But it is impossible that a god should be a
magician or avaricious, or maimed, or craving for what is not his, or an
athlete.  And if it be otherwise, he is found to be useless.

<span id="xiii.iv-p46"></span>And after him they bring forward as
another god Asklepios.  And they say that he is a physician and prepares
drugs and plaster that he may supply the necessaries of his livelihood. 
Is then this god in want?  And at length he was struck with lightning by
Dios on account of Tyndareos of Lacedæmon, and so he died.  If then
Asklepios were a god, and, when he was struck with lightning, was unable
to help himself, how should he be able to give help to others?  But that
a divine nature should be in want or be destroyed by lightning is
impossible.

<span id="xiii.iv-p47"></span>And again they bring forward another as a
god, and they call him Ares.  And they say that he is a warrior, and
jealous, and covets sheep and things which are not his.  And he makes
gain by his arms.  And they say that at length he committed adultery
with Aphrodite, and was caught by the little boy Eros and by Hephaistos
the husband of Aphrodite.  But it is impossible that a god should be a
warrior or bound or an adulterer.

<span id="xiii.iv-p48"></span>And again they say of Dionysos that he
forsooth! is a god, who arranges carousals by night, and teaches
drunkenness, and carries off women who do not belong to him.  And at
length, they say, he went mad and dismissed his handmaidens and fled
into the desert; and during his madness he ate serpents.  And at last he
was killed by Titanos.  If then Dionysos were a god, and when he was
being killed was unable to help himself, how is it possible that he
should help others?

<span id="xiii.iv-p49"></span>Herakles next they bring forward and say
that he is a god, who hates detestable things, a tyrant, <span
id="fr_4438"></span>[4439](#fn_4438) and warrior and a destroyer of
plagues.  And of him also they say that at length he became mad and
killed his own children, and cast himself into a fire and died.  If then
Herakles is a god, and in all these calamities was unable to rescue
himself, how should others ask help from him?  But it is impossible that
a god should be mad, or drunken or a slayer of his children, or consumed
by fire.

<span id="xiii.iv-p51"></span>XI.  And after him they bring forward
another god and call him Apollon.  And they say that he is jealous and
inconstant, and at times he holds the bow and quiver, and again the lyre
and plectron.  And he utters oracles for men that he may receive rewards
from them.  Is then this god in need of rewards?  But it is an insult
that all these things should be found with a god.

<span id="xiii.iv-p52"></span><span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_272"></span>And after him they bring forward as a
goddess Artemis, the sister of Apollo; and they say that she was a
huntress and that she herself used to carry a bow and bolts, and to roam
about upon the mountains, leading the hounds to hunt stags or wild boars
of the field.  But it is disgraceful that a virgin maid should roam
alone upon the hills or hunt in the chase for animals.  Wherefore it is
impossible that Artemis should be a goddess.

<span id="xiii.iv-p53"></span>Again they say of Aphrodite that she
indeed is a goddess.  And at times she dwells with their gods, but at
other times she is a neighbour to men.  And once she had Ares as a
lover, and again Adonis who is Tammuz.  Once also, Aphrodite was wailing
and weeping for the death of Tammuz, and they say that she went down to
Sheol that she might redeem Adonis from Persephone, who is the daughter
of Sheol (Hades).  If then Aphrodite is a goddess and was unable to help
her lover at his death, how will she find it possible to help others? 
And this cannot be listened to, that a divine nature should come to
weeping and wailing and adultery.

<span id="xiii.iv-p54"></span>And again they say of Tammuz that he is a
god.  And he is, forsooth! a hunter and an adulterer.  And they say that
he was killed by a wound from a wild boar, without being able to help
himself.  And if he could not help himself, how can he take thought for
the human race?  But that a god should be an adulterer or a hunter or
should die by violence is impossible.

<span id="xiii.iv-p55"></span>Again they say of Rhea that she is the
mother of their gods.  And they say that she had once a lover Atys, and
that she used to delight in depraved men.  And at last she raised a
lamentation and mourned for Atys her lover.  If then the mother of their
gods was unable to help her lover and deliver him from death, how can
she help others?  So it is disgraceful that a goddess should lament and
weep and take delight in depraved men.

<span id="xiii.iv-p56"></span>Again they introduce Kore and say that she
is a goddess, and she was stolen away by Pluto, and could not help
herself.  If then she is a goddess and was unable to help herself how
will she find means to help others?  For a god who is stolen away is
very powerless.

<span id="xiii.iv-p57"></span>All this, then, O King, have the Greeks
brought forward concerning their gods, and they have invented and
declared it concerning them.  And hence all men received an impulse to
work all profanity and all defilements; and hereby the whole earth was
corrupted.

<span id="xiii.iv-p58"></span>XII.  The Egyptians, moreover, because
they are <span id="page_273">p. 273</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_273"></span>more base and stupid than every people that
is on the earth, have themselves erred more than all.  For the deities
(or religion) of the Barbarians and the Greeks did not suffice for them,
but they introduced some also of the nature of the animals, and said
thereof that they were gods, and likewise of creeping things which are
found on the dry land and in the waters.  And of plants and herbs they
said that some of them were gods.  And they were corrupted by every kind
of delusion and defilement more than every people that is on the earth. 
For from ancient times they worshipped Isis, and they say that she is a
goddess whose husband was Osiris her brother.  And when Osiris was
killed by Typhon his brother, Isis fled with Horos her son to Byblus in
Syria, and was there for a certain time till her son was grown.  And he
contended with Typhon his uncle, and killed him.  And then Isis returned
and went about with Horos her son and sought for the dead body of Osiris
her lord, bitterly lamenting his death.  If then Isis be a goddess, and
could not help Osiris her brother and lord, how can she help another? 
But it is impossible that a divine nature should be afraid, and flee for
safety, or should weep and wail; or else it is very miserable.

<span id="xiii.iv-p59"></span>And of Osiris also they say that he is a
serviceable god.  And he was killed by Typhon and was unable to help
himself.  But it is well known that this cannot be asserted of
divinity.  And further, they say of his brother Typhon that he is a god,
who killed his brother and was killed by his brother’s son and by his
bride, being unable to help himself.  And how, pray, is he a god who
does not save himself ?

<span id="xiii.iv-p60"></span>As the Egyptians, then, were more stupid
than the rest of the nations, these and such like gods did not suffice
for them.  Nay, but they even apply the name of gods to animals in which
there is no soul at all.  For some of them worship the sheep and others
the calf; and some the pig and others the shad fish; and some the
crocodile and the hawk and the fish and the ibis and the vulture and the
eagle and the raven.  Some of them worship the cat, and others the
turbotfish, some the dog, some the adder, and some the asp, and others
the lion; and others the garlic and onions and thorns, and others the
tiger and other such things.  And the poor creatures do not see that all
these things are nothing, although they daily witness their gods being
eaten and consumed by men and also by their fellows; while some of them
are cremated, <span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_274"></span>and some die and decay and become dust,
without their observing that they perish in many ways.  So the Egyptians
have not observed that such things which are not equal to their own
deliverance, are not gods.  And if, forsooth, they are weak in the case
of their own deliverance, whence have they power to help in the case of
deliverance of their worshippers?  Great then is the error into which
the Egyptians wandered;—greater, indeed, than that of any people which
is upon the face of the earth.

<span id="xiii.iv-p61"></span>XIII.  But it is a marvel, O King, with
regard to the Greeks, who surpass all other peoples in their manner of
life and reasoning, how they have gone astray after dead idols and
lifeless images.  And yet they see their gods in the hands of their
artificers being sawn out, and planed and docked, and hacked short, and
charred, and ornamented, and being altered by them in every kind of
way.  And when they grow old, and are worn away through lapse of time,
and when they are molten and crushed to powder, how, I wonder, did they
not perceive concerning them, that they are not gods?  And as for those
who did not find deliverance for themselves, how can they serve the
distress of men?

<span id="xiii.iv-p62"></span>But even the writers and philosophers
among them have wrongly alleged that the gods are such as are made in
honour of God Almighty.  And they err in seeking to liken (them) to God
whom man has not at any time seen nor can see unto what He is like. 
Herein, too (they err) in asserting of deity that any such thing as
deficiency can be present to it; as when they say that He receives
sacrifice and requires burnt-offering and libation and immolations of
men, and temples.  But God is not in need, and none of these things is
necessary to Him; and it is clear that men err in these things they
imagine.

<span id="xiii.iv-p63"></span>Further their writers and their
philosophers represent and declare that the nature of all their gods is
one.  And they have not apprehended God our Lord who while He is one, is
in all.  They err therefore.  For if the body of a man while it is many
in its parts is not in dread, one member of another, but, since it is a
united body, wholly agrees with itself; even so also God is one in His
nature.  A single essence is proper to Him, since He is uniform in His
nature and His essence; and He is not afraid of Himself.  If then the
nature of the gods is one, it is not proper that a god should either
pursue or slay or harm a god.  If, then, gods be pursued and wounded by
gods, and some be kidnapped and some struck dead by lightning, it is
obvious that the nature of their gods is not one.  And hence it is
known, O King, that it is a mistake when they reckon and bring the
natures of their gods under a single <span id="page_275">p. 275</span>
<span id="xiii.iv-Page_275"></span>nature.  If then it becomes us to
admire a god which is seen and does not see, how much more praiseworthy
is it that one should believe in a nature which is invisible and
all-seeing?  And if further it is fitting that one should approve the
handiworks of a craftsman, how much more is it fitting that one should
glorify the Creator of the craftsman?

<span id="xiii.iv-p64"></span>For behold! when the Greeks made laws they
did not perceive that by their laws they condemn their gods.  For if
their laws are righteous, their gods are unrighteous, since they
transgressed the law in killing one another, and practising sorcery, and
committing adultery, and in robbing and stealing, and in lying with
males, and by their other practises as well.  For if their gods were
right in doing all these things as they are described, then the laws of
the Greeks are unrighteous in not being made according to the will of
their gods.  And in that case the whole world is gone astray.

<span id="xiii.iv-p65"></span>For the narratives about their gods are
some of them myths, and some of them nature-poems (lit:  natural:—<span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.iv-p65.1"></span>φυσικαί</span>), and some
of them hymns and elegies.  The hymns indeed and elegies are empty words
and noise.  But these nature-poems, even if they be made as they say,
still those are not gods who do such things and suffer and endure such
things.  And those myths are shallow tales with no depth whatever in
them.

<span id="xiii.iv-p66"></span>XIV.  Let us come now, O King, to the
history of the Jews also, and see what opinion they have as to God.  The
Jews then say that God is one, the Creator of all, and omnipotent; and
that it is not right that any other should be worshipped except this God
alone.  And herein they appear to approach the truth more than all the
nations, especially in that they worship God and not His works.  And
they imitate God by the philanthropy which prevails among them; for they
have compassion on the poor, and they release the captives, and bury the
dead, and do such things as these, which are acceptable before God and
well-pleasing also to men,—which (customs) they have received from their
forefathers.

<span id="xiii.iv-p67"></span><span id="page_276">p. 276</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_276"></span>Nevertheless they too erred from true
knowledge.  And in their imagination they conceive that it is God they
serve; whereas by their mode of observance it is to the angels and not
to God that their service is rendered:—as when they celebrate sabbaths
and the beginning of the months, and feasts of unleavened bread, and a
great fast; and fasting and circumcision and the purification of meats,
which things, however, they do not observe perfectly.

<span id="xiii.iv-p68"></span>XV.  But the Christians, O King, while
they went about and made search, <span
id="fr_4439"></span>[4440](#fn_4439) have found the truth; and as we
learned from their writings, they have come nearer to truth and genuine
knowledge than the rest of the nations.  For they know and trust in God,
the Creator of heaven and of earth, in whom and from whom are all
things, to whom there is no other god as companion, from whom they
received commandments which they engraved upon their minds and observe
in hope and expectation of the world which is to come.  Wherefore they
do not commit adultery nor fornication, nor bear false witness, nor
embezzle what is held in pledge, nor covet what is not theirs.  They
honour father and mother, and show kindness to those near to them; and
whenever they are judges, they judge uprightly.  They do not worship
idols (made) in the image of man; and whatsoever they would not that
others should do unto them, they do not to others; and of the food which
is consecrated to idols they do not eat, for they are pure.  And their
oppressors they appease (lit:  comfort) and make them their friends;
they do good to their enemies; and their women, O King, are pure as
virgins, and their daughters are modest; and their men keep themselves
from every unlawful union and from all uncleanness, in the hope of a
recompense to come in the other world.  Further, if one or other of them
have bondmen and bondwomen or children, through love towards them they
persuade them to become Christians, and when they have done so, they
call them brethren without distinction.  They do not worship strange
gods, and they go their way in all modesty and cheerfulness.  Falsehood
is not found <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_277"></span>among them; and they love one another, and
from widows they do not turn away their esteem; and they deliver the
orphan from him who treats him harshly.  And he, who has, gives to him
who has not, without boasting.  And when they see a stranger, they take
him in to their homes and rejoice over him as a very brother; for they
do not call them brethren after the flesh, but brethren after the spirit
and in God.  And whenever one of their poor passes from the world, each
one of them according to his ability gives heed to him and carefully
sees to his burial.  And if they hear that one of their number is
imprisoned or afflicted on account of the name of their Messiah, all of
them anxiously minister to his necessity, and if it is possible to
redeem him they set him free.  And if there is among them any that is
poor and needy, and if they have no spare food, they fast two or three
days in order to supply to the needy their lack of food.  They observe
the precepts of their Messiah with much care, living justly and soberly
as the Lord their God commanded them.  Every morning <span
id="fr_4440"></span>[4441](#fn_4440) and every hour they give thanks and
praise to God for His loving-kindnesses toward them; and for their food
and their drink they offer thanksgiving to Him.  And if any righteous
man among them passes from the world, they rejoice and offer thanks to
God; and they escort his body as if he were setting out from one place
to another near.  And when a child has been born to one of them, they
give thanks to God; <span id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_278"></span>and if moreover it happen to die in
childhood, they give thanks to God the more, as for one who has passed
through the world without sins.  And further if they see that anyone of
them dies in his ungodliness or in his sins, for him they grieve
bitterly, and sorrow as for one who goes to meet his doom.

<span id="xiii.iv-p71"></span>XVI.  Such, O King, is the commandment of
the law of the Christians, and such is their manner of life.  As men who
know God, they ask from Him petitions which are fitting for Him to grant
and for them to receive.  And thus they employ their whole lifetime. 
And since they know the loving-kindnesses of God toward them, behold!
for their sake the glorious things which are in the world flow forth to
view.  And verily, they are those who found the truth when they went
about and made search for it; and from what we considered, we learned
that they alone come near to a knowledge of the truth.  And they do not
proclaim in the ears of the multitude the kind deeds they do, but are
careful that no one should notice them; and they conceal their giving
just as he who finds a treasure and conceals it.  And they strive to be
righteous as those who expect to behold their Messiah, and to receive
from Him with great glory the promises made concerning them.  And as for
their words and their precepts, O King, and their glorying in their
worship, and the hope of earning according to the work of each one of
them their recompense which they look for in another world, you may
learn about these from their writings.  It is enough for us to have
shortly informed your Majesty concerning the conduct and the truth of
the Christians.  For great indeed, and wonderful is their doctrine to
him who will search into it and reflect upon it.  And verily, this is a
new people, and there is something divine (lit:  a divine admixture) in
the midst of them.

<span id="xiii.iv-p72"></span>Take, then, their writings, and read
therein, and lo! you will find that I have not put forth these things on
my own authority, nor spoken thus as their advocate; but since I read in
their writings I was fully assured of these things as also of things
which are to come.  And for this reason I was constrained to declare the
truth to such as care for it and seek the world to come.  And to me
there is no doubt but that the earth abides through the supplication of
the Christians.  But the rest of the nations err and cause error in
wallowing before the elements of the world, since beyond these their
mental vision will not pass.  And they search about as if in darkness
because they will not recognize the truth; and like drunken men they
reel and jostle one another and fall.

<span id="xiii.iv-p73"></span><span id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="xiii.iv-Page_279"></span>XVII.  Thus far, O King, I have spoken; for
concerning that which remains, as is said above, <span
id="fr_4441"></span>[4442](#fn_4441) there are found in their other
writings things which are hard to utter and difficult for one to
narrate,—which are not only spoken in words but also wrought out in
deeds.

<span id="xiii.iv-p75"></span>Now the Greeks, O King, as they follow
base practises in intercourse with males, and a mother and a sister and
a daughter, impute their monstrous impurity in turn to the Christians. 
But the Christians are just and good, and the truth is set before their
eyes, and their spirit is long-suffering; and, therefore, though they
know the error of these (the Greeks), and are persecuted by them, they
bear and endure it; and for the most part they have compassion on them,
as men who are destitute of knowledge.  And on their side, they offer
prayer that these may repent of their error; and when it happens that
one of them has repented, he is ashamed before the Christians of the
works which were done by him; and he makes confession to God, saying, I
did these things in ignorance.  And he purifies his heart, and his sins
are forgiven him, because he committed them in ignorance in the former
time, when he used to blaspheme and speak evil of the true knowledge of
the Christians.  And assuredly the race of the Christians is more
blessed than all the men who are upon the face of the earth.

<span id="xiii.iv-p76"></span>Henceforth let the tongues of those who
utter vanity and harass the Christians be silent; and hereafter let them
speak the truth.  For it is of serious consequence to them that they
should worship the true God rather than worship a senseless sound.  And
verily whatever is spoken in the mouth of the Christians is of God; and
their doctrine is the gateway of light.  Wherefore let all who are
without the knowledge of God draw near thereto; and they will receive
incorruptible words, which are from all time and from eternity.  So
shall they appear before the awful judgment which through Jesus the
Messiah is destined to come upon the whole human race.

<span id="xiii.iv-p77"></span>The Apology of Aristides the Philosopher
is finished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4426"></span>[263:4427](0090187.htm#fr_4426) <span
id="xiii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span> The superscription seems to be duplicate
in the Syriac.  It is absent from the Greek as we have it; the Armenian
has “To the Emperor Cæsar Hadrian from Aristides.”  Various explanations
are offered.  (a) Both emperors, as colleagues, may be meant.  In
support of this the Syriac adjectives for “venerable and merciful” are
marked plural; the phrase “Your majesty” occurring later has a plural
suffix; and two Imperatives, “Take and read,” are plural.  On the other
hand “O King” occurs constantly in the singular; and the emperors were
colleagues only for a few months in the year <span class="sc"><span
id="xiii.iv-p7.1"></span>a.d</span>. 138.

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span>(b)  The longer heading is the true one—the
shorter being due perhaps to a scribe who had a collection of works to
copy.  In that case the word “Hadrian” has been selected from the full
title of Antonine, and the two adjectives “venerable and merciful” are
proper names, Augustus Pius.  (Harris.)

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span>(c)  The shorter heading has the support of
Eusebius and the Armenian version; and the translator into Syriac may
have amplified.

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span>(\*\*\*) Almighty is separated from the
word for “God” by a pause, and is not an attribute which a Christian
would care to apply to a Roman emperor.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p10.1"></span>παντοκράτωρ</span> may have been confounded
with <span class="Greek"><span id="xiii.iv-p10.2"></span>αὐ
τοκράτωρ</span>.  Raabe supplies \*\*\* giving the sense “qui imperium
(postatem) habet,” as an epithet of Cæsar.  If \*\*\* ="Renewed, or
dedicated again to…Antoninus Pius,” could be read, both headings might
be retained.

<span id="fn_4427"></span>[264:4428](0090187.htm#fr_4427) <span
id="xiii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span> The Armenian adds, “For that which is
subject to this distinction is moved by passions.”

<span id="fn_4428"></span>[265:4429](0090187.htm#fr_4428) <span
id="xiii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p18"></span> Literally:  “a certain dispensation of
his.”  The Greek term <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p18.1"></span>οἰκονομία</span>, “dispensation,” suggests to
the translator into Syriac the idea of the Incarnation, familiar, as it
seems, by his time.  Professor Sachau reads the equivalent of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.iv-p18.2"></span>θαυμαστή</span> instead of
\*\*\* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p18.3"></span>τις</span>).  In the translation given \*\*\*
is taken adverbially = aliquamdiu.

<span id="fn_4429"></span>[265:4430](0090187.htm#fr_4429) <span
id="xiii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p21"></span> This irrelevant sentence is found in the
Armenian version also, and therefore was probably in the original
Greek.  It seems to be an *obiter dictum*.  Men fall into four groups,
and, by the way, so do the elements, air, fire, earth, and water; and
the powers that govern them.  One quaternion suggests others.

<span id="fn_4430"></span>[265:4431](0090187.htm#fr_4430) <span
id="xiii.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p24"></span> Cf. [Rom.
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025), [Col.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="xiii.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4431"></span>[268:4432](0090187.htm#fr_4431) <span
id="xiii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p32"></span> Or “and hence the world also gets its
name <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p32.1"></span>κόσμος</span>.”  The Syriac is the equivalent
of the Greek “<span class="Greek"><span id="xiii.iv-p32.2"></span>διὸ
καὶ κόσμος καλεῖται</span>,” which occurs (Chap. IV.) in discussing the
supposed divinity of the sky or heaven.

<span id="fn_4432"></span>[269:4433](0090187.htm#fr_4432) <span
id="xiii.iv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p35"></span> Professor Nöldeke’s emendation, \*\*\*,
in place of \*\*\* ="they were reviled,” is adopted in the translation
given.

<span id="fn_4433"></span>[269:4434](0090187.htm#fr_4433) <span
id="xiii.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p37"></span> Cf. [Amos v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#026)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.1"></span>,
“Chiun, your star god,” and [Acts vii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043)<span id="xiii.iv-p37.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_4434"></span>[270:4435](0090187.htm#fr_4434) <span
id="xiii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p39"></span> Pasiphae’s unnatural passion for Taurus
is not in the Greek mythology charged to Zeus.

<span id="fn_4435"></span>[270:4436](0090187.htm#fr_4435) <span
id="xiii.iv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p40"></span> The visit of Zeus to Semele (not Selene)
is evidently referred to.  <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p40.1"></span>Σελήνη</span> Luna would give the Syriac
\*\*\*.

<span id="fn_4436"></span>[270:4437](0090187.htm#fr_4436) <span
id="xiii.iv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p41"></span> Professor Rendel Harris pronounces
“Paludus” a *vox nihili*, and explains its presence as due to a corrupt
repetition of the preceding Polydeuces.  The Syriac word in the text
suggests Pollux—the Latin equivalent of Polydeuces.  Clytemnestra is the
name required.

<span id="fn_4437"></span>[270:4438](0090187.htm#fr_4437) <span
id="xiii.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p45"></span> Adopting Professor Harris’s emendation
\*\*\* = <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.iv-p45.1"></span>κλέπτης</span> instead of \*\*\* = vir.

<span id="fn_4438"></span>[271:4439](0090187.htm#fr_4438) <span
id="xiii.iv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p50"></span> “Tyrant,” \*\*\*, seems out of place when
connected with Herakles.  Perhaps \*\*\* = ebrius, which occurs at the
close of the paragraph, should be read here.  Cf. also the Greek.

<span id="fn_4439"></span>[276:4440](0090187.htm#fr_4439) <span
id="xiii.iv-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p69"></span> The same two words are used of Isis.  The
Christians are unlike her in finding what they sought.

<span id="fn_4440"></span>[277:4441](0090187.htm#fr_4440) <span
id="xiii.iv-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p70"></span> Cf. Pliny’s letter to the Emperor Trajan,
<span class="sc"><span id="xiii.iv-p70.1"></span>a.d.</span> 112, “The
Christians are wont to meet at dawn on an appointed day, and to sing a
hymn to Christ as God.”

<span id="fn_4441"></span>[279:4442](0090187.htm#fr_4441) <span
id="xiii.iv-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p74"></span> The Christian Scriptures are previously
referred to as a source of information, not as containing difficulties. 
cf. [2 Peter iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)<span
id="xiii.iv-p74.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Passion of the Scillitan Martyrs.](0090188)
