[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090318)  [Next](0090320) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>4.  Scripture Contains Many
Contradictions, and Many Statements Which are Not Literally True, But
Must Be Read Spiritually and Mystically.</span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p2"></span>In the case I have supposed where the
historians desire to teach us by an image what they have seen in their
mind, their meaning would be found, if the four were wise, to exhibit no
disagreement; and we must understand that with the four Evangelists it
is not otherwise.  They made full use for their purpose of things done
by Jesus in the exercise of His wonderful and extraordinary power; they
use in the same way His sayings, and in some places they tack on to
their writing, with language apparently implying things of sense, things
made manifest to them in a purely intellectual way.  I do not condemn
them if they even sometimes dealt freely with things which to the eye of
history happened differently, and changed them so as to subserve the
mystical aims they had in view; so as to speak of a thing which happened
in a certain place, as if it had happened in another, or of what took
place at a certain time, as if it had taken place at another time, and
to introduce into what was spoken in a certain way some changes of their
own.  They proposed to speak the truth where it was possible both
materially and spiritually, and where this was not possible it was their
intention to prefer the spiritual to the material.  The spiritual truth
was often preserved, as one might say, in the material falsehood.  As,
for example, we might judge of the story of Jacob and Esau. <span
id="fr_4996"></span>[4997](#fn_4996)   Jacob says to Isaac, “I am Esau
thy firstborn son,” and spiritually he spoke the truth, for he already
partook of the rights of the first-born, which were perishing in his
brother, and clothing himself with the goatskins he assumed the outward
semblance of Esau, and was Esau all but the voice praising God, so that
Esau might afterward find a place to receive a blessing.  For if Jacob
had not been blessed as Esau, neither would Esau perhaps have been able
to receive a blessing of his own.  And Jesus too is many things,
according to the conceptions of Him, of which it is quite likely that
the Evangelists took up different notions; while yet they were in
agreement with each other in the different things they wrote. 
Statements which are verbally contrary to each other, are made about our
Lord, namely, that He was descended from David and that He was not
descended from David.  The statement is true, “He was descended from
David,” as the Apostle says, <span id="fr_4997"></span>[4998](#fn_4997)
“born of the seed of David according to the flesh,” if we apply this to
the bodily part of Him; but the self-same statement is untrue if we
understand His being born of <span id="page_384">p. 384</span> <span
id="xv.iii.vi.iv-Page_384"></span>the seed of David of His diviner
power; for He was declared to be the Son of God with power.  And for
this reason too, perhaps, the sacred prophecies speak of Him now as a
servant, and now as a Son.  They call Him a servant on account of the
form of a servant which he wore, and because He was of the seed of
David, but they call Him the Son of God according to His character as
first-born.  Thus it is true to call Him man and to call Him not man;
man, because He was capable of death; not man, on account of His being
diviner than man.  Marcion, I suppose, took sound words in a wrong
sense, when he rejected His birth from Mary, and declared that as to His
divine nature He was not born of Mary, and hence made bold to delete
from the Gospel the passages which have this effect.  And a like fate
seems to have overtaken those who make away with His humanity and
receive His deity alone; and also those opposites of these who cancel
His deity and confess Him as a man to be a holy man, and the most
righteous of all men.  And those who hold the doctrine of Dokesis, not
remembering that He humbled Himself even unto death <span
id="fr_4998"></span>[4999](#fn_4998) and became obedient even to the
cross, but only imagining in Him the absence of suffering, the
superiority to all such accidents, they do what they can to deprive us
of the man who is more just than all men, and are left with a figure
which cannot save them, for as by one man came death, so also by one man
is the justification of life.  We could not have received such benefit
as we have from the Logos had He not assumed the man, had He remained
such as He was from the beginning with God the Father, and had He not
taken up man, the first man of all, the man more precious than all
others, purer than all others and capable of receiving Him.  But after
that man we also shall be able to receive Him, to receive Him so great
and of such nature as He was, if we prepare a place in proportion to Him
in our soul.  So much I have said of the apparent discrepancies in the
Gospels, and of my desire to have them treated in the way of spiritual
interpretation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4996"></span>[383:4997](0090319.htm#fr_4996) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p3"></span> [Gen.
xxvii](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#000)<span
id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4997"></span>[383:4998](0090319.htm#fr_4997) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p4"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4998"></span>[384:4999](0090319.htm#fr_4998) <span
id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p5"></span> [Philipp. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="xv.iii.vi.iv-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](0090320)
