[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0090390)  [Next](0090392) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c2"><span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p1.1"></span>14.  Why the Pharisees Were Not a Plant
of God.  Teaching of Origen on the “Bread of the Lord.”</span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p2"></span>After this, it is worth while to look
at the phrase which has been assailed in a sophistical way by those who
say <span id="fr_5453"></span>[5454](#fn_5453) that the God of the law
and the God of the Gospel of Jesus Christ is not the same; for they say
that the heavenly Father of Jesus Christ is not the husbandman of those
who think that they worship God according to the law of Moses.  Jesus
Himself said that the Pharisees, who were worshipping the God who
created the world and the law, were not a plant which His heavenly
Father had planted, and that for this reason it was being rooted
up. <span id="fr_5454"></span>[5455](#fn_5454)   But you might also say
this, that even if it were the Father of Jesus who “brought in and
planted the people,” when it came out of Egypt, “to the mountain of His
own inheritance, to the place which He had prepared for Himself to dwell
in,” <span id="fr_5455"></span>[5456](#fn_5455) yet Jesus would have
said, in regard to the Pharisees, “Every plant which My heavenly Father
planted not, shall be rooted up.”  Now, to this we will say, that as
many as on account of their perverse interpretation of the things in the
law were not a plant of His Father in heaven, were blinded in their
minds, as not believing the truth, but taking pleasure in
unrighteousness, <span id="fr_5456"></span>[5457](#fn_5456) by him who
is deified by the sons of this world, and on this account is called by
Paul the god of this world. <span id="fr_5457"></span>[5458](#fn_5457)  
And do not suppose that Paul said that he was truly God; for just as the
belly, though it is not the god of those who prize pleasure too highly,
being lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, is said by Paul to
be their god, <span id="fr_5458"></span>[5459](#fn_5458) so the prince
of this world, in regard to whom the Saviour says, “Now has the prince
of this world been judged,” <span id="fr_5459"></span>[5460](#fn_5459)
though he is not God, is said to be the god of those who do not wish to
receive the spirit of adoption, in order that they may become sons of
that world, and sons of the resurrection from the dead, <span
id="fr_5460"></span>[5461](#fn_5460) and who, on this account, abide in
the sonship of this world.  I have deemed it necessary to introduce
these matters, even though they may have been spoken by way of
digression, because of the saying, “They are blind guides of the
blind.” <span id="fr_5461"></span>[5462](#fn_5461)   Who are such?  The
Pharisees, whose minds the god of this world hath blinded as they are
unbelieving, because they have not believed in Jesus Christ; and he hath
blinded them so that the “light of the Gospel of the glory of God in the
face of Christ should not dawn upon them.” <span
id="fr_5462"></span>[5463](#fn_5462)   But not only must we avoid being
guided by those blind ones who are conscious that they are in need of
guides, because they have not yet received the power of vision of
themselves; but even in the case of all who profess to guide us in sound
doctrine, we must hear with care, and apply a sound judgment to what is
said, lest being guided according to the ignorance of those who are
blind, and do not see the things that concern sound doctrine, we
ourselves may appear to be blind because we do not see the sense of the
Scriptures, so that both he who guides and he who is guided will fall
into the ditch of which we have spoken before.  Next to this, it is
written in what way Peter answered and said to the Saviour, as if he had
not understood the saying, “Not that which cometh into the mouth
defileth the man, but that which goeth out of the mouth,” “Declare unto
us the parable.” <span id="fr_5463"></span>[5464](#fn_5463)   To which
the Saviour says, “Are ye also, even yet, without understanding?” <span
id="fr_5464"></span>[5465](#fn_5464)   As if He had said, “Having been
so long time with Me, do ye not yet understand the meaning of what is
said, and do ye not perceive that for this reason that which goeth into
his mouth does not defile the man, because it passeth into the belly,
<span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-Page_443"></span>and going out from it is cast into
the draught?” <span id="fr_5465"></span>[5466](#fn_5465)   It was not in
respect of the law in which they appeared to believe, that the Pharisees
were not a plant of the Father of Jesus, but in respect of their
perverse interpretation of the law and the things written in it.  For
since there are two things to be understood in regard to the law, the
ministration of death which was engraven in letters <span
id="fr_5466"></span>[5467](#fn_5466) and which had no kinship with the
spirit, and the ministration of life which is understood in the
spiritual law, those who were able with a sincere heart to say, “We know
that the law is spiritual,” <span id="fr_5467"></span>[5468](#fn_5467)
and therefore “the law is holy, and the commandment holy and righteous
and good,” <span id="fr_5468"></span>[5469](#fn_5468) were the plant
which the heavenly Father planted; but those who were not such, but
guarded with care the letter which killeth only, were not a plant of God
but of him who hardened their heart, and put a veil over it, which veil
had power over them so long as they did not turn to the Lord; “for if
any one should turn to the Lord, the veil is taken away, and the Lord is
the Spirit.” <span id="fr_5469"></span>[5470](#fn_5469)   Now some one
when dealing with the passage might say, that just as “not that which
entereth into the mouth defileth the man,” <span
id="fr_5470"></span>[5471](#fn_5470) of even though it may be thought by
the Jews to be defiled, so not that which entereth into the mouth
sanctifieth the man, even though what is called the bread of the Lord
may be thought by the simpler disciples to sanctify.  And the saying is
I think, not to be despised, and on this account, demands clear
exposition, which seems to me to be thus; as it is not the meat but the
conscience of him who eats with doubt which defiles him that eateth, for
“he that doubteth is condemned if he eat, because he eateth not of
faith,” <span id="fr_5471"></span>[5472](#fn_5471) and as nothing is
pure to him who is defiled and unbelieving, not in itself, but because
of his defilement and unbelief, so that which is sanctified through the
word of God and prayer <span id="fr_5472"></span>[5473](#fn_5472) does
not, in its own nature, sanctify him who uses it, for, if this were so,
it would sanctify even him who eats unworthily of the bread of the Lord,
and no one on account of this food would become weak or sickly or asleep
for something of this kind Paul represented in saying, “For this cause
many among you are weak and sickly and not a few sleep.” <span
id="fr_5473"></span>[5474](#fn_5473)   And in the case of the bread of
the Lord, accordingly, there is advantage to him who uses it, when with
undefiled mind and pure conscience he partakes of the bread.  And so
neither by not eating, I mean by the very fact that we do not eat of the
bread which has been sanctified by the word of God and prayer, are we
deprived of any good thing, nor by eating are we the better by any good
thing; for the cause of our lacking is wickedness and sins, and the
cause of our abounding is righteousness and right actions; so that such
is the meaning of what is said by Paul, “For neither if we eat are we
the better, nor if we eat not are we the worse.” <span
id="fr_5474"></span>[5475](#fn_5474)   Now, if “everything that entereth
into the mouth goes into the belly and is cast out into the
drought,” <span id="fr_5475"></span>[5476](#fn_5475) even the meat which
has been sanctified through the word of God and prayer, in accordance
with the fact that it is material, goes into the belly and is cast out
into the draught, but in respect of the prayer which comes upon it,
according to the proportion of the faith, becomes a benefit and is a
means of clear vision to the mind which looks to that which is
beneficial, and it is not the material of the bread but the word which
is said over it which is of advantage to him who eats it not unworthily
of the Lord.  And these things indeed are said of the typical and
symbolical body.  But many things might be said about the Word Himself
who became flesh, <span id="fr_5476"></span>[5477](#fn_5476) and true
meat of which he that eateth shall assuredly live for ever, no worthless
person being able to eat it; for if it were possible for one who
continues worthless to eat of Him who became flesh, who was the Word and
the living bread, it would not have been written, that “every one who
eats of this bread shall live for ever.” <span
id="fr_5477"></span>[5478](#fn_5477)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5453"></span>[442:5454](0090391.htm#fr_5453) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p3"></span> Marcion and his followers.

<span id="fn_5454"></span>[442:5455](0090391.htm#fr_5454) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p4"></span> [Matt. xv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5455"></span>[442:5456](0090391.htm#fr_5455) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p5"></span> [Exod. xv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5456"></span>[442:5457](0090391.htm#fr_5456) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p6"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5457"></span>[442:5458](0090391.htm#fr_5457) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p7"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5458"></span>[442:5459](0090391.htm#fr_5458) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p8"></span> [Phil. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5459"></span>[442:5460](0090391.htm#fr_5459) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p9"></span> [John xvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5460"></span>[442:5461](0090391.htm#fr_5460) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p10"></span> *Cf.* [Luke xx.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5461"></span>[442:5462](0090391.htm#fr_5461) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p11"></span> [Matt. xv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5462"></span>[442:5463](0090391.htm#fr_5462) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p12"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#004)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5463"></span>[442:5464](0090391.htm#fr_5463) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p13"></span> [Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5464"></span>[442:5465](0090391.htm#fr_5464) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p14"></span> [Matt. xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5465"></span>[443:5466](0090391.htm#fr_5465) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p15"></span> [Matt. xv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5466"></span>[443:5467](0090391.htm#fr_5466) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p16"></span> *Cf.* [2 Cor. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5467"></span>[443:5468](0090391.htm#fr_5467) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p17"></span> [Rom. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5468"></span>[443:5469](0090391.htm#fr_5468) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p18"></span> [Rom. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5469"></span>[443:5470](0090391.htm#fr_5469) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p19"></span> [2 Cor.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5470"></span>[443:5471](0090391.htm#fr_5470) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p20"></span> [Matt. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5471"></span>[443:5472](0090391.htm#fr_5471) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p21"></span> [Rom. xiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5472"></span>[443:5473](0090391.htm#fr_5472) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p22"></span> *Cf.* [1 Tim. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5473"></span>[443:5474](0090391.htm#fr_5473) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p23"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5474"></span>[443:5475](0090391.htm#fr_5474) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p24"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#008)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5475"></span>[443:5476](0090391.htm#fr_5475) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p25"></span> [Matt. xv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#017)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5476"></span>[443:5477](0090391.htm#fr_5476) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p26"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5477"></span>[443:5478](0090391.htm#fr_5477) <span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p27"></span> [John vi.
51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span
id="xvi.ii.iv.xiv-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](0090392)
