[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Christianity](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](aa1) [Next](aa3)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

## KITĀB AL-MAGĀLL <span class="small"><span class="small">OR</span> THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. <span class="small">ONE OF THE BOOKS OF CLEMENT</span>.</span>

 In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, one
God, the merciful Lord.

 This book is one of the hidden books of Saint Clement the Apostle,
disciple of Simon Cepha, which Saint Clement commanded to be kept secret
from the laity. Some of them were called “The Book of the Rolls,” and
there are the glorious genealogies and mysteries which our God and
Saviour Jesus the Christ committed to his disciples Simon and James, and
what things will happen at the end of time, and how the second coming of
our Lord the Christ from heaven to the world will happen, and what will
become of sinners and such like. This is the sixth of Clement’s books,
treasured up in the city of Rome since the time of the Apostles.

 Saint Clement said, When our God Jesus the Christ went up to heaven and
the disciples were scattered in the regions of the world to evangelize,
and to call mankind to the faith and to immersion by baptism, they took
disciples, whom they chose and selected to be with them, and to travel
about to the countries in the faith of the Christ. Wherefore Simon Cepha
took me for a disciple to himself; I believed in him, and in Him that
sent him, with a true faith; I recognized that he was chief of the
Apostles, to whom were given the keys of heaven and earth, on whom was
built the Catholic Apostolic Church of God, which <span id="page_2">p.
2</span> the gates of Hell shall not destroy, as our God Jesus the
Christ said in the holy Gospel. After a long time he took also my
brothers Constans and Constantinus to be his disciples. Twenty years
after he had taken me as his disciple, he brought me together with my
father and my mother, who was called Metrodora, and committed to me all
the mysteries which had been given him by our Lord Jesus the Christ on
the Mount of Olives. At that time the rest of the Apostles and all the
believers had a struggle with the unbelieving Jews because the Jews were
killing every one of the believers whose murder was possible to them. I
and my gracious Teacher Simon encompassed some of the countries, and we
met with great trouble from the controversy of the Jews, and their
questioning about the genealogy of the pure Mary, for their saying about
her was that she was not of the children of Judah that they might
invalidate by this the coming of our Lord the Christ into the world, and
His Incarnation from her. They were increasing \[their\] bribe of money
and other things to the Greeks and the Romans that they might help them
in the destruction of the believers and the bringing to nought of their
business, and hinder the Apostles from the reading of the Law, lest they
should teach out of it about the state of mankind, and how it was in the
beginning. When I saw in what misery we were with the Jews, I sought
from my gracious Teacher that he would make known to me how mankind were
at the beginning, and that he would make me perfect about the reasons,
for he had learned everything from the Lord Jesus the Christ, and I was
acquainted with the tongue of the Greeks and their books, and was
learned in their mysteries, and I had deposited their secrets which had
been entrusted to me, \[in\] my two books called the seventh and the
eighth. I informed my Teacher what I conjectured about the envy towards
the Lady Mary, and my anxiety at the reproach of the Jews to me that I
did not understand the Torah, and their much questioning of me about the
creation of our father Adam, and what I had heard with my ears of their
insult to the Lady Mary and their <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> fiction
about her without any resource being possible for me \[how\] I should
refute them in regard to their hateful saying. The Teacher was moved by
my excitement, and zeal entered him when I told him about it. He said,
“I will put it in order for thee, O my son, as thou hast asked me about
it, and will initiate thee in things since the beginning of the
creation, and will teach thee the genealogy of the Mother of Mercy, Mary
the pure, and its authenticity, and that without doubt she is of the
lineage of Judah the son of Jacob and his tribe, and I will relate to
thee mysteries, and what reason there was for the fall of the Devil, the
prince, from heaven. Know, O my son, that the Lord is the beginning and
before the beginning, He who is Infinite, raised above the height, equal
with the Highest, there is nothing lower about Him, nothing inward,
nothing outward, He is before the beginning, the ancient substance, He
who is boundless, whom no intelligence can reach, and no discernment nor
quality can comprehend. He was above Being, and with Being, and below
Being, the creative Substance, the glorious Light, which darkness
reacheth not. Light dwelling in the Light which eyes cannot reach,
before creation He was; and He is the Former of forms, whose glory is
from Himself and in Himself, and in His Essence. \[He is\] the Creator
of what glorifies Him, that thou mayest learn His divinity and His
power, He made the heaven and the earth, He created before harmony the
division of things. Angels worship Him, ten homogeneous choirs, I mean
by this ten ranks. The highest rank, some of whom are nearest to the
throne of the Lord God, pouring out praises in abundance, is the rank of
Satanaeel, who was the prince, and praises rose up to God from all the
Angels; that was the beginning in the first day which was the holy first
day (Sunday), chief of days; early in it God created the upper heaven
and the worlds, and the highest rank of Angels, which is the rank of
Satanaeel, and the Archangels, and powers, and chiefs, and thrones, and
dignities and governors, and cherubim and seraphim, and light, and day
and night, and wind and water, and air, and fire and what is like these
elements. Verily the Lord formed all this, may His names be sanctified!
by the completion of His eternal Word <span id="page_4">p. 4</span>
without speech, and in the first day in which these things were created,
the Holy Spirit hovered over the waters, and in its hovering over them
they were blessed and sanctified, and heat was formed in them by which
the watery beings are born, and with this were mixed yeasts of the
creatures, such as the bird which lays the egg by its wings, and from
this is formed the living bird, for by reason of the nature of the heat
of flaming fire, it verily reneweth heat in the wings of the bird, and
lo! with them it lays an egg in which chickens are formed. Verily the
reason why the holy Paraclete hovered over the waters in the form of a
bird, was that every winged fowl should be formed in this shape. On the
second day God created the lower heaven, which is called the firmament,
on which the gaze of men falls, that thou mayest know that the beings of
the highest heavens which the heaven of the visible firmament covers are
like the nature of the heaven of the firmament, except that the heaven
which the eyes reach is separated from the highest heavens. All the
heavens are three heavens. The visible firmament, and what is above it;
it is called Δίπατον and above it there is flaming fire; and a heaven
which is above the fire; and the two heavens are filled with light and
fire which created eyes cannot look at. On the second day which is the
second of the days (Monday) the Lord, to Whom be praise! separated
between the higher water and the lower water. Verily the rising up of
the water which was formed in the height that day was like gathered
clouds clinging together, and the waters remained resting in the air,
none of them inclining to any one district. On the third day (Tuesday)
God commanded the waters which were below the firmament that they should
be gathered together to one place, that the dry land might be seen. When
this happened, the veil was removed which was above the earth and the
earth was disclosed. He looked upon it, and it was barren of verdure,
\[it was\] dust and water mixed together. The water was in it and below
it and above it, and it was shaken to the blowing of the winds through
it. The air went up from the bosom of the earth, and rested in the bosom
of its <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> crevices and passages that in these
caves might arise heat and cold for the service and consolidation of the
earth, because the earth was created like a sponge standing above the
water. On this day God commanded the earth to bring forth grass and
reeds and trees and seeds and roots and other things. On the fourth day
(Wednesday) God formed the sun and the moon and the stars that the heat
of the sun might be spread over the earth and it should be strengthened
by its mellowness and that the moisture communicated to it by the water
high above it should be dried up. On the fifth day God commanded the
waters to bring forth animals of various colours and forms, some of
which should fly in the bosom of the water, and others should fly above
the water, and from them should spring the whales and Leviathan, and
Behemoth, so terrible in their appearance, and air-fowl and water-fowl.
On the sixth day God created from the earth all the beasts, and animals
and insects and creeping reptiles. This day is Friday, and on it God
created Adam of dust, and formed Eve from his rib. On the seventh day
God had completed all creation, and He called it Sabbath. God had
created Adam in the third hour of Friday the sixth day. Iblis had laid
claim to Godhead which had entered him in the second hour of that day,
and God had hurled him down from heaven to earth. Before God the Lord
created Adam, rest fell upon all the powers; and God said, ‘Come, let us
create a Man in our likeness and form and image.’ When the Angels heard
this saying from the Lord they became frightened and much terrified, and
they said to one another, ‘What is this great wonder which we hear, and
how is it possible that the form of our God and Creator can appear to
us?’ Then all the Angels looked towards the right hand of the Lord,
which was stretched out above all creation, and all of it was in His
right hand. Then they looked towards the right hand of the Lord, and it
took from all the earth a little handful of dust, and from all the
waters a drop of water, and from the air a soul and a spirit, and from
fire the force of heat, and it became in the grasp of the <span
id="page_6">p. 6</span> Lord portions of the four elements, heat and
cold, moisture and drought. Verily God, the glorious and strong, created
Adam from these four weak elements, which have no power, that all
creatures created from them might hear and obey him: dust, that man
might obey him; water, that all that is born of it and in it might obey
him; air, that it might be possible for him to breathe it and to feel
its breezes, and that its birds might obey him; and fire, that the heat
of forces created from it should be a powerful helper to his sense. The
reason why God, may His holy names be sanctified! created Adam with His
holy hand in His form and image was that he should receive wisdom and
speech and animal motion, and for the knowledge concerning things. When
the glorious and illustrious Angels saw one like Him in Adam, they were
affrighted. The wondrous glory upon his face terrified them, his form
appeared shining with divine light greater than the light of the sun,
and his body was bright and brilliant like the well-known stars in the
crystal. When the figure of Adam drew itself up, he leapt standing; he
was in the centre of the earth, he stretched out his right hand and his
left hand and put his feet in order upon Golgotha, which is the place
where was put the wood (cross) of our Saviour Jesus the Christ. He was
dressed with a royal robe, he wore upon his head a diadem of glory and
praise and honour and dignity, he was crowned with a royal crown, and
there he was made king and priest and prophet. God set him upon a throne
of honour, and gathered to what was there all the animals and beasts and
birds and all that God had created, and made them stand before Adam.
They bent their heads and did obeisance to him, and he called each of
them by its name. He made all the creatures obey him and they responded
to his command. The Angels and the Powers heard the voice of God, may He
be glorified and exalted! saying to Adam, ‘O Adam, I have made thee king
and priest and prophet and ruler and chief and governor over all
creatures that are made. All creation shall obey thee <span
id="page_7">p. 7</span> and follow thy voice. Under thy grasp they shall
be. To thee alone I have given this power; I have placed thee in
possession of all that I have created.’ When the Angels heard this
saying from the Lord they redoubled honour and respect to Adam. When the
Devil saw the gift that was given to Adam from the Lord, he envied him
from that day and the schismatic from God set his mind in cunning
towards him to seduce him by his boldness and his curse; and when he
denied the grace of the Lord towards him, he became shameless and
warlike. God, may His names be sanctified! deprived the Devil of the
robe of praise and dignity and called his name Devil, he is a rebel
against God, and Satan, because he opposes himself to the ways of the
Lord, and Iblis, because He took his dignity from him. While Adam was
listening to the speech of his Lord to him, and standing upon the place
of Golgotha, all the creatures being gathered together that they might
hear the conversation of God with him, lo! a cloud of light carried him
and went with him to Paradise and the choirs of Angels sang before him,
the cherubim among them blessing and the seraphim crying ‘Holy!’ until
Adam came into Paradise. He entered it at the third hour on Friday, and
the Lord, to Him be praise! gave him the commandment, and warned him
against disobedience to it. Then the Lord, to Him be praise! threw upon
Adam a form of sleep, and he slept a sweet sleep in Paradise. And God
took a rib from his left side, and from it He created Eve. When he awoke
and saw Eve he rejoiced over her and lived with her, and she was in the
pleasant garden of Paradise. God clothed them with glory and splendour.
They outvied one another in the glory with which they were clothed, and
the Lord crowned them for marriage, the Angels congratulated them, and
there was joy there such as never has been the like and never will be
till the day in which the people at the right hand shall hear the
glorious voice from the Lord. Adam and Eve remained in Paradise for
three hours. The site of Paradise was high up in the air, its ground was
heavenly, raised above all mountains and hills, that were thirty spans
high, that is fifteen cubits, according to the cubit of the Holy Ghost.
This <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> Paradise stretches round from the
east by a wall from the hollow to the southern place of darkness where
the cursed Prince was thrown, it is the place of sorrows. Eden is a
fountain of God lying eastwards, to a height of eight degrees of the
rising of the sun, and this is the mercy of God on which the children of
men put their trust, that they shall have a Saviour from thence, because
God, may He be exalted and glorified! knew in His foreknowledge what the
Devil would do to Adam. Adam lived in the treasury of His mercy, as
David the prophet said, ‘Thou hast been a fortress to us, O Lord,
throughout all ages; cause us to live in Thy mercy.’ The blessed David
said also in his prayer about the salvation of men, ‘Remember, Lord’
(the tree was the Cross which was planted in the middle of the earth),
‘Thy grace which thou hast wrought from all eternity’; I mean by this
the mercy which God loved to extend to all men and to our weak race.
Eden is the Church of God, and the Paradise in which is the altar of
rest, and the length of life which God has prepared for all the saints.
Because Adam was king, priest and prophet, God caused him to enter
Paradise that he might minister in Eden, the Church of God the holy
Lord, as Moses the holy Prophet testifies about this, saying, ‘That thou
shouldest minister and declare by noble and glorious service, and keep
the commandment by which Adam and Eve were brought into the Church of
God.’ Then God planted the tree of life in the middle of Paradise and it
was the form of the cross which was stretched upon it, and it was the
tree of life and salvation. Satan remained in his envy to Adam and Eve
for the favour which the Lord shewed them, and he contrived to enter
into the serpent, which was the most beautiful of the animals, and its
nature was above the nature of the camel. He carried it till he went
with it in the air to the lower parts of Paradise. The reason for Iblis
the cursed hiding himself in the serpent was his ugliness, for when he
was deprived of his honour he got into the acme of ugliness, till none
of the creatures could have borne the sight of him uncovered, and if Eve
had seen him unveiled in the serpent, when she spoke to him, she would
have run away from him, and neither cunning nor deceit would have
availed <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> him with her; but he contrived to
hide himself in the serpent, the cunning creature, to teach the birds
with round tongues the speech of men in Greek and such like. He would
bring a broad mirror with much light sending out rays; he would put it
between himself and a bird, and speak what he wished that the bird
should know, and when the bird heard this speech, it would glance around
and look in the mirror, and see the form of a bird like itself and
rejoice at it, and not doubting that it was a bird of its species that
was speaking to it would listen to it and attend to its language. And it
would comprehend it in a moment and talk to it. But the cursed Devil,
when he entered the serpent, came towards Eve, when she was alone in
Paradise away from Adam, and called her by her name. She turned to him,
and looked at her likeness behind a veil, and he talked to her, and she
talked to him, and he led her astray by his speech, for woman’s nature
is weak, and she trusts in every word, and he lectured her about the
forbidden tree in obedience to her desire, and described to her the
goodness of its taste, and that when she should eat of it she should
become a god; and she longed for what the cursed one made her long for,
and she would not hear from the Lord, may His names be sanctified! what
He had commanded Adam about the tree. She hastened eagerly towards it,
and seized some of its fruit in her mouth. Then she called Adam, and he
hastened to her, and she gave him of the fruit, telling him that if he
ate of it he would become a god. He listened to her advice because he
should become a god as she said. When he and she ate the deadly fruit
they were bereft of their glory, and their splendour was taken from
them, and they were stripped of the light with which they had been
clothed. When they looked at themselves, they were naked of the grace
which they had worn, and their shame was manifest to them; they made to
themselves aprons of fig-leaves, and covered themselves therewith, and
they were in great sadness for three hours. They did not manage to
continue in the grace and the power with which the Lord had endued them
before their rebellion for three hours, till it was taken from them and
they were made to slip and fall down at the time of sunset on that <span
id="page_10">p. 10</span> day, and they received the sentence of God in
punishment. After the clothing of fig-leaves they put on clothing of
skins, and that is the skin of which our bodies are made, being of the
family of man, and it is a clothing of pain. The entrance of Adam into
Paradise was at the third hour. He and Eve passed through great power in
three hours, they were naked for three hours, and in the ninth hour they
went out from Paradise, unwillingly, with much grief, great weeping,
mourning and sighing. They slept towards the East of it near the altar.
When they awoke from their sleep, God spoke to Adam and comforted him,
saying to him, blessed be His names! ‘O Adam! do not grieve, for I will
restore thee to thine inheritance, out of which thy rebellion has
brought thee. Know that because of my love to thee I have cursed the
earth, and I will not have pity upon it, on account of thy sin. I have
cursed also the serpent by whom thou hast been led astray, and I have
made its feet go within its belly. I have made dust its food. I have not
cursed thee. I have decreed against Eve that she shall be at thy
service. Know certainly that when thou hast accomplished the time that I
have decreed for thee to dwell outside, in the accursed land, for thy
transgression of my commandment, I will send my dear Son; He will come
down to the earth, He will be clothed with a body from a Virgin of thy
race, named Mary. I will purify her and choose her, and bring her into
power generation after generation until the time that the Son comes down
from Heaven. In that time shall be the beginning of thy salvation and
restoration to thine inheritance. Command thy sons when thy death
approaches which I have decreed for thee that when thou diest they keep
thy body in myrrh and cassia, and put it in the cave where thou art
dwelling to-day till the time of the exit of thy children from the bosom
of paradise and their passage to the dusty land. When that time comes,
instruct the one of thy children who lives until then to carry thy body
with him and put it in the place where I shall make him halt. This place
where he shall put thy body is the centre of the earth; from it and in
it salvation shall come to thee and to all thy children.’ God <span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> disclosed to him all the griefs and pains that
should happen to him, and commanded him to have patience about this.
When He put Adam and Eve out of Paradise, He shut its gate, and put in
charge a fiery Angel. He caused Adam and Eve to dwell in the holy
mountain on which is the foundation of Paradise, in the place known as
Matarimôn. They lived there in a cave at the top of the hill, hidden in
it, and despairing of mercy, and they were then pure virgins. Then Adam
thought of the wedding of Eve, and he found in the foundation of
Paradise gold and myrrh and incense. He left this together, and
consecrated it in the interior of the cave, which he had already made
his house of prayer. The gold which he got from the foundation of
Paradise was like in quantity to seventy-two images. He paid this with
the myrrh and the incense to Eve, saying, ‘This is thy dowry, keep it.
This must be all offered together to the Son of God at the time of His
coming into the world. The gold is the symbol of His royalty; the
incense is to burn before Him; and the myrrh is to anoint His body which
He will take from us. This shall be a witness between me and thee with
our Saviour that He shall come to the world.’ Adam called this cave the
Cave of Treasures. When a hundred years had passed over him after his
exit from Paradise, and he and Eve were grieved and weeping, they went
down from the holy hill to its foot, and there Adam knew Eve, and she
conceived, and her time was fulfilled, and she bare Cain, and Lusia his
twin-sister. He knew her again, and she conceived, and her time was
fulfilled, and she bare Abel and also his twin-sister Aclima. The boys
and the girls grew, and attained to discretion. Adam said to Eve, ‘If
God lets these lads and lasses grow up, let Cain marry Aclima the sister
of Abel, and let Abel marry Lusia the sister of Cain.’ And they did
thus. But Cain said to Eve, ‘O Mother, I have a greater right to my
sister who was born with me. Let her be given to me as a wife, and let
Abel’s sister who was born with him be given to him as a wife.’ For
Lusia was more beautiful than Aclima, being like her mother Eve. Adam
heard of his speech, and it made him angry and annoyed him. He said to
<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> Cain his son, ‘Thy request, O my son, is
unlawful, for it is not allowed to thee to marry thy sister who was born
with thee.’ From that time Cain envied his brother Abel and thought of
killing him. Then Adam said to him and to Abel, ‘Choose some of the
fruits of the earth and of the young of the flock and go up this holy
hill, and go into the Cave of Treasures, and pray there before the Lord.
Offer to Him what you have brought, fruit, and any young animals as an
offering. When you have done this, let each of you take his wife.’ And
they did so. While they were going up the hill, behold! the Devil
entered into Cain, and incited him to the murder of Abel. Then they
brought their offerings before the Lord; the Lord accepted the offering
of Abel and rejected the offering of Cain, because God, may He be
praised and exalted! knew the purpose of Cain, and how he was preparing
the murder of his brother. When Cain saw that the Lord, may His name be
praised! had accepted the offering of Abel instead of his offering, his
envy of Abel increased and his wrath against him. When they came down
from the hill, Cain attacked Abel and slew him with a sharp stone. God
cursed Cain, and his decree came down against him. He did not cease to
be in fear and terror all the days of his life. God led him with his
wife from the holy hill, outside to the cursed land, and they lived
there. Adam and Eve grieved much about Abel for a hundred years. Then
Adam came near to Eve, and she conceived, and her time was fulfilled,
and she bare Seth, the handsome man, the complete and perfect giant. In
his perfection he was like his father Adam, and God protected him when
he grew up, making him the father of the other giants of the earth. The
first who was born to Seth was Enos. And Enos begat Cainan, and Cainan
begat Mahlaleel; these were born during the life of Adam. Adam lived
nine hundred and thirty years, to the time that Mahlaleel was a hundred
and thirty-five years old. When the time of his death came, he summoned
Seth, and Enos, and Cainan and Mahlaleel; he prayed over them and
blessed them, and commanded to his son Seth this Testament.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

*The Testament of Adam.*

 Hear, O my son Seth! what I command thee. Keep it, and thou shalt
understand it. Command it at thy death to thy son Enos, that Enos may
command this to Cainan, and Cainan may command \[it\] to Mahlaleel, that
he may act according to this testament, and that the rest of your
generations may learn, generation after generation, and tribe after
tribe. This is the first thing that I command thee. When I die, embalm
my body with myrrh and cassia, and put it in the Cave of Treasures of
the holy hill, that thou mayest tell whosoever of thy posterity is alive
at the time when your exit shall take place from this holy
Paradise-encircled hill, to carry my body with him, and go with it to
the centre of the earth, and put it there, and in that place salvation
shall come to me and to all my children. Thou, O my son Seth, shalt
after my death be governor of thy people in the fear of God. Remove
thyself and all thy children, and keep them apart from the children of
the murderer Cain. Understand, O my son, the state of the hours of the
night and of the day, and their names, and what praises God in them,
wherewith you must call on God at their approach, and at what hour
prayer and supplication is due. My Creator has taught me this, and made
me understand the names of all the beasts of the earth, and birds of the
air; and the Lord has initiated me into the number of the hours of the
night and of the day, and the affairs of the Angels and their powers and
how they are. Know that in the first hour of the day is the raising of
the praise of my children to God. In the second hour there are the
prayers of the Angels and their cry. In the third hour the birds give
praise. In the fourth hour is the worship of spiritual beings. In the
fifth hour is the worship of the other living creatures. In the sixth
hour is the entreaty of the cherubim and their supplication. In the
seventh hour is the entrance to God and the exit from His presence, for
in it the prayers of every living thing rise to the Lord. In <span
id="page_14">p. 14</span> the eighth hour is the worship of all heavenly
beings and fiery creatures. In the ninth hour is the service of the
Angels of God who stand before Him, and the throne of His majesty. The
tenth hour is for the water, and in it the Holy Ghost hovers and goes up
over the other waters and chases the devils from them. Were it not for
the Holy Spirit hovering every day over the waters and descending in
that hour, when any one drank water, would there not be destruction to
him from the corrupting devils in it? If any one took the water in that
hour, and one of the priests of God mixed it with holy oil and anointed
with it the sick and those in whom were unclean spirits, they were cured
of their diseases. In the eleventh hour there is joy and rejoicing to
the righteous. In the twelfth hour the supplication and cry of men is
accepted before God.

 The hours of the night. In the first hour there is the worship of the
devils. In this hour, the hour of their worship, they do not hurt any
one, and no one fears them until the time of their return from their
worship. In the second hour there is the worship of the great fishes and
all that is upon the water, and the creeping things that are therein. In
the third hour is the worship of the fire which is below the abyss,
about this hour it is not possible for any one to speak. In the fourth
hour is the consecration of the seraphim. I heard that in this hour
during the time of my stay in Paradise, before my rebellion against the
commandment. When I transgressed the command, I could no longer hear the
voices nor their movement and agitation as I used to hear them, and I
could not see anything holy as I used to see it before \[my\] sin. In
the fifth hour there is the worship of the water which is above the
heaven. Verily I and the Angels used in that hour to hear voices from
the water which is in the height, and a tumult as if of chariots and
great wheels and the sounding amongst the waves, and commotion among the
echoes in praise to the Lord. In the sixth hour is the supplication of
the clouds to God when they are fearful and trembling. In the seventh
hour the powers of the earth are led forth, and they sing praise, whilst
the waters sleep and are stilled. If a man takes anything from the water
in <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> that hour and the priest mixes holy
oil with it and anoints with it the sick and those who cannot sleep at
night, verily the sick are cured and the wakeful sleep. In the eighth
hour the grass comes forth from the earth. In the ninth hour is the
service of the Angels and the entrance of prayers before God. In the
tenth hour the gates of heaven are opened, and the cry of my believing
children is heard, and they receive what they have asked from God, may
He be exalted and praised! and the seraphim rub their wings, and by the
force of their rubbing the cock crows in praise to the Lord. In the
eleventh hour there is joy and delight over all the earth, for the Sun
enters the Paradise of God, and its light arises in the regions of the
earth. All creatures are illumined by the falling of the sun’s rays upon
them. In the twelfth hour my children must burn jasmine before the Lord,
for by it there is much repose in heaven for all its inhabitants. Know,
O my son Seth, and attend to my saying. Be sure that God will come down
to the earth as He said to me, and made me understand and know when He
comforted me at my exit from Paradise. Praise to His names! He spoke to
me, saying \[that\] at the end of time He will be incarnate of a Virgin
girl named Mary and will be veiled in me. He will put on my skin, and
will be born like the birth of man by a force and direction that none
can understand but Himself and those to whom He reveals it; He will run
with the children, boys and girls of that period; He will do wonders and
signs openly; He will walk on the waves of the sea as if walking on the
dry land; He will rebuke the winds in a manifest way, and they will be
led by His command. He will call to the waves of the sea, and they will
answer Him obediently. At His command the blind shall see, the lepers
shall be cleansed, the deaf shall hear, the dumb shall speak, the
deformed shall be straightened, the lame shall spring up, the palsied
shall rise and walk. Many rebels shall be led to God, those who have
wandered shall be led aright, and devils shall be driven away. When the
Lord comforted me with this, He said to me, ‘O Adam, grieve not, for
thou art a god, as thou thoughtest to become by thy transgression of my
commandment, and I will make <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> thee a god,
not at this time, but after the lapse of years.’ The Lord said to me
also, ‘I have verily brought thee out of the land of Paradise, to the
land which brings forth thorns and briers, that thou mayest inhabit it;
I will bend thy loins, and make thy knees tremble from age and senility.
O thou dust! to death I will deliver thee, and thy body I will make to
be food for maggots, and the fodder of the worm. After five days and a
half (of my days) I will have pity on thee in my mercy. I will come down
to thee, and in thy house will I dwell and with thy body will I be
clothed. For thy sake, O Adam, I will become a child; for thy sake, O
Adam, I will appear in the market-places; for thy sake, O Adam, I will
fast for forty days; for thy sake, O Adam, I will receive baptism; for
thy sake, O Adam, I will be lifted up on the cross; for thy sake, O
Adam, I will endure lies; for thy sake, O Adam, I will be beaten with
the whip; for thy sake, O Adam, I will taste vinegar; for thy sake, O
Adam, my hands will be nailed; for thy sake, O Adam, I will be pierced
with a spear; for thy sake, O Adam, I will thunder in the height; for
thy sake, O Adam, I will darken the sun; for thy sake, O Adam, I will
cleave the rocks; for thy sake, O Adam, I will frighten the powers of
heaven; for thy sake, O Adam, I will cause heaven to rain on the desert;
for thy sake, O Adam, I will open the graves; for thy sake, O Adam, I
will cause all creation to tremble; for thy sake, O Adam, I will make a
new earth, and after three days, which I have spent in the grave, I will
raise up the body which I took from thee, and will make it go up with me
without any separation from me, and cause it to sit at the right hand of
my Godhead. I will make thee a god as thou hast desired.’ Keep, O my son
Seth, the commandments of God, and do not despise my word to thyself,
and learn that the Lord must come down to earth, and godless people will
take Him, and stretch Him on the wood of the cross, and strip Him of His
raiment, and raise Him between wicked thieves. He will go up upon the
cross in the substance of His humanity, He will be killed, and the body
which He took from us will be buried. Then after three days He will
raise it and take it up <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> with Him to
heaven, and will set it with Him at the right hand of His divinity. To
Him be the glory and the dignity and the praise and the greatness and
the worship and the reverence and the hallelujah and the song, and to
His Son, and to the Holy Ghost from now and always, and throughout all
ages and times, Amen.

 Know, O my son, that there must come a Flood to wash all the earth on
account of the children of Cain, the wicked man who slew thy brother for
his envy about his sister Lusia. After the Flood through the wickedness
of many congregations there shall be the end of the world, the
conditions will be fulfilled, things will be perfected, the time will be
cut short which I have fixed for the creatures, fire will consume
whatever it reaches before the Lord, and the earth shall be consecrated.

 Seth wrote this Testament, and sealed it with the seal of his father
Adam, which he had from Paradise, and the seal of Eve, and his own seal.
And Adam died, and the hosts of the Angels assembled to put him on his
bier, for his honour with God, and Seth embalmed him, and swathed him,
and he and his sons bare rule. And he put him eastwards of Paradise
where he slept at his exit from it, near the town that was built before
all building, called Enoch in the inhabited World. When Adam died, the
sun was darkened, and the moon for seven days and seven nights, with a
gross darkness.

 Seth took the scroll in which he wrote the Testament of his father Adam
into the Cave of Treasures along with the offerings which Adam had
carried with him from the land of Paradise, that is to say, gold, myrrh,
and incense, \[about\] which Adam taught Seth and his children that they
should belong to three Magian kings, and that they should travel with
these things to the Saviour of the world, to be born in a city called
Bethlehem, a territory of Judah.

 There was not one of the children born to Adam before his death who did
not gather to him; they bade him adieu, he prayed over them and wished
them health. Then he died, in the nine hundred and thirtieth year by the
reckoning of Abu-Seth. That is the beginning. The exit of our father
<span id="page_18">p. 18</span> Adam from this world was at three
o’clock in the day, on Friday the sixth of Nisan, fourteen nights after
the new moon. On a similar day our Lord the Christ gave up His spirit to
His Father’s hand. Adam’s children and children’s children grieved for
him a hundred and forty days, for he was the first mortal who died on
the earth, and the tribes were divided among the people of Cain the
murderer after the death of Adam. Seth took his children and his
children’s children and their wives, and made them go up to the glorious
and holy hill, the place in which Adam was buried. Cain and his people
and his children stayed below the hill, in the place where he killed
Abel. Seth became governor of the people of his time in godliness and
purity and holiness. My initiation, O my son Clement, into the story of
Adam and this his testament was from the Magi who travelled to the Lady
Saint Mary with offerings at the time of the birth of Jesus Christ our
God the Saviour. Verily we found that they had a scroll with all this in
it, and it was put by for safe keeping. I and the other Jews believed in
this, and there were many things in it besides what I have shewn to
thee, which it is not proper to make known at this time, and I must tell
thee about them afterwards. I will disclose to thee all the secrets with
which I have been entrusted. The reason of God’s calling the children of
Seth Ben-Adam, “the sons of God,” was as the book says what He had
revealed to Seth about godliness and purity. The Lord appropriated them
to Himself by this name; it is the most famous of names on account of
their favour with Him. He appointed them to replace the choir of Angels
which had rebelled and fallen from Heaven. He put Seth and his race in
the lower parts of Paradise, and around it on the holy hill, they
praising the Lord and sanctifying His name in all peace, no thought
intruding on them about the affairs of the world, their greatest work
being praise and hallelujah with the Angels, for they heard their voices
in praise and hallelujah in Paradise, for it was raised thirteen spans
above them, by the span of the Holy Ghost. They did not undergo the
least labour. The food with which they sustained their bodies was the
fruit of trees growing at the summits of the Mount <span id="page_19">p.
19</span> of Paradise. The zephyr of Paradise, which reached these
trees, ripened their fruits. This tribe was godly and holy; there was no
anger in any one of them nor envy nor quarrelling nor pride nor hatred,
and they held no shameless conversations nor falsehood nor slander nor
calumny, and they do not swear untruthfully nor in vain. Their oaths
were among themselves by the purity of the blood of pure Abel. Their
custom was to rise early, all of them, the old and the young, the male
and the female; to go up to the top of the hill and to worship there
before God and be blessed by the body of their father Adam. Then they
would lift up their eyes to Paradise and praising and sanctifying God
they would return to their place.

 Seth Ben-Adam the godly lived nine hundred and twelve years. Then he
fell sick of his disease of which he died. There gathered to him Enos
and Cainan and Mahlaleel and Jared and Enoch their wives, their sons and
their daughters. He prayed over them, and made vows for them, and
blessed them, and said to them, “By the truth of the blood of pure Abel,
let not one of you descend from this holy hill! Do not mix with the
children of Cain the murderer. You know the enmity between us since the
murder of Abel the pure.” Then his son Enos came near him, and he said
to him, “Thou art lord of thy people. Behold, I die. Devote thyself to
service before the Lord and before the consecrated body of our father
Adam.” He made him swear by the blood of Abel the pure that he would
govern his people well, and rule them in godliness and purity, and never
cease the service before the body of Adam. Seth died lat the age of nine
hundred and twelve years, on Tuesday the twenty-fourth night of Ab, the
twentieth year of the life of Enoch the righteous. He was embalmed with
myrrh and frankincense and cassia, and put in the Cave of Treasures with
the body of his father Adam. His people mourned for him forty days.

 Enos governed his tribe after the death of his father in purity and
godliness; he did to them what his father <span id="page_20">p.
20</span> commanded. When Enos had lived eight hundred and twenty years,
Lamech the Blind, of the tribe of Cain the murderer, killed \[some one\]
in the thicket known as Nod. This was the cause of it. Lamech was
passing the thicket, leaning upon one of his youthful sons. He heard a
movement in the thicket, it was the movement of Cain, for it was not
possible for him to stay in one place since he had killed his brother.
Lamech thought that this movement was that of some wild beasts. He took
up a stone from the ground and threw it towards the moving thing. The
stone hit Cain between the eyes and killed him. His son said, “By God,
thou hast killed our father Cain with thy shot.” Then Lamech the Blind
lifted up his hands to give \[him\] a blow on the ear out of grief for
the death of Cain. He hit the head of his son and killed him. When Enos
had reached nine hundred and five years he fell sick of his disease of
which he died, and there gathered to him the rest of the fathers;
amongst them were Jared, and Enoch, and Methuselah, and Cainan the son
of Methuselah, and Mahlaleel, and their wives and their sons and their
daughters. He blessed them and made vows for them and prayed over them
and confirmed them in the oaths by the blood of Abel—“oh do not mix
yourselves with the children of Cain, and oh do not go down from the
holy mountain.” He reminded them of the enmity betwixt them on account
of the murder of Abel. Then Cainan his son came near him. He said to
him, “O my son, be to thy people and family as I have been to them, and
govern them after my death.” He commanded his son Mahlaleel about the
care of his tribe in godliness and purity, and that he should not cease
from the service before the body of our father Adam during his life. And
Enos died when he had reached nine hundred and five years, on the
sabbath day, when the third night of October had passed, in the
fifty-third year of the life of Methuselah. His eldest son Cainan
embalmed him, and swathed him, and put him in the Cave of Treasures.

 Cainan governed his people in godliness and holiness, and kept the
commandments of his father. He lived for nine <span id="page_21">p.
21</span> hundred and twenty years and died on Wednesday, the thirteenth
night of June. Mahlaleel looked after his burial, and put him in the
Cave of Treasures with his fathers. Mahalaleel lived for eight hundred
and ninety-five years. When death came near to him, he commanded his
people like the commands of his fathers who had preceded him. He
appointed Jared his son over the tribe. His death was on Sunday after
two nights of Nisan had passed. Jared looked after him, and put him in
the cave with his fathers. When Jared was of the age of five hundred
years, some of the sons of Seth disobeyed the commands of their fathers,
and threw away their faith behind their backs. One by one they began to
go down from the holy hill to the tribes of the children of Cain. This
was the reason, that Lamech the Blind was followed by two sons, one
being called Tufeel (Jubal) and the other Tubalcain. They made lyres,
that is, harps, flutes, drums, and other musical instruments. The Devils
awoke harmonious tones in them, and there was not one among the sons of
Cain to command good behaviour or to restrain from what was forbidden.
Every one of them did according to his lust. They busied themselves with
musical instruments, and with eating and drinking, and immorality. \* \*
\* \* \* \* The Devil hunted the sons of Seth that he might mingle them
with the children of Cain, by means of these musical instruments, for
they heard the tones of them; he brought them down from the holy hill to
the cursed land, and he removed them from the protection of God and His
angels to the protection of the Devils; they chose death rather than
life, and renounced the name which God had bestowed on them, because,
may His name be sanctified! He called them the sons of the Lord,
according to His gracious saying in the prophecy of David, where he
says, “Verily, ye are all gods, and ye shall be called the sons of the
Most High. When ye do evil and defile your bodies with the idolatrous
daughters of Cain, like them ye shall die in sin.” They longed for
unclean amusements. \* \* \* They had no shame about this and thought no
harm of it. The earth was contaminated; children were confused; no one
knew his child from the child of another. The <span id="page_22">p.
22</span> Devil incited them and he goaded them on and appropriated them
to every misery. They rejoiced in their works. You could hear from them
hateful laughter like the neighing of steeds. Their noise was heard in
the holy mountain, and there assembled of the children of Seth a hundred
powerful strong giants, for the descent. This came to \[the knowledge
of\] Jared, and he was much troubled. He called them to his presence,
and adjured them by the blood of Abel the Pure not to go down; he
reminded them of the oaths which their fathers who had gone before had
received for them. Enoch the Righteous was there and said to them,
“Know, O sons of Seth, that whosoever rejects the commandment of the
Father and opposes the oaths by which he has been adjured and puts them
behind his back, and goes down from this holy mount, that he shall never
come back to it.” But they did not turn at the warning of Jared and at
the prohibitions of Enoch, and they went down. When they saw the
daughters of Cain and their beauty, and that they uncovered their bodies
without shame, they committed fornication with them, and destroyed their
souls. When they had done this, they aimed at a return to the hill, but
its stones became burning fire, and they could not do it. Another tribe
wished for an alliance with them, not knowing about the affair of the
stones. They went down to them, and defiled themselves with their
defilement.

 When Jared reached the age of nine hundred and seventy-two years, Death
came near to him. There gathered to him Enoch and Methuselah, and
Lamech, and Noah. He prayed over them and made vows for them and said,
“But as for you, go not down from this holy mountain; yet your sons and
your posterity shall be removed from it, because God will not allow them
upon it on account of their transgression of the commandments of the
fathers.” Then he said to the rest of their children, “You shall journey
to the dusty land which brings forth thorns and briers. Whosoever of you
goes out from this holy land, let him take with him the body of our
father Adam, and if he can take all the bodies of the fathers, let him
do it, and take with him the books of the Testaments, and the gifts of
gold and myrrh and frankincense, <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> and put
this with the body of our father Adam where God shall command him.” Then
said he to Enoch, “But thou, O my son, do not separate thyself from the
service and praise before the body of our father Adam and serve before
God in godliness and holiness all the days of thy life.” He died in the
third hour of Friday when the twelfth night of May had passed, in the
360th year of the life of Methuselah. His son embalmed him and swathed
him, and put him in the Cave of Treasures. God rejected the other
children of Seth on account of their love of sin. Seventy assembled, and
were inclined to descend. When Enoch and Methuselah and Lamech and Noah
saw this, they were much grieved. When Enoch had finished his service
before the Lord for fifty years, this being the 365th year of his life,
he presided over his house with his God. He called for Methuselah and
Lamech and Noah, and said, “I know that the Lord will be angry with this
people, and will surely judge them without mercy. But you, the rest of
the fathers and of the holy races, do not leave off the service before
the Lord, and be pure and godly. Know that there shall not be born in
this holy mountain after you any man who shall be father and chief to
his people.” When Enoch had finished this testament, God took him up to
the land of life, and made him dwell round about Paradise in the country
where there is no death. Then the children of Seth removed from the holy
mountain to the quarters of Cain and his children. None of them remained
on the mountain save the three fathers, Methuselah, Lamech and Noah.
Noah the just kept his virgin soul for 500 years. After that, the
merciful God revealed to him about the people who were subject to him,
and commanded him to marry a woman named Haikal the daughter of Namousa,
the son of Enoch, the brother of Methuselah. God disclosed to him about
the Deluge which He was about to send upon the earth, and taught him
that this would be after a hundred years, and commanded him to prepare
the ark, that is, the ship for his salvation and that of his children,
and that he should cut the wood from the holy mountain and make it in
the quarters of the sons of Cain. He commanded him to make its length
<span id="page_24">p. 24</span> 300 cubits, according to \[the length
of\] his arm; its breadth 50 cubits, and its height 30 cubits, by \[the
length of\] his arm; and the breadth of its top above should be one
cubit, and that he should make three stories to it. The lowest should be
for the tame and the wild animals and the cattle, the middle one for the
birds and their like, and the highest one for him and his children and
his wife and his sons’ wives. And that he should make in it storehouses
for water and for food and for fodder. Also that be should prepare a
gong of the cedar tree, its length to be three cubits, and its breadth
one cubit, and that its hammer should be \[made\] of the same. “When
thou beginnest to make the ship, thou shalt beat three strokes on it
every day, one in the morning, the second in the middle of the day, that
they may bring the workmen food; and the third at sunset for \[their\]
departure. If they ask thee about thy work, tell them that God is
sending a flood of water to cleanse the earth and that thou art making
the ship to save thyself and thy children.” Noah received the
commandment of the Lord, and married her. In the course of the hundred
years she bare him three male children, Shem, Ham and Japhet. They also
married some of the daughters of Methuselah. When Noah had finished the
building of the ship, and entered it with those whom God commanded
should enter it with him, the second thousand of the years of the time
of Adam was finished, as the 70 interpreters expound. They said, From
Adam till the Deluge was 2000 years.

 When Lamech had lived 777 years, Methuselah his father died; this was
four years before the Flood. Then Lameth died after him, and his death
was on the twenty-first \[day\] of September, in the 68th year of the
life of Shem, the first-born of Noah. His son Noah swathed him, and
enbalmed him, and put him in the Cave of Treasures. He mourned for him
40 days and remained with all the holy fathers, Noah and his children.
The daughters of Cain conceived by the sons of Seth, and brought forth
giant-sons. It was certainly supposed by some that the Book relates and
says that the Angels came down to earth and mingled with the children of
men, that those <span id="page_25">p. 25</span> who came down and
mingled with the children of men were really angels. This was only said
on account of the sons of Seth and their union with the daughters of
Cain, for God, may His name be glorified! had already out of His love to
them, called them, as we said before, Sons of God and Angels of God. So
he errs who thinks this; for union, that is, marriage, was not in the
substance of spiritual beings, and not in their nature, and if it had
been in them as it is in men, the Devils would not have left any one in
the world alone without corrupting them, till not a virgin would have
been left on the earth, for the foul Devils love corruption and
fornication. As they cannot do this, they change their nature on account
of it; they recommend it to men and make them love it.

 Methuselah lived for 969 years. When Death came to him, there gathered
to him Lamech, and Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japhet and their wives,
for none but they were left on the holy hill. Methuselah blessed them,
and called to them; he was weeping and sorrowful. He said to them,
“There remaineth none but you on this mountain out of all the tribes who
once were on it. The Lord God of our fathers who formed our father Adam
and our mother Eve and blessed them till the earth was filled with their
progeny, may He bless you and multiply you and cause your fruit to grow.
May He be to you a keeper and a shepherd. I ask of Him to fill the earth
with your progeny, and to help you and strengthen you and save you from
the fearful punishment that is coming upon this hill, and that He may
give you a share of the gift which He gave to our father Adam, that He
may bring blessings into your dwellings, and bestow upon you prophecy,
power, and priesthood.” Then he said to Noah, “O thou blessed of the
Lord, hear my speech and do my commandment. Know that I go out of this
world as the saintly fathers went out of it. Verily the Lord shall send
a Deluge to drown the earth for the many sins of men, but thou and thy
children shall be saved. When I am dead, embalm my body like as were
embalmed the bodies of the fathers who have gone before. Bury me in the
Cave of Treasures. Take thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives; go
down from this mountain, <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> and bear with
thee the body of our father Adam, and the offerings which thou didst
bring out with him from Paradise, namely, gold and myrrh and
frankincense. Put the body of our father Adam within the Ark which God
commanded me to prepare; and the other bodies separately from it, so
that the body of Adam may be like a dyke ever in the midst. Put the
offerings on his breast. Dwell thou and thy sons in the east of the ark,
thy wife and thy sons’ wives in the west, so that the body of our father
Adam may be a barrier to hinder the men from sinning with regard to the
women, and to hinder them from sinning with regard to the men; let them
not gather together for food or drink till ye come out of the Ark. When
the water of the Deluge departs from the earth, and ye come out of the
Ark, and dwell upon the earth, then gather ye together for food and
drink, and cease not the service before the body of our father Adam nor
the ministration before God in godliness and holiness within the Ark.
When your exit from it takes place, then put the offerings which thou
didst bring out from Paradise in the east of the land in which thou
dwellest. When Death comes to thee, make thy Testament to thy son Shem.
Command him to carry the body of our father Adam, and to bury it in the
middle of the earth. Verily (it is) the place in which there shall be
salvation to him and to his children. Where he burieth the body, let him
appoint a man from among his children to serve before the body and to
minister. Let him be pure all the days of his life, and let him command
him that he dwell not in any house, that he shed no blood, that he shave
not his hair, nor pare his nails, nor bring there any offering of
beasts, but let his offering before the Lord be of fine bread, pure and
white, and the best drink, pressed from the fruit of the vine, until the
time that God shall certainly command him. Verily the Angel of the Lord
shall go before the man chosen to officiate as a priest before the body
of Adam till he shall put it in the middle of the earth, and where the
body ought to be buried. Let this chosen one be commanded that his
raiment be of the skins of beasts, and that he be unique as it is
unique. Verily he is the priest of the glorious God.” When Methuselah
had finished <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> this testament, and tears
were coming down from his eyes, on account of the grief that was in his
heart, he died. Then nine hundred and sixty-nine years were completed,
it was in Adar (March) on a Sunday. Noah and Shem and Japhet and their
wives laid him out with weeping and groaning. They held a mourning for
him for 40 days; he was swathed and embalmed and laid with the fathers
in the Cave of Treasures. They were blessed by the other bodies that
were there. Then Noah bore the body of Adam and the bodies of the
fathers from the Cave, and put them into holy coffins. Of the offerings
Shem carried the gold, Ham carried the myrrh, and Japhet carried the
frankincense. They left the Cave of Treasures with weeping and groaning.
A noise was raised by them which was heard from Paradise, sorrow and
mourning on account of \[their\] departure from the mountain, when they
knew that they were leaving it for good. They lifted up their heads
towards Paradise, they sobbed, and wept, and said: “Peace be to thee, O
holy Paradise! dwelling-place of our father Adam; we are deprived of thy
shelter, which is denied to us then, on our return to the cursed land in
which we suffer pains and endure labours. Peace be to thee, O Cave of
Treasures! from us and from all the bodies of the fathers. Peace be to
thee, O glorious dwelling-place and inheritance of the saintly fathers
for ever. Peace be to you, O ye Fathers, beloved friends of God. Pray
for us and bless us, and entreat for our salvation, O holy ones of God,
who are well-pleasing unto Him. Peace be to Seth, chief of the fathers.
Peace be to Enos, governor of his people, and righteous judge amongst
them. Peace be to Cainan and Mahlaleel, those who govern their people in
purity. Peace be to Methuselah and Jared and Lamech and Enoch, servants
of God. We entreat you all to mediate for our salvation lest we be
prevented looking for our inheritance from this time forth for
evermore.” Then they came down from the mountain, kissing its stones and
embracing its trees with weeping and great grief, and they travelled
towards the land. When Noah had finished building the ship, he entered
it, and <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> brought in the body of Adam and
put it in the middle of it, with the offerings upon its breast. This was
on a Friday, on the 17th day of March, it is also said, of May. Early
the next day he brought in the beasts and the cattle, and made them
dwell in the lowest deck. In the middle of the day he brought in the
birds and all the sentient beings, and made them dwell in the middle
deck. At sunset Noah and his sons and his sons’ wives entered, and dwelt
in the topmost deck. The Ark was built in the form of a Church, in which
the men are prevented from mingling with the women; as there is peace
and love betwixt man and woman, and between the elders amongst them and
the youths, thus there was love betwixt the rest of the beasts and the
birds and the sentient beings in the ship; and as wise men are at peace
with their inferiors, thus were the lions and the ewes at peace in the
Ark. All that were in it were seven pairs of all the clean beasts, and
two pairs of the unclean ones. When Noah and his people had arrived, the
Lord shut the Ark. Then the doors of heaven were opened, and the doors
of the abyss, and the waters came down in torrents, and the imprisoned
sea appeared, which is called Oceanus, which encircles the whole earth.
Raging winds were sent out from all directions. When the sons of Seth
saw this, they came near to the place of the Ark, and entreated Noah to
carry them; but he gave them no answer about it, because the Ark was
bolted and sealed by command of the Lord, and the Angel of the Lord was
standing directing it. Repentance encompassed them, sorrow came upon
them, and they had no refuge from destruction, as they were also
hindered from going up to the holy mountain. They were all destroyed by
drowning and suffocation, in the thick waters and the raging winds, as
David the Prophet sang about their state where he said, “I said, All ye
are gods, and children of the Most High ye shall be called; by this
great sign ye are marked; but sin hath overthrown you, and ye have
rebelled against the commandment; ye have defiled jour bodies with the
idolatrous daughters of Cain, and ye shall die the death like them. Ye
<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> shall be tormented with the Prince who
fell from the heavenly rank.” The Ark was lifted up from the earth to
the height of the waters, and all that was on the earth perished in the
deluge; the waters rose above the tops of the mountains fifteen cubits,
by the holy cubit. The waves bore the ship till they brought it to the
lower parts of Paradise. It was blessed from Paradise; the tops of the
waves were rolled back, and they did obeisance before it, then returning
from it were poured out to the destruction of those who remained on the
earth. The ship flew on the wings of the wind above the waters from the
east to the west, and from the south to the sea, like the sign of the
Cross. It stood above the waters 150 days; the waves were stilled and
laid to rest at the end of the seventh month from the beginning of the
Deluge. The Ark stood upon the mountains, the Kurdish mountains, and the
waters were divided from one another. They all returned to their places,
and did not cease diminishing gradually, till the tenth month, which was
February. He looked at the tops of the mountains from the Ark. On the
tenth of March Noah opened the Ark from the eastern side, and sent the
Raven, that at its return he might learn the news of the earth. It did
not return to him. He sent the Dove; it circled round, and found no
place for its foot. It returned at sunset. After a week Noah sent
another Dove. It returned to him with an olive-branch in its mouth.
About the Dove there are holy mysteries. The first dove resembles the
first covenant, to which there was no rest among the rejected nations;
the second dove the second covenant, which found rest with the nations
that accepted the mysteries of baptism and preached the Christ at the
end of 600 years of the life of righteous Noah. One day of Nisan (April)
had passed, and the water was removed from the earth. On this day Noah
and his wife and his sons and his sons’ wives went out of the ship.
Their entrance to the ship had been in separation, their exit from it
was in unity. At their exit came out all the beasts and the cattle and
the birds and the creeping things which were in the ship. Noah built a
town, and called it Thamânû, which remains to this day. The number of
those who were in the ship with Noah was eight <span id="page_30">p.
30</span> persons. Noah built an altar to the Lord and offered upon it
an offering of the beasts and the clean birds that were slain. God
accepted his offering, and gave a covenant that He would not send a
deluge of water on the earth to all eternity. May His names be
sanctified! He took off wrath from them in regard to the bow in the
clouds. By it He put away the bowstring of anger; for before the Deluge
men saw in heaven the bowstring of anger and the arrow of wrath. The
sons of Noah planted in the town the fruit of the vine, and pressed from
it a new drink; they gave their father Noah to drink, and he got drunk,
for he was not accustomed to drink. While he was drunk he slept, and his
nakedness was uncovered. Ham looked at him, and laughed and mocked at
him, and fetched his brothers to mock with him. When Shem and Japhet
knew the reason was about the uncovering of their father, they were
grieved at it; they took a garment, threw it upon their hands, and went
backwards, lest they should see their father uncovered; then they threw
the garment upon him. When Noah awoke from his drunken sleep, his wife
told him what had happened about his sons, and he was angry with Ham,
and said, “Let him and Canaan be cursed, and let him be a slave to his
brethren.” But Noah cursed Canaan, who was not guilty, and the guilt was
Ham’s; for he knew that when Canaan should arrive at man’s estate, he
should renew what had already been blotted out of the works of the
children of Cain, the music-halls and such like. When he came to man’s
estate, he did all this, and Noah knew it, was concerned about him and
grieved at his work, that according to the example of the works of
Canaan, the sons of Seth fell into sin, he increased in his curse of
Canaan, wherefore his sons became slaves. They are the Copts, the
Abyssinians, the Hindoos, the Mysians and other negroes. Ham was a
hypocrite, a lover of unclean desire all the days of his life. This was
in his mockery of his father. The sleep of Noah in his drunkenness was a
type of the crucifixion of the Christ and His slumber in the tomb for
three days, as David the prophet says about it, “The Lord awoke from his
sleep like a man who recovers from strong drink.” When Noah awoke <span
id="page_31">p. 31</span> from his drunken sleep, he cursed Canaan and
made his posterity slaves. Likewise when the Christ arose from the grave
He cursed the Devil and destroyed those who had crucified Him, and
scattered them among the nations. The sons of Canaan became slaves for
ever, carrying burdens upon their necks. Every proprietor negotiates
riding about on his business, but the children of Canaan negotiate about
the affairs of their masters, as poor men on foot, and they are called
the slaves of slaves.

 Noah lived after going out of the ship 350 years. When his death came
near, there gathered to him Shem, and Ham, and Japhet, and Arphaxad, and
Salah. He made vows for them, and desired the presence of Shem his
firstborn, and commanded him secretly, saying to him, “When I die, bury
me. Go into the Ark of safety, and take out of it the body of our father
Adam secretly, let no one with thee know. Make for it a large chest, and
put it within. Prepare for thyself a store of bread and drink, and carry
the chest in which is the body of our father. Take with thee
Melchizedek, the son of Malih. Verily the Lord hath chosen him from the
rest of your sons to minister before our father Adam. When thou reachest
the centre of the earth, bury the body there, and set Melchizedek in the
place for the service of the body and the praise before it. Verily the
Angel of the Lord will go before you to guide you two to the place for
the body, which is the centre of the earth. From it shall be seen the
power of God. The four pillars of the world are joined together and have
become one pillar, and from it shall be salvation to Adam and to all his
children.” Thus it was written in the tables which Moses received from
the hand of the Lord and broke at the time of his anger against his
people. Noah strengthened Shem in receiving the testament, and told him
that it was the Testament of Adam to Seth, and of Seth to Enos, and of
Enos to Cainan, and of Cainan to Mahlaleel, and of Mahlaleel to Jared,
and of Jared to Enoch, of Enoch to Methuselah, and of Methuselah to
Lamech, and of Lamech to Noah; he made him swear that no one \[else\]
should attend to <span id="page_32">p. 32</span> what he commanded in
regard to the body of Adam. When he had finished his testament, he died,
being 950 years old, on a Wednesday. Shem embalmed him, and with him his
other children put him on a bier and buried him. They raised a wail over
him for forty days. Then Shem went secretly into the ship, and took out
the body of Adam. He sealed the ship with his father’s seal. Then he
desired the presence of Ham and Japhet and said to them, “Know that Noah
my father commanded me to journey after his death to the elevated land
and to go round it to the place of the sea, that I may attend to the
state of its trees, and fruits and rivers. I have already resolved on
this, and have left my wife and children with you; take heed to them
till the time of my return.” They said to him, “Take with thee a man
since thou hast resolved on this, for the land which thou hast described
has wild beasts and hunting lions.” He said to them, “Verily, the Angel
of God is with me, he is my Saviour.” His brethren called to him and
said, “The Lord be with thee wherever thou dwellest.” Then he said to
them, “Verily, our father at his death made me swear not to enter the
ship nor allow any one \[else\] to enter it. I have received his
testament, and sealed it with his seal, and beware that ye enter it not!
ye, nor any of your children.” They pledged themselves to him concerning
this. Then he approached the father and mother of Melchizedek and said
to them, “I wish that you would give me Melchizedek that I may journey
with him in my way.” They said to him, “He is before thee, as thou
wouldest journey, take him with thee.” Then Shem called Melchizedek by
night, and bore with him the body of Adam secretly. They went out, the
Angel going before them, till he brought them to the place with the
utmost speed. He said to them, “Set him down, for this is the centre of
the earth.” And they put him down from their hands. When he came to the
ground, the earth was cleft for him as a door, and the body was let down
into it, and they put him in it. When the body rested in its place, the
earth returned and covered it over. The place was called *Gumgumah*, “of
a skull,” because in it was placed the <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>
skull of the Father of mankind, and *Gulgulah*, because it was
conspicuous in the earth, and was despised by its sons, for in it was
the head of the hateful Dragon which seduced Adam. It was called also
Otâriâ, which is, being interpreted, “the families of the world,”
because to it is the gathering together of mankind. Shem said to
Melchizedek son of Malih, “Know that thou art the priest of the
Everlasting God, who hath chosen thee from the rest of men to minister
before Him before the body of our father Adam. Accept the Lord’s choice
of thee, and never leave this place. Do not marry any woman, do not
shave thy hair, nor pare thy nails. Shed no blood for thyself, and
sacrifice no beast. Do not build a building over this place. Let thine
offerings before the Lord be of fine pure bread, and \[let the\] drink
be of the juice of the vine. The Angel of the Lord is with thee for
ever.” He wished him peace, and bade him farewell and embraced him, and
returned to his dwelling. Then came to him Jozadak and Malih, the
parents of Melchizedek. They asked him about him, and he told them that
he had died on the road, and that he had looked after him and buried
him. His father and his people sorrowed over him with a great sorrow.
When Shem the righteous was 700 years old, he died, and his son Arphaxad
looked after him, and Salah and Eber, and they buried him. When Arphaxad
was thirty years old, he begat Salah his son, and when he was 465 years
old, he died, and Salah and Eber looked after him. They buried him in
the town that Arphaxad had built, known as Arphaxad (cod. Arbalsarbat).
When Salah was thirty years old, he begat Eber, and when he had
completed 430 years, he died. Eber and Peleg looked after him; he was
buried in the town that Salah had built, known as Salḥadîb. When Eber
was thirty years old, he begat Peleg, and when he had completed 434
years, he died; his son Peleg buried him, and Reu and Serug in the town
which Eber had built and had called by his name. When Peleg attained 239
years, all the tribes of the sons of Shem, and Ham and Japhet gathered
themselves together and journeyed to the elevated land; they found in
the place known as Shinar a beautiful plain. They dwelt in it, and their
speech was altogether <span id="page_34">p. 34</span> Syriac, and it is
called Resany, and Chaldaean; it is the tongue and speech of Adam.
Verily the Syriac language is the Queen of languages and the most
comprehensive; from it all other tongues are derived; Adam is a Syriac
name. Whoever asserts that it is Hebrew tells a falsehood. Speakers of
Syriac will not stand on the left of the Lord but on His right, for the
writing of Syriac runs from right to left, and of others the way of the
Persian from left to right. In the days of Peleg the nations built the
tower at Babel, upon which their tongues were diversified and confounded
and divided; because of their confusion the town was called Babel. Peleg
was very much grieved about this when he saw the scattering of the
nations in the regions of the earth. He died, and his son Reu, and Serug
and Nahor buried him in the town which he had built and had called by
his name. The earth became two portions among two chiefs of tribes; they
allowed to every tribe and tongue a king and a chief; they appointed in
the race of Japhet thirty-seven kings, and in the race of Ham sixteen
kings. The kingdom of the sons of Japhet was from the border of the holy
mountain and Mount Nod (?), which is in the borders of the East, to the
Tigris and the side of Algaut: and from Bactria to the island town (or
Gades = Cadix). The kingdom of the sons of Shem was from the land of
Persia, that is from the borders of the East to the Hardasalgs sea among
the borders of the West. They had authority also in the centre of the
earth. When Reu was thirty-two years old, Serug was born to him; the
length of his life being 232 years. At the end of 163 years of the life
of Reu, Nimrod the giant reigned over the whole earth. The beginning of
his kingdom was from Babel. It was he who saw in the sky a piece of
black cloth and a crown; he called Sasan the weaver to his presence, and
commanded him to make him a crown like it; and he set jewels in it and
wore it. He was the first king who wore a crown. For this reason people
who knew nothing about it, said that a crown came down to him from
heaven. The length of his reign was sixty-nine years. He died in the
days of Reu, and the third thousand <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>
since Adam was completed. In his days the people of Egypt set up a king
over them called Firnifs. He reigned over them for sixty-eight years. In
his days also a king reigned over the town of Saba and annexed to his
kingdom the cities of Ophir and Havilah, his name was Pharaoh. He built
Ophir with stones of gold, for the stones of its mountains are pure
gold. After him there reigned over Havilah a king called Hayul. He built
it and cemented it, and after the death of Pharaoh women reigned over
Saba until the time of Solomon son of David. When he (Reu) was 239 years
old, he died. Serug his son and Nahor buried him in the town called
Oa‘nân, which Reu had built for himself. When Serug was thirty years
old, his son Nahor was born to him. In the days of Serug idols were
worshipped, and they were adored instead of God, and the people in that
day were scattered in the earth; there was not among them a teacher nor
a lawgiver, nor a guide to the way of truth, nor even a right way. They
wandered and were rebellious and became a sect. Some of them worshipped
the Sun and the Moon, some of them worshipped the sky, some of them
worshipped images, some of them worshipped the stars, some of them
worshipped the earth, some of them worshipped beasts, some of them
worshipped trees, and some of them worshipped waters and winds and such
like, for the Devil blinded their hearts and left them in darkness
without light. No one among them believed in the Last Day and the
Resurrection. When one of them died, his people made an image in his
likeness, and put it upon his tomb, lest his memory should be cut off.
The earth was filled with sins, and idols were multiplied in it, made in
the likenesses of males and females.

 When Serug was 230 years old he died. His son Nahor, and Terah and
Abraham buried him in the town which Serug had built and called it
Serug. Terah was born to Nahor when he was twenty-nine years old. In the
third year of the life of Nahor, God looked up through His remembrance
at His creatures, and they were worshipping idols. He sent upon them
earthquakes which destroyed all the idols. Their <span id="page_36">p.
36</span> worshippers did not turn from their error, but persevered in
their godlessness. In the twenty-sixth year of the rule of Terah
appeared witchcraft. The beginning of it was that a rich man died; his
son made a golden image of him and placed it upon his tomb as a mark
\[to\] the people of his age, and appointed a young man to guard it. The
Devil entered into the image, and spoke to its guardian from the tongue
of the deceased and \[with\] his voice. The guardian told the son of the
deceased about it. After some days robbers entered the dwelling of the
deceased, and took all that belonged to his son, and his grief was
greater at this, and they bewailed him beside the grave of his father.
The Devil called to him from the image with a voice like the voice of
his father, and said, “O my son, weep not. Bring me thy little son, to
sacrifice him to me, and I will restore to thee all that has been taken
from thee.” He brought his son to the tomb and sacrificed him to the
Devil. When he had done this, the Devil entered him and taught him
witchcraft, unveiled his mysteries, and taught him omens and auguries.
Since that time people offer their children to Devils. At the completion
of a hundred years of the life of Nahor, God, may His name be exalted!
looked on the godlessness of men, and their sacrificing of their
children to the Devils, and their adoration of images. God, may His
names be sanctified, sent them raging winds which tore away the images
and their worshippers, and buried them in the earth and strewed over
them great mounds and towering hills, and they are below these unto this
day. Some assert on this account that in the time of Terah there was a
Deluge of wind. Wise men of India say that these mounds came into
existence in the days of the Deluge. That is nonsense, for image-worship
was after the Deluge of water, and the Deluge was not sent upon them for
the worship of images; verily that was done because there was so much
corruption on the earth among the children of Cain, and the musical
instruments which they invented. There was no people inhabiting this
rough wild land, but when <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> our fathers
were not found worthy of the neighbourhood of Paradise they were thrust
away to it. Then they came out of the ship to this land, and were
scattered amongst its regions. He talks nonsense who asserts that these
elevated mounds have never ceased in the earth, for they have been
formed since the time of the anger of God about idol-worship. They were
turned topsy-turvy, and there is no mound on the earth beneath which a
Devil with an image appeareth not. In the days of Nimrod the giant, he
looked at fire from heaven, and fire came up from the earth. When Nimrod
saw it he adored it, and appointed in the place where he saw it people
to worship it, and to throw incense into it. Since that time magicians
adore fire when they see it coming up from the heaven and from the
earth, and they worship it to this day. A chief magician named Sasir
found a spring of bountiful water at a place in the country of
Atropatene. He erected upon it a white horse. Whoever bathed in that
fountain worshipped this horse. The Magi honour the horse, and there is
a sect of them who worship it to this day. Nimrod travelled till he
arrived at the land of Mariûn. When he entered the city of Altûrâs he
found there Bouniter the fourth son of Noah. Nimrod’s army was on a
lake, and he went down there one day to bathe in it. When Nimrod saw
Bouniter the son of Noah, he did obeisance to him. Bouniter said to him,
“O giant king, why do you adore me?” Nimrod said to him, “I did thee
homage because thou didst meet me.” Nimrod stayed with him three years
that he might teach him wisdom and strategy, then he wandered away from
him. He said to Nimrod, “Thou shalt not return a second time.” When
Nimrod was passing through the East, he deposited books making known
what Bouniter the son of Noah had taught him. The people were astonished
at his wisdom. There was among the people entrusted with the worship of
fire a man called Ardashir. When Ardashir saw the wisdom of Nimrod and
the excellency of his star-gazing (Nimrod had a perfect genius), he
envied him for this, and implored a Devil who had appeared to him beside
the fire to teach him the wisdom of Nimrod. The Devil said to him, “Thou
canst not do this until thou have <span id="page_38">p. 38</span>
fulfilled the magic rite, and its perfection is the marriage of mothers,
daughters and sisters.” Ardashir answered him concerning this, and did
what he commanded him about it. Since that time the Magi allow the
wedlock of mothers, sisters and daughters. The Devil also taught
Ardashir the knowledge of omens and auguries, and physiognomy, and
fortune-telling, and divining and witchcraft, which were doctrines of
the Devil, and the Chaldæans gave one another this doctrine; these were
the Syrians, and some people say that it is the tongue of the
Nabataeans. Every one who uses aught of these doctrines, his guilt
before God is great. But the knowledge which Nimrod learned from
Bounitar, verily Bounitar the son of Noah learned it from God, the great
and glorious, for it is the counting of the stars, and the years and the
months; the Greeks call this science Astronomy, and the Persians call it
Astrology. Nimrod built great towns in the East, namely, Hadâniûn,
Ellasar, Seleucia, Ctesiphon, Rûhîn, and the towns of Atrapatene, and
Telalôn, and others that he chose for himself.

 When Terah, father of Abraham, reached two hundred and three years he
died. Abraham and Lot buried him in the city of Haran. \[God\] commanded
him that he should travel to the Holy Land. Abraham took with him Sarah
his wife, and Lot his brother’s son, and journeyed to the land of the
Amorites. Abraham the Just was then seventy-five years old. When he
reached eighty years, he fought with the nations and put them to flight
and delivered Lot from them, and he had no child at that time, for Sarah
was barren. When he returned from the war with the nations, God
commanded him to journey and pass over to Mount Yâbûs. When he got there
he met Melchizedek, priest of God. When Abraham saw him, he did homage
to him and was blessed by him. He offered before him fine pure bread and
drink. Melchizedek blessed Abraham and made vows for him. Thereupon God
commanded Melchizedek to pare his nails. Melchizedek consecrated an
offering of fine bread and drink. Abraham offered some <span
id="page_39">p. 39</span> of it, and paid to Melchizedek the tenth of
his goods. Then God, may His names be sanctified, discoursed with
Abraham the second time and said to him, “Thy reward shall be great with
Me. Since thou hast received the blessing of Melchizedek and thou art
worthy to receive from his hand the gift of bread and wine, I will bless
thee, and will multiply thy seed.”

 When Abraham reached eighty-six years, Ishmael was born to him of Hagar
the Egyptian bond-maid. Pharaoh of Egypt had given her to Sarah, the
wife of Abraham, who was his sister by his father but not by his mother,
for Terah married two wives; the name of the one was Yuta, she was the
mother of Abraham, and she died when she gave birth to him; the name of
the other was Nahdeef, and she was the mother of Sarah. Therefore
Abraham answered as he said to the king of Egypt when he wished to do
violence to Sarah, that “she is my sister.” When Abraham reached
ninety-nine years, God came down to his house, and gave to Sarah a son.
When he reached a hundred years, Isaac was born to him, the son whom God
gave him of barren Sarah. When Isaac reached twelve years, Abraham
offered him to God as all offering upon the hill Yâbûs, which is the
place in which the Christ was crucified, and which is known as Golgolah.
In it Adam was created; in it Abraham looked at the tree which bore the
lamb by which Isaac was redeemed from sacrifice, and in it the body of
Adam was laid. In it was the altar of Melchizedek, and in it David
looked at the Angel of the Lord bearing a sword for the destruction of
Jerusalem. Verily Abraham’s carrying up there of Isaac to the altar is a
type of the crucifixion of the Christ for the salvation of Adam and his
children. The proof of this is the saying of the Christ in the holy
Gospel to the children of lsrael, that “your father Abraham did not
cease to long to look on my days, and when he saw them, he rejoiced in
them.” The lamb which Abraham saw hanging on the tree was a type of the
slaying of the Christ in the body, which He had taken from us, and of
His crucifixion also, because the lamb was not the child of a ewe and
was worthy of being sacrificed. In that place Abraham saw what pertained
<span id="page_40">p. 40</span> to the salvation of Adam through the
crucifixion of the Christ. In the hour that Abraham took up Isaac to the
altar, Jerusalem began to be built, and the reason was this. When
Melchizedek, priest of God, appeared to men, his fame reached the kings
of the nations, and they came to him from every region to be blessed.
Among those that came to him were Abimelech king of Gerar, Amraphel king
of Shinar, Arioch king of Delassar (Ellasar), Kedarlaomer king of Elam,
and Tidal king of men, Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, or
Simeon king of the Amorites, and Simair king of Saba, Bislah king of
Bela, Hiar king of Damascus, and Yaftar king of the deserts. When these
kings, O my son Clement, saw Melchizedek king of Peace and priest of
God, and heard his word, they honoured and applauded him and asked him
to journey with them to their lands. He told them that he was not
allowed to leave his place, in which God had appointed him to an office.
Their unanimous counsel was that a city should be built for him at their
expense, and that they should rule it. They built for him the Holy City,
and delivered it to him, and Melchizedek called it Jerusalem.

 Then Maoalon king of Teman journeyed to Melchizedek when his fame
reached him, and gave him noble and glorious presents. He honoured him
when he saw him and heard his word. All kings and nations honoured him
and called him the Father of Kings. Some people think that Melchizedek
will not die, and bring as proof the saying of David the Prophet in his
psalms, “Thou art a priest for ever after the figure of Melchizedek.”
David does not wish (to say) in this his saying that he will not die,
and how can this be when he is a man? But God honoured him and made him
His priest, and in the Torah there is no mention of a beginning to his
days. Therefore David sang as he sang about him. Moses does not make
mention of him in his book, for he was only relating the genealogy of
the Fathers. But Shem the son of Noah has told us in the books of the
Testaments that Melchizedek was the son of Malih, son of Arphaxad, son
of Shem, son of Noah; and his mother was Jozedek.

 In the hundredth year of Abraham there reigned in the East <span
id="page_41">p. 41</span> a king called Karmos, he who built Shamshat,
and Claudia, and Careem, and Leouza. He had a son called Cârân and three
daughters; the name of the one being Shamshout, and the other Harzea,
and the other Leouza, and he called these cities by their names. When
Peleg had reached fifty years, Nimrod journeyed to the province of
Mesopotamia, and built Nisibis, and Raha (Edessa), and Haran; to every
city he put a wall, and he called the wall of Haran by the name of
Harteeb, the wife of Sem, priest of the beautiful mountains. The people
of Haran made an image in the form of this Sem, and worshipped it.
Ba‘alsameen fell in love with Nalkeez wife of Nimroda, and Nimroda fled
before Ba‘alsameen; on account of this the children of Israel wept over
Nimroda and burnt the city of Haran in anger about him. When Sarah died,
Abraham the famous (or the Friend, i.e. of God) married a woman named
Kentoura, daughter of Yaftour king of the deserts. When Isaac, son of
Abraham, reached forty years, Eleazar his servant journeyed in search of
her who was named Rebecca for Isaac. When Abraham reached one hundred
and seventy years he died; his sons Ishmael and Isaac buried him by the
side of Sarah his wife. When Isaac reached sixty years, Rebecca his wife
conceived Jacob and Esau. When the birth-pangs took hold of her, she
went to Melchizedek; he blessed her and prayed over her. He said to her,
“God has already formed two men in thy womb, who shall be chiefs of two
great nations. The elder of them shall be beneath the younger. Each of
them shall hate his brother, and the elder shall serve a man of the race
of the other. I am servant of that man, whose name shall be called ‘the
living God,’ and he shall come up upon a branch of cursing because of
those who rebel against him.”

 When sixty years of Isaac’s life had passed, he built a city which he
called Ail, and in his sixty-fourth year Jericho was built by the hand
of seven kings, the king of the Hittites, the king of the Amorites, the
king of the Jebusites, the king of the Canaanites, the king of the
Girgashites, the king of the Hivites and the king of the
\[Perizzites?\], and every one of them built <span id="page_42">p.
42</span> a wall to it. But the town which was called Masr (Egypt), the
king of the Copts had built. Ishmael was the first to work with a
hand-mill, and it was called the mill of the kingdom. After one hundred
and thirty years of the life of Isaac; that is in the seventy-seventh
year of Jacob, God blessed Jacob, and he received the blessings of
Isaac, and the blessing of Esau his brother by deceit. He journeyed to
the land of the East. While he was on his journey, behold, a deep sleep
came upon him. He prepared below his head seven stones and slept upon
them. In his sleep he saw a ladder of fire whose top was in heaven, and
its bottom on the earth. On it Angels were descending from it and
ascending, and he saw the Lord sitting on the top. When he awoke he
said, “Doubtless this place is the house of God.” He took the stones
which were beneath his head and built them into an altar and anointed it
with oil, and vowed there that he would give to God the tenth of all his
goods as an offering. The power of this vision, O my son Clernent, is
not difficult to those who know, for it is a prophecy of the coming of
our Lord the Christ. Verily the ladder which Jacob saw was a sign of the
Crucifixion, and the Angers coming down from Heaven \[were\] for the
Gospel to Zacharia, and Mary, and the Magi and the shepherds. The place
of the Lord’s seat at the top of the ladder was like the descent of our
God the Christ from Heaven for our salvation, and the place where Jacob
saw it was a type of the Church, which is being interpreted, the House
of God. The stones are a type of the altar, and their being anointed
with oil \[a type\] of the union of Godhead with Manhood. The vow which
he made of a tenth of his goods is a type of the Eucharist. Jacob
journeyed from the place of the vision till he came to the town of his
uncle Laban. He saw a well of water, at which three flocks of sheep were
lying down; over the mouth of the well was a great stone. Rachel, the
daughter of Jacob’s uncle, was standing there with the sheep. Jacob came
near to the well, removed the stone from its mouth, and watered the
sheep that were with Rachel. Then he approached Rachel and kissed her.
Jacob’s uncovering of the well was a type of Baptism, which was veiled
from of old, and <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> uncovered in the latter
\[days\]. That which the priest gives to those whom he baptizes in the
water is in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Know, O my son, that Jacob did not come forward to kiss Rachel
until he had uncovered the well and watered her sheep from it. Likewise,
I say that it is not permitted in the law of the Christ for any one to
enter the Church till after baptism, for if he is baptized, he has
become one of Christ’s sheep. The prophet Moses said in his book that
Jacob wrought with his uncle Laban seven years for Rachel, whom he loved
of Laban’s daughters, for she was at the height of beauty, but he gave
him his ugly daughter. Like this was the story of Moses with the Jews
whom God saved from the bondage of Pharaoh. On account of them he did
not give the young girl, but he gave her who was old and faded. Verily
the first girl whom he gave to Jacob had ugly eyes, and the second one
was perfect in face and had beautiful eyes. The face of the first one
was covered lest the children of Israel should look at its beauty; the
second one had her face uncovered, and had a bright, and shining and
beautiful personality. The girl with ugly eyes who was spouse of Jacob
was the type of the people of his day whom he ruled; in his time there
were prophets, and saints and pure ones, and there was little sin in
them. The faded old woman whom Moses describes, she is the people of the
children of Israel which went astray in the worship of idols, and left
the worship of God; and the girl whose face was covered so that it was
not possible for the children of Israel to look at her was the tribe
that was established on the holy mount, which did not mingle with the
children of Israel, and did not look at them, and if they had looked at
it (the tribe), verily they would have imitated its good works. The
better and brighter girl is the tribe which received the Lord of the
world, the Christ, and worshipped Him in His Godhead. He enlightened our
hearts by His holiness.

 When Jacob had reached sixty-nine years, Reuben was born to him, then
followed him his brethren whom God brought out of the loins of Jacob;
these were Simeon and Levi, Judah the ancestor of Mary, Issachar and
Zebulun; Joseph and Benjamin <span id="page_44">p. 44</span> the sons of
the beautiful Rachel; Gad and Asher, sons of Zilpah; Dan and Naphtali,
sons of Bilhah the maid of Rachel. Two years after the emigration of
Jacob, he returned to Isaac his father. He lived after that fully
thirty-one years of Levi’s life. When he reached one hundred and twenty
years his father Isaac died. Twenty-three years afterwards he journeyed
from Haran to the elevated land; Joseph was sold during the lifetime of
Isaac, and he was a companion to Jacob in his sorrow. After the sale of
Joseph, Isaac died; his sons Jacob and Esau buried him beside the grave
of his father Abraham. After nine years Rebecca died, and was buried
near the grave of Abraham. Judah married Hoshâ‘ the Canaanitess; Jacob
was grieved at that because she was not of the children of Israel, and
said to him, “By the God of Abraham and Isaac, do not mingle the seed of
Canaan with us,” and he did not accept it from him. He begat from her Er
and Onan \[Cod. Othen\] and Shelah. Judah wedded his son Er with Tamar
the daughter of Kedar, son of Levi. Er wrought the deed of the people of
Sodom, and God punished him for his deed. God killed him in answer to
the prayer of Jacob, and the seed of Canaan was not mingled with his
seed. Then this Tamar disguised herself, and sat in the middle of the
way; Judah came together with her, not knowing that she was his
daughter-in-law; she conceived by him, and bare Pharez and Zarah. At
this time Jacob and his children journeyed to Egypt, and stayed with
Joseph for seventeen years. When he had completed \[a hundred\] and
forty-seven years of life he died, Joseph that day being fifty-six years
old. The wise physicians of Pharaoh embalmed him. After this Joseph
removed his body and placed it beside the bodies of his father and of
his grandfather Abraham. Pharez the son of Judah begat Hezron, and
Hezron begat Aram, and Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Nahson,
who was the most cunning of the sons of Judah. And Aminadab wedded
Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest to a girl, and from her he begat
Phinehas the priest, who by his prayer took away death from the people,
and whose was the deed with the javelin. Know that the priesthood was
from Aminadab among the people of Israel, and from Nahson the kinghood
came among them. Look, <span id="page_45">p. 45</span> O my son Clement,
how from Judah came the priesthood and the kinghood among the children
of Israel. Nahson begat a son, who is Salmon; Salmon begat Boaz. When
Boaz was old, he married Ruth the Moabitess; in her was kinghood, for
she was of the race of kings. She was of the children of Lot. God did
not make Lot unclean for his cohabiting with his daughters, and did not
attach blame to him, and did not depreciate his good deed in his support
of his uncle Abraham in his exile, and his reception of the Angels in
faith, but He put the kinghood into Ruth who was of his race, so that
the Incarnation of our Lord the Christ was of the race of Abraham. Also
\[into\] her, the wife of Solomon, son of David, by whom he begat.
Solomon verily had six hundred free women and four hundred concubines,
and he obtained no child from any of them, because God, may His name be
praised! wished that the seed of Canaan should not mingle with the seed
of the chosen people from whom Jesus the Christ took flesh. The rest of
the wives of Solomon were of the children of Canaan. Nevertheless Moses
the Prophet of God related, for the responsible books, the chronicles of
the children of Israel relate that Levi, when he entered Egypt with his
father Jacob, begat there his son Amram the father of Moses. When Moses
was born he was thrown out by his mother into the Egyptian Nile, and
Sapphira the daughter of Pharaoh, king of Egypt, saved him from drowning
and brought him up in her father’s palace. When he grew up and had
finished forty years, he killed Casoum the Egyptian, chief of the
swordsmen of Pharaoh. He fled to Reuel to the priest of Midian for fear
of Pharaoh, and that because Sapphira had died before this, and if she
had been still there, why should Moses have been afraid of Pharaoh?
Moses married Zipporah daughter of Jethro, priest of Midian. She bare
him two sons, these were Gershon and Eleazar, at the time of the birth
of Joshua the son of Nun, and Moses’ age was fifty-two years. When he
had completed eighty years, God spake to him from the thorn bush, and
his tongue stammered out of fear for God, and he said, “O Lord, at the
time when thou spakest to thy servant, his tongue stammered.” All his
years were 120. He spent forty in Egypt, and <span id="page_46">p.
46</span> forty in Midian, and he governed the children of Israel forty
years in the wilderness. When he died, Joshua the son of Nun governed
them thirty-one years. Then Chushan the Atheist governed them after him
eight years. Then Othniel the son of Kenaz the brother of Caleb, for
forty years. Then the Moabites enslaved the children of Israel for
eighteen years. Then \[God\] prepared their deliverance from their hand.
Their government was presided over by Ehud the son of Gera for eighty
years. In the twenty-sixth year of the reign of this Ehud, the fourth
thousand \[year\] from the beginning was finished. Then after him the
famous Jabin presided over their government for an interval of twenty
years, then Deborah and Barak looked after it for forty years. Then the
Midianites conquered them, and enslaved them for seven years, then God
saved them by the hand of Gideon. He presided over their government for
forty years; then his son Abimelech for three years. Then Jufa (Tola)
the son of Puah for twenty years, then a daughter of the Gileadite
twenty-two years. Then the children of Ammon conquered the children of
Israel and enslaved them for eighteen years, then God saved them by the
hands of Jephthah, he who offered his daughter as a sacrifice before
God. And Ibzan governed them for six years, then after him Elon son of
Zebulon for ten years. Then Abdon for eight years. Then the Philistines
fought with the children of Israel and subdued them and enslaved them
for forty years, and God saved them by the hands of Samson. He governed
them for twenty years, and after him they remained for twelve years
without a leader. Then there arose to rule them Eli the priest, and he
governed them for forty years, then Samuel for twenty-two years. In his
time the children of Israel rebelled against God, and set up Saul as
king over them; he was the first king among the children of Israel, and
he governed them for forty years. In the days of Saul appeared the giant
Goliath; he drove out the children of Israel and killed their young men.
Then God sent against him David the Prophet, and he killed him; against
Saul \[He sent\] the Philistines, and they killed him, because Saul left
<span id="page_47">p. 47</span> off seeking help from God, and sought
help from devils. David the son of Jesse reigned over the children of
Israel for forty years. Then after his Solomon reigned over them and did
many wonderful things; amogst them his sending to the city of Ophir, and
bringing out the gold from its mountains, and ships continued for
thirty-six months carrying gold from its mountains. Also he built the
city of Tadmor in the interior of the wilderness, and wrought in it many
extraordinary things. When Solomon passed by Sabad, a building built by
Kourhi and Abu Nigaf (they whom Nimrod had sent to Bila‘am the priest
when he heard of his occupation with the stars, and he built there this
altar to the Sun and a stone fort), Solomon built there also a city
called the City of the Sun. Then Aradus, which is in the middle of the
sea, was built at Solomon’s command and they praised him yet more for
his wisdom. There journeyed to him the Queen of Sheba and she was
obedient to his religious worship. There came up to him at his command
Hiram king of Tyre, and had a real love for him; he had already been a
friend to David before him. His reign was before the reign of David, and
he remained to the last of King Zedekiah. Solomon took one thousand
wives, as we said above about him; and they deteriorated his mind when
he exceeded in his love to them, and they got the power to mock at him,
and it caused him to slide away from the worship of God; he sacrificed
to idols and worshipped them instead of the Lord. He died, after
reigning for forty years, an idolator and an infidel. Then Hiram king of
Tyre was seduced and forgot his humanity and disbelieved in God, and
claimed divinity, and he said, “I sit in the heart of the seas like the
sitting of a God”; and news of him came to Nebuchadnezzar, and he
journeyed to him till he killed him. In the chronicles of the Hebrews, O
my son Clement, \[we learn\] that in the days of this Hiram appeared the
purple dye, and this \[was that\] a shepherd and his sheep were on the
sea-shore, and he saw a dog of his gnawing with its mouth something that
came out of the sea, and its mouth was filled with its blood. He looked
at the blood, and had never seen the like of it. He took some <span
id="page_48">p. 48</span> clean wool and wiped this blood with it; with
that he made a crown and put it upon his head. It had a brightness like
the brightness of the sun or rays of fire. The news of it came to Hiram;
he sent for him and wondered greatly at the beauty of his dye. He
assembled the dyers of his kingdom and gave them a commission for its
like, and they were amazed at this, until some of the wise men of his
time possessed themselves of the purple shell-fish. He made garments for
himself with its blood, and he rejoiced over this with a great joy.
Thou, O my son, and all the Greeks, disagree with the Hebrews in this
narrative. After Solomon, Rehoboam his son reigned, and defiled the land
by the worship of idols, by much whoredom in the city of Jerusalem, and
by sacrificing to devils. In his day the kingdom of the house of David
was divided, and became two parts. In his fifth year journeyed Shishak
king of Egypt to Jerusalem, and took possession of all that was in the
treasuries of the Lord’s house and the treasuries of David and Solomon,
the vessels of gold and silver, and he was strengthened by this in his
power. He said to the Jews, “This is none of your earning; it is some of
what your fathers brought out of Egypt at the time of their flight.” And
Rehoboam the son of Solomon died an infidel, after he had reigned for
seventeen years. Abia his son reigned after him, being twenty years old.
He enslaved Jerusalem and destroyed it, and his mother Ma‘ka, the
daughter of Abishalom, commended his deeds. He died after three years,
and Asa reigned. He did right, and abolished the worship of the stars
and the images, and whoredom from Jerusalem. He drove away his mother
from his kingdom, because she committed adultery and built an altar to
the idols. There came to him Azârâh king of Hind, and Asa put him to
flight, and reigned for forty years, then he died. After him his son
Jehoshaphat reigned, and he went in the way of his father in
righteousness, but he loved the household of Ahab, and kept company with
them. He built ships, and sent by them to the land of Ophir to bring
gold from its mountains. God sunk his ships, and was angry with him and
his mother <span id="page_49">p. 49</span> Sem daughter of Uriah
daughter of Shalom. When he had died, his son Joram reigned, being
thirty-two years of age. He was disobedient, and sacrificed to devils,
on account of his wife Aliah (Athaliah) daughter of Amsir (Omri) son of
the sister of Ahab. He died an infidel. After him Ahaziah reigned, being
twenty years of age. He was a shameless infidel. The Lord delivered him
over to his enemies, and they killed him after one year of his reign.
His mother took the kingdom to herself, and killed the kings’ sons, that
thereby she might destroy the kingdom of the family of David. None were
saved from her except Joash, for Jehosheba the daughter of Joram son of
Jehoshaphat hid him. She increased adultery and infidelity in Jerusalem.
She died after seven years, and the people of Jerusalem thought about
who should reign over them, Jehoiada knew about that, and their choice
fell upon none but Joash whom Jehoiada had hidden. He sent and brought
\[him\] out to the house of the Lord; the warriors completely armed
surrounded him and Jehoiada the priest seated him upon the throne of the
family of David his father, he being seven years of age. His mother’s
name was Zibiah of the family of Sheba. Jehoiada the priest covenanted
with him that he should do righteousness before the Lord. When Jehoiada
the priest died, Joash forgot his covenants, and did not know rightly
what was administered from the throne of the family of David, nor the
shedding of innocent blood. He died after he had reigned for forty
years. After him his son reigned, and his mother’s name was Jehoaddan.
He killed every one who had killed any one of his household, but spared
their sons, for in this he followed the law of the Lord. He died after
he had reigned for twenty-nine years, and his son Azariah reigned after
him, being twenty years old. His mother’s name was Jecholiah. He did
right before the Lord, save that he was bold about the priesthood, for
which reason he became a leper, and God weakened the power of Isaiah the
prophet from prophecy until this Azariah died, because he did not
reprove him for his boldness about the priesthood. The duration of his
reign was fifty-two <span id="page_50">p. 50</span> years, and Jotham
his son reigned after him, being twenty-five years of age, and his
mother’s name was Jerusha the daughter of Dafma (Zadok). He did right,
and the duration of his reign was sixteen years. After him his son Ahaz
reigned, being twenty years of age; his mother’s name was Jahkebez the
daughter of Levi. He did wickedly, and sacrificed to devils and idols.
God was angry with him, and Tiglath son of Cardak, king of Assyria, came
against him, and besieged him. Ahaz wrote himself down his vassal, and
delivered Jerusalem up to the Assyrians, and he carried all the gold and
silver that was in the temple of God to Assyria the regions of Tiglath.
In his time the children of Israel were led captive, and went down to
Babylon. The king of Assyria sent instead Babylonians to the land of
Judah to dwell in it; and they complained of what befel them to the king
of Assyria, and he sent to them Urijah one of the priests of the
children of Israel that he might teach them the law of the Lord. When
they knew it, the lions ceased from them, and went to the land of
Babylon and to Samaria. When he (Ahaz) had completed sixteen years he
died, and his son Hezekiah reigned after him, being twenty-five years
old, and his mother’s name was Ahi (Abi) the daughter of Zechariah. He
did right and broke the idols, and caused the sacrifices to cease, and
cut up the serpent that Moses had made in the wilderness of the
wandering (Tih), because the children of Israel were seduced in their
worship of it. In the fourth year of his reign, Shalmanezer king of
Assyria came to Jerusalem, and took captive the Israelites who were in
it, and drove them away to a place beyond Babylon named Media. In the
twenty-sixth year journeyed Sennacherib king of the province to the
cities of Judah, and took captive those whom he found in them and their
villages excepting Jerusalem. Verily it was saved by the prayer and
cries of king Hezekiah. When Hezekiah was ill with his death-sickness,
he grieved and wept because he had no son to reign after him; he prayed
before the Lord, and said, “Lord, have mercy on Thy servant, and do not
let him die without offspring; let not the kingdom fail from the house
of David, nor the blessings cease which have come on the tribes in my
days.” The Lord answered him, and told him that <span id="page_51">p.
51</span> He had added to his life fifteen years; he recovered; a son
was born to him, and he called him Manasseh. When twenty-six years of
his reign were finished, and he was rejoicing in his son, he died. His
son reigned after him, being twelve years old; his mother’s name was
Hephzibah. He did wickedly, and his infidelity surpassed all the infidel
kings that were before him in evil-doing. He built an altar to idols,
and sacrificed to them; he defiled Jerusalem with corruption, and the
worship of idols. He took Isaiah the prophet, and they sawed him with a
wooden saw from the middle of his head to between his feet, because he
had reproved him for his wicked deeds. Isaiah’s age that day was one
hundred and twenty years, he began to prophesy when he was ninety years
old. Then Manasseh repented about that, and turned to his Lord; he put
on sackcloth, and imposed a fast upon himself \[all\] the days of his
life. God accepted his repentance and he died. His son Amon reigned
after him, being that day twenty-two years of age; his mother’s name was
Musalmath the daughter of Hasoun. He did wicked deeds before the Lord,
and burned his children in the fire. He reigned twelve years and he
died. After him his son Josiah reigned, being sixty-eight years of age;
his mother’s name was Arnea, daughter of Azariah son of Tarfeeb. He kept
righteously the feast of the Passover, a feast such as the children of
Israel had never kept since the time of the Prophet Moses; he abolished
the sacrifices to the images, broke the idols, sawed them with saws,
killed their worshippers, and burnt in the fire the bones of the
prophets of the Honoured One. He cleansed Jerusalem from defilements.
None like him reigned over the Jews before him nor after him. He
remained there for thirty years, but Pharaoh king of Egypt killed him.
After him his son Jehoahaz reigned, being twenty-two years of age; his
mother’s name was Hamtoul the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah. Not more
than three months of his reign had passed when Pharaoh the lame bound
him, made him fast with chains, and carried him to Egypt, and he died
there. After him his brother Jehoiakim reigned, being twenty-five years
of age; his mother’s name was Zobeed, daughter of Yerkuiah of the town
of Al-Ramah. In the third year of his <span id="page_52">p. 52</span>
reign Nebuchadnezzar approached Jerusalem, reigned over it, and made him
his vassal for three years. He rebelled against Nebuchadnezzar, and
death overtook him. His son Jehoiachin reigned after him, being eighteen
years of age; his mother’s name was Tahseeb the daughter of Lutanan of
the people of Jerusalem. Nebuchadnezzar journeyed a second time to
Jerusalem, bound him after three months of his reign, and carried him
and his officers and the armies of his soldiers to Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar in his first attack had bound the wife of Jehoiakim and
other wives of the grandees and nobles of Jerusalem, and carried them to
Babylon. The wife of Jehoiakim was pregnant that day, and in the way she
gave birth to Daniel. In the Captivity were also Hananiah, Azariah, and
Mishael, sons of Johanan. The reason of this Captivity was that
Jehoiachin had made a truce with Nebuchadnezzar, then they betrayed one
another. When Johanan died, Zedekiah the uncle of Jehoiakim reigned
after him, being twenty-one years of age; the seat of all the kings of
the children of Israel was Jerusalem; the name of Zedekiah’s mother was
Hamtoul; he was the last of the kings of the children of Israel. After
eleven years of his reign, Nebuchadnezzar journeyed for the third time
to the West, to pacify its cities, and the cities of the Euphrates, and
of the Great Sea. He made his way through the islands of the sea, and
took captive their people, he laid Tyre waste, and smote it with fire.
He killed Hiram its king as we have already said. He entered Egypt to
seek those of the children of Israel who had fled, and killed its
Pharaoh. He returned by sea to Jerusalem, and was victorious there a
second time. He bound Zedekiah, killed his sons Jerbala and Rahmut, and
carried him blind and fettered with chains to Babylon. This was a
punishment from God to him for his deed that he did to the prophet
Jeremiah when he threw him into a miry well. Nebuchadnezzar appointed
Jozadan (Nebuzaradan) the captain of his prison in Jerusalem until he
had laid waste its wall, and burned the temple of the Lord which Solomon
had built in it. He demolished the rest of the dwellings of Jerusalem,
carried all the tools that he found of iron and brass, and the raiment
which belonged to the house <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> of the Lord
to Babylon. Between Simeon the High Priest of Jerusalem and Jozadan
captain of the prison to Nebuchadnezzar there was love and friendship.
He asked if he would give him the old writings; he and Simeon carried
them with him, being among the crowd of the Captivity. He saw a well in
his way among the borders of the West; be laid the writings in it, and
put with them a bronze vase, filled with glowing coals, and in it sweet
smelling incense; he covered up this well, and went to Babylon. The
devastation of Jerusalem was completed, and it became a waste. There was
not one person in it, nor even a building save the tomb of the prophet
Jeremiah. Jeremiah in his lifetime had dwelt in a place called Samaria;
he commanded a man named Uriah that he should be buried in Jerusalem,
and he did it. It was not known that this place was the grave of
Jeremiah except at the devastation of Jerusalem.

 Now for the genealogies. The Syrians say that no one looked after them
after the last devastation of Jerusalem, except among the tribe of the
Philistines, and no one looked after the genealogy of the people among
whom the children of Israel married, nor from whence was the beginning
of the priesthood. Jehoiachin did not cease to be bound in the land of
Babylon, and shut up in prison for thirty-seven years. Meanwhile there
was born to Mardul a son named Mardahi, and the king let Jehoiachin out
of the prison, and married him to Helmuth the daughter of Eliakim. By
him she gave birth in the land of Babylon to a son, who was called
Salathiel. Then he married another who was called Melkat the daughter of
Ezra the teacher, and had no child by her in Babylon. At that time Cyrus
reigned in Babylon. He married Masabet the sister of Zerubabel a
nobleman of the Jews, according to the custom of Persia; he let her rule
his affairs; she begged him to restore the children of Israel to
Jerusalem, and he did this to its place where it had been before him. He
commanded a herald to proclaim, that there should not remain one of the
children of Israel, who should not present himself to Zerubabel his
brother-in-law. When they were gathered together, he commanded him to
take them to Jerusalem and that they should build it. The children <span
id="page_54">p. 54</span> of Israel returned to Jerusalem in the second
year of the reign of Cyrus the Persian. At that time was completed the
fifth thousand from the beginning. The children of Israel after their
return to Jerusalem remained without a teacher to teach them the law of
the Lord or any writings of the prophets. When Ezra saw this, he went to
the well in which the Law had been put, uncovered it, and found the vase
full of fire and incense, and he found the writings faded, there was no
means to get them. God revealed to him that he should receive of them
from His hands; he succeeded, and threw it on his mouth once, and twice
and thrice, and God put into it the power of the spirit of prophecy; he
kept all the writings, and that fire which was in the vase in the well
was from the fire of Paradise which was in the house of the Lord.
Zerubabel journeyed to Jerusalem as king over it. By Joshua son of
Jozadak the High Priest and by Ezra, the writing of the Law and the
Books of the Prophets were completed. After their return, the children
of Israel kept the feast of the Passover, and all the feasts that they
celebrated were three. The first was the feast of Moses in Egypt, the
second the feast of Josiah, and the third after their return from
Babylon in the days of Cyrus the Persian. The number of the years of the
Captivity which Jeremiah the prophet mentions are seventy years. The
children of Israel built the temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, and its
building was finished by the hands of Zerubabel and Joshua the son of
Jozadak the priest, and Ezra the scribe of the Law, in six and forty
years. When the books of the genealogies were destroyed, the fathers
were in despair about genealogy, and there was despair about it after
them, until their accuracy was guaranteed by the secret books of the
Hebrews. I relate this to thee, my son Clement, that when Zerubabel
journeyed to Jerusalem, he married Malka the daughter of Ezra the
teacher, and by her he begat a son called Abiud. She had already been
the wife of Jehoiachin before him. When Abiud grew up, he married Ragib,
daughter of Joshua the son of Jozadak the priest. By he he begat a son
called Jehoiachim. Jehoiachim married a wife, and begat a son by her.
When he grew up, he married <span id="page_55">p. 55</span> Alfeet,
daughter of Hesron, and by her he begat Zadok. Zadok married Felbin the
daughter of Rahab, and by her he begat Atin. Atin married Hesheeb,
daughter of Jula, and by he he begat Tur (Eliud). Tur (Eliud) married
Salsin, daughter of Hasoul, and by her he begat Eleazar. Eleazar married
Habeeth, daughter of Malih, and by her he begat Manar (Matthan). Manar
(Matthan) married Seerâb, daughter of Phinehas, and by her he begat two
sons in \[one\] womb. One of them was Jacob, who was called by two
names, Joachim son of Yartâh. Jacob maried Had the daughter of Eleazar,
and by her he begat Joseph. Joachim married Hannah, daughter of Ka‘rdal,
and by her he begat Mary, by whom our Lord the Christ was incarnate. On
account of our knowledge, O my son Clement, about the genealogy of the
Lady Mary, and the genealogies of her ancestors, the Jews begin by
assertions about us that we do not understand the genealogies, and we do
not know them; and they venture to mock the mother of Light, the Lady
Mary, the Virgin, and they attribute he genealogy to fornication,
because they do not know that it was the Holy Ghost who came down on us,
a company of twelve in the upper room of Zion, who taught us all that we
need to know about the genealogies and the rest of the mysteries, as He
had taught Azariah (Ezra) the teacher all the Law, so that he kept it
and renewed it. Let the mouths of the cursed Jews now be stopped, and
let them know assuredly that Mary the pure was of the race of Judah,
also of the race of David, also of the race of Abraham; that they have
nothing against the genealogies which the Holy Ghost taught us, and
there is not a book left in their hands from which they can make a stand
against genealogy, since their books have been burnt three times; the
first time in the days of Antiochus, who defiled the temple of the Lord,
and commanded sacrifices to idlos; the second by Herod at the time of
the devastation of Jerusalem; and the third, hear, O blessed son, what
the Holy Ghost has revealed to me, about the sixty-three fathers, whose
names are registered, and how the pedigree came about to the tribe from
which was incarnate our God the Christ.

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

 The beginning of genealogies.

 Adam begat Seth. Seth married Aclima, sister of Abel, and by her begat
Enos. Enos married a woman called Hita, daughter of Mahmouma of the sons
of Har son of Seth, and by her begat Cainan. Cainan married Karith,
daughter of Kersham son of Maheâl, and by her begat Mahlaleel. Mahlaleel
married Teshabfatir, daughter of Enos, and by her begat Jared. Jared
married Zebeeda, daughter of Kargilan son of Cainan, and by her begat
Enoch. Enoch married Jardakin, daughter of Terbah son of Mahlaleel, and
by her begat Methuselah. Methuselah married Rahoub, daughter of Serkeen
son of Enoch, and by her begat Lamech. Lamech married Kifar, daughter of
Jutab son of Methuselah, and by her begat Noah. Noah married Haikal,
daughter of Mashamos son of Enoch, and by her begat Sem. Sem married
Leah, daughter of Nasih, and by her begat Arphaxad. Arphaxad married
Fardou, daughter of Salweh son of Japhet, and by her begat Salah. Salah
married Muldath, daughter of Kahin son of Sem, and by her begat Obed
(Eber). Obed (Eber) married Rasdah sister of Melchisedek, daughter of
Malih son of Arphaxad, and by her begat Peleg. Peleg married Hadeeb,
daughter of Hamlâh, and by her begat Jareu (Reu). Jareu (Reu) married
Tanaa‘b, daughter of Obed (Eber), and by her begat Serug. Serug married
Feel, and by her begat Nahor. Nahor married a wife, A‘âkris daughter of
Reu, and by her begat Tarah. Tarah married two wives, one of them Juta,
and the other Salmat, by Juta he begat Abraham and by Salmat Sarah.
Abraham married Sarah, daughter of this Salmat his father’s wife, and by
her begat Isaac. Isaac married a wife called Rebecca, daughter of
Fathâel, and by her begat Jacob. Jacob married Leah, daughter of Laban,
and by her begat Judah. Judah begat Pharez by Tamar. Pharez son of Judah
married Afdeeb, daughter of Levi, and by her begat Hesron. Hesron
married Farteeb, daughter of Zebulon, and by her begat Aram. Aram
married Safuza, daughter of Judah, and by her begat Aminadab. Aminadab
married Baruma, daughter of Hesron, and by her begat Nahshon. Nahshon
married Aram, daughter <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> of Adam, and by
her begat Salmon. Salmon married Saleeb (Rahab), daughter of Aminadab,
and by her begat Boaz. Boaz married Aroof (Ruth), daughter of Lot, and
by her begat Obed. Obed married Nefut, daughter of Shela, and by her
begat Asse (Jesse). Asse (Jesse) married Amrat, daughter of Othan, and
by her begat David. David married Balseba‘ (Bathsheba), daughter of
Joutân son of Shela, and by her begat Solomon. Solomon married Naama,
daughter of Maheel, and by her begat Rehoboam: who had none like him.
Rehoboam married Naheer, daughter of Al, and by her begat Abia. Abia
married Maachah the daughter of Abishalom, and by her bcgat Asa. Asa
married Auzbah the daughter of Shalih, and by her begat Jehoshaphat.
Jehoshaphat married Na‘mna the daughter of Amon, and by her begat Joram.
Joram married Tala‘ia, daughter of Amoi, and by her begat Ahaz. Ahaz
married Suma the daughter of Balhi, and by her begat Amaziah. Amaziah
married Kama, daughter of Caram, and by her begat Uzziah. Uzziah married
Jerousa, daughter of Zadok, and by her begat Jeream (Jotham). Jeream
(Jotham) married Jahfat, daughter of Hani, and by her begat Ahaz. Ahaz
married Ahir, daughter of Zachariah, and by her begat Hezekiah. Hezekiah
married Hephzibah, daughter of Jarmoun, and by her begat Manasseh.
Manasseh married Artida, daughter of Azuriah, and by her begat Aman.
Aman married Tarib, daughter of Murka, and by her begat Josiah. Josiah
married Hamtoul, daughter of Armeed (Jeremiah), and by her begat
Jehoahaz. Jehoahaz married a woman and had no sons by her. Jehoiakim
reigned after the death of his brother, and married a woman called
Carteem, daughter of Haluta, and by her begat Salaeel (Salathiel).
Salaeel (Salathiel) married Hamtat, daughter of Eliakim, and by her
begat Zerubabel. Zerubabel married Malkut, daughter of Ezra, and by her
begat Armeed (Abiud). Armeed (Abiud) married Awarkeeth, daughter of
Zadok, and by her begat Jachim. Jachim married Hali, daughter of
Zurniem, and by her begat A‘zor. A‘zor married Afi, daughter of Hasor,
and by her begat Sadoc. Sadoc married Faltir, daughter of Dorteeb, and
by her begat Asham Joteed. Joteed Asham married Hasgab, daughter of
Jula, and by her <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> begat Liud (Eliud).
Liud (Eliud) married Shabshetin, daughter of Hubaballia, and by her
begat Eleazar. Eleazar married Hanbeth, daughter of Jula, and by her
begat Mathan. Mathan married Seerab, daughter of Phinehas, and by her
begat Jacob. Jacob married Harteeb, daughter of Eleazar, and by her
begat Joachim, known as Jonahir. Joachim married Hannah, and returned to
the house of Eleazar. And after sixty years of his marriage to her, he
begat by her Mary the Virgin, her by whom the Christ became incarnate.
Joseph the Carpenter was the son of her \[paternal\] uncle Laha, and
therefore his vote did not fall against her when Ram, priest of the
children of Israel, delivered her to a man who should be surety for her.
It was in the hidden work of God (may He be glorious and exalted!) and
in the mystery of His knowledge that there was no escape from the Jews
reproaching Mary the pure on account of her bearing the Christ. To our
Master and our God and our Lord Jesus the Christ be praise and power and
greatness and dignity and worship with the Father and the Holy Ghost
from now unto all time and throughout all ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](aa3)
