[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc26014)  [Next](cc26016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>Chapter 9

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001.md)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as
*other* people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast
loved a reward upon every cornfloor.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Ne laeteris Israel super exultatione
sicuti populi, quia scortata es a Deo tuo: dilexisti mercedem super
omnes areas tritici.

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span><span id="xvi.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>It is not known at what time the Prophet
delivered this discourse, but it is enough to know that it is directed
against the obstinate wickedness of the people, because they could by no
means be turned to repentance, though their defection was, at the same
time, manifest. He now declares that God was so angry, that no success
could be hoped for. And this warning ought to be carefully noticed; for
we see that hypocrites as long as God spares or indulges them, take
occasion to be secure: they think that they have sure peace with God,
when he bears with them even for a short time; and further, except the
drawn sword appears, they are never afraid. Since, then, men sleep so
securely in their vices, especially when the Lord treats them with
forbearance and kindness, the Prophet here declares, that the Israelites
had no reason to rejoice for their prosperity, or to flatter themselves
under this cover, that the Lord had not immediately taken vengeance on
them; for he says, that though all people under heaven were prosperous,
yet Israel would be miserable, because he had committed fornication
against his God.

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet.
*Israel,* he says, *rejoice not thou with exultations like the people;*
that is, “Whatever prosperity may happen to thee, though God may seem
propitious by not afflicting thee, but kindly bearing with thee, — nay,
though he may bountifully nourish thee, and may seem to give thee many
proofs of paternal favor, yet there is no reason for thee to felicitate
thyself, for vain will be this joy, because an unhappy end awaits thee.”
*Thou hast committed fornication*, he says, *against thy God* This
warning was very necessary. This vice, we know, has ever prevailed among
men, that they are blind to their sins as long as the Lord spares them;
and experience, at the present day, most fully proves, that the same
disease still cleaves to our marrow. As it is so, let this passage of
the Prophet awaken us, so that we may not rejoice, though great
prosperity may smile on us; but let us rather inquire, whether God has a
just cause of anger against us. Though he may not openly put forth his
hand, though he may not pursue us, we ought yet to anticipate his wrath;
for it is the proper office of faith, not only to find out from present
punishment that God is angry, but also to fear, on account of any
prevailing vices, the punishment that is far distant. Let us then learn
to examine ourselves, and to make a severe scrutiny, even when the Lord
conceals his displeasure, and visits us not for our sins. If, then, we
have committed fornication against God, all our prosperity ought to be
suspected by us; for this contempt, in abusing God’s blessings, will
have to be dearly bought by us.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>The comparison here made is also of great
weight. *As other people,* says the Prophet. He means, that though God
might pardon heathen nations, yet he would punish Israel, for less
excusable was his apostasy and rebellion in having committed fornication
against his God. That other nations wandered in their errors, was no
wonder; but that Israel should have thus cast off the yoke, and then
denied his God, that he should have broken and violated the fidelity of
sacred marriage, — all this was quite monstrous. It is then no wonder
that God here declares, by the mouth of his Prophet, that though he
spared other people, he would yet inflict just punishment on Israel.

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>He then adds, *Thou hast loved a reward upon
every cornfloor* He pursues the same metaphor, that Israel had committed
fornication like an unchaste and perfidious woman. Hence he says, that
they were like harlots, who are so enticed by gain, that they are not
ashamed of their lewdness. He said yesterday, that the people had hired
lovers; but now he says, that they were led astray by the hope of
reward. These things are apparently contradictory; but their different
aspect is to be noticed. Israel hired for himself lovers, when he
purchased, with a large sum of money, a confederacy with the Assyrians;
but, at the same time, when he worshipped false gods with the hope of
gain, he was like strumpets, who prostitute their body to all kinds of
filthiness, when any rewards entice them.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>But a question may be here moved, Why does
the Prophet say that the reward is meretricious, when a plenty of corn
is sought for? for he reproaches the Israelites for no other thing, but
that they wished their floors to be filled with wheat. This seems not
indeed to be in itself worthy of reproof, for who of us does not desire
a fruitful increase of corn and wine? Nay, since the Lord, among other
blessings, promises to give abundance of provision, it is certainly
lawful to ask by supplications and prayers what he promises. But the
Prophet calls it a wicked reward, when what God has promised to give is
sought from idols. When therefore we depart from the one true God, and
devise for ourselves new gods to nourish us and supply our food and
raiment, we are like strumpets, who choose by lewdness to gain support,
rather than to receive it from their own husbands. This is then to be
like a woman whom her husband treats bountifully, and she casts her eyes
on others, and seeks a filthy reward from adulterers. Such are
idolaters. For God offers himself freely to us, and testifies that he
will perform the part of a father and preserver; but the greater part,
despising the blessing of God, flee elsewhere, and invent for themselves
false gods, as we see to be done under the Papacy: for who are the
patrons (<span id="xvi.i-p10.1"></span>*nutricios* — nourishers) they
implore, when either drought or any other adverse season threatens
sterility and want? They have an innumerable multitude of gods to whom
they flee. They are then strumpets who hunt for gain from adulterers;
while, at the same time, God freely promises to be a husband to them,
and to take care that nothing should be wanting. Since, then, they are
not satisfied with the blessing of God alone, it is a meretricious lust,
which is insatiable, and in itself filthy and disgraceful.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span>We now then see what the Prophet repudiates
in the people of Israel, and that is, They hoped for a larger abundance
of corn from their idols than from the true God, as was the case with
the idolaters mentioned by Jeremiah,

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>‘when we served,’ they said, ‘the queen of
heaven,  
we abounded in wine and corn,’ (<span id="xvi.i-p12.2"></span>[Jer
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017)<span id="xvi.i-p12.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>They compared God with idols, and denied
that they were so well and so sumptuously provided for when they
worshipped God alone. Since, then, idolaters give honour to fictitious
gods, so as to think them to be more liberal to them than the true God,
this is the reason that the Prophet now so severely blames Israel, when
he says that they loved a meretricious reward on all the floors of
wheat. It then follows —

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#002.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**2.** The floor and the winepress shall not
feed them, and the new wine shall fail in her.  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md)

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span>**2.** Area et torcular non pascet eos, et
mustum mentietur in ea.

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>God now denounces such a punishment as the
Israelites deserved. They had been drawn away, as we have said, from the
pure worship of God by allurements; they hoped for more profit from
superstitions. Hence God shows, that he would on this account punish
them by taking away from them their wine and corn, as we have already
noticed in <span id="xvi.ii-p7.2"></span>[Hosea
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#000.md)<span id="xvi.ii-p7.2"></span>: for
it is the only way by which the Lord restores men to a sane mind, or at
least renders them inexcusable, to deprive them of his blessings. The
harlot, as long as gain is to be had, as long as she surpasses all
honest and chaste matrons in her dress and mode of living, is pleased
with herself and blinded by her own splendour; but when she is reduced
to extreme want, when she sees herself to be the laughing-stock of all,
and when she drags a miserable life in poverty, she then sighs and owns
how infatuated she had been in leaving her husband. So the Lord now
declares by his Prophet, that he would thus deal with the Israelites,
that they might no longer please themselves with such delusions.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span>Hence he says, *The floor and the wine-press
shall not feed them, and the new wine shall disappoint them,* (<span
id="xvi.ii-p8.1"></span>*mentietur illis* — shall lie to them;) — that
is, the vineyards shall not answer their expectation. It is the same as
though he said, “As these men regard only their stomach, as they deem
nothing of any moment but provision, therefore *the floor and the
wine-press shall not feed them;* I will deprive them of their support,
that they may understand that they in vain worship false gods.” Let us
take a common similitude: We see some boys so disingenuous as not to be
moved either by disgrace or even by stripes; but as they are subject to
the cravings of appetite, when the father deprives them of bread, they
nearly lose all hope. Stripes do no good, all warnings are slighted; but
when the boy who loves excess sees that bread is denied him, he finds
out that his father’s displeasure ought to be feared. Thus God corrects
men addicted to excessive indulgence; for they are so insensible, that
no other remedy can do them any good.

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>We now, then, apprehend the meaning of the
Prophet. He first reproaches the Israelites for loving a reward, for
hastening after fictitious gods, that they might glut themselves with
great abundance of things: but when the Lord saw that they had become
stupefied in their fatness, he said, “I will deprive them of all their
provisions; neither wine nor wheat shall be given them; this want will
at length drive them to repentance.” We hence see how the Lord deals
with men according to their disposition. And his manner of speaking
ought to be noticed; he says, that neither the floor nor the wine-press
shall feed them. He does not say, that the fields shall be barren; he
does not say, that he would send hail or storm; but he says, that
neither the floor nor the wine-press shall feed them; and further, that
the new wine shall disappoint them; that is, when they shall think
themselves to be blessed with all plenty, when the harvest shall appear
abundant, and when they shall have already, by anticipation, swallowed
up the large produce of their vineyards, all this shall come to nothing;
for neither the floor nor the wine-press shall feed them; nay, the very
wine which they thought to have been prepared shall disappoint them. It
follows —

<span id="xvi.iii"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003.md)<span id="xvi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p2"></span>**3.** They shall not dwell in the Lord’s
land; but Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean
*things* in Assyria.

<span id="xvi.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Non habitabunt in terra Jehovae, et
revertetur Ephraim in Aegyptum, et in Assyria immundum comedent.

<span id="xvi.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet proclaims here a heavier
punishment — that the Lord would drive them into exile. It was indeed a
dreadful repudiation, when they were deprived of the land of Canaan,
which was the Lord’s rest, as it is called in the Psalms, (<span
id="xvi.iii-p6.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014.md)<span
id="xvi.iii-p6.1"></span>.) While they dwelt in the land of Canaan, they
lived as it were in the habitations of God, and could have a sure hope
that he would be a father to them: but when they were thence expelled,
the Lord testified that he regarded them as aliens; it was the same as
when a father disinherits his son. The Prophet now threatens them not
only with the want of food, but also with repudiation, which was far
more grievous — *They shall not dwell,* he says, *in the Lord’s land*

<span id="xvi.iii-p7"></span>There is an elegant play on words in the
verbs here used; <span id="xvi.iii-p7.1"></span>ישבו, *ishebu,* and
<span id="xvi.iii-p7.2"></span>ושב, *usheb;* the one is from <span
id="xvi.iii-p7.3"></span>ישב, *isheb,* and the other from <span
id="xvi.iii-p7.4"></span>שוב, *shub*. ‘They shall not dwell in the
Lord’s land; but Ephraim shall return into Egypt:’ and the other
circumstance is still more dreadful*. In Assyria they shall eat what is
unclean;* for it was the same as if the Lord intended to blend that holy
people with the profane Gentiles, so that there should be afterwards no
difference; for the uncleanness of which the Prophet speaks would have
the effect of destroying the distinction which the adoption of God made
between that people and the profane nations. It was indeed by badges
that the Lord retained the people of Israel, when he ordered them to
abstain from unclean meats: but when they differed nothing, as to common
food, from the Gentiles, it was evident that they were rejected by God,
and that the holiness which belonged to them through the free covenant
of God was obliterated. *They shall eat,* then, *what is unclean in
Assyria;* that is, “They shall not now be under my care and protection;
they shall live according to their own will, as the other nations. I
have hitherto preserved them under some restraint; but now, as they will
not bear to live under my law, they shall have their own liberty, and
shall be profane like the rest of the world, so that they shall become
involved in all the defilements and pollutions of the Gentiles.” This is
the meaning.

<span id="xvi.iii-p8"></span>And now we ought to consider, whether it be
right, when we are among idolaters, to conform to the rites approved by
them. This place, no doubt, as other places, most clearly shows, that
nothing more grievous can happen to us than the doing away of all
difference between us and the profane despisers of God, even in the
outward manner of living. Had the Prophet said, “The Israelites shall
now be hungry in a far country; — the Lord has hitherto fed them with
plenty, for he has performed what he had formerly promised by Moses;
this land has in every way been blessed, and has supplied us with great
abundance of wine, wheat, and oil; yea, honey has flowed like water; but
they shall now be constrained to pine away with want among their
enemies:” — Had the Prophet said this, it would have been a grievous and
severe denunciation; but now he fills them, as it has been already said,
with much greater horror, for he says, *‘They shall eat what is
unclean.’* There seemed to be some great importance belonging to the
external rite: but the outward profession was the badge of divine
adoption. When therefore the people loosened the reins and ate
indiscriminately any meat, and made no choice according to the
directions of the law, then the distinction was removed, so that they
ceased to be the people of God. It is the same also, at this day, with
those who turn aside from a sincere profession of their faith and
associate with the Papists; they renounce, as far as they can, the
favour of God, and abandon themselves to the will of Satan.

<span id="xvi.iii-p9"></span>Let us then know that it is a dreadful
judgement of God, when we are not allowed to profess our faith by
outward worship; and when the ungodly so rule, as to put us under the
necessity of which the Prophet here speaks, even of eating unclean
things, that is, of being implicated in their profane superstitions. It
is then a favour, to be highly valued, when we are permitted to abstain
from all defilements and to worship God purely, so that no one may
contaminate himself by dissimulation: but when we are compelled, under
the tyranny of the ungodly, to conform to impure superstitions, it is a
sign of the dreadful judgement of God; and there is nothing by which any
one can excuse himself in this respect or extenuate his fault, as many
do, whom yet conscience bites within, though they deem it sufficient to
spread forth their own excuses before the eyes of men. But there is
nothing by which such men can either flatter themselves, or dazzle the
eyes of the simple; for it is an extreme reproach, when people, who
ought to be sacred to God and to profess outwardly his pure worship,
suffer themselves to be polluted with unclean food. It follows —

<span id="xvi.iv"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004.md)<span id="xvi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p2"></span>**4.** They shall not offer wine *offerings*
to the Lord, neither shall they be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices
*shall be* unto them as the bread of mourners; all that eat thereof
shall be polluted: for their bread for their soul shall not come into
the house of the Lord

<span id="xvi.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Non libabunt Jehovae vinum, et non
dulcia erunt illi libamina (*vel*, ipsi non erunt grati et suaves
Domino) sacrificia ipsorum sicut panis lugentium ipsis: quicunque
comederint polluentur; quia panis ipsorum pro anima ipsorum, non veniet
in domum Jehovae.

<span id="xvi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.iv-p5"></span><span id="xvi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.iv-p6"></span>It is uncertain whether the Prophet
testifies here, that they should lose their labour and their oil (as
they say) when they sacrificed to God; or whether he declares what would
be the case when they had been driven into exile. Both views seem
probable. Now, if we refer the words of the Prophet to the time of
exile, they seem not unsuitable, *They shall not then pour out wine* *to
Jehovah, and their sacrifices shall not be acceptable to him*; no
oblation shall come any more to the temple of Jehovah.” And thus many
understand the passage; yet the former sense is the most appropriate, as
it may be easily gathered from the context. The Prophet says, that they
shall not pour out wine to Jehovah, and that their sacrifices shall not
be acceptable to him; and then he adds, *All that eat shall be polluted*
It seems not by any means applicable to exiles, that they should vainly
endeavour to pour out wine to God; for their religion forbade them to do
such a thing. Further, when he says, *Their sacrifices shall be to them
as the bread of mourners,* — this must also be understood of sacrifices,
which they were wont daily to offer to God; for in exile (as it has been
said) it was not lawful for them to make any offering, nor had they
there an altar or a sanctuary.

<span id="xvi.iv-p7"></span>What, then, is the meaning of the Prophet,
when he says, “All that eat of their sacrifices shall be polluted”? We
must know that the Prophet speaks here of the intermediate time, as
though he said, “What the Israelites now sacrifice is without any
advantage, and God is not pacified with these trifles for they bring
polluted hands, they change not their minds, they obtrude their
sacrifices on God, but they themselves first pollute them.” Of this same
doctrine we have already often treated; I shall not then dwell on it
now; but it is enough to point out the design of the Prophet, which was
to show that the Israelites were seeking in vain to pacify God by their
ceremonies, for they were vain expiations which God did not regard, but
deemed as worthless.

<span id="xvi.iv-p8"></span>*They shall not then pour out wine to God*.
There is an important meaning in this sentence; for it is certain that
as long as the Israelites lived in their country, they were sedulous
enough in the performance of outward worship, and that drink-offerings
were not neglected by them. Since, then, this custom prevailed among
them, the Prophet must be speaking here only of the effect, and says,
that they exercised themselves in vain in their frivolous worship, for
they poured not out wine to Jehovah, that is, their libation did not
come to Jehovah; and he explains himself afterwards, when he says,
*Their drink-offerings shall not be pleasant to him* However much, then,
the Israelites might labour, the Prophet says that their labour would be
fruitless, for the Lord would reject whatever they did. He then adds
what is to the same purpose, *Their sacrifices shall be unto them as the
bread of mourners; all that eat shall be polluted;* that is, all their
sacrifices are polluted. The Prophet now shows more clearly, not that
there would be no sacrifices, but that they would be in vain, because
the Lord would abominate them, and would repudiate all the masks which
they would put on in his presence, and under the cover of which they
withdrew themselves from their allegiance to him. The reason is, because
when any one unclean touches pure flesh, he pollutes it by his
uncleanness. God then must necessarily abominate whatever impure men
offer, unless they seek to purify their minds. And this principle has
ever prevailed among the very blind, —

<span id="xvi.iv-p9"></span>An impious right hand does not rightly
worship the celestials.  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p9.2"></span>Non bene coelestes impia dextra colit.)

<span id="xvi.iv-p10"></span>These words, which spread everywhere, have
been witnesses of the common feeling; for the Lord intended to draw out
men, as it were, from their converts, when he forced them to make such a
confession. It is no wonder that the Prophet now says (as this truth is
also often taught in Scripture) that the sacrifices of the people, who
continued in their own perfidy, would be like the bread of mourners; as
Isaiah says,

<span id="xvi.iv-p11"></span>‘When one kills an ox, it is the same as if
he slew a man; when one sacrifices a lamb, it is the same as if he
killed a dog,’  
(<span id="xvi.iv-p11.2"></span>[Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)<span id="xvi.iv-p11.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.iv-p12"></span>He compares sacrifices to murders; nor is
it to be wondered at, for it is a more atrocious crime to abuse the
sacred name of God than to kill a man, and this is what ungodly men do.

<span id="xvi.iv-p13"></span>Then he says, “If any one eats, he will be
polluted.” He enlarges on what he said before, and says that if any one
clean should come, he would be polluted by being only in company with
them. We now see how sharply the Prophet here arouses hypocrites, that
they might now cease to promise to themselves what they were wont to do,
and that is, that God would be propitious to them while they pacified
him with their vain things. “By no means,” he says; “nay, there is so
much defilement in your sacrifices, that they even contaminate others
who come, being themselves clean.”

<span id="xvi.iv-p14"></span>But it may be asked, Can the impiety of
others pollute us, when we afford no proof of companionship, nor by
dissimulation manifest any consent? when we then abstain from all
superstition, does society alone contaminate us? The answer is easy: The
Prophet does not avowedly discuss here how another’s impiety may
contaminate men who are clean; but his object was to show in strong
language how much God abhors the ungodly, and that not only he is not
pacified with their sacrifices, but also holds them as the greatest
abominations. But with regard to this question, it is certain that we
become polluted as soon as we content to profane superstitions: yet when
ungodly men administer either holy baptism or the holy supper, we are
not polluted by fellowship with them, for the deed itself has nothing
vicious in it. Then the act only does not pollute us, nor the hidden and
inward impiety of men. This is true: but we are to understand for what
purpose the Prophet said, that all who eat of their sacrifices shall be
polluted.

<span id="xvi.iv-p15"></span>He proceeds with the same subject, *Their
bread for their souls* *etc*. This clause, “for their soul,” may be
explained in two ways. In saying, Bread for their soul, the Prophet
spake by way of contempt; as though he said, “Let them serve themselves
and their stomach with bread, and no more offer it to God; let them then
satiate themselves with bread, for they cannot consecrate to God their
bread, when they themselves are unclean.” But I am inclined to follow
what has been more approved, that bread for their soul shall not come to
the house of the Lord; for men, we know, are then wont to offer their
sacrifices to God to reconcile themselves to him, or at least to present
emblems of their expiation: hence the Prophet says, that bread is
offered for the soul according to the directions of the law; but that
the ungodly could not bring bread into the house of Jehovah, because the
Lord excludes them, as it were, by an interdict. Not that hypocrites
keep away, for we see how boldly they thrust themselves into the temple;
nay, they would occupy the first place; but the Lord yet forbids them to
come to his presence. This is the reason why he says, that the bread of
the ungodly shall not come before God, though in appearance their
oblations glitter before men. It follows —

<span id="xvi.v"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p1"></span><span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#005.md)<span id="xvi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p2"></span>**5.** What will ye do in the solemn day, and
in the day of the feast of the Lord?

<span id="xvi.v-p3"></span>**5.** Quid facietis in die solenni? in die
festivitatis Jehovae?

<span id="xvi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.v-p5"></span><span id="xvi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.v-p6"></span>The Prophet here alludes again to their
exile, and shows how deplorable the condition of the people would be,
when deprived of all their sacrifices. It is indeed true that the
Israelites, when they changed the place of the temple, and when new and
spurious rites were introduced by Jeroboam, became wholly rejected, so
that from that time no sacrifice pleased God, for they sacrificed to
idols and demons and not to God, as it is elsewhere stated, (<span
id="xvi.v-p6.1"></span>[De 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017.md)<span
id="xvi.v-p6.1"></span>;) but yet, as they had some kind of divine
worship, as circumcision remained, and sacrifices were offered, as it
were, by Moses’ command, and they boasted themselves to be the children
of Abraham and lived in the holy land, they were satisfied with their
condition. But when in exile they saw no sign of God’s favour, when they
were deprived of the temple and altar and all sacrifices, when on every
side mere solitude and waste met their eyes, when God thus manifested
that he was far removed from them, great sorrow must have entered their
hearts. Hence the Prophet says, *What will ye do in the solemn day?*

<span id="xvi.v-p7"></span>And he expressly mentions solemn and
festal-days. “If the morning and the evening oblation, which is wont to
be made, will not be remembered, and if the other sacrifices will not
occur to your minds, what will you do when the festal days will come?
for the Lord will then show that he has nothing to do with you.” For the
trumpets sounded on the festivals, that the people might come from the
whole land into the temple; and it was, as it were, the voice of God,
sounding from heaven: but when the feast-days were forgotten, when there
were no holy assemblies, it was the same as if the Lord, by commanding
silence, had proved that he no longer cared for the people. That the
Israelites then might not think that exile only was threatened to them,
the Prophet here shows that something worse was connected with it, and
that was, that the Lord would wholly forsake them, and that there would
exist no token of his presence, as though they were cut off from the
Church. What then will ye do on the solemn day, on the day of Jehovah’s
festivity? That is, “Do you think that something of an ordinary kind is
denounced on you when I speak of exile? The Lord will indeed take away
the whole of your worship, and will deprive you of all the evidences of
his presence. What then will you do? But if a brutish stupor should so
occupy your minds, that this should not recur to your thoughts daily,
the solemn and festal-days will at least constrain you to think how
dreadful it is, that you have nothing remaining among you, which may
afford a hope of God’s favour.” We now apprehend the meaning of the
Prophet.

<span id="xvi.v-p8"></span>We hence learn what I have said before, that
nothing worse can happen to us in this world, than to be scattered
without any order, when no outward evidence appears by which the Lord
collects us to himself. It would therefore be better for us to be
deprived of meat and drink, and to go naked, and to perish at last
through want, than that the exercises of religion, (<span
id="xvi.v-p8.1"></span>*exercita pietatis* — exercises of religion) by
which the Lord holds us, as it were, in his own bosom, should be taken
away from us. When therefore we are deprived of these aids, and God thus
hides his face from us, and mournful waste discovers to us dread on
every side, it is an extreme calamity, an evidence of the dreadful
judgement of God. Let us then learn, when our flesh is touched, when
sterility or some other evil impends over us — let us learn to dread
this deprivation still more, and to fear lest the Lord should deprive us
of our festal-days; that is, take away all the aids of religion by which
he holds us together in his house, and shows us to be a part of his
Church. This then, in the last place, ought to be noticed: what remains
we shall consider in our next lecture.

<span id="xvi.vi"></span>

<span id="xvi.vi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xvi.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as thou
drawest us at this time to thyself by so many chastisements, While we
are yet insensible, through the slothfulness and the indolence of our
flesh, — O grant, that Satan may not thus perpetually harden and
fascinate us; but that we, being at length awakened, may feel our evils,
and be not merely affected by outward punishments, but rouse ourselves,
and feel how grievously we have in various ways offended thee, so that
we may return to thee with real sorrow, and so abhor ourselves, that we
may seek in thee every delight, until we at length offer to thee a
pleasing and acceptable sacrifice, by dedicating ourselves and all we
have to thee, in sincerity and truth, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

<span id="xvi.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.vii"></span>

<span id="xvi.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-fourth

<span id="xvi.viii"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006.md)<span id="xvi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p2"></span>**6.** For, lo, they are gone because of
destruction: Egypt shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury them: the
pleasant *places* for their silver, nettles shall possess them: thorns
*shall be* in their tabernacles.

<span id="xvi.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Quia ecce abierunt a vastatione
(*vel*, propter vastationem;) Aegyptus colliget eso, Memphis sepeliet
eos: desiderabile argenti eorum haereditabit urtica; spina in
tabernaculis eorum.

<span id="xvi.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.viii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms here what is
contained in the last verse, that is, that the Israelites would at
length find that the Prophets had not in vain threatened them, though
they at the time heedlessly despised the judgement of God. *Lo,* he
says, *they have departed:* he speaks of the exile as if it had already
taken place, when it was only nigh at hand. The Israelites were then
dwelling in their own country, he yet speaks of them as having already
gone away. But he sets forth the certainty of the prediction by this
manner of speaking, that profane men might cease to promise themselves
impunity when God summons them to his tribunal: yea, he shows that he
was already armed to take vengeance: “They have gone away,” he says, “on
account of desolation.” Then he adds, *Egypt shall gather them* To
gather here is to be taken in a bad sense; for it means the same as
<span id="xvi.viii-p6.1"></span>*trousser* (to pack up, to bundle) in
our language; and it is often taken in this sense by the Prophets, when
mention is made of destruction: and this appears still clearer from the
word, burying, which the Prophet immediately subjoins. *Egypt shall
gather them:* He certainly speaks not of a kind retreat, but declares
that Egypt would be a sepulchre to them, in which they should remain
shut up: and thus he takes away from them any hope of deliverance. The
Israelites expected that they should find shelter for a season in Egypt,
when they bent their course there for fear of their enemies. The Prophet
now shows that they would be disappointed in dreaming of a return, for
they would remain there gathered up; that is, a free return, as they
imagined, would not be allowed them, but a perpetual habitation, yea, a
grave.

<span id="xvi.viii-p7"></span>‘Egypt will gather them, Memphis will bury
them.’ There is a striking correspondence between the words here used,
<span id="xvi.viii-p7.1"></span>קבר, *kober,* and <span
id="xvi.viii-p7.2"></span>קבף, *kobets,*. By the first the Prophet
signifies that they should be shut up, so as to be, as it were, bound
and fixed to a place; and then he adds that they should be buried.

<span id="xvi.viii-p8"></span>He then says, *The desirable place of
their silver the nettle shall possess, as by hereditary right, and the
thorn,* *etc*.; some render it paliurus; but I follow what is more
received, *the thorn then shall be in their tabernacles* The meaning is,
that the Israelites would be exiles and sojourners, not for a short
time, but that their exile would be so long that their land would become
waste and uncultivated; for neither nettles nor thorns grow in an
inhabited place. Hosea then declares that their land would be deserted
and without inhabitants, for nettles and thorns would occupy it instead
of men. Now it tended greatly to increase the sorrow of exile, that the
hope of return was cut off from them; and God had also declared that
Egypt, where they had promised a refuge for themselves, would be to them
like a grave. And thus it happens for the most part to the ungodly, who
retake themselves to vain solaces, that they may escape the vengeance of
God; for they throw themselves into deep labyrinths; where they think to
find a harbour of rest for a time, and a commodious habitation; but
there they find either a gulf or a grave. This is the meaning. Let us
proceed —

<span id="xvi.ix"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p2"></span>**7.** The days of visitation are come, the
days of recompence are come; Israel shall know *it*: the prophet *is* a
fool, the spiritual man *is* mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity,
and the great hatred.

<span id="xvi.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Venerunt dies visitationis, venerunt
dies retributionis; agnoscet Israel; stultus Propheta (*vel*, uno
contextu, sicuti alii legunt, cognoscet Israel stultum Prophetam,)
insanum virum spiritus, propter multitudinem iniquitatis tuae, et multum
odium (*vel*, stultus Prophets, vaesanus vir spiritus propter
multitudinem iniquitatis tuae et multum odium: et propter accentun
melior est distinctio, quam secundo loco posui, cognoscet Israel,
stultus est Propheta: et que sequuntur poterunt legi separatim, sed
tamen ego utrunque exponam, ut libera deinde sit electio.  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) .md)

<span id="xvi.ix-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ix-p8"></span><span id="xvi.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p9"></span>The Prophet, by saying that the days of
visitation had come, intended to shake off from hypocrites that supine
torpor of which we have often spoken; for as they were agitated by their
own lusts, and were in a state of continual fervour, so they hardened
themselves against God’s judgement, and, as it were, covered themselves
over with hardness. It was then necessary to deal roughly with them in
order to break down such stubbornness. This is the reason that the
Prophet repeats so often and in so many forms what might be expressed in
this one sentence — That God would be a just avenger. Hence he cries out
here, that the days of visitation had come. For when the Lord spared
them, as sacred history relates, and as we said at the beginning, (and
under the king Jeroboam the second, the son of Joash, their affairs were
prosperous,) their pride and contempt of God the more increased. Since
then they thought themselves to be now beyond the reach of harm, the
Prophet declares that the days had come. And there is here an implied
contrast in reference to the time during which the Lord had borne with
them; for as the Lord had not immediately visited their sins, they
thought that they had escaped. But the Prophet here distinguishes
between time and time: “You have hitherto thought,” he says, “that you
are at peace with God; as if he, by conniving at the sins of men, denied
himself, so as not to discharge any more the office of a judge: nay,
there is another thing to be here considered, and that is, that God has
certain days of visitation, which he has fixed for himself; and these
days are now come.”

<span id="xvi.ix-p10"></span>And he again teaches the same thing, *The
days of retribution have come* He uses another word, that they might
know that they could not go unpunished for having in so many ways
provoked God. For as the Lord disappoints not the hope of his people,
who honour him; so also there is a reward laid up for the ungodly, who
regard as nothing his judgement. “God will then repay you what you have
deserved, though for a time it may please him to suspend his judgement.”

<span id="xvi.ix-p11"></span>Then he says, *Israel shall know* This is
the wisdom of fools, as it is said even in an old proverb; and Homer has
also said, <span id="xvi.ix-p11.1"></span>παθων δε τε νήπιος εγνω, (Even
the foolish knows when he suffers.) The foolish is not wise, except when
he suffers. Hence the Prophet says, that Israel, when afflicted, would
then perceive that instruction had been despised, and that all warnings
had been trifled with, at least had not been regarded. *Israel* then
*shall know;* that is, he shall at length, when too late, understand
that he had to do with God, even when the time of repentance shall be no
more. The meaning then is that as the ungodly reject the word of God,
and obey not wise admonitions and counsels, they shall at length be
taken to another school, where God teaches not by the mouth but by the
hand. Whosoever then does not now willingly submit to his teaching,
shall find God to be a judge, and shall not escape his hand.

<span id="xvi.ix-p12"></span>They who join what follows elicit this
meaning, *Israel shall know the Prophet to be foolish, the man of the
spirit to be mad;* that is, Israel shall then understand that he was
deluded by flatteries, when the false Prophets promised that all things
would be prosperous. We indeed know that they catched at those
prophecies which pleased their ears; for which Micah also reproves them;
hence he calls those who gave hope of a better state of things, the
Prophets of wine and oil and wheat, (<span id="xvi.ix-p12.1"></span>[Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)<span id="xvi.ix-p12.1"></span>..md)
The world wishes to be ever thus deceived. Since then there were many in
Israel, who by their impositions deceived the miserable, he says, Israel
shall at last know that he has been deluded by his own teachers. If we
receive this sense, there is then here a reproof to Israel for thinking
that the vengeance of God was in some way restrained, when the false
Prophets said that he was pacified, and that there was no danger to be
feared. For do not men in this way stultify themselves? And how gross is
their stupidity, when they think that God’s hands are tied, when men are
silent, or when they perfidiously turn the truth into a lie? And yet
even at this day this disease prevails in the world, as it has prevailed
almost in all ages. For what do the ungodly seek, but to be let alone in
their sins? When mouths are closed, they think that they have gained
much. This madness the Prophet derides, intimating that those profane
men, who have such delicate ears, that they can bear no words of
reproof, shall at last know what they had gained by hiring prophets to
flatter them. We hence see, in short, that the adulations, by which the
ungodly harden themselves against God, will be to them the occasion of a
twofold destruction; for such fallacies dementate them, so that they
much more boldly provoke against themselves the wrath of God.

<span id="xvi.ix-p13"></span>But if we read the two clauses apart, the
rendering will be this, “The Prophet is a fool, the man of the spirit is
mad.” And as to the matter itself, there is not much difference. I will
not then dwell on the subject; for when we are agreed as to the design
of the Prophet and the truth remains the same, it is vain, at least it
is of no benefit, to labour very anxiously about the form of the
sentence. If then we begin a sentence with these words, <span
id="xvi.ix-p13.1"></span>אויל הנביא, *avil enebia*, the sense will be
this, “I know that the Prophets promise impunity to you; but they who
thus hide your sins, and cover them over as with plasters, are insane
men, yea, they are wholly infatuated. There is then no reason why their
flatteries should delight you; for the event will show that they are
mere absurdities and idle ravings.” We now see that there is no great
difference in the sense: for this remains still unaltered, that there
were many flatterers among the people, who made it their business to
lie, that they might thus procure the favour of the people; and this
ambition has prevailed in all ages: and sometimes also cupidity or
avarice takes such hold on men, that they use a meretricious tongue, and
excuse all vices however grievous, and elude all threatening. This is
what the Prophet shows in the first place; and then he shows, that men
without any advantage indulge their vices, when there is no one severely
to reprove them, or boldly to exhort them to repent; and that though all
the Prophets should give them hope of safety they should yet perish: for
men cannot by their silence restrain God from executing at last his
judgement. Nay, we must remember this, that God spares men when he does
not spare them; that is, when he chastises them, when he reproves their
sins, and when he constrains them by terror, he then would spare them.
And again, when God spares, he does not spare; that is, when he connives
at their sins, and leaves men to their own will, to grow wanton at their
pleasure, without any yoke or bridle, he then by no means spares them,
for he destines them for destruction.

<span id="xvi.ix-p14"></span>“The man of the spirit,” some render “the
man of the wind;” and some “the fanatical man;” but they are in my
judgement mistaken; for the Prophet, I doubt not, uses a respectful
term, but yet by way of concession. He then calls those the men of the
spirit who were by their office prophets, but who abused that title, as
those who at this day call themselves pastors when they are really
rapacious wolves. The Prophets, as we know, always declared that they
did not speak from their own minds but what the Spirit of God dictated
to them. Hence they were men of the Spirit, that is, spiritual men: for
the genitive case, we know, was used by the Hebrews to express what we
designate by an adjective. The Prophets then were the men of the Spirit.
He concedes this name, in itself illustrious and honourable, to
impostors; but in the same sense as when I speak generally of teachers;
I then include the false as well as the true. This then is the real
meaning of the expression, as we may gather from the context: for he
says the same thing twice, <span id="xvi.ix-p14.1"></span>אויל הנביא,
*avil enebia*, *Fool is the Prophet,* and then, <span
id="xvi.ix-p14.2"></span>משגע איש הרוח, *moshigo aish eruch,* *Mad is
the man of the spirit* As he spoke of a Prophet, so he now mentions the
same by calling him a man of the spirit, or a spiritual man.

<span id="xvi.ix-p15"></span>At the end of the verse he adds, *For the
multitude of thine iniquity, for great hatred,* or, *much hatred;* for
it may be rendered in these two ways. Here the Prophet shows, that
though the false Prophets stultified by their fallacies the people, yet
this could by no means avail for an excuse or for extenuating the fault
of the people. How so? Because they suffered the punishment of their own
impiety. For whence comes it, that the Lord takes away his light from
us, that after having once shown to us the way of salvation, he turns
suddenly his back on us, and suffers us to go astray to our perdition?
How does this happen? Doubtless, because we are unworthy of that light,
which was a witness to us of God’s favour. For as much then as men
through their own fault procure such a judgement to themselves, the Lord
neither blinds them nor gives to Satan the power of deluding them,
except when they deserve such a treatment. Hence the Prophet says, *For
the multitude of thine iniquity,* and for thy crimes, by which thou hast
excited against thyself the wrath and hatred of God. We hence see how
frivolous are the pretences by which men clear themselves, when they
object and say that they have been deceived and that if their teachers
had been faithful and honest, they would have willingly obeyed God. When
therefore men make these objections, the ready answer is this, that they
had been deprived of true and faithful teachers, because they had
refused the favour offered to them, and extinguished the light, and as
Paul says, preferred a lie to the truth; and that they had been deceived
by false Prophets, because they willingly hastened to ruin when the Lord
called them to salvation. We now then understand the import of what is
here taught.

<span id="xvi.ix-p16"></span>The Prophet says, in the first place, that
the day of vengeance was now at hand, because the Lord by forbearance
could prevail nothing with the obstinate. He then adds, that as all
threatenings were despised by the people, and as they were deaf to every
instruction, they would at length know that God had not spoken in vain
but would perceive that their were justly treated; for the Lord would
not now teach them by his word, but by scourges. He adds, in the third
place, that the Prophet was foolish and delirious, and also, that they
who boasted themselves to be the men of the spirit were mad: by which
expressions he meant that the flatteries, by which the people were
lulled asleep were foolish; for God would not fail at last, when the
time came, to execute his office. And, lastly he reminds them that this
would happen through the fault of the people, that there was no reason
for them to trace or to ascribe the cause of the evil to any thing else;
for this blindness was their just punishment. The Lord would have never
permitted Satan thus to prevail in his own inheritance, had not the
people, by the immense filth of their sins, provoked God for a long
time, and as it were with a determined purpose. It now follows —

<span id="xvi.x"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p1"></span><span id="xvi.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#008.md)<span id="xvi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p2"></span>**8.** The watchman of Ephraim *was* with my
God: *but* the prophet *is* a snare of a fowler in all his ways, *and*
hatred in the house of his God.  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md)

<span id="xvi.x-p8"></span>**8.** Speculator Ephraim cum Deo meo,
Propheta laqueus aucupis super omnes vias ejus, odium (*hoc est,* res
execrabilis: *est idem nomen quo usus est in proximo versu:* res
*igitur* execrabilis) in domo Dei sui.

<span id="xvi.x-p9"></span> 

<span id="xvi.x-p10"></span><span id="xvi.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p11"></span>Interpreters obscure this verse by their
various opinions. Almost all suppose a verb to be understood that
Ephraim “had set” a watchman. But I see no need to make any change in
the words of the Prophet: I therefore take them simply as they are. Now
some think that there is here a comparison between the old Prophets who
had not turned aside from God’s command, and those flatterers who
pretended the name of God, while they were the ministers of Satan to
deceive. They therefore thus distinguish them, *The watchman of Ephraim
was with my God;* that is, there was a time formerly when the watchmen
of Ephraim were connected with God, and declared no strange doctrine,
when they drew from the true fountain all that they taught; there was
then a connection between God and the Prophets, for they depended on the
mouth of God, and the Prophets delivered to the people, as from hand to
hand, whatever God commanded; there was then nothing corrupt, or impure,
or adventitious in their words. But now the *Prophet is a snare of a
fowler;* that is, the dice is turned, a deplorable change has taken
place; for now the Prophets lay snares to draw people by their disciples
into destruction; and this abomination bears rule, that is, this
monstrous wickedness prevails in the temple of God: these Prophets live
not in caves nor traverse public roads, but they occupy a place in the
temple of God; so that of the sacred temple of God they make a brothel
for the impostures of Satan. Such is their view.

<span id="xvi.x-p12"></span>But I read the verse as connected together,
*The watchman of Ephraim,* who ought to have been *with God, even the
Prophet, is a snare of a fowler on all his ways* The former view would
have indeed met my approbations did not the words appear to be forced;
and I do not love strained meanings. This is the reason which prevents
me from subscribing to an exposition which in itself I approve, as it
embraces a useful doctrine. But this simple view is more correct, that
the watchman of Ephraim, a Prophet, is a snare of a fowler: and he adds,
with God; for it is the duty of teachers to have nothing unconnected
with God. Hosea then shows what Prophets ought to do, not what they may
do. A Prophet then is he who is a watchman of Israel; for this command,
we know, is given in common to all Prophets — to be as it were on their
watch-tower, and to be vigilant over the people of God. It is therefore
no wonder that the Prophet dignifies with his own title all those who
were then teachers among God’s people. But he thus doubles their crime,
by saying that they were only keen and sharp-sighted to snare the
people. Then the watchmen of Israel, the Prophet, who was placed on the
watch-tower to watch or to exercise vigilance over the safety of the
whole people — this Prophet was a snare of a fowler! But he triplicates
the crime when he says, *With my God:* for as we have already observed,
teachers could not faithfully discharge their office, except they were
connected with God, and were able truly to testify that they brought
forth nothing that was invented, but what the Lord himself had spoken,
and that they were his organs. We now then apprehend the real meaning of
the Prophet; and according to this view there is nothing strained in the
words.

<span id="xvi.x-p13"></span>The Prophet also thus confirms what he had
said before, that the Prophets were fools, that is, that their
prophecies would at length appear empty and vain; for they could not
prevent God from inflicting punishment on the wicked by their fallacious
flatteries; he confirms this truth when he says, *The watchmen of
Ephraim is a snare of a fowler on all his ways:* that is, he ought to
have guided the people, and to have kept them safe from intrigues. But
now the people could not move a foot without meeting with a snare; and
whence came this snare but from false doctrine and impostures? What then
was to be at last? Could the snares avail to make them cautious? By no
means; but Satan thus hunts his prey, when he soothes the people by his
false teachers, and keeps them, as it were, asleep, that they may not
regard the hand of God. There was then no reason for the Israelites to
think well of the fowlers by whom they were drawn into ruin.

<span id="xvi.x-p14"></span>This indignity is more emphatically
expressed, when he says, that there was *a detestable thing in the
temple of God* There was not, indeed, a temple of God in Bethel, as we
have often said; but as the people were wont to pretend the name of God,
the Prophet, conceding this point, says, that these abominations were
covered over by this pretence. There is then no need anxiously to
inquire here, whether it was the temple at Samaria or at Bethel, or the
house and sanctuary of God; for a concession proves not a thing to be
so, but it is to speak according to the general opinion. So then the
Prophet does not without reason complain, that the place, on which was
inscribed the name of God, was profaned, and that, instead of the
teaching of salvation, there was fowling everywhere, which drew the
people into apostasy, and finally into utter ruin. It follows —

<span id="xvi.xi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#009.md)<span id="xvi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p2"></span>**9.** They have deeply corrupted
*themselves*,  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) as in the days of
Gibeah: *therefore* he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their
sins.

<span id="xvi.xi-p4"></span>**9.** Profundaverunt (*ad verbum, alii
vertunt,* Multiplicaverunt, *sed male; alii,* Astute cogitaverunt, *quod
mihi etiam non placet: sed quia verbum quod posui neque Latinum est et
esset ambiguum, ideo vertamus,* Profunde vel alte defixi sunt)
corruperunt sicuti in diebus Gabaa; recoradabitur iniquitatis eorum,
visitabit scelera eorum.

<span id="xvi.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xi-p6"></span><span id="xvi.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p7"></span>Hosea declares here, that the people were so
sunk in their vices, that they could not be drawn out of them. He who
has fallen can raise up himself when one extends a hand to him; and he
who strives to emerge from the mire, finding a helper to assist him, can
plant his foot again on solid ground: but when he is cast into a gulf,
he has no hope of a recovery. I extend my hand in vain, when one sinks
in a shipwreck, and is fallen into the deep. So now the Prophet says,
that the people were unhealable, because they were deeply fixed; and
further, because they were infected with corruptions. He therefore
intimates that their diseases were incurable, that they had struck roots
so deeply, that they could by no means be cleansed. *They were* then
*deeply fixed, and were corrupt as in the days of Gibeah*

<span id="xvi.xi-p8"></span>The Gibeonites, we know, were so fallen,
that their city differed nothing from Sodom; for unbridled
licentiousness in all kinds of vices prevailed there, and lusts so
monstrous reigned among them, that there was no distinction between good
and evil, no shame whatever. Hence it was, that they ravished the
Levite’s wife, and killed her by their filthy obscenities: and this was
the cause of that memorable slaughter which nearly demolished the whole
tribe of Benjamin. The history is related in the Book of Judges <span
id="xvi.xi-p8.2"></span>[Jud
19:1-21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001.md)<span
id="xvi.xi-p8.2"></span>; and it deserved to be recorded, that people
might know what it is not to walk with care and fear in obedience to the
Lord. Who could indeed have believed that a people taught in the law of
God could have fallen into such a state of madness as this city did,
which was nigh to Jerusalem, the destined place of the temple, though
not yet built? and, not to mention the temple, who could have thought
that this city, which was in the midst of the people, could have been so
demented, that, like brute beasts, they should abandon themselves to the
filthiest lusts? nay, that they should have been more filthy than the
beasts? For monstrous lusts, as I have said, were there left unpunished,
as at Sodom and in the neighbouring cities.

<span id="xvi.xi-p9"></span>The Prophet says now, that the whole of
Israel had become as corrupt as formerly the citizens of Gibeah. Deeply
sunk, then, were the Israelites in their vices, and were as addicted as
the inhabitants of Gibeah to their corruptions. What, then, is to
follow? *God,* he says, *will remember their iniquities, and will visit
their sins* The Prophet means two things first, that as the Israelites
were wholly disobedient, and would receive no instruction, God would in
no other way deal with them, as though he said, “The Lord will no longer
spend labour in vain in teaching you, but he will seize the sword and
execute his vengeance; for ye are not worthy of being taught by him any
longer; for his teaching is counted a mockery by you.” This is one
thing; and the other is, that though God had hitherto spared the people
of Israel, he had not yet forgotten the filth of sins which prevailed
among them. Hence God, he says, will at length remember and, as he had
said before, will visit your sins.

<span id="xvi.xi-p10"></span>We now then perceive the simple meaning of
the Prophet. But let us hence also learn to rouse ourselves; and let us,
in the first place, notice what the Prophet says of the Israelites, that
they were deeply fixed; for men must be filled with contempt to God,
when they thus descend, as Solomon says, (<span
id="xvi.xi-p10.1"></span>[Pr 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#004.md)<span
id="xvi.xi-p10.1"></span>,) to the deep. Lets then each of us stir up
himself to repentance and carefully beware lest he should descend into
this deep gulf. But since he says, “the Lord will remember and will
visit”, let us know that they are greatly deceived who indulge
themselves as long as the Lord mercifully bears with their sins; for
though he may for a time conceal his displeasure yet an oblivion will
never possess him: but at a fit time he will remember, and prove that he
does so by executing a just punishment.

<span id="xvi.xii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xvi.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou shinest
on us by thy word, we may not be blind at mid-day, nor wilfully seek
darkness, and thus lull our minds asleep: but that exercising ourselves
in thy word, we may stir up ourselves more and more to fear thy name,
and thus present ourselves, and all our pursuits, as a sacrifice to
thee, that thou mayest peaceably rule, and perpetually dwell in us,
until thou gatherest us to thy celestial habitation, where there is
reserved for us eternal rest and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

<span id="xvi.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-Fifth

<span id="xvi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010.md)<span id="xvi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv-p2"></span>**10.** I found Israel like grapes in the
wilderness; I saw your fathers as the firstripe in the fig tree at her
first time: *but* they went to Baalpeor, and separated themselves unto
*that* shame; and *their* abominations were according as they loved.

<span id="xvi.xiv-p3"></span>**10.** Tanquam uvas in deserto inveni
Israel, sicut primum fructum ficulneae in suo exordio vidi patres eorum:
ipsi ingressi sunt ad Baalpeor, et segregati sunt in opprobrium, et
fuerunt abominationes secundum amores suos.  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md)

<span id="xvi.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xiv-p7"></span><span id="xvi.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv-p8"></span>In this verse God reproves the Israelites
for having preferred to prostitute themselves to idols, rather than to
continue under his protection, though he had from the beginning showed
his favour to them; as though he had said that they having been
previously favoured with his free love, had transferred their affections
to others; for he says, that he had found them as grapes in the
wilderness. The word wilderness, ought to be joined with grapes, as if
he had said, that they had been as sweet and acceptable to him as a
grape when found in a desert. When a traveller finds, by chance, a grape
in a barren and desolate place, he not only admires it, but takes great
delight in a fruit so unlooked for. And thus the Lord, by this
comparison, shows his great love towards the Israelites. He adds, — *As
the first fruit of the figtree;* for the fig-tree, we know, produces
fruit twice every year. Therefore, God says, — *As figs at the
beginning* (or, as they say, the first fruits) are delightful, so have I
taken delight in this people. The Prophet does not however mean, that
the people were worthy of being so much loved. But the Hebrews use the
word, to find, in the same sense as we do, when we say in French, —
<span id="xvi.xiv-p8.1"></span>*Je treuve cela a mon gout,* (I find this
to my taste.) I have therefore regarded Israel *as grapes in the
wilderness* And this remark is needful, lest some one should subtilely
infer, that the Israelites were loved by God, because they had something
savoury in them. For the Prophet relates not here what God found in the
people, but he only reproves their ingratitude, as we shall presently
see.

<span id="xvi.xiv-p9"></span>The first part then shows that God had
great delight in this people. It is the same or similar sentence to that
in <span id="xvi.xiv-p9.2"></span>[Hosea
11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#000.md)<span id="xvi.xiv-p9.2"></span>,
where he says, ‘When Ephraim was yet a child, I loved him,’ except that
there is not there so much fervour and warmth of love expressed; but the
same argument is there handled, and the object is the same, and it is to
prove, that God anticipated his people by his love. There remained, in
this case, less excuse, when men rejected God calling them, and
responded not to his love. A perverseness like this would be hardly
endured among men. Were any one to love me freely, and I to slight him,
it would be an evidence of pride and rudeness: but when God himself
gratuitously treats us with kindness, and when, not content with common
love, he regards us as delectable fruit, does not the rejection of this
love, does not the contempt of this favour, betray, on our part, the
basest depravity? We now then understand the design of the Prophet. In
the first clause, he says, in the person of God, “I have loved Israel,
as a traveller does grapes, when he finds them in the desert, and as the
first ripe figs are wont to be loved: since then, I so much delighted in
them, ought they not to have honoured me in return? Ought not my
gratuitous love to have inflamed their hearts, so as to induce them to
devote themselves wholly to me?”

<span id="xvi.xiv-p10"></span>But *they went in unto Baal-peor*. So I
interpret the verb <span id="xvi.xiv-p10.1"></span>באו, *bau*; and it is
taken in this sense in many other places. For the Hebrews say, “they
went in,” to express in a delicate way the intercourse between husbands
and wives. And the Prophet does not, without reason, compare the
sacrifices which the people offered to Baal-peor to adultery, as being
like the intercourse which an adulterer has with an harlot. They then
went in unto Baal-peor; and he adds, that they “separated themselves”.
Some interpret the word <span id="xvi.xiv-p10.2"></span>נזר, *nesar,* as
referring to worship, and as meaning that they consecrated themselves to
Baal-peor; and others derive it from <span
id="xvi.xiv-p10.3"></span>זרה, *sare*, which they think is here in a
passive sense, and means, “to be alienated.” But I take it in the same
sense as when Ezekiel says, “They have separated themselves from after
me,” <span id="xvi.xiv-p10.4"></span>מאחרי, *macheri*, <span
id="xvi.xiv-p10.5"></span>[Eze
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#007.md)<span id="xvi.xiv-p10.5"></span>;
that is, that they may not follow me. God here expostulates with the
people for following their fornication, and for thus repudiating that
sacred marriage which God contracts with all his people. I therefore
read the two sentences as forming one context, *The Israelites went in
unto Baal-peor,* as an adulterer goes in unto a harlot; and *they
separated themselves;* for they denied God, and violated the faith
pledged to him; they discarded the spiritual marriage which God made
with them.” For the Prophet, we know, whenever he refers to idolatries
speaks allegorically or metaphorically, and mentions adultery.

<span id="xvi.xiv-p11"></span>They *have separated themselves,* he says,
*to reproach;* that is, though their filthiness was shameful, they were
yet wholly insensible: as when a wife disregards her character, or as
when a husband cares not that he is pointed at by the finger, and that
his baseness is to all a laughing-stock; so the Israelites, he says, had
separated themselves to reproach, having cast away all shame, they
abandoned themselves to wickedness. Some render the word <span
id="xvi.xiv-p11.1"></span>בשת, *beshet*, obscenity, and others refer it
to Baal-peor, and render the sentence thus, “They have separated
themselves to that filthy idol.” For some think Priapus to have been
Baal-peor; and this opinion has gained the consent of almost all. But I
extend wider the meaning of the word “reproach,” as signifying that the
people observed no difference between what was decent and what was
shameful, but that they were senseless in their impiety. They were
therefore *abominable,* or *abominations according to their lovers* The
Prophet, I doubt not, connects here the Israelites with idols and with
Baal-peor itself, that he might strip them of all that holiness which
they had obtained through God’s favour. We now apprehend the meaning of
the Prophet.

<span id="xvi.xiv-p12"></span>Now, what is here taught is worthy of
being noticed and is useful. For, as we have said, inexcusable is our
wickedness, if we despise the gratuitous love of God, bestowed unasked.
When God then comes to us of his own accord, when he invites us, when he
offers to us the privilege of children, an inestimable benefit, and when
we reject his favour, is not this more than savage ferocity? It was to
reprobate such conduct as this that the Prophet says, that God had loved
Israel, as when one finds grapes in the desert, or as when one eats the
first ripe figs. But it must, at the same time, be noticed why the
Prophet so much extols the dealings of God with the people of Israel; it
was for this reason, because their adoption, as it is well known, was
not an ordinary privilege, nor what they enjoyed in common with other
nations. Since, then, the people had been chosen to be God’s special
possession, the Prophet here justly extols this love with peculiar
commendation. And the like is our case at this day; for God vouchsafes
not to all the favour which has been presented to us through the shining
light of the gospel. Other people wander in darkness, the light of life
dwells only among us: does not God thus show that he delights especially
in us? But if we continue the same as we were, and if we reject him and
transfer our love to others, or rather if lust leads us astray from him,
is not this detestable wickedness and obstinacy?

<span id="xvi.xiv-p13"></span>But what the Prophet says, that they
*separated themselves to reproach,* is also worthy of being noticed; for
he exaggerates their crime by this consideration, that the Israelites
were so blinded, that they perceived not their own turpitude, though it
was quite manifest. The superstitions which then prevailed in the land
of Moab were no doubt very gross; but Satan had so fascinated their
minds that they gave themselves up to a conduct which was worse than
shameful. Let us then know that our sin is worthy of a heavier
punishment in such a case as this, that is, when every distinction is
done away among us, and when we are hurried away by the spirit of
giddiness into every impiety and when we no longer distinguish between
light and darkness, between white and black; for it is a token of final
reprobation. When, therefore, shame ought to have restrained them, he
says, that the Israelites had yet “separated themselves to reproach, and
became abominable like their lovers”; that is, As Baal-peor is the
highest abomination to me, so the people became to me equally
abominable. It now follows —

<span id="xvi.xv"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011.md)<span id="xvi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p2"></span>**11.** *As for* Ephraim, their glory shall
fly away like a bird, from the birth, and from the womb, and from the
conception.

<span id="xvi.xv-p3"></span>**11.** Ephraim, quasi avis avolavit gloria
eorum, a partu et ab utero et a conceptione, (*jungamus etiam sequentem
versum*:)

<span id="xvi.xv-p4"></span>**12.** Though they bring up their children,
yet will I bereave them, *that there shall* not *be* a man *left*: yea,
woe also to them when I depart from them!

<span id="xvi.xv-p5"></span>**12.** Quia si extulerint filios suos, tunc
exterminabo eos ab homine (*hoc est,* ne sint in numero hominum:) certe
etiam vae illis quum recessero ab eis.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md)

<span id="xvi.xv-p10"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xv-p11"></span><span id="xvi.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p12"></span>The Hebrews, we know, have often abrupt
sentences as in this place, *Ephraim! their glory has fled* Ephraim is
to be placed by itself; and the speech seems striking, when the Lord
thus breaks off the sentence, Ephraim! he does not continue the sense,
but immediately adds, *Like a bird their glory has fled.* When he speaks
of Ephraim, he no doubt refers especially to his offspring; and by
mentioning a part for the whole, he includes whatever was then deemed to
be wealth, or glory, or power. The Prophet, I say, speaks of offspring,
for he immediately adds, *from the birth, and the womb, and the
conception* But they are mistaken who confine this sentence to offspring
only; for it is, as I have said, a mode of speaking, by which a part is
taken for the whole. According to the letter, he mentions children or
offspring; but yet he includes generally the whole condition of the
people.

<span id="xvi.xv-p13"></span>Then *as a bird the glory of Ephraim fled
away* In what respect? From the birth, from the womb, from the
conception. The Prophet, no doubt, sets forth here the gradations of
God’s vengeance, which was yet in part near at hand to the Israelites,
and which was in part already evident by clear proofs. He says, *from
the birth,* then *from the womb,* and, lastly, *from the conception* If,
then, the glory of Ephraim had vanished at the beginning, the Prophet
would not have thus spoken; but as the Lord showed signs of his wrath by
degrees, that vengeance at length might reach the highest point, the
Prophets in the first place, mentions birth, then the womb; as though he
said, “The glory of Israel shall vanish from the birth, but if they
still continue proud, and seem not subdued by this punishment, I will
slay them in the womb itself; nay, in the conception, if they repent
not; they shall be suffocated as in the very womb.”

<span id="xvi.xv-p14"></span><span id="xvi.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p15"></span>He then adds, *Though they shall bring up
children, I will yet exterminate them, so that they shall not be men,*
or, *before they grow up,* as some expound the words. The meaning is,
that though Ephraim then flattered himself, yet a dreadful ruin was at
hand, which would extinguish the whole seed, so that there would be
nothing remaining. But lest they should think that all was over, when
the Lord had inflicted on them one punishment, he lays down three
gradations; that God would slay them first in the birth, then extinguish
them in the womb, and, lastly, before conception; but if he spared them,
so that they would raise up children, it would yet be without advantage,
inasmuch as God would take away the youths in the flower of their age.
Thus, then he threatens entire destruction to the kingdom of Israel.

<span id="xvi.xv-p16"></span>And, lastly, he closes the verse in these
words, *And surely woe will be to them when I shall depart from them*
The Prophet means by these words, that men become miserable and
accursed, when they alienate themselves from God, and when God takes
away from them his favour. After having mentioned especially the
vengeance of Godwhich was at hand, he says here that the cause and
occasion of all evils would be, that God would depart from them,
inasmuch as they had previously renounced their faith in him. But we
must bear in mind the reason why the Prophet added this clause, and that
is, because wicked men dream, that though God be displeased, things will
yet go on prosperously with them: for they neither ascribe adversities
to the wrath of God, nor acknowledge the fountain of all blessings to be
God’s free and paternal favour. As then profane men do not understand
this truth, however much God may proclaim that he is an enemy to them,
that he is armed to destroy them, they care nothing, but promise to
themselves a prosperous fortune: until they feel the hand of God and the
signs of destruction appear, they continue still secure. This is the
reason why the Prophet says, that there is woe to men when God departs
from them. Forasmuch, then, as Scripture teaches everywhere that every
desirable thing comes and flows to us from the mere grace of God and his
paternal favour, so the Prophet declares in this place, that men are
miserable and accursed when God is angry with them. But it follows —

<span id="xvi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#013.md)<span id="xvi.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p2"></span>**13.** Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus,  <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) *is* planted in a pleasant place: but
Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p6"></span>**13.** Ephraim, sicut vidi in Tyro
plantatam (*subaudi* arborem) in habitaculo: Ephraim tamen ad educendum
(*hoc est,* educet) ad excidium (*vel*, mactationem) filios suos.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xvi-p8"></span><span id="xvi.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p9"></span>Hosea here confirms his previous statements
that the Israelites in vain trusted in their present condition, for the
Lord could reverse their prosperity whenever it pleased him. Men, we
know, harden themselves in their vices, when they enjoy their wishes and
when they are sunk in pleasures; for prosperity is not without reason
often compared to wine, because it inebriates men; nay, rather it
dementates them. We see what happened to the Sodomites and to others;
yea, the abuse of God’s forbearance has ever been the cause of
destruction to almost all the reprobate, as Paul also says. Such pride
reigned in the people of Israel, that they heedlessly despised all
threatening, as it has been already often stated. To this then the
Prophet refers when he says, *Ephraim is like a tree planted in Tyrus:
yet he shall bring forth his children to the slaughter* The Prophet then
points out here the indulgences of Israel, and then adds, that in a
short time the Lord would draw them forth to judgement, though he had
treated them as a precious tree, by fostering them gently and tenderly
for a time.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p10"></span>Some render this place thus, “I have seen
Ephraim planted like Tyrus;” and they render the next word, <span
id="xvi.xvi-p10.1"></span>בנוה, *benue*, “in pleasantness.” But since it
means a house or a habitation, I am disposed to retain its proper sense.
Interpreters, however, vary in their opinion; for some say, “I have seen
Ephraim like Tyrus;” because an event awaits this people similar to that
which happened to Tyrus; for, as punishment was inflicted on Tyrus, so
Ephraim shall not escape unpunished. This is the exposition of some, but
in my view it is too refined. As, however, there is here a preposition,
<span id="xvi.xvi-p10.2"></span> ל“*lamed*”, I am inclined to consider
“a tree” or “plant,” or some such word, understood. Ephraim then was, as
if one beheld a tree in Tyrus, literally to Tyrus, or in Tyrus. This
letter, as a preposition, I allow, is redundant in many places; and yet
it preserves some propriety, except when necessity interferes: and in
this place what I have already stated is the most suitable rendering,
“Ephraim is like a tree planted in Tyrus, in a dwelling” or shed. Tyrus,
we know, was built on an island in the sea; it had gardens the most
pleasant, but not formed without much expense and labour. It was washed
on every side by the sea; and unless mounds were set up, the dwellings
were confined. Since, then, it was difficult to raise trees there, much
work and labour was doubtless necessary, as it is usually the case; for
men often struggle with nature. And if we say that Ephraim was planted
like Tyrus in a dwelling, what can it mean? We therefore say, that he
was like a tree preserved as in a dwelling: for we see that there are
some trees which cannot bear the cold air, and are kept during winter in
a house that they may be preserved; and it is probable that the Syrians,
who were rich and had a lucrative trade, employed much care in rearing
their trees.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p11"></span>The meaning is, that Ephraim was like
tender trees, preserved by men with great care and with much expense;
but that they should hereafter bring forth their children for the
slaughter. This bringing forth is set in opposition to the house or
dwelling. They had been kept without danger from the cold and heat, like
a tender tree under cover; but they would be constrained to draw forth
their children to the slaughter; that is, there would be no longer any
dwelling for them to protect them from the violence of their enemies,
but that they would be drawn forth to the light.

<span id="xvi.xvi-p12"></span>We now see that the words harmonise well
with the view, that the people of Israel in vain flattered themselves
because they had hitherto been subject to no evils, and that God had
preserved them free from calamity. There is no reason, the Prophet says,
for the people to be proud, because they had been hitherto so
indulgently treated; for though they had been like tender trees, they
would yet be forced to draw forth their children to be killed. And this
comparison, which he amplifies, is what often occurs in Scripture. ‘If
Jehoiakim were as a ring on my right hand, saith the Lord, I would pluck
him thence.’  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) Men are wont to abuse
even the promises of God. As king Jehoiakim was of the posterity of
David, he thought it impossible that hid enemies could ever deprive him
of his kingdom; “But it shall not be so; for though he were as a ring on
my hand, I would pluck him thence.” So also in this place; “Though the
Israelites had been hitherto brought up in my bosom, and though I have
kindly given them all kinds of blessings, and though they have been like
tender trees, yet their condition hereafter shall be entirely
different.” Then it follows —

<span id="xvi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#014.md)<span id="xvi.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p2"></span>**14.** Give them, O Lord: what wilt thou
give? give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p3"></span>**14.** Da illis, Jehova: quid dabis? Da
illis valvam abortientem (*vel,* interficere facientem) et ubera arida.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xvii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvii-p6"></span>Interpreters translate these words in a
different way: “Give them what thou art about to give,” then they
repeats “Give them;” but, as I think, they do not comprehend the design
of the Prophet, and are wholly mistaken; for the Prophet appears here as
one anxious and perplexed. He therefore presents himself here before God
as a suppliant, as though he said, “Lord, I would gladly intercede for
this people: what then is it that I should chiefly desire for them?
Doubtless my chief wish for them in their miserable dispersion is, that
thou wouldest give them a killing womb and dry breasts;” that is, that
none may be born of them. Christ says, that when the last destruction of
Jerusalem should come, the barren would be blessed (<span
id="xvi.xvii-p6.1"></span>[Lu
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#029.md)<span
id="xvi.xvii-p6.1"></span>;) and this he took from the common doctrine
of Scripture, for many such passages may be observed in the Prophets.
Among the blessings of God, this, we know, is not the least, the birth
of a numerous offspring. It is, therefore, a token of dreadful
judgement, when barrenness, which in itself is deemed a curse, is
desired as an especial blessing. For what can be more miserable than for
infants to be snatched from their mothers’ bosom? and for children to be
killed before their eyes, or for pregnant women to be slain? or for
cities and fields to be consumed by fire, so that children, not yet
born, should perish together with their mothers? But all these things
happen when there is an utter destruction.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p7"></span>We hence see what the prophet chiefly
meant: the state of the people would be so deplorable that nothing could
be more desirable than the barrenness of the women, that no offspring
might be afterwards born, but that the name and memory of the people
might by degrees be blotted out.

<span id="xvi.xvii-p8"></span>He has, indeed, already denounced
punishments sufficiently grievous and dreadful; but we know that the
contumacy and hardness of those are very great on whom religion has no
hold. Hence all threatening were derided by that obstinate people. This
is the reason why the Prophet now takes the part of an intercessor. “O
Lord,”, he adds “give them;” that is, “O Lord, forgive them at least in
some measure, and grant them yet something.” And “what wilt thou give?”
Here he reasons with himself, being as it were in suspense and
perplexity; and he also reasons with God as to what would be the most
desirable thing. “I am indeed a suppliant for my own nation, whom I
pity; but what shall I ask? I would wish thee, Lord, to pardon this
people; but what shall be the way, what can give me comfort, or what
sort of remedy yet remains? Certainly I see nothing better than that
they should be barren, that none hereafter should be born of them; but
that thou shouldest suffer them to consume and die away; for this will
be their chief happiness in a condition so deplorable.” It was then the
Prophet’s design here, to strike hypocrites and profane men with terror,
that they might understand that God’s vengeance, which was at hand,
could by no means be fully expressed; for it would be the best thing for
them to be deprived of the blessing of an offspring, that their infants
might not perish with them, that they might not see women with child
cruelly slain by their enemies, or their children led away as a spoil.
That such things as these might not take place, the Prophet says, that
barrenness ought to be desired by them as the chief blessing. The
Prophet, I doubt not, meant this. It now follows —

<span id="xvi.xviii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015.md)<span id="xvi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p2"></span>**15.** All their wickedness *is* in
Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the wickedness of their doings I
will drive them out of mine house, I will love them no more: all their
princes *are* revolters.

<span id="xvi.xviii-p3"></span>**15.** Omne malum eorum in Gilgal, quia
illic odium concepi contra eos: super malitia (*vel*, propter malitiam)
operum ipsorum, e domo mea ejiciam eos: non pergam amare eos: omnes
principes eorum sunt defectores (perfidi.) *Est autem elegans
paranomasia in verbo* <span id="xvi.xviii-p3.1"></span>שרים *et* <span
id="xvi.xviii-p3.2"></span>שוררים*, qua etiam utitur Isaias primo
capite.*

<span id="xvi.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xviii-p6"></span>He says first, that *all their evil was
in Gilgal;* though they thought that they had the best pretence for
offering there their sacrifices to God’s honour, because it had been
from old times a sacred place. He had said before that they had
multiplied to themselves altars to sin, and by these to give way to
sins; he now repeats the same in other words, *All their evil,* he says,
*is in Gilgal;* as though he said, “They indeed obtrude on me their
sacrifices, which they offer in Gilgal, and think that they avail to
excuse all their wickedness. I might, perhaps, forgive them, if they
were given to plunder and cruelty, and were perfidious and fraudulent,
provided pure worship had continued among them, and religion had not
been so entirely adulterated; but as they have changed whatever I
commanded in my law, and turned this celebrated place to be the seat of
the basest impiety, so that it is become, as it were, a brothel, where
religion is prostituted, it is hence evident, that the whole of their
wickedness is in Gilgal.”

<span id="xvi.xviii-p7"></span>It is certain that the people were also
addicted to other crimes; but the word <span
id="xvi.xviii-p7.1"></span>כל, *cal,* all, is to be taken for what is
chief or principal. The Prophet speaks comparatively, not simply; as
though he had said, that this corruption of offering sacrifices at
Gilgal was more abominable in the sight of God than adulteries, or
plunder, or frauds, or unjust violence, or any crime that prevailed
among them. Their whole evil then was at Gilgal. But why the Prophet
speaks thus, I have lately explained; and that is because superstitious
men put forth their own devices, when God reproves them, “O! we have
still many exercises of religion.” They bring forward these by way of
compensation. But the Lord shows that he is far more grievously offended
with these superstitions, with which hypocrites cover themselves as with
a shield, than with a life void of every appearance of religion: for
“these,” he says, “I conceived a hatred against them, on account of the
wickedness of their works.”

<span id="xvi.xviii-p8"></span>Here again the Prophet condemns what men
think to be their special holiness. Who indeed can persuade hypocrites
that their fictitious modes of worship are the greatest abominations?
Nay, they even extol and imagine themselves to be like angels, and, as
it were, cover all their wickedness with these disguises; as we see to
be the case with the Papists who think, that when they obtrude on God
their many masses and other devised forms, every sort of wickedness is
redeemed. Since then hypocrites are thus wont to put on a disguise
before God, and at the same time flatter themselves, the Prophet here
declares that they are the more hated by God for this very wickedness,
of daring to corrupt and adulterate his pure worship.

<span id="xvi.xviii-p9"></span>He then adds, *I will eject them from my
house* When God threatens to eject Israel from his house, it is the same
as though he said, “I will wholly cast you away;” as when one cuts off a
withered branch from a tree, or a diseased member from the body. It is
indeed certain that the Israelites were then like bastards; for they
were not worthy of any account or station in the Church, inasmuch as
they had a strange temple and profane sacrifices; but as circumcision,
and the priesthood in name, still remained among them, they boasted
themselves to be the children of Abraham, and a holy people; hence the
Prophet denounces here such a destruction, that it might appear that
they in vain gloried in these superior distinctions, for God would
expunge them from his catalogue. We now understand the design of the
Prophet: but we shall, to-morrow, notice the remaining portion.

<span id="xvi.xix"></span>

<span id="xvi.xix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xvi.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as thou
hast freely embraced us in thy only-begotten Son, and made us, from
being the sons and race of Adam, a holy and blessed seed, and as we have
not hitherto ceased to alienate ourselves from the grace thou hast
offered to us, — O grant, that we may hereafter so return to a sound
mind, as to cleave faithfully and with sincere affection of heart to thy
Son, and so retain by this bond thy love, and be also retained in the
grace of adoption, that thy name may be glorified by us as long as we
sojourn in this world, until thou at length gatherest us into thy
celestial kingdom, which has been purchased for us by the blood of thy
Son. Amen.

<span id="xvi.xx"></span>

<span id="xvi.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-sixth

<span id="xvi.xx-p2"></span>We stated yesterday how God expels from his
house those who ought to have been deemed to be already among such as
are without: for hypocrites always invent coverings for themselves until
the Lord himself openly shows to them their baseness. It is therefore
necessary that what they seem to have, as Christ also declares
respecting hypocrites, should be taken away from them, (<span
id="xvi.xx-p2.1"></span>[Mt 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012.md)<span
id="xvi.xx-p2.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvi.xx-p3"></span>It then follows, — *I will not proceed on to
love them* A question may be moved here — why does God speak thus of his
love? for he had already ceased to love that people, as it maybe fully
gathered from facts. — Though this saying may not be strictly correct,
yet it is not unsuitable. Profane men, and those who are in love with
worldly things estimate the love of God by present appearances. When the
Lord feeds them well and plentifully, when they enjoy their pleasures,
when they have no troubles to bear, they think themselves to be most
acceptable to God. Such was the case with this people, as it has been
already often stated, as long as the Lord suspended his vengeance; and
this was especially the case under king Jeroboam the second, for we know
that the Lord then spared and greatly favoured them. It was then a
certain kind of love, when the Lord thus cherished them, God allured
them to repentance by the sweetness of his goodness. But now, as he sees
them to be growing harder and harder, he says, “I will not continue my
love towards them; for I will now really show that I am angry with them,
as I see that I have done nothing by my forbearance, which they do in a
manner laugh to scorn.” Thus we see that men are rejected by God nearly
in the same way, when he exterminates them from his Church, as when he
withdraws his blessing, which is, as it were, the pledge and symbol of
his love.

<span id="xvi.xx-p4"></span>The reason afterwards follows, *Because
their princes are perfidious:* and this is expressly mentioned, for it
was needful that the origin of the evil should be stated. The Prophet
then shows here that corruptions originated not with the common people,
but with the princes. Now we know for what end God would have rank and
dignity to exist among men, and that is, that there might be something
like a bridle to restrain the waywardness of the multitude. When,
therefore, princes become leaders to every wickedness, all things must
then go on in the worst manner; for what ought to be a remedy becomes
the cause of ruin. This, then, is what the Prophet meant in the first
place. But by accusing the princes he does not absolve the people; but,
as it has been said in another place, he insinuates that they must have
been very blind, when they suffered themselves to be drawn into the
ditch by the blind: for the people doubtless went astray of their own
accord and willingly, though they had erring leaders; and though, as it
has appeared elsewhere, they anxiously sought excuses for their errors.
But we may hence learn how frivolous is the excuse of those who at this
day exculpate themselves by the pretext of obeying princes and bishops;
for the Lord here denounces punishment on the whole people, because the
princes were perfidious. If it be so, we see that the whole body is
involved, when wicked leaders rule and draw the people from the right
way; yea, when they precipitate them into the same transgressions, and
carry them along with them. When, therefore, there is such a confusion,
universal punishment, which consumes all together, must follow. Let us
proceed —

<span id="xvi.xxi"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#016.md)<span id="xvi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p2"></span>**16.** Ephraim is smitten, their root is
dried up, they shall bear no fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet
will I slay *even* the beloved *fruit* of their womb.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p3"></span>**16.** Percussus est Ephraim, radix eorum
exaruit, fructum non facient: etiamsi genuerint, tunc interficiam
desiderabilia uteri ipsorum.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xxi-p5"></span><span id="xvi.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxi-p6"></span>The Prophet again threatens extreme
vengeance to the Israelites. It is no wonder that the same sentence is
so often repeated; for hypocrites, we know, too much flatter themselves,
and are not frightened even by the most grievous threatening. As then
hypocrites are so stupid, they must be often, nay, frequently pricked,
and most sharply, that they may at length be awakened out of their
torpor. Hence the Prophet repeats the threatening which he had often
before announced, and says, that *Israel had been so smitten, that their
root had dried up* The comparison is taken from a tree, which not only
has had its branches cut off, but has also been torn from the roots. The
meaning is, that God would take such vengeance on this miserable people,
as wholly to destroy them, without any hope of recovery. The root then
is dried up, they will produce fruit no more.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p7"></span>He then leaves this similitude or metaphor,
and says, *If they generate, I will slay the desirable fruit of their
womb;* that is, though some seed be begotten, I will yet destroy it.

<span id="xvi.xxi-p8"></span>We now then apprehend the design of the
Prophet, which was to show, that the Lord would no more be content with
some moderate punishment, for he had often found that this abandoned
people were in vain chastised by paternal love; but that extreme
vengeance awaited them, which would consume not only the men, but also
their children so that no residue should remain. The reason is
afterwards added —

<span id="xvi.xxii"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#017.md)<span id="xvi.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxii-p2"></span>**17.** My God will cast them away,
because they did not hearken unto him: and they shall be wanderers among
the nations.

<span id="xvi.xxii-p3"></span>**17.** Abjiciet eos meus Deus, quia non
audierunt eum (*vel*, non obedierunt ei, *ut sit clarius,*) et erunt
vagi inter gentes.

<span id="xvi.xxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvi.xxii-p5"></span><span id="xvi.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxii-p6"></span>The Prophet, as I have lately hinted,
assigns a reason why God had resolved to deal so severely with this
people, namely because he saw their unnameable perverseness. For the
Prophets always defend the justice of God against the impious complaints
of those men who murmur whenever God severely punishes them, and cry out
that he is cruel, and exceeds moderation. The Prophets do therefore shut
up the mouth of the ungodly, that they may not vomit out their
blasphemies against God; and the Prophet is now on this subject. Hence
he says, that destruction was nigh the Israelites, because God had
rejected them; for the verb <span id="xvi.xxii-p6.1"></span>מאס, *mas,*
means to reject, to cast away, to despise. As long then as the Lord
vouchsafed to care for this people, they possessed at least some
eminence; but the Prophet says that now they were wholly cast away. What
then remained for them but entire ruin?

<span id="xvi.xxii-p7"></span>And he says, *My God will cast them away*
By this expression he claims authority to himself, and thunders against
the whole people; for though the whole worship of God was shamefully
corrupted in the kingdom of Israel, they yet boasted that they were the
holy seed of Abraham, and the name of God was as yet ready in every
mouth, as we know that the ungodly take to themselves the liberty of
profaning the name of God without any hesitation or shame. Since then
this false glorying prevailed as yet among the Israelites, the Prophet
says, “He is no more your God, mine he is.” Thus he placed himself on
one side, and set himself alone in opposition to the whole people. But
at the same time he proves that he has more authority than they all; for
he brings forward God as the supporter and defender of his doctrine. ‘My
God,’ he says, ‘will cast them away.’ So also Isaiah says, when
reproving Ahab,

<span id="xvi.xxii-p8"></span>‘Is it not enough that ye be troublesome
to men, except ye be also troublesome to my God?’ (<span
id="xvi.xxii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013)<span id="xvi.xxii-p8.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xvi.xxii-p9"></span>And yet Isaiah was not the only one who
worshipped God purely. This is true; but he had respect to the king and
his company; and therefore he connected himself with God, and separated
them all from himself, inasmuch as they had already by their perfidy
separated themselves from him.

<span id="xvi.xxii-p10"></span>Then he says, ‘My God will cast them
away.’ So at this day we may safely take the name of God in opposition
to the Papists; for they have nothing in common with the true God, since
they have polluted themselves with so many abominations: and though they
may be proud against us, trusting in their vast multitude, and because
we are few; yet we may boldly oppose them, since God, we know, can never
be separated nor drawn away from his word, and his word, we know, stands
on our side. We may then lawfully reprove the Papists, and say that God
is opposed to them, for we fight under his banner.

<span id="xvi.xxii-p11"></span>*Because*, he says, *they have not obeyed
me* We see that the cause of extreme vengeance is perverseness; that is,
when men designedly harden their hearts against God. The Gentiles also
perish, indeed, without any instruction; but vengeance is doubled, when
the Lord extends his hand to the erring, and seeks to recall them to the
way of salvation, and when they obstinately refuse to obey; yea, when
they show their heart to be perverse in their wickedness. When, then,
such perverseness is added to errors and vicious affections, God must
necessarily come forth with his extreme vengeance, as he threatens here
by his Prophet.

<span id="xvi.xxii-p12"></span>As, then, they obeyed not, the Lord will
cast them away, and *they shall be fugitives among the nations* This
seems to be a lighter punishment than what he had previously stated
respecting their seed being destroyed. But we must remember the contrast
between the rest given them by God, and this vagrant wandering, of which
the Prophet now speaks. The land of Canaan was to them a quiet
habitation, where they rested as though God cherished them under his
wings; and hence it is even called the rest of God in <span
id="xvi.xxii-p12.1"></span>[Psalm
95](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#000.md)<span id="xvi.xxii-p12.1"></span>.
 <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) But now, when the Israelites
wandered as fugitives, and sought rest here and there, and could not
find it, it was more evidently a rejection of them; for the Lord proved,
every day and every moment, that they were repudiated by him, inasmuch
as they were deprived of that rest which he had promised them. Let us
proceed —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc26015.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="xvi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span> ‘And the choice wine shall deceive them.’ —
*Newcome.* The true reading no doubt is <span
id="xvi.ii-p3.1"></span>בם, ‘them,’ and not <span
id="xvi.ii-p3.2"></span>בה, ‘her,’ confirmed by all the early versions
and by several of the best MSS., and is adopted by *Horsley* as well as
*Newcome*. And so does Calvin in his exposition take the word. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc26015.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="xvi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ix-p4"></span> The following is offered as the literal
rendering of the original: —

<span id="xvi.ix-p5"></span>*‘The days of visitation have come,  
The days of retribution have come;  
Israel shall know him a fool, the Prophet,  
*And *mad, the man of the spirit:  
For the greatness of thine iniquity,  
Great also has been the abomination.’*

<span id="xvi.ix-p6"></span>The ‘abomination,’ or detestation, was the
false Prophet, who had been a fool and a madman. The following verse
confirms this view, where the Prophet is represented as ‘an abomination
in the house of his God;’ for it is the same word. And this is the view
substantially taken in this comment. It is singular that interpreters
have overlooked the postfix, <span id="xvi.ix-p6.1"></span>ו, ‘him,’ to
the verb, ‘know’ — <span id="xvi.ix-p6.2"></span>ידעו. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc26015.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="xvi.x-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.x-p3"></span> Bishop *Horsley* gives the following
rendering of this verse: —

<span id="xvi.x-p4"></span>‘The watchman of Ephraim is with his God.  
The Prophet! the snare of the fowler is  
Over all his ways. Vengeance against  
the household of my God.’

<span id="xvi.x-p5"></span>For ‘his,’ instead of ‘my’ God in the first
clause, there is the authority of many MSS: but for turning ‘his’ into
‘my,’ in the last clause there is no satisfactory authority: and there
is nothing to justify the introducing of ‘vengeance’ for the word here
used. The verb from which it is derived means to hate: and the noun as
here formed signifies, no doubt, either the act or feeling of hating, or
what is hated or is hateful. Calvin gives nearly its meaning — ‘<span
id="xvi.x-p5.1"></span>res execrabilis’ — an execrable thing. I offer
the following translation: —

<span id="xvi.x-p6"></span>*‘The watchman of Ephraim,  
Before his God a Prophet,  
*Is *a snare of a fowler in all his ways,  
An abomination in the house of his God.’*

<span id="xvi.x-p7"></span>The first two lines designate his office — a
watchman and a Prophet before God; and the two last, his wicked conduct
and base character. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc26015.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="xvi.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xi-p3"></span> Our translators, contrary to their usual
practice, have paraphrased this clause, without any notice in the
margin. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc26015.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="xvi.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xiv-p4"></span> ‘As grapes in the desert have I found
Israel,  
As the first fruit on the fig-tree in its first season  
Have I seen your fathers:  
They went to Baal-peor,  
And dedicated themselves to shame,  
And became filthy like what they loved.’  
Or, literally, ‘like their love.’

<span id="xvi.xiv-p5"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc26015.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="xvi.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xv-p6"></span> I offer the following rendering of the
original: —

<span id="xvi.xv-p7"></span>**11**. ‘Ephraim as a bird flieth swiftly
away; Their glory is from the birth, and from the womb, and from
conception:

<span id="xvi.xv-p8"></span>**12**. ‘But though they bring up their
children, I will yet destroy them, that they shall not be men; Yes, even
woe *will* be to them, when I turn aside from them.’

<span id="xvi.xv-p9"></span>Fruitfulness of progeny was included in
Jacob’s blessing on Joseph, the father of Ephraim, who especially
represented him. “Blessings of the breasts and of the womb” are
specifically mentioned, <span id="xvi.xv-p9.1"></span>[Ge
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025.md)<span id="xvi.xv-p9.1"></span>.
The former of these two verses alludes to this circumstance. Ephraim is
compared to a bird, soon fledged and flying away from the nest: and then
it is added, that the glory of that people was their rapid increase. It
is a declaration, not a denunciation, for this follows in the next
verse. Besides, a denunciation comports not with what is said in that
verse, nor with the contents of the fourteenth. If their glory had
departed from the birth, etc., how was it that the threatening on the
next verse is, that their children should not grow up to be men, and
that the Prophet should pray God to give them, in verse 14, an abortive
womb, etc.? — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc26015.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="xvi.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p3"></span> Both *Horsley* and *Newcome* render
‘tyrus,’ ‘a rock,’ and are countenanced by *Aquila*, *Symmachus*, and
*Theodotion*; and the Septuagint give not the word ‘Tyrus.’ But there is
a difficulty in this case to fix any meaning to the words rendered in
our version, ‘as I saw;’ and all here have failed to give any
satisfaction. Hence the rendering of our translators, and of Calvin,
seems on the whole to be the best. And as to the idea of a tree put
under cover, it comports well with the passage: only to suppose ‘tree’
understood seems not necessary: for the word rendered ‘planted’ is in my
view a noun, and means a plant. The verse may be thus translated: —

<span id="xvi.xvi-p4"></span>*‘Ephraim* is*, according to what I have
seen at Tyrus,  
A plant in the house:  
Yet Ephraim* is *to bring forth  
to the slayer his children.’*

<span id="xvi.xvi-p5"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc26015.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="xvi.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.xvi-p13"></span> <span id="xvi.xvi-p13.1"></span>[Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024.md)<span id="xvi.xvi-p13.1"></span>.
There is a mistake here. The text is, ‘Coniah the son of Jehoiakim.’ —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc26015.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="xvi.xxii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.xxii-p13"></span> <span id="xvi.xxii-p13.1"></span>[Ps
95:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011.md)<span
id="xvi.xxii-p13.1"></span>. — *fj.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc26016.md)
