[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26000)  [Next](cc26002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>Prejudice has often deprived many of advantages
which they might have otherwise derived: and this has been much the case
with respect to The Works of Calvin; they have been almost entirely
neglected for a long time, owing to impressions unfavorable to the
Author. In his own and the succeeding age, the authority of Calvin as a
Divine, and especially as an Expounder of Scripture, was very high, and
higher than that of any of the Reformers. Though an eminent writer of
the present day, Dr. D’Aubigne, has pronounced Melancthon “the
Theologian of the Reformation,” yet there is sufficient reason to
ascribe that distinction to Calvin; and to him, no doubt, it more justly
belongs, than to any other of the many illustrious men whom God raised
up during that memorable period.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>It is not difficult to account for what happened
to our Author. Various things combined to depreciate his repute. In this
country his views on Church government created in many a prejudice
against him; and then the progress of a theological system, not more
contrary to what he held than to what our own Reformers maintained,
increased this prejudice; and where the former ground of difference and
dislike did not exist, the latter prevailed: so that, generally in our
Church, and among Dissenting bodies, the revered name of Calvin has been
regarded with no feelings of affection, or even of respect; no
discrimination being exercised, and no distinction being made between
his great excellencies as an Expounder of Scripture, and his peculiar
views on Church discipline, and on the doctrine of Predestination.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>On the Continent other things operated against
his reputation. Popery owed him a deep grudge; for no one of the
Reformers probed the depths of its iniquities with so much
discrimination, and with such an unsparing hand as he did. His
remarkably acute mind enabled him to do this most effectually; and there
is much on this subject in the present work, which renders it especially
valuable at this period, when Popery makes such efforts to spread its
errors and delusions. The two weapons which he commonly employed were
Scripture and common sense, — weapons ever dreaded by Popery; and to
blunt their edge has at all times been its attempt, the first, by vain
tradition, and the other, by implicit faith, not in God, or in God’s
word, but in a palpably degenerated Church. But these weapons Calvin
wielded with no common skill dexterity, and power, being deeply versed
in Scripture, and endued with no ordinary share of sound and penetrating
judgment. In addition to this, his doctrinal views were diametrically
opposed to those of Popery, and especially to the papal system, as
modified by and concentrated in Jesuitism, which may be considered to be
the most perfect form of Popery. For these reasons, the Writings of
Calvin could not have been otherwise than extremely obnoxious to the
adherents of the Church of Rome: and the consequence has been, that they
spared no efforts to vilify his name, and to lessen his reputation.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>The first writer of eminence and acknowledged
learning in this country, who has done any thing like justice to Calvin,
was Bishop Horsley; and when we consider the very strong prejudice which
at that time prevailed almost in all quarters against Calvin, to
vindicate his character was no ordinary proof of moral courage. There
were, no doubt, some points in which the two were very like. They both
possessed minds of no common strength and vigor, and minds
discriminating no less than vigorous. In clearness of perception, also,
they had few equals; so that no one needs hardly ever read a passage in
the writings of either twice over in order to understand its meaning.
But probably the most striking point of likeness was their independence
of mind. They thought for themselves, without being swayed by authority
either ancient or modern, and acknowledged no rule and no authority in
religion but that which is divine. The Bishop had more imagination, but
the Pastor of Geneva had a sounder judgment. Hence the Bishop,
notwithstanding his strong mind and great acuteness, was sometimes led
away by what was plausible and novel; but Calvin was ever sober-minded
and judicious, and whatever new view he gives to a passage, it is
commonly well supported, and for the most part gains at once our
approbation.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>But something must be said of the present work.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>It embraces the most difficult portion, in some
respects, of The Old Testament, and of that portion, as acknowledged by
all, the most difficult is The Book Of The Prophet Hosea. Probably no
part of Scripture is commonly read with so little benefit as The Minor
Prophets, owing, no doubt, to the obscurity in which some parts are
involved. That there is much light thrown on many abstruse passages in
this Work, and more than by any existing Comment in our language, is the
full conviction of the writer. Acute, sagacious, and sometimes profound,
the Author is at the same time remarkably simple, plain, and lucid, and
ever practical and useful. The most learned may here gather instruction,
and the most unlearned may understand almost every thing that is said.
The whole object of the Author seems to be to explain, simplify, and
illustrate the text, and he never turns aside to other matters. He is
throughout an Expounder, keeps strictly to his office, and gives to
every part its full and legitimate meaning according to the context, to
which he ever especially attends.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>The style of Hosea is somewhat peculiar. Jerome
has long ago characterized it as being *commatic,* sententious; and
those links, the connective particles, by which different parts are
joined together, are sometimes omitted. This is, indeed, in a measure
the character of the style of all the Prophets, but more so with respect
to Hosea than any other. What at the same time creates the greatest
difficulty is the rapidity of his transitions, and the change of person,
number, and gender. Persons are spoken *to* and spoken *of* sometimes in
the same verse; and he passes from the singular to the plural number,
and the reverse, and sometimes from the masculine to the feminine
gender. To account for these transitions is not always easy.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>It has been thought by many critics, that the
received Hebrew text of Hosea is in a more imperfect state than that of
any other portion of Scripture; but Bishop Horsley denies this in a
manner the most unhesitating; and those emendations which Archbishop
Newcome introduced in his version, about 51 in number, the Bishop has
swept away as unauthorized, and, indeed, as unnecessary, for most of
them had been proposed to remedy the anomalies peculiar to the style of
this Prophet; and some of those few emendations, which the Bishop
himself introduced, founded on the authority of MSS., Calvin’s
exposition shows to be unnecessary. The fact is, that different
readings, collected by the laborious Kennicott and others, have done
*chiefly* this great good — to show the extraordinary correctness of our
received text. Throughout this Prophet, there is hardly an instance in
which the collations of MSS. have supplied an improvement, and certainly
no improvement of any material consequence.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>This Work of Calvin appears now for the first
time in the English language. There is a French translation, but not
made by the Author himself, as in the case of some other portions of his
writings, and can therefore be of no authority. The following
translation has been made from an edition printed at Geneva in 1567,
three years after Calvin’s death, compared with another, printed also at
Geneva in 1610.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>It has been thought advisable to adopt our
common version as the text, and to put Calvin’s Latin version in a
parallel column. His version is a literal rendering of the original,
without any regard to idiom, and to translate it has been found
impracticable, at least in such a way as to be understood by common
readers. His practice evidently was to translate the Hebrew word for
word, and to make this his text, and then in his Comment to modify the
expressions so as to reduce them into readable Latin, and his version
thus modified agrees in most instances with our authorized version. The
agreement is so remarkable, that the only conclusion is, that this Work
must have been much consulted by our Translators.

<span id="ii-p12"></span>In making quotations from Scripture, the Author
seems to have followed no version, but to have made one of his own; and
they are often given paraphrastically, the meaning rather than the words
being regarded. The same is often done also with respect to the passages
explained, the words being frequently varied. In these instances the
Author has been strictly followed throughout in this Translation, and
his quotations, and the text when paraphrased, are marked by a single
inverted comma.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>The Hebrew words which occur in the Lectures
are not accompanied with the points, and it has not been deemed
necessary to add them. The words are given in corresponding English
characters, with the insertion of such vowels only as are necessary to
enunciate them, and these vowels, to distinguish them from the Hebrew
vowels, are put in Roman characters. The Hebrew vowels are uniformly
given the same, and not with that almost endless variety of sounds to
which the points have reduced them. The <span id="ii-p13.1"></span>ו
*vau,* is always represented by u, except when in sonic instances it is
followed by a vowel, and then by v. The Hebrews have four vowels
corresponding with a, e, u, i, and o, in English.

<span id="ii-p14"></span>This work is calculated to be of material help
to those engaged in translations. Our Missionaries may derive from it no
small assistance, as it gives as literal a version of the Hebrew as can
well be made, and contains much valuable criticism, and develops, in a
very lucid and satisfactory manner, the drift and meaning of many
difficult passages. There is no existing Commentary in which the text is
so minutely examined, and so clearly explained. There are also many of
the most approved expositions given by others referred to and stated;
and the Translator has added, on interesting and difficult passages,
what has been suggested by learned critics since the time of the Author.

<span id="ii-p15"></span>If it be a right rule to judge of the
impressions which the perusal of this volume, now presented to the
public, may produce on others, by what one has himself experienced, the
Editor will mention one thing in particular, and that is, that he fully
expects that those who will carefully read this volume will be more
impressed than ever with the extreme propensity of human nature to
idolatry, and with the amazing power and blinding effects of
superstition. The conduct of the Israelites, notwithstanding all the
means employed to restore them to the true worship of God, is here
described with no ordinary minuteness and specialty. Though God sent his
Prophets to them to remind them of their sins, to reason and expostulate
with them, to threaten and to exhort them, to draw and allure them with
promises of pardon and acceptance; and though God chastised them in
various ways, and then withheld his displeasure, and showed them
indulgence, they yet continued obstinately attached to their idolatry
and superstition, and all the while professed and boasted that they
worshipped the true God, and perversely maintained that their mixed
service, the worship of God, and the worship of idols, was right and
lawful, and vastly superior to what the Prophets recommended.

<span id="ii-p16"></span>Having this case of the Israelites in view, we
need not be surprised at the fascinating and blinding influence of
Popery, whose idolatry and superstitions are exactly of the same
character with those of the Israelites; no two cases can be more alike.
Their identity is especially seen in this, — that there is an union of
two worships — of God and of images; and this union was the idolatry
condemned in the Israelites, and is the very idolatry that now exists in
the Church of Rome: and as among the Israelites, so among the Papists,
though God is not excluded, but owned, yet the chief worship is given to
false gods and their images. That the two systems are the same, no one
can doubt, except those who are under the influence of strong delusion;
and this is what is often referred to and amply proved in this work.

<span id="ii-p17"></span>It may be useful to subjoin here an account of
the time in which THE TWELVE MINOR PROPHETS lived. The precise time
cannot be ascertained: they flourished between the two dates which are
here given. The names of the other four Prophets are also added.

<span id="ii-p18"></span>BEFORE THE BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY

<span id="ii-p19"></span>Before Christ

<span id="ii-p20"></span>**I.** **Jonah**,... 856-784.  
**II. Amos**,... 810-785.  
**III. Hosea**,... 810-725.  
**1** **Isaiah**,.... 810-698.  
**IV.** **Joel**,... 810-660.  
**V.** **Micah**,... 758-699.  
**VI. Nahum**,... 720-698.  
**VII. Zephaniah**,... 640-609.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>IMMEDIATELY PREVIOUS TO AND DURING THE
CAPTIVITY

<span id="ii-p22"></span> **2.** **Jeremiah**,... 628-586.  
**VIII.** **Habakkuk**,... 612-598.  
**3.** **Daniel**,... 606-534.  
**IX.** **Obadiah**,... 588-583.  
**4.** **Ezekiel**,... 595-536.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>AFTER THE CAPTIVITY

<span id="ii-p24"></span>**X.** **Haggai**,... 520-518.  
**XI. Zechariah**,... 520-518.  
**XII. Malachi**,... 436-420.

<span id="ii-p25"></span>In the last Volume, the fourth, will be given
the two Indices appended to the original work.

<span id="ii-p26"></span>J.O.  
THRUSSINGTON, September 1, 1816.

<span id="ii-p27"></span>POSTSCRIPT

<span id="ii-p28"></span>After the preceding Preface had gone through
the press, it has been discovered that The Twelve Minor Prophets cannot
be comprised in four volumes of the size generally published in the
present Series of The Works Of John Calvin.

<span id="ii-p29"></span>The Translation, though it be as brief and
concise as the idiom of the English language will well admit, takes up
more space than the Editor at first anticipated. His first calculation
was made from the Latin: he was not then fully aware of the *great*
disparity in the two languages as to relative diffuseness of style. He
has since found, by a minute comparison, that a work in Latin, comprised
in five volumes, would require at least *six* of the same size and type
in English: and in the present instance, what was calculated would be
contained in four, must be extended to *five* volumes, on account of the
respective Prefaces and Notes, &C. by the Editor, besides the Literal
Translations Of each of the Books Of The Twelve Minor Prophets, which it
has since been resolved shall be appended to each successive Commentary,

<span id="ii-p30"></span>The arrangement of this Work, now made with
some degree of certainty, is as follows:

<span id="ii-p31"></span>The **First** Volume is to contain **Hosea**;  
The **Second** Volume, **Joel**, **Amos**, and **Obadiah**;  
The **Third** Volume, **Jonah**, **Micah**, and **Nahum**;  
The **Fourth** Volume, **Habakkuk**, **Zephaniah**, and **Haggai**;
and  
The **Fifth** Volume, **Zechariah** and **Malachi.**

<span id="ii-p32"></span>On this account, the Volumes cannot be all of
equal size, some being considerably above, and some below, the average
extent of the present Series of Calvin’s Works, being 500 pages on the
average. To avoid such inequality, it would have been needful to divide
some of the Books — a thing by no means desirable in any case, and which
has been studiously shunned in all the other Commentaries.

<span id="ii-p33"></span>In addition to what was originally
contemplated, there will be given at the end of each Book a continuous
Literal Translation Of Calvin’s Latin Version, as modified by his
Commentary; and the Editor is requested to state that a similar plan is
to be observed in all the other Prophetical Books of the Old Testament.

<span id="ii-p34"></span>Editor.  
Thrussington, September 1846.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calvin's Epistle Dedicatory](cc26002)
