[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26007)  [Next](cc26009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>Chapter 2

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span>Lecture Fourth

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Say ye unto your brethren, Ammi; and
to your sisters, Ruhamah.

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Dicite fratribus vestris— Populus
meus; et sororibus vestris— Dilecta.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span><span id="ix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet having spoken of the people’s
restoration, and promised that God would some time receive into favour
those whom he had before rejected, now exhorts the faithful mutually to
stir up one another to receive this favour. He had previously mentioned
a public proclamation; for it is not in the power of men to make
themselves the children of God, but God himself freely adopts them. But
now the mutual exhortation of which the Prophet speaks follows the
proclamation; for God at the same time invites us to himself. After we
are taught in common, it remains then that each one should extend his
hand to his brethren, that we may thus with one consent be brought
together to the Lord.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>This then is what the Prophet means by
saying, *Say ye to your brethren,* <span id="ix.ii-p7.1"></span>עמי
*omi, and to your sisters* <span id="ix.ii-p7.2"></span>רוחמה
*ruchamah;* that is, since I have promised to be propitious to you, you
can now safely testify this to one another. We then see that this
discourse is addressed to each of the faithful, that they may mutually
confirm themselves in the faith, after the Lord shall offer them favour
and reconciliation. Let us now proceed —

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span><span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002)<span id="ix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>**2.** Plead with your mother, plead: for
she *is* not my wife, neither *am* I her husband: let her therefore put
away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her
breasts;

<span id="ix.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Litigate cum matre vestra— litigate;
quia ipsa non uxor mea— et ego non maritus ejus: et tollat (hoc est—
tollat igitur) scortationes suas e facie sua— et adulteria sua e medio
uberum suorum.

<span id="ix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iii-p5"></span><span id="ix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet seems in this verse to
contradict himself; for he promised reconciliation, and now he speaks of
a new repudiation. These things do not seem to agree well together that
God should embrace, or be willing to embrace, again in his love those
whom he had before rejected, — and that he should at the same time send
a bill of divorce, and renounce the bond of marriage. But if we weigh
the design of the Prophet, we shall see that the passage is very
consistent, and that there is in the words no contrariety. He has indeed
promised that at a future time God would be propitious to the
Israelites: but as they had not yet repented, it was needful to deal
again more severely with them, that they might return to their God
really and thoroughly subdued. So we see that in Scripture, promises and
threatening are mingled together, and rightly too. For were the Lord to
spend a whole month in reproving sinners they may in that time fall away
a hundred times. Hence God, after showing to men their sins adds some
consolation and moderates severity, lest they should despond: he
afterwards returns again to threatening, and does so from necessity; for
though men may be terrified with the fear of punishment, they do not yet
really repent. It is then necessary for them to be reproved not only
once and again, but very often.

<span id="ix.iii-p7"></span>We now then perceive what the Prophet had in
view: he had spoken of the people’s defection; afterwards he proved that
the people had been justly rejected by the Lord; and then he promised
the hope of pardon. But now seeing that they still continued obstinate
in their vices, he reproves again those who had need of such
chastisement. He, in a word, has in view their present state.

<span id="ix.iii-p8"></span>Almost all so expound this verse as if the
Prophet addressed the faithful: and with greater refinement still do
they expound, who say, that the Prophet addresses the faithful who had
fallen away from the synagogue. They have and I have no doubt, been much
deceived; for the Prophets on the contrary, shows here that God was
justly punishing the Israelites, who were wont to excuse themselves in
the same way as hypocrites are wont to do. When the Lord treated them
otherwise than according to their wishes, they expostulated, and raised
up contention — “What does this mean?” So do we find them introduced as
thus speaking, by Isaiah. \[<span id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>[Isa
58:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)<span
id="ix.iii-p8.1"></span>.\] There, indeed, they fiercely contend with
God, as if the Lord dealt with them unjustly, for they seemed not
conscious of having done any evil. Hence the Prophet, seeing the
Israelites so senseless in their sins, says, *Contend, contend with your
mother.* He speaks here in the person of God: and God, as it has been
stated, uses the similitude of a marriage. Let us now see what is the
import of the words.

<span id="ix.iii-p9"></span>When a husband repudiates his wife, he fixes
a mark of disgrace on the children born by that marriage: their mother
has been divorced; then the children, on account of that divorce, are
held in less esteem. When a husband repudiates his wife through
waywardness, the children justly regard him with hatred. Why? “Because
he loved not our mother as he ought to have done; he has not honoured
the bond of marriage.” It is therefore usually the case, that the
children’s affections are alienated from their father, when he treats
their mother with too little humanity or with entire contempt. So the
Israelites, when they saw themselves rejected, wished to throw the blame
on God. For by the name, “mother”, are the people here called; it is
transferred to the whole body of the people, or the race of Abraham. God
had espoused that people to himself, and wished them to be like a wife
to him. Since then God was a husband to the people, the Israelites were
as sons born by that marriage. But when they were repudiated, the
Israelites said, that God dealt cruelly with them, for he has cast them
away for no fault. The Prophet now undertakes the defence of God’s
cause, and speaks also in his person, *Contend, contend, he says with
your mother* In a word, this passage agrees with what is said in the
beginning of <span id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>[Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)<span id="ix.iii-p9.1"></span>,

<span id="ix.iii-p10"></span>‘Where is the bill of repudiation? Have I
sold you to my creditors? But ye have been sold for your sins, and your
mother has been repudiated for her iniquity.’

<span id="ix.iii-p11"></span>Husbands were wont to give a bill of
divorce to their wives, that they themselves might see it: for it freed
them from every reproach, inasmuch as the husband bore a testimony to
his wife: “I dismiss her, not that she has been unfaithful, not that she
has violated the bond of marriage; but because her beauty does not
please me, or because her manners are not agreeable to me.” The law
compelled the husband to give such a testimony as this. God now says by
his Prophet, “Show me now the bill of repudiation: have I of my own
accord cast away your mother? No, I have not done so. Ye cannot accuse
me of cruelty, as though her beauty did not please me, and as though I
had followed the common practice approved by you. I have not willingly
rejected her, nor at my own pleasure, and I have not sold her to my
creditors, as your fathers were sometimes wont to do, as to their
children, when they were in debt.” In short, the Lord shows there that
the Jews were to be blamed, that they were rejected together with their
mother. So he says also in this place, *Contend, contend with your
mother;* which means, “Your dispute is not with me:” and by the
repetition he shows how inveterate was their perverseness, for they
never ceased to glamour against God. We now see the real meaning of the
Prophet.

<span id="ix.iii-p12"></span>In vain then do they philosophise, who say
that the mother was to be condemned by her own children; because, when
they shall be converted to their former faith, they ought then to
condemn the synagogue. The Prophet meant no such thing; but, on the
contrary, he brings this charge against the Israelites, that they had
been repudiated for the flagitious conduct of their mother, and had
ceased to be counted the children of God. For the comparison between
husband and wife is here to be understood; and then the children are
placed as it were in the middle. When the mother is dismissed, the
children indignantly say that the father has been too inhuman if indeed
he wilfully divorces his wife: but when a wife becomes unfaithful to her
husband, or prostitutes herself to any shameful crime, the husband is
then free from every blame; and there is no cause for the children to
expostulate with him; for he ought thus to punish a shameless wife. God
then shows that the Israelites were justly rejected, and that the blame
of their rejection belonged to the whole race of Abraham; but that no
blame could be imputed to him.

<span id="ix.iii-p13"></span>And for a reason it is added, *Let her then
take away her fornication from her face, and her adulteries from the
midst of her breasts* The Prophet, by saying, “Let her then take away
her fornications”, (for the copulative <span id="ix.iii-p13.1"></span>ו,
*vau,* ought to be regarded as an illative,) confirms what we have just
now said; that is that God had stood to his pledged faith, but that the
people had become perfidious; and that the cause of the divorce or
separation was, that the Israelites persevered not, as they ought to
have done, in the obedience of faith. Then God says, *Let her take away
her fornications.* But the phrase, *Let her take away from her face and
from her breasts*, seems singular; and what does it mean? because women
commit fornication neither by the face nor by the breasts. It is evident
the Prophet alludes to meretricious finery; for harlots, that they may
entice men, sumptuously adorn themselves, and carefully paint their face
and decorate their breasts. Wantonness then appears in the face as well
as in the breasts. But interpreters do not touch on what the Prophet had
in view. The Prophet, no doubt, sets forth here the shamelessness of the
people; for they had now so hardened themselves in their contempt of
God, in their ungodly superstitions, in all kinds of wickedness, that
they were like harlots, who conceal not their baseness, but openly
prostitute themselves, yea, and exhibit tokens of their shamelessness in
their eyes as well as in every part of their bodies. We see then that
the people are here accused of disgraceful impudence as they had grown
so callous as to wish to be known to be such as they were. In the same
way does Ezekiel set forth their reproachful conduct,

<span id="ix.iii-p14"></span>‘Spread has the harlot her feet,  
she called on all who passed by the way,’  
(<span id="ix.iii-p14.3"></span>[Eze
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#025)<span id="ix.iii-p14.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.iii-p15"></span>We now then understand why the Prophet
expressly said, *Let her take away from her face her fornication, and
from her breasts her adulteries:* for he teaches that the vices of the
people were not hidden, and that they did not now sin and cover their
baseness as hypocrites do, but that they were so unrestrained in their
contempt of God, that they were become like common harlots.

<span id="ix.iii-p16"></span>Here is a remarkable passage; for we first
see that men in vain complain when the Lord seems to deal with them in
severity; for they will ever find the fault to be in themselves and in
their parents: yea, when they look on all impartially, they will confess
that all throughout the whole community are included in one and the same
guilt. Let us hence learn, whenever the lord may chastise us, to come
home to ourselves, and to confess that he is justly severe towards us;
yea, were we apparently cast away, we ought yet to confess, that it is
through our own fault, and not through God’s immoderate severity. We
also learn how frivolous is their pretext, who set up against God the
authority of their fathers, as the Papists do: for they would, if they
could, call or compel God to an account, because he forsakes them, and
owns them not now as his Church. “What! has not God bound his faith to
us? Is not the Church his spouse? Can he be unfaithful?” So say the
Papists: but at the same time they consider not, that their mother has
become utterly filthy through her many abominations; they consider not,
that she has been repudiated, because the Lord could no longer bear her
great wickedness. Let us then know, that it is in vain to bring against
God the examples of men; for what is here said by the Prophet will ever
stand true, that God has not given a bill of divorce to his Church; that
is, that he has not of his own accord divorced her, as peevish and cruel
husbands are wont to do, but that he has been constrained to do so,
because he could no longer connive at so many abominations. It now
follows —

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#003)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Lest I strip her naked, and set her as
in the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her
like a dry land, and slay her with thirst.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Ne expoliem eam nudam— (*hoc est*— ne
expoliando denudem—) et statuam eam secundam diem nativitatis suae— et
ponam eam quasi desertum— ponam eam quasi terram siccitatis (*hoc est*—
terram aridam) et occidam eam siti— (*hoc est*— perire faciam: Je la
feray mourir— *ad* *verbum*.)

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span><span id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>Though the Prophet in this verse severely
threatens the Israelites, yet it appears from a full view of the whole
passage, that he mitigates the sentence we have explained: for by
declaring what sort of vengeance was suspended over them, except they
timely repented, he shows that there was some hope of pardon remaining,
which, as we shall see, he expresses afterwards more clearly.

<span id="ix.iv-p7"></span>He now begins by saying, *Lest I strip her
naked, and set her as on the day of her nativity* This alone would have
been dreadful; but we shall see in the passage, that God so denounces
punishment, that he cuts not off altogether the hope of mercy: and at
the same time he reminds them that the divorce, for which they were
disposed to contend with God, was such, that God yet shows indulgence to
the repudiated wife. For when a husband dismisses an adulteress, he
strips her entirely, and rightly so: but God shows here, that though the
Israelites had become wanton, and were like a shameless woman, he had
yet so divorced them hitherto, that he had left them their dowry, their
ornaments and marriage gifts. We then see that God had not used, as he
might have done, his right; and hence he says, *Lest I strip her naked*;
which means this, “I seem to you too rigid, because I have declared,
that I am no longer a husband to your mother: and yet see how kindly I
have spared her; for she remains as yet almost untouched: though she has
lost the name of wife, I have not yet stripped her; she as yet lives in
sufficient plenty. Whence is this but from my indulgence? for I did not
wish to follow up my right, as husbands do. But except she learns to
humble herself, I now gird up myself for the purpose of executing
heavier punishments.” We now comprehend the whole import of the passage.

<span id="ix.iv-p8"></span>What the Prophet means by the day of
nativity, we may readily learn from <span id="ix.iv-p8.1"></span>[Eze
16](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#000)<span id="ix.iv-p8.1"></span>; for
Ezekiel there treats the same subject with our Prophet, but much more at
large. He says that the Israelites were then born, when God delivered
them from the tyranny of Egypt. This then was the nativity of the
people. And yet it was a miserable sight, when they fled away with fear
and trembling, when they were exposed to their enemies: and after they
entered the wilderness, being without bread and water, their condition
was very wretched. The Prophet says now, *Lest I set her as on the day
of her nativity*, and *set her as the desert*. Some regard the letter
<span id="ix.iv-p8.2"></span> כ*caph* to be understood, as if it were
written, <span id="ix.iv-p8.3"></span>כבמדבר as in the desert; that is,
I will set her as she was formerly in the desert; and this exposition is
not unsuitable; for the day of nativity, the Prophet doubtless calls
that time, when the people were brought out of Egypt: they immediately
entered the desert, where there with the want of every thing. They might
then have soon perished there, being consumed by famine and thirst, had
not the Lord miraculously supported them. The sense then seems
consistent by this rendering, *Lest I set her as in the deserts and as
in a dry land*. But another exposition is more approved, *Lest I set her
like the desert and dry land*

<span id="ix.iv-p9"></span>With regard to what the Prophet had in view,
it was necessary to remind the Israelites here of what they were at
their beginning. For whence was their contempt of God, whence was their
obstinate pride, but that they were inebriated with their pleasures? For
when there flowed an abundance of all good things, they thought of
themselves, that they had come as it were from the clouds; for men
commonly forget what they formerly were, when the Lord has made them
rich. As then the benefits of God for the most part blind us, and make
us to think ourselves to be as it were half-gods, the Prophet here sets
before the children of Abraham what their condition was when the Lord
redeemed them. “I have redeemed you,” he says, “from the greatest
miseries and extreme degradation.” Sons of kings are born kings, and are
brought up in the midst of pomps and pleasures; nay, before they are
born, great pomps, we know, are prepared for them, which they enjoy from
their mother’s womb. But when one is born of an ignoble and obscure
mother, and begotten by a mean and poor father, and afterwards arises to
a different condition, if he is proud of his splendour, and remembers
not that he was once a plebeian and of no repute, this may be justly
thrown in his face, “Who were you formerly? Why! do you not know that
you were a cow-herd, or a mechanic, or one covered with filth? Fortune
has smiled on you, or God has raised you to riches and honours; but you
are so self-complacent as though your condition had ever been the same.”

<span id="ix.iv-p10"></span>This is the drift of what the Prophet says:
*I will set* thy mother, he says, as she was at her first nativity. For
who are you? A holy race, a chosen nation, a people sacred to me? Be it
so: but free adoption has brought all this to you. Ye were exiles in
Egypt, strangers in the land of Canaan, and were nothing better than
other people. Besides, Pharaoh reduced you to a base servitude, ye were
then the most abject of slaves. How magnificent, with regard to you, was
your going forth! Did you not flee away tremblingly and in the night?
And did you not afterwards live in a miraculous way for forty years in
the desert, when I rained manna on you from the clouds? Since then your
poverty and want has been so great, since there is nothing to make you
to raise your crests, how is it that you show no more modesty? But if
your present condition creates in you forgetfulness, I will set you as
on the day of your nativity.” It now follows —

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span><span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#004)<span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>**4.** And I will not have mercy upon her
children; for they *be* the children of whoredoms.

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span>**4.** Et filiorum ejus non miserabor, quia
filii adulterini sunt.

<span id="ix.v-p4"></span>**5.** For their mother hath played the
harlot: she that conceived them hath done shamefully: for she said, I
will go after my lovers, that give *me* my bread and my water, my wool
and my flax, mine oil and my drink.

<span id="ix.v-p5"></span>**5.** Quia scortata est mater eorem, probriis
foedata est quae concepit ipsos, (*vel*, genitrix ipsorum:) dixit enim,
Ibo post amatores meos, datores panis mei (*vel*, qui dant panem meum)
et aquas meas, lanam meam et linum meum, et oleum meum et potum meum.

<span id="ix.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.v-p7"></span><span id="ix.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p8"></span>The Lord now comes close to each individual,
after having spoken in general of the whole people: and thus we see that
to be true which I have said, that it was far from the mind of the
Prophet to suppose, that God here teaches the faithful who had already
repented, that they ought to condemn their own mother. The Prophet meant
nothing of the kind; but, on the contrary, he wished to check the
waywardness of the people, who ceased not to contend with God, as though
he had been more severe than just towards their race. Now then he
reproves each of them; *your children*, he says, *I will not pity; for
they are spurious children* He had indeed said before that they had been
born by adultery; but he afterwards received them into favour. This is
true; but what I have said must be remembered that the Prophet as yet
continues in his reproofs; for though he has mingled some consolation,
he yet saw that their hearts were not as yet contrite and sufficiently
humbled. We must bear in mind the difference between their present state
and their future favour. God before promised that he would be propitious
to apostates who had departed from him: but now he shows that it was not
yet the ripe time, for they had not ceased to sin. Hence he says, *I
will not pity your children*

<span id="ix.v-p9"></span>Having spoken of the mother’s divorce, he now
says that the children, born of adultery, were not his: and certainly
what the Prophet promised before was not immediately fulfilled; for the
people, we know, had been disowned, and when deprived of the land of
Canaan, were rejected, as it were, by the Lord. The Babylonian exile was
a kind of death: and then when they returned from exile, a small portion
only returned, not the whole people; and they were tossed, we know, by
many calamities until Christ our Redeemer appeared. Since then the
Prophet included the whole of this time, it is no wonder that he says
that the children were to be repudiated by the Lord, because they were
born of adultery: for until they returned from captivity, and Christ was
at length revealed, this repudiation, of which the Prophet speaks, ever
continued *Thy children,* he says, *I will not pity.* At first sight it
seems very dreadful, that God takes away the hope of mercy; but we ought
to confine this sentence to that time during which it pleased God to
cast away his people. As long, then, as that temporary casting away
lasted, God’s favour was hid; and to this the Prophet now refers, *I
will not* then pity her children, *for they are born by adultery*. At
the same time, we must remember that this sentence specifically belonged
to the reprobate, who boasted of being the children of Abraham, while
they were profane and unholy, while they impiously perverted the whole
worship of God, while they were wholly ungovernable. Then the Prophet
justly pronounces such a severe judgement on obstinate men, who could be
reformed by no admonitions.

<span id="ix.v-p10"></span><span id="ix.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p11"></span>He afterwards declares how the children
became spurious; *their mother, who conceived* or *bare* *them, has been
wanton; with shameful acts has she defiled herself* <span
id="ix.v-p11.1"></span> בוש*bush,* means, to be ashamed; but here the
Prophet means not that the Israelites were touched with shame, for such
a meaning would be inconsistent with the former sentence; but that they
were like a shameless and infamous woman, touched with no shame for her
baseness. *Their mother*, then, *had been wanton, and she who bare them
had become scandalous* Here the Prophet strips the Israelites of their
foolish confidence, who were wont to profess the name of God, while they
were entirely alienated from him: for they had fallen away by their
impiety from pure worship, they had rejected the law, yea, and every
yoke. Since then they were wild beasts, it was extreme stupidity ever to
set up for their shield the name of God, and ever to boast of the
adoption of their father Abraham. But as the Jews were so perversely
proud, the Prophet here answers them, “*Your mother has been wanton, and
with shameful acts has she defiled herself;* I will not therefore count
nor own you as my children, for ye were born by adultery.”

<span id="ix.v-p12"></span>This passage confirms what I have shortly
before explained, — that it is not enough that God should choose any
people for himself, except the people themselves persevere in the
obedience of faith; for this is the spiritual chastity which the Lord
requires from all his people. But when is a wife, whom God has bound to
himself by a sacred marriage, said to become wanton? When she falls
away, as we shall more clearly see hereafter, from pure and sound faith.
Then it follows that the marriage between God and men so long endures at
they who have been adopted continue in pure faith, and apostasy in a
manner frees God from us, so that he may justly repudiate us. Since such
apostasy prevails under the Papacy, and has for many ages prevailed, how
senseless they are in their boasting, while they would be thought to be
the holy Catholic Church, and the elect people of God? For they are all
born by wantonness, they are all spurious children. The incorruptible
seed is the word of God; but what sort of doctrine have they? It is a
spurious seed. Then as to God all the Papists are bastards. In vain then
they boast themselves to be the children of God, and that they have the
holy Mother Church, for they are born by filthy wantonness.

<span id="ix.v-p13"></span>The Prophet pursues still the same subject:
“She said, *I will go after my lovers, the givers of my bread, of my
waters, of my wool, and of my flax, and of my oil, and of my drink* The
Prophet here defines the whoredom of which he had spoken: this part is
explanatory; the Prophet unfolds in several words what he had briefly
touched when he said, *your mother has been wanton.* Now, if the Jews
object and say, How has she become wanton? Because, “she said, *I will
go after my lovers, who give me my bread and my waters, etc.* The
Prophet here compares false gods to lovers, who seduce women from their
conjugal fidelity; for he pursues the similitude which he had
introduced. The Church, to whom God has pledged his faith, is
represented as a wife; and as a woman does, when enticed by gifts, and
as many women follow covetousness and become lascivious, that they may
dress sumptuously, and live luxuriously, so the Prophet now points out
this vice in the Israelitic Church, *She said, I will go after my
lovers* Some understand by lovers either the Assyrians or the Egyptians;
for when the Israelites formed connections with these heathen nations,
they were drawn away, we know, from their God. But the Prophet inveighs
especially against false and corrupt modes of worship, and all kinds of
superstitions; for the pure worship of God, we know, is ever to have the
first place, and that justly; for on this depend all the duties of life.
I therefore doubt not, but that he includes all false gods, when he
says, “I will go after my lovers”.

<span id="ix.v-p14"></span>But by introducing the word, “said”, he
amplifies the shamelessness of the people, who deliberately forsook
their God, who was to them as a legitimate husband. It indeed happens
sometimes that a man is thoughtlessly drawn aside by a mistake or folly,
but he soon repents; for we see many of the unexperienced deceived for a
short time: but the Prophet here shows that the Israelites premeditated
their unfaithfulness, so that they wilfully departed from God. Hence
*she said*; and we know that this *said* means so much; and it is to be
referred, not to the outward word as pronounced, but to the inward
purpose. *She* therefore *said*, that is, she made this resolution; as
though he said, “Let no one make this frivolous excuse, that they were
deceived, that they did it in their simplicity: ye are, he says,
avowedly perfidious, ye have with a premeditated purpose sought this
divorce.” He, however, ascribes this to their mother: for defection
began at the root, when they were drawn away by Jeroboam into corrupt
superstitions; and the promotion of this evil became as it were
hereditary. He therefore intended to condemn here the whole community.
Hence, “she said, I will go after my lovers, who give me my bread and my
waters”. But I cannot finish today; I must therefore break off the
sentence.

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast not
only of late adopted us as thy children, but before we were born, and as
thou hast been pleased to sign us, as soon as we came forth from our
mother’s womb, with the symbol of that holy redemption, which has been
obtained for us by the blood of thy only begotten Son, though we have by
our ingratitude renounced so great a benefit, — O grant, that being
mindful of our defection and unfaithfulness, of which eve are all
guilty, and for which thou hast justly rejected us, we may now with true
humility and obedience of faith embrace the grace of thy gospel now
again offered to us, by which thou reconciles thyself to us; and grant
that we may steadfastly persevere in pure faith, so as never to turn
aside from the true obedience of faith, but to advance more and more in
the knowledge of thy mercy, that having strong and deep roots, and being
firmly grounded in the confidence of sure faith, we may never fall away
from the true worship of thee, until thou at length receives us in to
that eternal kingdom, which has been procured for us by the blood of thy
only Son. Amen.

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifth

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>It remains for us to explain what the
Prophet declares concerning the Israelites, that they boasted of their
abundance of wine and oil, and all good things as having come to them
through their superstitions. What, then, they ought to have ascribed to
God alone, they absurdly transferred to their idols. Of this ingratitude
the Prophet here accuses them in the person of God himself, and at the
same time shows that the ungodly are so deluded by prosperity, that they
harden themselves more and more in their superstitions; and this is not
the case only at one time, but almost universally in the world. We see
how full of pride the Papists are at this day, because they bear rule in
the world, and possess riches and honours. They think their services
acceptable to God, because he shows not himself openly opposed to and
angry with them; and so it has been from the beginning.

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>But the Prophet here condemns this foolish
presumption, that we may learn not to judge at all times of God’s love
by the prosperous issue of events. There are then two things to be
observed here, — that the superstitious falsely ascribe to their idols
what comes from God alone; — and further, that they conclude that they
are loved by God, whenever he does not immediately take vengeance on
them. The Sodomites, we find, became obstinate in their sins for the
same reason; when all kinds of pleasures abounded, they thought
themselves to be approved of God. Let us now proceed to what follows.

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span><span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#006)<span id="ix.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>**6.** Therefore, behold, I will hedge up
thy way with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not find her paths.

<span id="ix.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Propterea ecce ego concludo viam
tuam spius, et circumdo (circumdabo) sepem (*ad verbum*, sepire sepem;
*sed tamen sensus clarus est*, circumdabo sepem, *vel* maceriem) et
semitam suam non reperiet.

<span id="ix.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.viii-p5"></span><span id="ix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet here pursues the subject we
touched upon yesterday; for he shows how necessary chastisement is, when
people felicitate themselves in their vices. And God, when he sees that
men confess not immediately their sins, defends as it were his own
cause, as one pleading before a judge. In a word, God here shows that he
could not do otherwise than punish so great an obstinacy in the people,
as there appeared no other remedy.

<span id="ix.viii-p7"></span>*Therefore*, he says, *behold I* — There is
a special meaning in these words; for God testifies that he becomes the
avenger of impieties, when people are brought into straits; as though he
said, “Though the Israelites are not ready to confess that they suffer
justly, yet I now declare that to punish them will be my work, when they
shall be deprived of their pleasures, and when the occasion of their
pride shall be removed from them.” And he intimates by the metaphorical
words he uses, that he would so deal with them, as to keep the people
from wandering, as they had done hitherto, after their idols; but he
retains the similitude of a harlot. Now when an unchaste wife goes after
her paramours, the husband must either connive at her, or be not aware
of her base conduct. However this may be, wives cannot thus violate the
marriage-vow, except they are set at liberty by their husbands. But when
a husband understands that his wife plays the wanton, he watches her
more closely, notices all her ways day and night. God now takes up this
comparison, *I will close up,* he says*, her way with thorns, and
surround her with a mound,* that there may be no way of access open to
adulterers.

<span id="ix.viii-p8"></span>But by this simile the Prophet means that
the people would be reduced to such straits, that they might not
lasciviate, as they had done, in their superstitions; for while the
Israelites enjoyed prosperity, they thought everything lawful for them;
hence their security, and hence their contempt of the word of the Lord.
By *hedge,* then, and by *thorns,* God means those adversities by which
he restrains the ungodly, so that they may cease to flatter themselves,
and may not thoughtlessly follow, as they were before wont to do, their
own superstitions. *She shall not* then *find her ways*; that is, “I
will constrain them so to groan under the burden of evils, that they
shall no longer, as they have hitherto done, allow loose reins to
themselves.” It afterwards follows —

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span><span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007)<span id="ix.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span>**7.** And she shall follow after her lovers,
but she shall not overtake them; and she shall seek them, but shall not
find *them*: then shall she say, I will go and return to my first
husband; for then *was it* better with me than now.

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Et persequentur amatores suos— et non
apprehendet eos; et quaeret eos— et non inveniet: tunc dicet— Ibo et
revertar as maritum meum priorem— quia melius mihi tunc fuit quam nunc.

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span><span id="ix.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span>God now shows what takes place when he
chastises hardened and rebellious people with heavy punishment. In the
first clause he shows that perverseness will cleave so completely to
their hearts, that they will not immediately return to a sound mind.
*She will follow her lovers, he says, and seek them.* Here the Prophet
tells us, that though the Israelites should be chastised by frequent
punishments, they would yet continue in their obstinacy. It hence
appears how hard a neck they had, and how uncircumcised in heart they
were; and such did the Prophets, as well as Moses, represent them to be.
And we hence learn, that had they been only moderately corrected, it
would not have been sufficient for their amendment. Amazing, indeed, was
their obstinacy; for God had divorced them, and then led them into great
straits; and yet they went on in their course, as though they were
utterly stupid and destitute of every feeling. Is it not a prodigious
madness, when men run on so obstinately, even when God sets his hand so
strongly against them? Such, however, is represented to have been the
obstinacy of the Israelites.

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span>The meaning then is, that when they were
subdued, God would not immediately soften their hearts. Then God, though
he bruised, did not yet reform them; for their hardness was so great,
that they could not be turned immediately to a docile state of mind;
but, on the contrary, they followed their lovers. By the word, *follow,*
is expressed that mad zeal which possesses idolaters; for as we see,
they are like men who are frantic. As then the superstitious know no
bounds, nor any moderation, but a mad zeal at times lays hold on them,
the Prophet says *She will follow her lovers and shall not overtake
them*. What does the latter clause mean? That God will frustrate the
hope of the ungodly, that they may know that they in vain worship false
gods and follow with avidity absurd superstitions. *They will seek
them*, he says, *and shall not find them*. He ever speaks of the people
under the character of a shameless and unfaithful wife.

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span>We then see what the Prophet intended to do,
— to vindicate God from every blame, that men might not raise a clamour,
as though he dealt unkindly with them. He shows that God, even when so
rigid, produces hardly any effect; for the ungodly in their perverseness
struggle against his scourges, and suffer not themselves to be brought
immediately into due order.

<span id="ix.ix-p9"></span>But in the second clause the Prophet adds,
that some benefit would at length arise, that though idolaters abused
God’s goodness, and even hardened themselves against his rods, yet this
would not be perpetually the case; for the Lord would grant better
success. Hence it follows, *She will then say, I will go and return to
my former* *husband*. Here the Prophet shows more clearly a hope of
pardon, inasmuch as he speaks of the people’s repentance; for men, we
know, repent not without benefit, as God is ever ready to receive them
when they return to him in genuine sorrow. Then the Prophet here
avowedly speaks of the repentance of the people, that the Israelites
might hence know, that corrections, which men naturally ever dislike,
would be profitable to them. It is our wish that God should always
favour us, and that we should be nourished kindly and tenderly in his
bosom; but in the meantime, he cannot allure us to himself, by whatever
means he may try to do so: and hence it is, that chastisements are
bitter to us, and our flesh immediately murmurs. When the Lord raises
his finger, before he strikes us, we instantly groan and become angry,
and even roar against him: in short, men can never be brought willingly
to offer themselves to be chastised by God. Hence the Prophet now shows,
that the severity of God is profitable to us; for it drives us at length
to repentance: in a word, he commends the favour of God in his very
severity, that we may know that he furthers our salvation, even when he
seems to treat us most unkindly. *She will then say, I will go and
return to my former husband.*

<span id="ix.ix-p10"></span>But we must observe, that when men really
repent, they do so through the special influence of the Spirit; for they
would otherwise perpetually remain in that perverseness of which we have
spoken. Were God for a hundred years continually to chastise perverse
men, they would not yet change their disposition; and true is that
common saying, “The wicked are sooner broken than reformed.” But when
men, after many admonitions, begin to be wise, this change comes through
the Spirit of God. We may also learn from this passage what true
repentance is; that is, when he who has sinned not only confesses
himself to be guilty, and owns himself worthy of punishment, but is also
displeased with himself, and then with sincere desire turns to God.
Many, we see, are ready enough, and disposed, to confess their sins, and
yet go on in the same course. But the Prophet shows here that true
repentance is something very different, “I will go and return”, he says.
Repentance then consists (as they say) in the act itself; that is,
repentance produces a reforming change in man, so that he reconciles
himself to God, whom he had forsaken.

<span id="ix.ix-p11"></span>*I will* then *go and return to my former
husband*. Why? *Because* *better was it with me then than now*. The
Prophet again confirms what I lately said, — that the faithful are not
made wise, except they are well chastised; for the Prophet speaks not
here of the reprobate, but of the remnant seed. The people of Israel
were to be exterminated; but the Prophet now declares that there would
be some remaining who would at last receive benefit from God’s
chastisements. Since then we must understand the Prophet as speaking of
the elect, we may hence readily conclude, that chastisements are
necessary for us; for we grow torpid in our vices, as long as God spares
us. Unless, then it appears that God is really displeased with us, it
will never come to our minds, that we ought to repent. Let us now
proceed —

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span><span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008)<span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>**8.** For she did not know that I gave her
corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her silver and gold, *which*
they prepared for Baal.

<span id="ix.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et ipsa non cognovit quod ego dederim
ei triticum et vinum (<span id="ix.x-p3.1"></span>תירוש *significat
propice* mustum,) et oleum, et argentum multiplicaverim ei, et aurum
aptarunt ipsi Baal.

<span id="ix.x-p4"></span>**9.** Therefore will I return, and take away
my corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will
recover my wool and my flax *given* to cover her nakedness.

<span id="ix.x-p5"></span>**9.** Propterea revertar et tollam triticum
meum tempore suo, et mustum meum suo statuto tempore, et linum meum ad
tegendum turpitudinem ejus (*vel*, nuditatem; hoc est, quibus texit suam
nuditatem.)

<span id="ix.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.x-p7"></span><span id="ix.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p8"></span>God here amplifies the ingratitude of the
people, that they understood not whence came such abundance of good
things. *She understood not*, he says, *that I gave to her corn and
wine*. The superstitious sin twice, or in two ways; — first, they
ascribe to their idols what rightly belongs to God alone; and then they
deprive God himself of his own honour, for they understand not that he
is the only giver of all things, but think their labour lost were they
to worship the true God. Hence the Prophet now complains of this
ingratitude, *She understood not that I gave to her corn and wine and
oil.* And this was an inexcusable stupidity in the Israelites, since
they had been abundantly instructed, that the abundance of all good
things, and every thing that supports man, flow from God’s bounty. Of
this they had the clear testimony of Moses; and then the land of Canaan
itself was a living representation of the Divine favour. It was then a
prodigious madness in the people, that they who had been taught by word
and by fact, that God alone is the Giver of all things, should yet not
consider this truth. The Prophet, therefore, condemns this outrageous
folly of the people, that neither experience nor the teaching of the law
availed anything, *She knew not*, he says. There is stress to be laid on
the pronoun, she; for the people ought to have been familiarly
acquainted with God, inasmuch as they had been brought up in his
household, as a wife, who is her husband’s companion. It was then
incapable of any excuse, that the people should thus turn their minds
and all their thoughts away from God.

<span id="ix.x-p9"></span>*She knew not* then *that I had given to her
corn and wine and oil, that I had multiplied to her the silver, and also
the gold she has prepared for Baal* The verb <span
id="ix.x-p9.1"></span>עשה means specifically, to make: but here to
appropriate to a certain purpose. They have, therefore, *prepared gold
for Baal;* when they ought to have dedicated to me the first-fruits of
all good things, in obedience to me and to the honour of my name, they
have appropriated to Baal whatever blessings I have bestowed on them. We
then see that in this verse two evils are condemned, — that the people
deprived God of his just honour, — and that they transferred to their
own idols what they ought to have given to God only. But he touched upon
the last wickedness in the fifth verse, where he said in the person of
the people, *I will go after my lovers, who give my bread and my waters,
my wool and my wine, etc.* Here again he repeats, that they had
*prepared gold for Baal.*

<span id="ix.x-p10"></span>As to the word Baal, no doubt the
superstitious included under this name all those whom they called
inferior gods. No such madness had indeed possessed the Israelites, that
they had forgotten that there is but one Maker of heaven and earth. They
therefore maintained the truth, that there is some supreme God; but they
added their patrons; and this, by common consent, was the practice of
all nations. They did not then think that God was altogether robbed of
his own glory, when they joined with him patrons or inferior gods. And
they called them by a common name, Baalim, or, as it were, patrons. Baal
of every kind was a patron. Some render it, husband. But foolish men, I
doubt not, have ever had this superstitious notion, that inferior gods
come nearer to men, and are, as it were, mediators between this world
and the supreme God. It is the same with the Papists of the present day;
they have their Baalim; not that they regard their patrons in the place
of God: but as they dread every access to God, and understand not that
Christ is a mediator, they retake themselves here and there to various
Baalim, that they may procure favour to themselves; and at the same
time, whatever honour they show to stones, or wood, or bones of dead
men, or to any of their own inventions, they call it the worship of God.
Whatever then, is worshipped by the Papists is Baal: but they have, at
the same time, their patrons for their Baalim. We now then perceive the
meaning of the Prophet in this verse.

<span id="ix.x-p11"></span><span id="ix.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p12"></span>It now follows *Therefore will I return, and
take away my corn in its time, and my new wine in its stated time.*
Here, again, the Prophet shows that God was, by extreme necessity,
constrained to take vengeance on an ungodly and irreclaimable people. He
makes known how great was the hardness of the people, and then adds,
“What now remains, but to deprive those who have been so ungrateful to
me of all their blessings?” It is, indeed, more than base for men to
enjoy the gifts of God and to despise the giver; yea, to exalt his
creatures to his place, and to reduce, as it were, all his authority to
nothing. This the superstitious indeed do, for they thrust God from his
pre-eminence, and insult his glory. Will God, in the meantime, so throw
away his blessings as to suffer them to be profaned by the ungodly, and
himself to be thus mocked with impunity? We now then see the object of
the Prophet; for God here shows that there was no other remedy, but to
deprive the Israelites of all their gifts: he had indeed enriched them,
but they had abused all their abundance. It was therefore necessary to
reduce them to extreme want, that they might no longer pollute God’s
gifts which ought to be held sacred by us.

<span id="ix.x-p13"></span>And he uses a very suitable word; for <span
id="ix.x-p13.1"></span>נצל *natsal* means properly, to pluck away, to
set free. *I will by force take away*, he says, *my wool and my flax.*
It seems, indeed, to denote an unjust possession, as when one takes away
by force from the hand of a robber what he unjustly possesses, or as
when any one rescues wretched men from the power of a tyrant. So God now
speaks, ‘I will pluck away my gifts from these men who basely and
unjustly pollute them.’

<span id="ix.x-p14"></span>And he adds, *to cover her nakedness* <span
id="ix.x-p14.1"></span>ערוה, *orue,* properly, though not simply, means
nakedness: it is the nakedness of the uncomely parts. Moses calls any
indecorous part of the body <span id="ix.x-p14.2"></span>ערוה, *orue,*
and so it means what is uncomely. This word we ought carefully to
notice; for God here shows, that except he denudes idolaters, they will
ever continue obstinate. How so? Because they use coverings for their
baseness. While the ungodly enjoy their triumphs in the world, they
regard them as veils drawn over them, so that nothing base or
disgraceful can be seen in them. The same is the case with great kings
and monarchs; they think that the eyes of all are dazzled by their
splendour; and hence it is, that they are so audaciously dissolute. They
think their own filth to be fine odour: such is the arrogance of the
world. It is even so with the superstitious; when God is indulgent to
them, they think that they have coverings. When, therefore, they abandon
themselves to any kind of wickedness, they regard it as if it were a
holy thing. How so? Because, whatever obscene thing is in them, it is
covered by prosperity. When God observes such madness as this in men,
can he do otherwise than pluck away his blessings, that such a pollution
may not continually prevail? For it is an abuse extremely gross, that
when God’s blessings are so many images of his glory, and when his
paternal goodness shines forth even towards the ungodly, the world
should convert them to a purpose wholly contrary, and make them as
coverings for themselves, that they may conceal their own baseness, and
more freely sin and carry on war against God himself. Hence he says,
“That they may no longer cover their baseness, I will pluck away
whatever I have bestowed on them.”

<span id="ix.x-p15"></span>When he says, *I will take away the corn and
wine in its time, and in its stated time,* he alludes, I have no doubt,
to the time of harvest and vintage; as though he said, “The harvest will
come, the vintage will come: there has been hitherto great fruitfulness;
but I will show that the earth and all its fruits are subject to my
will. Though, then, the Israelites are now full, and have their
storehouses well furnished, they shall know that I rule over the harvest
and the vintage, when the stated time shall come.” Now, the Spirit of
God denounced this punishment early, that the Israelites, if
reclaimable, might return to a right course. But as their blindness was
so great that they despised all that had been said to them, no excuse
remained for them. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#010)<span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>**10.** And now will I discover her lewdness
in the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of mine hand.

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span>**10.** Et nunc retegam flagitium ejus in
oculis amatorum ejus, et nullus eripiet eam e manu mea.

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span>**11.** I will also cause all her mirth to
cease, her feast days, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her
solemn feasts.

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span>**11.** Et cessare faciam omne gaudium ejus,
festivitatem ejus (alii vertunt, tripudium,) novilunium ejus, sabbathum
ejus et omnem diem ejus festum.

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span>**12.** And I will destroy her vines and her
fig trees, whereof she hath said, These *are* my rewards that my lovers
have given me: and I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the
field shall eat them.

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span>**12.** Et destruam (*vel*, in solitudinem
redigam) vineam ejus et ficum ejus, de quibus dixit, Merces haec sunt
mihi, quam dederunt mihi amatores mei: et ponam eas (*vel*, redigam,
nempe vineas et ficus) in sylvam, et comedat (*vel*, depascet) eas fera
campestris.

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span><span id="ix.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p10"></span>He pursues the same subject; and the Prophet
explains at large, and even divides what he had briefly said before,
into many clauses or particulars. He says firsts *I will uncover her
baseness*. How was this done? By God, when he took away the coverings by
which the Israelites kept themselves hid: for, as we have said
hypocrites felicitate themselves on account of God’s gifts, and thus
hide themselves as thieves do in caverns; and they think that they can
mock God with impunity; for, through the fatness of their eyes, as it is
said in <span id="ix.xi-p10.1"></span>[Ps
73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007)<span id="ix.xi-p10.1"></span>,
they have but a very dim sight. Now then God declares, that the
filthiness of the people would be made to appear, when he deprived them
of those gifts with which he had for a time enriched them.

<span id="ix.xi-p11"></span>*Now*, he says, *will I uncover her baseness
before the eyes of her lovers* By this sentence he intimates a change,
of which the people were not apprehensive; for, as long as the wicked
feel not the strokes, they laugh at all threatening. Hence God, that he
might rouse them from such an indifference, says, *Now will I uncover
her before the eyes of her lovers.* The Prophet, no doubt, speaks of
false gods, and of all those devices by which the Israelites corrupted
the pure worship of God: for I cannot be persuaded to explain this
either of the Assyrians or of the Egyptians. I indeed know, as I
mentioned briefly yesterday, that the treaties into which the Jews, as
well as the Israelites, entered with idolaters, were the tenter-hooks of
Satan: this I allow; but at the same time, I look on what the Prophet
especially treats of; for he directly inveighs here against absurd and
vicious modes of worship. What then does he mean by saying, that God
will uncover the baseness of the people before their lovers? He alludes
to shameless women, who dare, by terror, to check their husbands, that
they may not exercise their own right. “What! do you treat me ill? there
is one who will resent this conduct.” Even when husbands indignantly
bear their own reproach, they often attempt not to assert their own
right, because they see that fear is in the way. But God says, “Nothing
will hinder me from chastising thee as thou deserves (for he addresses
the people under the character of a wife;) before thy lovers then will I
uncover thy baseness.”

<span id="ix.xi-p12"></span>*And no man shall rescue thee from my hand.*
The word man is put here for idols; for it is a word of general import
among the Hebrews. Sometimes when brute animals are spoken of, this
word, man, is used; and it is also applied to the fragments of a
carcass. For when Moses describes the sacrifice made by Abraham, ‘Man,’
he says, ‘was laid to his fellow;’ that is, Abraham joined together the
different parts of the sacrifice, as we say in French, <span
id="ix.xi-p12.1"></span>*Il n’y a piece* God then speaks here of idols:
*No one*, he says, *shall rescue them from my hand.* We now comprehend
the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="ix.xi-p13"></span>We must, at the same time, see what he had
in view. The Israelites indeed thought, that as long as their corrupt
modes of worship prevailed, they were safe and secure: it seemed
impossible to them that any adversity should happen to them while
idolatry continued. As, then, they imagined their false gods to be to
them like an invincible rampart, “Thy idols,” he says, “shall remain,
and yet thou shalt fall: for I will before thy lovers uncover thy
baseness, and not one of them shall deliver thee from my hand.”

<span id="ix.xi-p14"></span><span id="ix.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p15"></span>The Prophet now descends to particulars;
and, in the first place, he says, that the people would be deprived of
their sacrifices and feast-days, and of that whole external pomp, which
was with them the guise of religion. He then adds, that they would be
spoiled of their food, and all their abundance. He has hitherto been
speaking of their nakedness; but he now describes what this nakedness
would be: and he specially mentions, that sacrifices would cease, that
feast days, new-moons, and whatever belonged to external worship, would
cease. *I will make to cease,* he says, *all her joy.* He speaks
doubtless, of sacred joys; and this may be easily collected from the
context. He adds, *her every festal-day* As they were wont to dance on
their festal-days, this word may be referred to that practice. He
afterwards adds, “her sabbath”, and all feast-days. Then the first kind
of nakedness was, that God would take away from the Israelites that
fallacious and empty form of religion in which they foolishly delighted.
The second kind of nakedness was, that they were to be stripped of all
earthly riches, and be reduced to misery and extreme want. But I cannot
finish to-day.

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as we are
so dull and slothful, that though often admonished, we yet consider not
our sins, yea, though chastised by thy hand, we yet return not
immediately to a right mind, — O grant, that we may hereafter profit
more under thy rod, and not he refractory and untractable; but as soon
as thou raises thy hand, may each of us mourn, know our own evils, and
then, with one consent, surrender ourselves to be ruled by thee; and may
we, in the meantime, patiently and calmly endure thy chastisements, and
never murmur against thee, but ever aspire to the attainment of true
repentance, until, having at length put off all the vices and
corruptions of our flesh, we attain to the fulness of righteousness, and
to that true and blessed glory which has been prepared for us in heaven
by Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Sixth

<span id="ix.xiii-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the verse in
which the Lord speaks of the intermission of the Sabbath, and of the
new-moon, and of external worship. The people of Israel, as we have
stated, were to be deprived of these excellent gifts with which they had
been favoured. And God, we know, is in two respects bountiful to men.
There is his common bounty as to foods and other earthly benefits: but
he is especially bountiful to his people in those gifts which are called
supernatural. Hence the Prophet says in the first place, *I will make to
cease the sabbath, and* *the new-moon, and the festal-days* They indeed
thought themselves, blessed when they celebrated the festal-days, when
they offered sacrifices, and in a word, when the external pomp of God’s
worship shone forth among them: yet we know that they worshipped God
neither in a lawful place nor in a right manner, as he had commanded in
the law; for they mingled many superstitions; nay, the whole of religion
among them was polluted; and yet they thought that their worship pleased
God. We now see that the object of their punishment was this, — that the
people of Israel might now cease to felicitate themselves on account of
their external form of religion, when deprived of their temple, and
sacrifices, and all outward worship: and all this happened when the
Israelites were driven away into exile. We indeed know that they did not
leave off their superstitions until they were deprived of their country
and driven into banishment.

<span id="ix.xiii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p4"></span>I now come to the second kind of nakedness:
the Prophet says, *I will waste* or *destroy her vine and her fig-tree,
of which she has said, Reward are these to me; that is,* These things
are wages to me, *which my lovers have given to me: and I will make them
a forest, and feed on them shall the beast of the field*. The second
part of the spoiling, as we have said, is, that the Israelites would be
reduced to miserable want, who, before, had not only great abundance of
good things, but also luxury, as we shall hereafter see more fully in
other passages. As then they were swollen with pride on account of their
prosperity, the Prophet now announces their future nakedness, *I will
take away,* he says, *the vine and the fig-tree*. It is a mode of
speaking by which a part is to be taken for the whole; for under the
vine and the fig-tree the Prophet intended to comprehend every variety
of temporal blessings. Whatever then belongs to man’s support, the
Prophet here includes in these two words: and he repeats what he had
said before, that the Israelites falsely thought, that it was a reward
paid them for their superstitions, while they worshipped false gods.

<span id="ix.xiii-p5"></span>*She said, These are my reward.* The word
is derived from the verb <span id="ix.xiii-p5.1"></span>תנה *tene:* some
have rendered it gift, but not rightly. I indeed allow that <span
id="ix.xiii-p5.2"></span> נתנו“natnu”, which means to give, follows
shortly after; from which some derive this word. But we know that in
many parts of Scripture <span id="ix.xiii-p5.3"></span>אתנה, *atne,* is
strictly taken for reward; and is sometimes applied to hired soldiers:
but the Prophets often use this word when they speak of harlots. Hence
the Prophet here introduces the people of Israel under the character of
a harlot; *These are my reward,* or, *These things are my reward, which
to me have my lovers given.*

<span id="ix.xiii-p6"></span>Since then the Israelites had so hardened
themselves in their superstitions, that this false persuasion could not
be driven out of them, until they were deprived of all their blessings,
he announces to them this punishment, — that God would take away
whatever they thought had come to them from their idols or false gods:
*I will turn*, he says, *all these into a forest*, that is, “I will
reduce to a waste, both the vineyards and all the well cultivated parts;
so that they will produce nothing, as is usually the case with desert
places.” We now understand the whole meaning of the Prophet. Let us
proceed —

<span id="ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013)<span id="ix.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p2"></span>**13.** And I will visit upon her the days
of Baalim, wherein she burned incense to them, and she decked herself
with her earrings and her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and
forgat me, saith the LORD.

<span id="ix.xiv-p3"></span>**13.** Et visitabo super eam dies Baalim,
quibus incensum (*vel,* suffitum) illis obtulit (*vel*, adolevit illis,)
et ornata fuit inaure sua et monili (*vel*, torque) suo, et profecta est
post amatores suos, et mei oblita est, dixit Dominus.

<span id="ix.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiv-p5"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p6"></span>He confirms what he taught last. We have
said before, that this admonition is very necessary, that whenever God
deals severely with men, he thus visits their sins, and inflicts a just
punishment. For though men may consider themselves to be chastised by
the Lord, they yet do not thoroughly search and examine themselves as
they ought. Hence the Prophet repeats what we have before met with, and
that is, that this chastisement would be just; and at the same time, he
shows us as by the finger what chiefly displeased God in the Israelites,
which was, that religion was corrupted by them: for there is nothing
more necessary to be known than that in order that men may ever
habituate themselves to worship God in a pure manner, this should be
testified to them, that all superstitions are such an abomination to God
that he cannot bear them.

<span id="ix.xiv-p7"></span>He therefore says, *I will visit upon her
the days of Baalim*; that is, when the Israelites shall find themselves
to be without a temple, deprived of sacrifices and new-moons, and having
no more any external form of worship, let them know that they are thus
punished, because they worshipped Baalim instead of the only true God.
The Prophet, at the same time, alludes again to harlots, who more finely
adorn themselves and with greater care, when they look for their lovers,
that they may captivate them with their charms. *She decked herself*, he
says, *with her ear-ring and her jewel* This the superstitious usually
do, when they celebrate their fast-days; for they think that a great
part of holiness consists in the splendour of vestments; and we see that
this stupidity prevails at this day among those under the Papacy: for
they would think themselves to be doing great dishonour to God, or
rather to their idols, were they not to adorn themselves when going to
perform sacred duties. This, no doubt, was then a common error and
custom. But in order to show more clearly that God abominated each gross
superstitions, the Prophet says that they were like harlots. For as a
strumpet, in order to allure men, paints herself, and also dresses
splendidly, puts on her ornaments, and decks herself with jewels and
gold; even so, he says, the Israelites did; they played the wanton, and
bore the tokens of their lewdness. This then is the allusion, when the
Prophet says, that *she decked herself with jewels and an ear-ring, and
went after her lovers.*

<span id="ix.xiv-p8"></span>But most grievous is what he adds at the end
of the verse, *Me*, he says, *has she forgotten* God here complains that
the fellowship of marriage availed nothing: though he had lived with the
people a long time, and treated them bountifully and kindly, yet the
memory of this was buried, *Me*, he says, *has she forgotten.* There is
then here an implied comparison between the Israelites whom God had
joined to himself, and other nations who had known nothing of true
religion, nor understood who the true God was. It was indeed no wonder
for the Gentiles to be deceived by the impostures of Satan: but it was a
monstrous ingratitude for the Israelites, who had been rightly taught
and long habituated to the pure worship of God, to cast away the
recollection of him. It was like the bestial depravity of a wife, who,
having for a time lived with her husband, and having been kindly treated
by him, afterwards prostitutes herself to adulterers, and no more
cherishes or retains in her heart any love for her husband. We now see
for what end it was added, that the Israelites had forgotten God. It was
indeed a grave and severe reproof to say, that they, after having long
worshipped the true God, had been led away into such madness as to
worship false gods, the figments of their own brains: for they had
before learnt who the true and the only God was.

<span id="ix.xiv-p9"></span>The Prophet, in a word, confirms in this
verse (as I have before reminded you) the truth, that the punishment
which God was about to inflict on this ungodly people would not only be
just, but also necessary; and he proves at the same time, how basely
they had violated their marriage-vow, since the recollection of God did
not prevail among them, after they had become the followers of idols,
and of the figments of their own hearts. Let us now go on —

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014)<span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span>**14.** Therefore, behold, I will allure her,
and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span>**14.** Propterea ecce ego inclino illam
(*vel*, persuadeo illi: *dicemus postea de hoc verbo*) et proficisci eam
faciam (*hoc est*, deducam eam) in desertum, et loquar super cor ejus
(*hoc est*, luquar quod gratum est.)

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span><span id="ix.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span>Here the Lord more clearly expresses, that
after having long, and in various ways, afflicted the people, he would
at length be propitious to them; and not only so, but that he would also
make all their punishments to be conducive to their salvation, and to be
medicines to heal their diseases. But there is an inversion in the
words, *Behold, I will incline her, and I will make her to go into the
wilderness;* and so they ought to be explained thus, “Behold, I will
incline her, or, persuade her, after I shall have drawn her into the
desert; then, *I will speak to her heart.”* <span
id="ix.xv-p6.1"></span>פתה, *pete* is often taken in a bad sense, to
deceive, or, to persuade by falsehoods or, to use a vulgar word, to
wheedle: but it means in this place, to speak kindly; so that God
persuades a rebellious and obstinate people as to what is right: and
then he declares that this would take place, when he led the people into
the wilderness. This is connected with the former sentence, where it is
said, ‘I will set her as on the day of her nativity:’ for God alludes to
the first redemption of the people, which was like their birth; for it
was the same as though the people had emerged from their grave; they
obtained a new life when they were freed from the tyranny of Egypt. God
therefore begot them a people for himself.

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span>But the Prophet adds, After having led her
into the wilderness, *I will incline her;* that is, render her pliable
to myself. He intimates by these words, that there would be no hope of
repentance until the people were led to extreme evils; for had their
punishment been moderate, their perverseness would not have been
corrected. Then God shows in this verse, that there would be no end or
lessening of evils until the people were drawn into the wilderness, that
is, until they were deprived of their country and sacrifices, and all
their wealth; yea, until they were deprived of their ordinary food, and
cast into a wilderness and solitude, where the want of all things would
press upon them, and extreme necessity would threaten them with death.
If then the people had been visited with light punishment, nothing would
have been effected; for their hardness was greater than could have been
softened by slight or common remedies.

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span>But this declaration was full of great
comfort. The faithful might have otherwise wholly desponded, when they
found themselves led into exile, and the sight of the land, which was,
as it were, the mirror of the divine adoption, was taken from them, when
they saw themselves scattered into various parts, and that there was now
no community, no seed of Abraham. The Lord, therefore, that despair
might not swallow up the faithful, intended in this way to ease their
sorrow; assuring them, that though they were drawn again into the
wilderness, God, who first redeemed them, was still the same, and endued
with the same strength and power which he put forth in behalf of their
fathers. We now apprehend the design of the Prophet. Calamity might have
shaken their hearts with so much terror, as to take away every
confidence in God’s favour, and make them to think themselves wholly
lost: but God sets the desert before them, “What! have I not once drawn
you out of the desert? Has my power diminished since that tithe? I
indeed continue to be the same God as your fathers found me to be: I
will again draw you out of the wilderness.” But at the same time, God
reminded them that their diseases would be unhealable, until they were
led into the wilderness, until they were deprived of their country and
all the tokens of his favour, that they might no more delude themselves
with vain confidence.

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span>He therefore says, *After I shall draw her
into the wilderness, then I will persuade,* or, *turn her*. I prefer the
word, turning or inclining, though the word, persuading, is by no means
unsuitable. But there seems to be an implied comparison between the
present contumacy of the people, and the obedience they would render to
their God after having been subdued by various afflictions. “The
people,” he says, “will be then pliable, when they shall be drawn into
the wilderness.”

<span id="ix.xv-p10"></span>*And I will speak then to her heart*. What
is the import of this expression we know from <span
id="ix.xv-p10.1"></span>[Isa 40](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#000)<span
id="ix.xv-p10.1"></span>. To speak to the heart is to bring comfort, to
soothe grief by a kind word, to offer kindness, and to hold forth some
hope, that he who had previously been worn out with sorrow may breathe
freely, gather courage, and entertain hope of a better condition. And
this kind of speaking ought to be carefully observed; for God means,
that there was now no place for his promises, because the Israelites
were so refractory. Paul did not say in vain to the Corinthians

<span id="ix.xv-p11"></span>‘Open ye my mouth,  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) O Corinthians; for I am not narrow towards
you; but ye are narrow in your own bowels,’  
(<span id="ix.xv-p12.2"></span>[2 Cor.
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#012)<span id="ix.xv-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xv-p13"></span>The Corinthians, when alienated from Paul,
had obstructed, as it were, the passage of his doctrine, that he could
not address them in a paternal manner. So also in this place, the Lord
testifies that the floor was closed against his promises; for if he gave
to the Israelites the hope of pardon, it would have been slighted; if he
had invited them kindly to himself, they would have scornfully refused,
yea, spurned the offer with contempt, so great was their ferocity; if he
had wished to be reconciled to them, they would have despised him, or
refused, or proceeded in abusing his kindness as before. He then shows,
that it was their fault that he could not deal kindly and friendly with
them. Hence, *After I shall draw her into the wilderness, I will address
her heart.*

<span id="ix.xv-p14"></span>Let us then know, that whenever we are
deprived of the sense of God’s favour, the way has been closed up
through our fault; for God would ever be disposed willingly to show
kindness, except our contumacy and hardness stood in the way. But when
he sees us so subdued as to be pliable and ready to obey, then he is
ready in his turn, to speak to our heart; that is, he is ready to show
himself just as he is, full of grace and kindness.

<span id="ix.xv-p15"></span>We hence see how well the context of the
Prophet harmonises. There are, in short, two parts, — the first is, that
God takes not away wholly the hope of pardon from the Israelites,
provided there were any healable among them, but shows that though the
chastisement would be severe, it would yet be useful, as it would appear
from its fruit; this is one clause; — and the other is, that they might
not be too hasty in inquiring why God would not sooner mitigate his
severity, he answers that the time was not as yet ripe; for they would
not be capable of receiving his kindness, until they were by degrees
subdued and humbled by heavier punishment. Let us now proceed —

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015)<span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span>**15.** And I will give her vineyards from
thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope: and she shall sing
there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up
out of the land of Egypt.

<span id="ix.xvi-p3"></span>**15.** Et dabo ei vineas suas illinc (ab eo
loco) et vallem Achor in apertionem (*vel*, januam) spei: et canet illic
sicuti diebus adolescentiae (*vel*, pueritiae) suae, et sicut in die quo
ascendit e terra Aegypti.

<span id="ix.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvi-p5"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p6"></span>The Prophet now plainly declares, that God’s
favour would be evident, not only by words, but also by the effects and
by experience, when the people were bent to obedience. The Prophet said
in the last verse, ‘I will speak to her heart;’ now he adds, ‘I will
bring a sure and clear evidence of my favour, that they may feel assured
that I am reconciled to them.’ He therefore says that he would give them
vines. He said before, ‘I will destroy her vines and fig-trees;’ but now
he mentions only vineyards: but as we have said, the Prophet, under one
kind, comprehends all other things; and he has chosen vines, because in
vines the bounty of God especially appears. For bread is necessary to
support life, wine abounds, and to it is ascribed the property of
exhilarating the heart, <span id="ix.xvi-p6.1"></span>[Ps
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015)<span id="ix.xvi-p6.1"></span>:
‘Bread strengthens,’ or, ‘supports man’s heart; wine gladdens man’s
heart.’ As then vines are usually planted not only for necessary
purposes, but also for a more bountiful supply, the Prophet says, that
the Lord, when reconciled to the people, will give them their vineyards
from that place.

<span id="ix.xvi-p7"></span>*And I will give*, he says, *the valley of
Achor,* *etc*. He alludes to their situation in the wilderness: as soon
as the Israelites came out of the wilderness, they entered the plain of
Achor, which was fruitful, pleasant, and vine-bearing. Some think that
the Prophet alludes to the punishment inflicted on the people for the
sacrilege of Achan, but in my judgement they are mistaken; for the
Prophet here means nothing else than that there would be a sudden change
in the condition of the people, such as happened when they came out of
the wilderness. For in the wilderness there was not even a grain of
wheat or of barley, nor a bunch of grapes; in short, there was in the
wilderness nothing but penury, accompanied with thousand deaths; but as
soon as the people came out, they descended into the plain of Achor,
which was most pleasant, and very fertile. The Prophet meant simply
this, that when the people repented, there would be no delay on God’s
part, but that he would free them from all evils, and restore a blessed
abundance of all things, as was the case, when the people formerly
descended into the plain of Achor. He therefore brings to the
recollection of the Israelites what had happened to their fathers, *Her
vines*, then, *will I give her from that place,* that is, “As soon as I
shall by word testify my love to them, they shall effectually know and
find that I am really and from the heart reconciled to them, and shall
understand how inclined I am to show kindness; for I shall not long hold
the people in suspense.”

<span id="ix.xvi-p8"></span>And he adds, *For an opening,* or *a door of
hope* He signifies here, that their restoration would be as from death
into life. For though the people daily saw with their eyes that God took
care of their life, for he rained manna from heaven and made water to
flow from a rock; yet there was at the same time before their eyes the
appearance of death. As long, then, as they sojourned in the wilderness,
God did ever set before them the terrors of death: in short, their
dwelling in the wilderness, as we have said, was their grave. But when
the people descended into the plain of Achor, they then began to draw
vital air; and they felt also that they at length lived, for they had
obtained their wishes: they had now indeed come in sight of the
inheritance promised to them. As then the valley of Achor was the
beginning, and as it were the door of good hope to their fathers, so the
Prophet, now alluding to that redemption, says, that God would
immediately deal with so much kindness with the Israelites as to open
for them a door of hope and salvation, as he had done formerly to their
fathers in the valley of Achor.

<span id="ix.xvi-p9"></span>*And she shall sing there*. We may easily
learn from the context that those interpreters mistake who refinedly
philosophise about the valley of Achor. It is indeed true that the root
of the word is the verb <span id="ix.xvi-p9.1"></span>עכר, *ocar,* which
means, to confound or to destroy, and that this name was given to the
place on account of what had occurred there: but the Prophet referred to
no such thing, as it appears clearly from the second clause; for he
says, “She shall sing there as in the days of her youth”, and as in the
day in which she ascended from the land of Egypt. For then at length the
people of God openly celebrated his praises, when they beheld with their
eyes the promised land, when they saw an end to God’s severe vengeance,
which continued for forty years. Hence the people then poured forth
their hearts and employed their tongues in praises to God. The Prophet,
therefore, teaches here, that their restoration would be such, that the
people would really sing praises to God and offer him no ordinary
thanks; not as they are wont to do who are relieved from a common evil,
but as those who have been brought from death into life. *She* *shall
sing* then *as in the days of her childhood, as in that day when she
ascended from the land of Egypt*

<span id="ix.xvi-p10"></span>Thus we see that a hope of deliverance is
here given, that the faithful might sustain their minds in exile, and
cherish the hope of future favour; that though the face of God would for
a time be turned away from them, they might yet look for a future
deliverance, nor doubt but that God would be propitious to them, after
they had endured just punishment, and had been thus reformed: for as we
have said, a moderate chastisement could not have been sufficient to
subdue their perverseness. It follows —

<span id="ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#016)<span id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p2"></span>**16.** And it shall be at that day, saith
the Lord, *that* thou shalt call me Ishi; and shalt call me no more
Baali.

<span id="ix.xvii-p3"></span>**16.** Et erit in die illo, dicit Jehova,
vocabis me, vir meus (*vel*, marite mi,) et non vocabis me amplius Baal
meus, (alii vetunt, non vocabi me amplius, Dominus meus; sed retinendum
est nomen Baal, sicuti mox dicam.)

<span id="ix.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p6"></span>The Prophet now expands his subject, and
shows that when the people repented, the fruits of repentance would
openly appear. One fruit he records, and that is, that they would then
begin to worship God purely, all superstitions being abolished. *It
shall be*, he says, *in that day that thou shalt call me, My husband;*
and he mentions the word, husband, to show to the people, that after
having been corrected, they would be mindful of the covenant which God
had made with them; and in that covenant, as stated before, there was
the condition of a mutual engagement.

<span id="ix.xvii-p7"></span>We hence see what the Prophet means: he
tells us that the people would then be no more given to superstitions as
before, but on the contrary would be mindful of God’s covenant, and
would continue sincere and true to their conjugal vow. Hence, *thou
shalt call me, My husband*; that is, “Thou shalt know what I am to thee,
that I am joined to thee by a sacred and inviolable marriage.” *And thou
shalt not call me, My Baal*; that is, “Thou shalt not give me a false
and heathenish name:” for the word, Baal, as I have said before, was
everywhere in every one’s mouth. But the next verse must be added —

<span id="ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#017)<span id="ix.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p2"></span>**17.** For I will take away the names of
Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be remembered by their
name.

<span id="ix.xviii-p3"></span>**17.** Et auferam nomina Baalim ex ore
ejus, et non recordabitur amplius nominis ipsorum (*Baalim scilicet*.)

<span id="ix.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xviii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p6"></span>In this verse the Prophet more clearly
unfolds what he said before, that there would be a new mind in the
people, so that they would worship God purely, though they were before
entangled in their superstitions. The meaning then is, that religion
will then return to its true state, for the names of Baalim shall cease.
We have already stated whence this name had arisen. Not even the
heathens wished to thrust the only true God from his celestial throne,
by forming for themselves many gods: but while they allowed some Supreme
Being, they wished to have patrons, whom they employed in conciliating
his favour and good-will. That this was for the most part the common
doctrine, may be easily learnt from Plato: and the Jews also, no doubt,
thought of becoming wise by following the common judgement of others;
they hence had their Baalim. But though they called their patrons
Baalim, they yet gave this name to God: “Let us worship Baalim.” The
Papists do the same; when they enter their temples, they immediately
turn to the image of Mary or of some saint, and dare not come to God. At
the same time they worship God, that is, pretend to worship God, and
they call superstition God’s worship. So it was among the Israelites;
though the majesty of the Supreme God was not denied, yet that happened
which the Papists also say, “That Christ is not distinguished from his
Apostles;” all things were with them mixed together and confused. He
therefore says, *I will take away Baalim from her mouth, and she will no
more remember the name of Baalim;* which means, “They will be content
with the profession of pure faith, and will celebrate the name of the
only true God; they will no more mix their own glosses with the doctrine
of the law, and thus vitiate the pure and holy worship of God;” We now
understand the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="ix.xviii-p7"></span>Now we learn from this place, that the
Church cannot be rightly reformed except it be trained to obedience by
the frequent scourges of God; for the Lord thereby creates a new people
for himself. We see at this day what great stupidity possesses their
minds, who have not been well prepared for the worship of God. They
indeed laugh at the superstitions of the Papacy; but, at the same time,
they are a sort of Cyclops:  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) we see
that there is nothing but barbarous ignorance in their hearts. The
Prophet then says, not in vain, that the state of religion would then be
right, when the Lord had wholly subdued his people. Hence “in that day”,
which refers to the heavy punishment which God would inflict on the
Israelites — *In that day*, then, *saith the Lord, thou wilt no more
call me, Baal; but thou wilt call me, Husband* How so? Because “I will
take away” the names of Baalim from thy mouth; that is, I will make the
people to cast away their own devices, and to be content with the pure
doctrine of my law.

<span id="ix.xviii-p9"></span>We ought also to remember that a
confession of faith is here commended by the Prophet. It is no doubt the
fruit of true penitence, when we testify by the mouth and tongue that
the only true God is our God, and when we are not ashamed to confess his
name before the world, though it may rage madly against us.

<span id="ix.xviii-p10"></span>We are further reminded by these words,
that too much diligence and care cannot be taken to cleanse ourselves
wholly from all sorts of pollutions; for as long as any relics of
superstition continue among us, they will ever entangle us, and thus we
shall stumble, or, at least not run so briskly as we ought. Since, then
whatever men retain of their own corrupt devices is a hindrance to them
in obtaining a direct access to God, it is meet for us to labour that
the names of Baalim should cease, and be abolished among us; and for
this end, that nothing may hinder and retard us in the true worship of
God. Now follows —

<span id="ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="ix.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we set up
against thee so many obstacles through the depravity of our flesh and
natural disposition, that we seem as it were to be designedly striving
to close up the door against thy goodness and paternal favour, O grant,
that our hearts may be so softened by thy Spirit, and the hardness which
has hitherto prevailed may be so corrected, that we may submit ourselves
to thee with genuine docility, especially as thou dost so kindly and
tenderly invite us to thyself, that being allured by thy sweet
invitation, we may run, and so run as not to be weary in our course,
until Christ shall at length bring us together to thee, and, at the same
time, lead us to thee for that eternal life, which he has obtained for
us by his own blood. Amen.

<span id="ix.xix-p3"></span> 

<span id="ix.xx"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Seventh

<span id="ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018)<span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p2"></span>**18.** And in that day will I make a
covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of
heaven, and *with* the creeping things of the ground: and I will break
the bow and the sword and the battle out of the earth, and will make
them to lie down safely.

<span id="ix.xxi-p3"></span>**18.** Et percutiam illis foedus in die
illa cum bestia agri et cum volucre coeli et cum reptili terrae: et
arcum et gladium et proelium confringam e terra et quiescere eos faciam
ad fiduciam, (*hoc est*, confidenter.)

<span id="ix.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxi-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p6"></span>The Prophet shows here that the people would
be in every way happy after their return to God’s favour: and, at the
same time, he reminds us that the cause of all evils is, that men
provoke God’s wrath. Hence, when God is angry, all things must
necessarily be adverse to us; for as God has all creatures at his will,
and in his hand, he can arm them in vengeance against us whenever he
pleases: but when he is propitious to us, he can make all things in
heaven and earth to be conducive to our safety. As then he often
threatens in the Law, that when he purposed to punish the people, he
would make brute animals, and the birds of heaven, and all kinds of
reptiles, to execute his judgement, so in this place he declares that
there would be peace to men when he received them into favour.

<span id="ix.xxi-p7"></span>*I will make a covenant,* he says, *in that
day with the beast of the field* We know what is said in another place,

<span id="ix.xxi-p8"></span>‘If thou shuttest thyself up at home, a
serpent shall there bite thee; but if thou goest out of thy house,
either a bear or a lion shall meet thee in the way,’ (<span
id="ix.xxi-p8.1"></span>[Am 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019)<span
id="ix.xxi-p8.1"></span>;)

<span id="ix.xxi-p9"></span>by which words God shows that we cannot
escape his vengeance when he is angry with us; for he will arm against
us lions and bears as well as serpents, both at home and abroad. But he
says here, ‘I will make a covenant for them with the beasts;’ so that
they may perform their duty towards us: for they were all created, we
know, for this end, — to be subject to men. Since, then, they were
destined for our benefit, they ought, according to their nature, to be
in subjection to us: and we know that Adam caused this, — that wild
beasts rise up so rebelliously against us; for otherwise they would have
willingly and gently obeyed us. Now since there is this horrible
disorder, that brute beasts, which ought to own men as their masters,
rage against them, the Lord recalls us here to the first order of
nature, *I will make a covenant for them,* he says, *with the beast of
the field*, which means, “I will make brute animals to know for what end
they were formed, that is, to be subject to the dominion of men, and to
show no rebelliousness any more.”

<span id="ix.xxi-p10"></span>We now then perceive the intention of the
Prophet: he reminds the Israelites that all things were adverse to their
safety as long as they were alienated from God; but that when they
returned into favour with him, this disorder, which had for a time
appeared, would be no longer; for the regular order of nature would
prevail, and brute animals would suffer themselves to be brought to
obedience. This is the covenant of which the Prophet now speaks when he
says, *I will make a covenant for them, that is, in their name, with the
beast of the field, and with the bird of heaven, and with the reptile of
the earth*

<span id="ix.xxi-p11"></span>It follows, *I will shatter the bow, and
the sword, and the battle*, that is, every warlike instrument; for under
the word <span id="ix.xxi-p11.1"></span> מלחמה“milchamah”, the Prophet
includes every thing adapted for war. Hence, “I will shatter” every kind
of weapons “in that day, and make them dwell securely”. In the last
clause he expresses the end for which the weapons and swords were to be
shattered, — that the Israelites before disquieted by various fears,
might dwell in peace, and no more fear any danger. This is the meaning.

<span id="ix.xxi-p12"></span>But it is meet for us to call to mind what
we have before said, that the Prophet so speaks of the people’s
restoration, that he extends his predictions to the kingdom of Christ,
as we may learn from Paul’s testimony already cited. We then see that
God’s favor, of which the Prophet now speaks, is not restricted to a
short time or to a few years but extends to Christ’s kingdom, and is
what we have in common with the ancient people. Let us therefore know,
that if we provoke not God against us by our sins, all things will be
subservient to the promotion of our safety, and that it is our fault
when creatures do not render us obedience: for when we mutiny against
God, it is no wonder that brute animals should become ferocious and rage
against us; for what peace can there be, when we carry on war against
God himself? Hence were men, as they ought, to submit to God’s
authority, there would be no rebelliousness in brute animals; nay, all
who are turbulent would gently rest under the protection of God. But as
we are insolent against God, he justly punishes us by stirring up
against us various contentions and various tumults. Hence, then swords,
hence bows, are prepared against us, and hence wars are stirred up
against us: all this is because we continue to fight against God.

<span id="ix.xxi-p13"></span>It must, at the same time, be further
noticed, that it is a singular benefit for a people to dwell in
security; for we know that though we may possess all other things, yet
miserable is our condition, unless we live in peace: hence the Prophet
mentions this as the summit of a happy life. It now follows —

<span id="ix.xxii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019)<span id="ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p2"></span>**19.** And I will betroth thee unto me for
ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in lovingkindness, and in mercies.

<span id="ix.xxii-p3"></span>**19.** Et desponsabo te mihi in perpetuum,
et desponsabo te mihi in justicia, et in judicio, et in clementia,
(*vel*, bonitate,) et in misericordiis.

<span id="ix.xxii-p4"></span>**20.** I will even betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness: and thou shalt know the Lord.

<span id="ix.xxii-p5"></span>**20.** Et desponsabo te mihi in fide,
(*vel*, veritate:) et cognosces Jehovam.

<span id="ix.xxii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxii-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p8"></span>The Prophet here again makes known the
manner in which God would receive into favor his people. As though the
people had not violated the marriage vow, God promises to be to them
like a bridegroom, who marries a virgin, young and pure. We have before
spoken of the people’s defection; but as God had repudiated them, it was
no common favor for the people to be received again by God, and received
with pardon. When a woman returns to her husband, it is a great thing in
the husband to forgive her, and not to upbraid her with her former base
conduct: but God goes farther than this; for he espouses to himself a
people infamous through many disgraceful acts; and having abolished
their sins, he contracts, as it were, a new marriage, and joins them
again to himself. Hence he says, *I will espouse thee to me.* We now
perceive the import of the word, espouse: for God thereby means, that he
would not remember the unfaithfulness for which he had before cast away
his people, but would blot out all their infamy. It was indeed an
honorable reception into favor, when God offered a new marriage, as
though the people had not been like an adulterous woman.

<span id="ix.xxii-p9"></span>And he says, *I will espouse thee to me for
ever*. There is here an implied contrast between the marriage of which
the Prophet had hitherto spoken, and this which God now contracts. For
God, having redeemed the people, had before entered, as we have said,
into marriage with them: but the people had departed from their vow;
hence followed alienation and divorce. That marriage was then not only
temporary, but also weak and soon broken; for the people did not
continue long in obedience: but of this new marriage the Prophet
declares, that it will continue fast and for ever; and thus he sets its
durable state in contrast with the falling away which had soon alienated
the people from God. Hence he says, *I will espouse thee to me for
ever.*

<span id="ix.xxii-p10"></span>He then declares by what means he would do
this, even in righteousness and judgment, and then in kindness and
mercies, and thirdly, in faithfulness. God had indeed from the beginning
covenanted with the Israelites in righteousness and judgment; there was
nothing disguised or false in his covenant: as then God had in sincerity
adopted the people, to what vices does he oppose righteousness and
judgment? I answer, These words must be applied to both the contracting
parties: then, by righteousness God means not only his own, but that
also which is, as they say, mutual and reciprocal; and by
*righteousness* and *judgment* is meant rectitude, in which nothing is
wanting. We now then perceive what the Prophet had in view.

<span id="ix.xxii-p11"></span>But he adds, secondly, *In kindness and
mercies*: by which words he intimates, that though the people were
unworthy, yet, this would be no impediment in their way, to prevent them
to return into favor with God; for in this reconciliation God would
regard his own goodness, rather than the merits of his people.

<span id="ix.xxii-p12"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p13"></span>In the third place, he adds, *In
faithfulness*: and this confirms what we have before briefly referred
to, — the fixed and unchangeable duration of this marriage.

<span id="ix.xxii-p14"></span>The words, righteousness and judgment,
are, I know, more refinedly explained by some. They say that
righteousness is what is conferred on us by God through gratuitous
imputation; and they take judgment for that defense which he affords
against the violence and the assaults of our enemies. But here the
Prophet, I doubt not, intimates in a general way, that this covenant
would stand firm, because there would be truth and rectitude on both
sides. That this may be more clearly understood, let us take a passage
from the 31st chapter of Jeremiah \[<span id="ix.xxii-p14.1"></span>[Jer
31:31-34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span
id="ix.xxii-p14.1"></span>\] where God complains, that the covenant he
had made with the ancient people had not been firm; for they had
forsaken it. ‘My covenant,’ he says, ‘with your fathers has not
continued.’ — Why? ‘Because they departed from my commandments.’ God
indeed in perfect sincerity adopted the people, and no righteousness was
wanting in him; but as there was no constancy and faithfulness in the
people, the covenant came to nothing: hence God afterwards adds, ‘I will
hereafter make a new covenant with you; for I will engrave my laws on
your hearts,’ etc. We now then see what the Prophet means by
righteousness and judgment, even this, that God would cause the marriage
vow to be kept on both sides; for the people, restored from exile, would
no more violate their pledged faith nor act unfaithfully.

<span id="ix.xxii-p15"></span>But we must notice what is added, *In
goodness and mercies*. And this part Jeremiah does not omit, for he
adds, ‘Their iniquities I will not remember.’ As then the Israelites,
conscious of evils might tremble through fear, the Prophet seasonably
anticipates their diffidence, by promising that the marriage which God
was prepared anew to contract, would be in kindness and mercies. There
is then no reason why their own unworthiness should frighten away the
people; for God here unfolds his own immense goodness and unparalleled
mercies. The Prophet might indeed have expressed this in one word, but
he adds mercies to goodness. The people had indeed sunk into a deep
abyss, that restoration could have been hardly hoped: hence the word,
kindness, or goodness, would have been hardly sufficient to raise up
their minds, had not the word, mercies, been added for the sake of
confirmation.

<span id="ix.xxii-p16"></span>Now he adds, *in faithfulness*; and by
faithfulness is to be understood, I doubt not, that stability of which I
have spoken; for what some philosophize on this expression is too
refined, who give this explanation, ‘I will espouse thee in faith,’ that
is by the gospel; for we embrace God’s free promises, and thus the
covenant the Lord makes with us is ratified. I simply interpret the word
as denoting stability.

<span id="ix.xxii-p17"></span>And the Prophet shows afterwards that this
covenant would be confirmed, because faithfulness would be reciprocal,
*they shall know*, he says, *Jehovah*. Jeremiah, I doubt not, borrowed
from this place what is written in the 31st chapter; for there he also
adds, ‘No one shall hereafter teach his neighbor, for all, from the
least to the greatest shall know me, saith Jehovah.’ Our Prophet says
here in one sentence, *they shall know Jehovah* Hence then is the
stability of the covenant, because God by his light shall guide the
hearts of those who had before strayed in darkness and wandered after
their own superstitions. Since then a horrible darkness prevailed among
the Israelitic people, Hosea promises the light of true knowledge; and
this knowledge of God is such, that the people fall not away from the
Lord, nor are they seduced by the fallacies of Satan. Hence God’s
covenant stands firm. We now understand the import of the words.

<span id="ix.xxii-p18"></span>Jerome thinks that the Prophet promises
espousals thrice, because the Lord once espoused the people to himself
in Abraham, then when he led them out of Egypt, and, thirdly, when once
he reconciled the whole world in Christ: but this is too refined, and
even frivolous. I take a simpler meaning, — that the Prophet proclaims
an espousal thrice, because it was difficult to restore the people from
fear and despair, for they well understood how grievously and in how
many ways they had alienated themselves from God: it was hence necessary
to apply many consolations, which might serve to confirm their faith.
This is the reason why the Lord does not say once, *I will espouse thee
to myself,* but repeats it thrice. The Prophet indeed seemed then to
speak of a thing incredible: for what sort of an example is this, that
the Lord should take for his wife an abominable harlot? Nay, that he
should contract a new marriage with an unclean adulteress, immersed in
debauchery? This was like something monstrous. Hence the Prophet, that
nothing might hinder souls from recumbing on the promise, says, “Doubt
not, for the Lord very often assures you, that this is certain.”

<span id="ix.xxii-p19"></span>Now, since we have this promise in common
with them, we see by the words of the Prophet what is the beginning of
our salvation: God espoused the Israelites to himself, when restored
from exile through his goodness and mercies. What fellowship have we
with God, when we are born and come out of the womb, except he
graciously adopts us? for we bring nothing, we know, with us but a
curse; this is the heritage of all mankind. Since it is so, all our
salvation must necessarily have its foundation in the goodness and
mercies of God. But there is also another reason in our case, when God
receives us into favor; for we were covenant-breakers under the Papacy;
there was not one of us who had not departed from the pledge of his
baptism; and so we could not have returned into favor with God, except
he had freely united us to himself: and God not only forgave us, but
contracted also a new marriage with us, so that we can now, as on the
day of our youth, as it has been previously said, openly give thanks to
him.

<span id="ix.xxii-p20"></span>But we must notice this short clause,
*They shall know Jehovah*. We indeed see that we are in confusion as
soon as we turn aside from the right and pure knowledge of God, nay,
that we are wholly lost. Since then our salvation consists in the light
of faith, our minds ought ever to be directed to God, that our union
with him, which he has formed by the gospel, may abide firm and
permanent. But as this is not in the power or will of man, we draw this
evident conclusion, that God not only offers his grace in the outward
preaching, but at the same time in the renewing of our hearts. Except
God then recreates us a new people to himself, there is no more
stability in the covenant he makes now with us than in the old which he
made formerly with the fathers under the Law; for when we compare
ourselves with the Israelites, we find that we are nothing better. It
is, therefore, necessary that God should work inwardly and efficaciously
on our hearts, that his covenant may stand firm: nay, since the
knowledge of him is the special gift of the Spirit, we may with
certainty conclude, that what is said here refers not only to outward
preaching, but that the grace of the Spirit is also joined, by which God
renews us after his own image, as we have already proved from a passage
in Jeremiah: but that we may not seem to borrow from another place, we
may say that it appears evident from the words of the Prophet, that
there is no other bond of stability, by which the covenant of God can be
strengthened and preserved, but the knowledge he conveys to us of
himself; and this he conveys not only by outward teaching, but also by
the illumination of our minds by his Spirit, yea, by the renewing of our
hearts. It follows —

<span id="ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#021)<span
id="ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p2"></span>**21.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, I will hear, saith the LORD, I will hear the heavens, and they
shall hear the earth;

<span id="ix.xxiii-p3"></span>**21.** Et erit in die illa, exaudiam,
dicit Dominus, exaudiam coelos, etaudient terram:

<span id="ix.xxiii-p4"></span>**22.** And the earth shall hear the corn,
and the wine, and the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p5"></span>**22.** Et terra exaudiet frumentum et
mustum et oleum, et ipsa exaudient Jezreel.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiii-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p8"></span>The Lord promises again that he will not
be wanting to the people, when they shall be reconciled to him. We must,
indeed, in the first place, seek that God may be propitious to us; for
they are very foolish who desire to live well and happily, and in the
meantime care nothing for God’s favor. The Prophet shows when the
happiness of men begins; it begins when God adopts them for his people,
and when, having abolished their sins, he espouses them to himself. It
is therefore necessary, in the first place, to seek this; for as we have
said, the desire of being happy is preposterous, when we first seek the
blessings of an earthly life, when we first seek ease, abundance of good
things, health of body, and similar things. Hence the Prophet now shows,
that we are then only happy when the Lord is reconciled to us, and not
only so, but when he in his love embraces us, and contracts a holy
marriage with us, and on this condition, that he will be a father and
preserver to us, and that we shall be safe and secure under his
protection and defense.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p9"></span>But at the same time he comes down to
things of the second rank. Our happiness is, indeed, as we have said, in
the enjoyment of God’s love; but there are accessions which afterwards
follow; for the Lord provides for us, and exercises a care over us, so
that he supplies whatever is needful for the support of life. Of this
later part the Prophet now treats: he says, *In that day*. We see that
he reminds us of the covenant, lest we be content with worldly
abundance; for as it has been said, men are commonly devoted to their
present advantages. Hence the Prophet sets here before our eyes the
Lord’s covenant; he afterwards adds, that God’s favor would reach to the
corn, and to the wine, and the oil.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p10"></span>But we must notice the Prophet’s words,
*I will hear*, he says, or *I will answer,* (<span
id="ix.xxiii-p10.1"></span>ענה, *one,* means to answer, but it is here
equivalent to hear,) *I will hear* then, *I will hear the heavens, and
they will hear the earth*. The repetition is not superfluous; for the
Israelites had been for some time consumed by famine, before they were
led away into exile; as though the heavens were iron, no drop of rain
came down. They might hence have thought that there was now no hope; but
God here raises them up, *I will hear, I will hear,* he says; as though
he said, “There is no reason for the miserable condition in which I have
suffered you long to languish as your sins deserved, to discourage you;
for I will hereafter hear the heavens.” As the Prophet before reminded
them that when the beasts were cruel to them, it was a token of God’s
wrath; so also he teaches by these words that the heavens are not dry
through any hidden influence; but that when God withholds his favor,
there is no rain by which the heavens irrigate the earth. Then God here
plainly shows that the whole order of nature, as they say, is in his
hand, that no drop of rain descends from heaven except by his bidding,
nor can the earth produce any grass; in short, that all nature would be
barren were he not to fructify it by his blessing. And this is the
reason why he says, *I will hear the heavens and they will hear the
earth, and the earth will hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and
all these will hear Jezreel*

<span id="ix.xxiii-p11"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p12"></span>The Prophet used the word, *Jezreel*,
before in a bad sense; for his purpose was to reproach the Israelites
with their unfaithfulness: when they boasted of being the seed of
Abraham, and always claimed that honorable and noble distinction, the
Lord said, ‘Ye are Jezreel, and not Israel.’ It may be that the Prophet
wished to show again what they deserved; but he teaches, at the same
time, that God would by no means be prevented from showing kindness to
the unworthy when reconciled to him. Though, then, they were rather
Jezreelites than Israelites, yet their unworthiness would be no
impediment, that God should not deal bountifully with them. There may
also be an allusion here to a new people; for it follows in the next
verse, <span id="ix.xxiii-p12.1"></span>וזרעתיה, *usarotie,* *and I will
sow her;* and the word, Jezreel, has an affinity to this verb, it is
indeed derived from <span id="ix.xxiii-p12.2"></span>זרע, *saro,* which
is to sow: and as the Prophet presently adds, that Jezreel is, as it
were, the seed of God, I do not disapprove of this supposed allusion.
But yet the Prophet seems here to commend the grace of God, when he
declares that they were Jezreelites with whom God would deal so kindly
as to fructify the earth for their sake.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p13"></span>Let us now again repeat the substance of
the whole, *The corn, and the wine, and the oil, will hear Jezreel* The
Israelites were famished, and as it is usual with those in want of food,
they cried out, ‘Who will give us bread, and wine, and oil?’ For the
stomach, as it is said, has no ears; nor has it reason and judgment:
when there is extreme want, men, as if they were distracted, will call
for bread, and wine, and oil. God then has regard for these blind
instincts of men, which only crave what will gratify them: hence he
says, *The corn, and wine, and oil, will hear Jezreel,* — but when? Even
when the earth will supply trees with sap and moisture, and extend to
the seed its strength; it is then that the earth will hear the corn, and
the wine, and the oil: for these grow not of themselves, but derive
supplies from the earth; and hence the earth is said to hear them. But
cannot the earth of itself hear the corn, or the wine, or the oil? By no
means, except rain descends from heaven. Since, then, the earth itself
draws moisture and wetness from heaven, we see that men in vain cry out
in famine, except they look up to heaven: and heaven is ruled by the
will of God. Let men, therefore, learn to ascend up to God, that they
may seek from him their daily bread.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p14"></span>We now, then, see how suitable is this
gradation employed by the Prophet, by which God, on account of the rude
and weak comprehension of men, leads them up at last to himself. For
they turn their thoughts to bread, and wine, and oil; from these they
seek food: they are in this matter very stupid. Be it so; God is
indulgent to their simplicity and ignorance; for by degrees he proceeds
from corn, and wine, and oil, to the earth, and then from the earth to
heaven; and he afterwards shows that heaven cannot pour down rain except
at his will. It follows at last —

<span id="ix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p2"></span>**23.** And I will sow her unto me in the
earth; and I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I
will say to *them which were* not my people, Thou *art* my people; and
they shall say, *Thou art* my God.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p3"></span>**23.** Et seminabo eam mihi in terra
(*vel*, in terram) et miserabor ejus quae non erat adapta misericordiam,
et dicam, <span id="ix.xxiv-p3.1"></span>ללא-עמי, (*hoc est*, qui non
erat populus meus,) Tu populus meus; et ipse dicet, Deus mi.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiv-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p6"></span>The Prophet here takes the occasion to
speak of the increase of the people. He had promised a fruitful and
large increase of corn, and wine, and oil; but for what end would this
be, except the land had numerous inhabitants? It was hence needful to
make this addition. Besides, the Prophet had said before, ‘Though ye be
immense in number, yet a remnant only shall be preserved.’ He now sets
God’s new favor in opposition to his vengeance, and says, that God will
again sow the people.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p7"></span>From this sentence we learn that the
allusion in the word, Jezreel, has not been improperly noticed by some,
that is, that they, who had been before a degenerate people and not true
Israelites shall then be the seed of God: yet the words admit of two
senses; for <span id="ix.xxiv-p7.1"></span>זרע *saro,* applies to the
earth as well as to seed. The Hebrews say, ‘The earth is sown,’ and
also, ‘The wheat is sown,’ or any other grain. If then the Prophet
compares the people to the earth, the sense will be, I will sow the
people as I do the earth; that is, I will make them fruitful as the
earth when it is productive. It must then be thus rendered*, I will sow
her for me as the earth*, that is, as though she were my earth. Or it
may be rendered thus, I will sow her for myself in the earth, and for
this end, that the earth, which was for a time waste and desolate, might
have many inhabitants, as we know was the case. But the relative pronoun
in the feminine gender ought not to embarrass us, for the Prophet ever
speaks as of a woman: the people, we know, have been as yet described to
us under the person of a woman.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p8"></span>And he afterwards adds, <span
id="ix.xxiv-p8.1"></span>לא-רוחמה, *La-ruchamae.* He speaks here either
of *La-ruchamae,* an adulterous daughter, or an adulterous woman, whom a
husband takes to himself. As to the matter itself, it is easy to learn
what the Prophet means, which is, that God would diffuse an offspring
far and wide, when the people had been brought not only to a small
number, but almost to nothing: for how little short of entire ruin was
the desolation of the people when scattered into banishment? They were
then, as it has been stated, like a body torn asunder: the land in the
meantime enjoyed its Sabbaths; God had disburdened it of its
inhabitants.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p9"></span>We then understand the meaning of the
Prophet to be, that God would multiply the people, that the small
remnant would increase to a great and almost innumerable offspring. *I
will* then *sow her in the earth*, that is, throughout the whole land;
*and I will have mercy on La-ruchamae*, that is, I will in mercy embrace
her, who had not obtained mercy; *and I will say to the no-people, Ye
are now my people* We see that the Prophet insists on this, — That the
people would not only seek the outward advantages of the present life,
but would make a beginning at the very fountain, by regaining the favor
of God, and knowing him as their propitious Father: for this is the
meaning of the Prophet, of which something more will be said to-morrow.

<span id="ix.xxv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="ix.xxv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are in this
life subject to so many miseries, and in the meantime grow insensible in
our sins, — O grant that we may learn to search ourselves and consider
one sins, that we may be really humbled before thee, and ascribe to
ourselves the blame of all our evils, that we may be thus led to a
genuine feeling of repentance, and so strive to be reconciled to thee in
Christ, that we may wholly depend on thy paternal love, and thus ever
aspire to the fulness of eternal felicity, through thy goodness and that
immeasurable kindness which thou testifies is ready and offered to all
those, who with a sincere heart worship thee, call upon thee, and flee
to thee, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc26008.htm#fr_8) <span
id="ix.xv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p12"></span> As there is no different reading that
favors this view of the text, it is difficult to know how Calvin came to
give this paraphrase, as it is the reverse of the meaning of the
passage. It is literally rendered in our version, “Our mouth is opened
unto you.” Though the text is not correctly given, yet what is here
taught is true and important. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc26008.htm#fr_9) <span
id="ix.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p8"></span> Fabled giants with one eye. These
referred to had an eye to see the absurdities of Popery; but they had no
eye to see the beauty and glory of the Gospel. —*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc26009)
