[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26021)  [Next](cc26023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p1"></span> A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xxiii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xxiii-p3"></span>THE PROPHECIES OF HOSEA.

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span>**1** THE word of Jehovah, which came to
Hosea, the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, Hezekiah,
kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king of
Israel.

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span>**2** The beginning of what Jehovah spoke
by Hosea: Jehovah said to Hosea, “Go, take to thee a wife of wantonness,
and children of wantonness; for by wantoning the land hath become
wanton, so that it follows not Jehovah.”

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span>**3** And he went and took Gomer, the
daughter of Diblaim; and she conceived, and bare him a son:

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span>**4** And Jehovah said to him, “Call *his*
name Jezreel; for yet a little while and I will visit the blood of
Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of
the house of Israel;

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span>**5** And it shall be in that day, that I
will break in pieces the bow in the valley of Jezreel.”

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span>**6** And she conceived again, and bare a
daughter; and he said to him, “Call her name Loruchamah; for I will no
more show mercy to the house of Israel, for I will utterly take them
away: (**56**.)  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101)

<span id="xxiii.i-p10"></span>**7** But to the house of Judah I will
show mercy, and will save them by Jehovah their God; and I will save
them neither by the bow, nor by the sword, nor by battle, nor by horses,
nor by horsemen.”

<span id="xxiii.i-p11"></span>**8** And she weaned Lo-ruchamah, and
conceived, and bare a son;

<span id="xxiii.i-p12"></span>**9** And he said, “Call his name Lo-ammi;
for ye are not my people, and I will not be yours:

<span id="xxiii.i-p13"></span>**10** Yet the number of the children of
Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor
numbered; and it shall be, that in the place where it had been said to
them, ‘Ye are not my people,’ even there it shall be said, ‘*Ye are* the
children of the living God:’

<span id="xxiii.i-p14"></span>**11** And assembled together shall be the
children of Judah and the children of Israel, and shall set over
themselves one head, and shall ascend from the land, though great shall
be the day of Jezreel.”

<span id="xxiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p2"></span><span id="xxiii.ii-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER 2.
 <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)

<span id="xxiii.ii-p4"></span>**1** Say to your brethren, “My people;”
And to your sisters, “Beloved.” —

<span id="xxiii.ii-p5"></span>**2** Contend with your mother, contend;
For she is not my wife, and I am not her husband: Let her then remove
her fornications from her face,And her adulteries from the midst of her
breasts;

<span id="xxiii.ii-p6"></span>**3** Lest I strip her naked, And place
her as on the day of her nativity, And set her as the desert, and set
her as a dry land, And make her to die with thirst.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p7"></span>**4** And her children I will not pity;
For they are spurious children:

<span id="xxiii.ii-p8"></span>**5** For the wanton has their mother
played; With lewdness is she defiled who hath conceived them; For she
said, — “I will go after my lovers, Who give me my bread and my waters,
My wool, and my flax, and my oil, and lily drink.”

<span id="xxiii.ii-p9"></span>**6** Behold, therefore, I will close up
her way with thorns, And surround her with a mound, And her path she
shall not find;

<span id="xxiii.ii-p10"></span>**7** And she will follow her lovers, and
shall not overtake them, And will seek them, and shall not find them;
Then she will say, — “I will go and return to my former husband, For
better was it. with me then than now.”

<span id="xxiii.ii-p11"></span>**8** And she knew not that I gave to her
corn, and wine, and oil, And multiplied to her the silver and the gold,
Which they applied to Baal.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p12"></span>**9** I will therefore return, and take
away the corn in its time, And my new wine in its season; And will
snatch away my wool and flax, By which she covered her own nakedness;

<span id="xxiii.ii-p13"></span>**10** And I will now uncover her
baseness before the eyes of her lovers, And no one shall rescue her from
my hand;

<span id="xxiii.ii-p14"></span>**11** And I will cause to cease all her
joy *and* her mirth, Her new Moon, her sabbath, and every festal-day;

<span id="xxiii.ii-p15"></span>**12** And I will destroy her vine and
her fig-tree, Of which she said, — “These are my rewards, Which my
lovers have given me;” And will set them as the forest, And eat them
shall the beast of the field;

<span id="xxiii.ii-p16"></span>**13** And I will visit on her the days
of Baalim, To whom she offered incense, And adorned herself with her
earring and her chain, And went after her lovers, and forgat me, saith
Jehovah.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p17"></span>**14** Behold, therefore, I will turn
her, When I shall have led her to the desert, And will speak to her
heart;

<span id="xxiii.ii-p18"></span>**15** And will give her thence her
vineyards, And the valley of Achor for a door of hope; And there she
will sing as in the days of her youth, And as in the day she ascended
from the land of Egypt.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p19"></span>**16** And it shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah, That thou shalt call me, — “My Husband,” And shalt no more call
me, — “My Baal:”

<span id="xxiii.ii-p20"></span>**17** And I will take away the names of
Baalim from her mouth, And she will no more remember their name:

<span id="xxiii.ii-p21"></span>**18** I will also make for them a
covenant, in that day, With the beast of the field, and the bird of
heaven, and the reptile of the earth; And the bow, and the sword, and
the battle, I will break from the land; And I will make them rest in
security:

<span id="xxiii.ii-p22"></span>**19** I will also espouse thee to me for
ever, And espouse thee to me in righteousness, And in judgment, and in
kindness, and in mercies; And I will espouse thee to me in faithfulness,
And thou shalt know Jehovah.

<span id="xxiii.ii-p23"></span>**20** And in that day I will hear, saith
Jehovah, I will hear the heavens, and they will hear the earth, And the
earth will hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, And these will hear
Jezreel: And I will sow her for me in the land, And show mercy to her
who obtained not mercy, And will say to Lo-ammi, — “Ye *are* my people”
And they will say, — *“Thou art* our God.”

<span id="xxiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="xxiii.iii-p3"></span>**1** And Jehovah said to me, — “Go
again, love a woman beloved by a husband, and who is an adulteress, —
according to the love of Jehovah towards the children of Israel, who yet
look to strange gods, and love flagons of grapes.”

<span id="xxiii.iii-p4"></span>**2** And I bought her for myself for
fifteen silverings and one homer of barley, and half an homer of barley.

<span id="xxiii.iii-p5"></span>**3** And I said to her, — “For many days
shalt thou abide for me; thou shalt not play the wanton, and shalt not
be for any man, and I also shall be for thee.”

<span id="xxiii.iii-p6"></span>**4** For the children of Israel shall
for many days abide without a king, and without a prince, and without a
sacrifice, and without a statue, and without an ephod, and without
teraphim.

<span id="xxiii.iii-p7"></span>**5** Afterward shall the children of
Israel return and seek Jehovah their God, and David their king; and they
shall fear Jehovah and his goodness at the end of days.

<span id="xxiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="xxiii.iv-p3"></span>**1** Hear the word of Jehovah, ye
children of Israel; For a contention has Jehovah with the inhabitants of
the land, For there is no faithfulness and no kindness, And no knowledge
of God in the land:

<span id="xxiii.iv-p4"></span>**2** Cursing, and lying, and murder, And
stealing, and adultery, have burst forth; And blood have touched blood.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p5"></span>**3** Mourn therefore shall the land, And
languish shall every one who dwells in it; Together with the beast of
the field, the bird of heaven, And also the fish of the sea, shall they
be taken away.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p6"></span>**4** But yet no man may rebuke and
reprove a man; For thy people are as those who chide the priest.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p7"></span>**5** Fall then shalt thou in the daytime,
And fall also shall the Prophet with thee in the night; And I will
destroy thy mother.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p8"></span>**6** Perished have my people without
knowledge: As thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee,
That thou shalt not discharge for me the priesthood; And as thou hast
forgotten the law of thy God, Thy children will I also forget.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p9"></span>**7** According to their increase, so have
they sinned against me: Their glory will I turn to shame.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p10"></span>**8** The sin of my people they eat, And
to their iniquity they raise up the soul of each. (**154**)

<span id="xxiii.iv-p11"></span>**9** And it shall be, as the people so
shall be the priest; And I will visit on them their ways, And their
works will I repay them:

<span id="xxiii.iv-p12"></span>**10** For they shall eat, and shall not
be satisfied: They shall play the wanton, and shall not increase; For
Jehovah have they left off to serve.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p13"></span>**11** Wantonness and wine, and new wine,
take away the heart.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p14"></span>**12** My people their wood consult, And
their staff answers them; For the spirit of wantonness has deceived
them, And they have played the wanton away from their God:

<span id="xxiii.iv-p15"></span>**13** On the tops of mountains they
sacrifice, And on hills they burn incense — Under the oak, and the
poplar, and the teil-tree, For pleasant is its shade. Therefore your
daughters shall become wanton, And your daughters-in-law shall be
adulteresses. —

<span id="xxiii.iv-p16"></span>**14** I will not punish your daughters,
because they become wanton, Nor your daughters-in-law, because they have
committed adulteries; For they with strumpets separate themselves, And
with harlots they sacrifice: — And the people who understand not shall
stumble.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p17"></span>**15** If thou, Israel, art become
wanton, let not Judah offend; Come ye not to Gilgal, nor ascend into
Bethaven, Nor swear, Jehovah liveth.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p18"></span>**16** For as an untameable heifer,
untameable is Israel: Now feed him will Jehovah, as a tender lamb, in a
spacious place.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p19"></span>**17** To idols has Ephraim joined
himself; — leave him.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p20"></span>**18** Putrid is become their drink, By
wantoning they have become wanton; “Bring ye,” have their princes
shamefully loved.

<span id="xxiii.iv-p21"></span>**19** They have bound up wind in their
wings, And ashamed they shall be of their sacrifices.

<span id="xxiii.v"></span>

<span id="xxiii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xxiii.v-p3"></span>**1** Hear this, ye priests, and attend, ye
house of Israel, And ye house of the king, give ear, — For to you is
judgment; For a snare have you been in Mizpah, And a net expanded over
Tabor.

<span id="xxiii.v-p4"></span>**2** And turning aside in sacrificing they
are deeply fixed; Yet a correction have I been to them all.

<span id="xxiii.v-p5"></span>**3** I have known Ephraim, and Israel is
not hid from me; For thou Ephraim art wanton, polluted is Israel.

<span id="xxiii.v-p6"></span>**4** They apply not their endeavors to
turn to their God; For the spirit of wantonness is in the midst of them.
And Jehovah they have not known

<span id="xxiii.v-p7"></span>**5** And testify does the pride of Israel
to his face: Israel then and Ephraim shall fall in their iniquity, Fall
also shall Judah with them.

<span id="xxiii.v-p8"></span>**6** With their sheep and their herds
shall they go to seek Jehovah; But shall not find him: he has separated
himself from them.

<span id="xxiii.v-p9"></span>**7** With Jehovah have they dealt
perfidiously; For strange children have they begotten: Now devour them
shall a month, together with their portions.

<span id="xxiii.v-p10"></span>**8** Sound the cornet in Gibeah, blow the
trumpet in Ramah, Blow also the horn in Bethaven after thee, Benjamin: —

<span id="xxiii.v-p11"></span>**9** Ephraim shall be a waste in the day
of correction; Among the tribes of Israel have I taught this truth.

<span id="xxiii.v-p12"></span>**10** The princes of Judah have been as
those who remove the boundary; On them will I pour, as waters, my fury.

<span id="xxiii.v-p13"></span>**11** Exposed to plunder has Ephraim
been, broken by judgment; For he willingly walked after the
commandments.

<span id="xxiii.v-p14"></span>**12** And as a moth have I been to
Ephraim, And as a worm to the house of Judah;

<span id="xxiii.v-p15"></span>**13** And Ephraim saw his disease, and
Judah his wound; Ephraim went to Assur, and sent to king Jareb: Yet he
could not heal you, nor will he cure you of your wound;

<span id="xxiii.v-p16"></span>**14** For as a lion shall I be to
Ephraim, And as a young lion to the house of Judah: I — I will tear and
go away; I will take away, and none shall deliver. —

<span id="xxiii.v-p17"></span>**15** I will go, I will return to my
place, Until they confess that they have sinned, and seek my face: When
they shall have affliction, they will seek me: —

<span id="xxiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xxiii.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xxiii.vi-p3"></span>**1** “Come and let us return to Jehovah;
For he hath torn, and he will heal us; He hath smitten, and he will bind
up our wounds:

<span id="xxiii.vi-p4"></span>**2** He will revive us after two days, On
the third day he will raise us up,

<span id="xxiii.vi-p5"></span>**3** And we shall live in his presence:
And we shall know and pursue after the knowledge of Jehovah; As the
dawn, his going forth is appointed; And he shall come as the rain to us,
As the latter rain — a rain to the earth.” (**260**)

<span id="xxiii.vi-p6"></span>**4** What shall I do to thee, Ephraim?
What shall I do to thee, Judah? For your goodness is like the morning
dew, Like the cloud which passeth away early.

<span id="xxiii.vi-p7"></span>**5** I have therefore hewn them by my
Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth; And thy judgments
have been as the light which goeth forth:

<span id="xxiii.vi-p8"></span>**6** For mercy I desire, and not
sacrifice, And the knowledge of God before burnt-offerings.

<span id="xxiii.vi-p9"></span>**7** But they as men have transgressed
the covenant; In this they have dealt perfidiously with me.

<span id="xxiii.vi-p10"></span>**8** Gilead is a city of those who work
iniquity, filled with blood;

<span id="xxiii.vi-p11"></span>**9** And, as robbers wait for a man, The
company of priests kill in the way by consent; For their wicked purpose
they accomplish.

<span id="xxiii.vi-p12"></span>**10** In the house of Israel have I seen
infamy; There is the wantonness of Ephraim, — Israel is polluted.

<span id="xxiii.vi-p13"></span>**11** Judah also did set a plant for
thee, While I was restoring the captivity of my people.

<span id="xxiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xxiii.vii-p3"></span>**1** While I was healing Israel, Then
were discovered the iniquity of Ephraim, And the vices of Samaria; For
they dealt falsely, and the thief entered in, The robber plundered
abroad:

<span id="xxiii.vii-p4"></span>**2** And they said not in their heart,
That I remember all their wickedness: Surrounded them have now their
vices, — they are in my sight.

<span id="xxiii.vii-p5"></span>**3** By their wickedness they cheer the
king, And by their falsehoods the princes. All are adulterers, like an
oven heated by the baker;

<span id="xxiii.vii-p6"></span>**4** .Who ceases from stirring up, After
mixing the dough, till it be fermented.

<span id="xxiii.vii-p7"></span>**5** The day of our king! — the princes
Have made him sick with a bottle of wine; — He stretched forth his hand
to scorners.

<span id="xxiii.vii-p8"></span>**6** For they have made ready, as an
oven, Their heart, for lying in wait: All the night their baker sleeps;
In the morning the oven burns as a flaming fire

<span id="xxiii.vii-p9"></span>**7** All are hot like an oven; They have
consumed their own judges, — All their kings have fallen; — No one among
them cries to me.

<span id="xxiii.vii-p10"></span>**8** Ephraim mingles himself with the
nations; Ephraim is become bread baked under the ashes, Which has not
been turned:

<span id="xxiii.vii-p11"></span>**9** Eaten have strangers his strength,
and he knows it not; And hoariness has spread over him, and he knows it
not;

<span id="xxiii.vii-p12"></span>**10** And testify does the pride of
Israel to his face; But they have not returned to Jehovah their God, Nor
sought him notwithstanding all these things.

<span id="xxiii.vii-p13"></span>**11** Ephraim is also like a silly
dove, without understanding; They cry on Egypt, they go to Assyria:

<span id="xxiii.vii-p14"></span>**12** But when they go, I will expand
over them my net, As a bird of heaven, I will bring them down, I will
hold them fast, as their assembly have heard.

<span id="xxiii.vii-p15"></span>**13** Woe to them! for they have gone
back from me; Desolation to them! for they have dealt perfidiously with
me: Though I redeemed them, They have yet spoken lies against me:

<span id="xxiii.vii-p16"></span>**14** And they have not cried to me
with their heart; For they howled on their beds; For corn and wine they
assemble together; — They have revolted from me: (**269**)

<span id="xxiii.vii-p17"></span>**15** Though I have bound and
strengthened their arms, Yet against me they contrive evil.

<span id="xxiii.vii-p18"></span>**16** They return not to God; They have
been like a deceitful bow: Fallen by the sword have their princes,
Through the pride of their tongue; — This will be their reproach in the
land of Egypt.

<span id="xxiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xxiii.viii-p3"></span>**1** To thy mouth the trumpet! As an
eagle, against the house of Jehovah; For they have transgressed my
covenant, And against my law have they acted perfidiously.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p4"></span>**2** To me will Israel exclaim, “My
God, we have known thee,”

<span id="xxiii.viii-p5"></span>**3** Israel has cast good far away; —
The enemy will closely pursue him:

<span id="xxiii.viii-p6"></span>**4** They have caused to reign, but not
by me; Dominion have they set up, but I knew not; Of their silver and
their gold they have made for themselves idols; They shall therefore be
cut off.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p7"></span>**5** Cast thee far away has thy calf, O
Samaria! — Kindled has my fury against them: How long will they not bear
cleanness?

<span id="xxiii.viii-p8"></span>**6** For even from Israel it is; The
artificer has made it, and it is no god; For in fragments shall be the
calf of Samaria.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p9"></span>**7** Surely the wind they sow, and the
tempest they shall reap; There is no stalks — the grain will produce no
flour; If indeed it will produce, strangers will devour it.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p10"></span>**8** Devoured is Israel, — now shall
he be among the Gentiles, Like a vessel in which there is no delight:

<span id="xxiii.viii-p11"></span>**9** For they went up to Assyria,
*like a* solitary wild ass; — Ephraim hired lovers:

<span id="xxiii.viii-p12"></span>**10** Though they have hired among the
nations, I will now gather them; And they shall grieve a little under
the burden of the king and princes.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p13"></span>**11** Because Ephraim has multiplied
altars to sin, Altars for sinning shall be to him.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p14"></span>**12** I have written for him the
precious things of my law; As something strange have they been
accounted.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p15"></span>**13** For sacrifices of
burnt-offerings they offer flesh, and eat; Jehovah will not regard it as
acceptable: He will now remember their iniquity, He will visit their
wickedness; — To Egypt shall they return.

<span id="xxiii.viii-p16"></span>**14** For Israel has his Maker
forgotten, and built altars: Judah also has multiplied fortified cities;
But I will send fire on his cities, And it shall devour his palaces.

<span id="xxiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xxiii.ix-p3"></span>**1** Rejoice not, Israel, with joy like
that of the people; For thou hast become wanton from thy God; Thou hast
loved wages on all the floors of corn. —

<span id="xxiii.ix-p4"></span>**2** The floor and the vat shall not feed
them, And the new wine shall disappoint them:

<span id="xxiii.ix-p5"></span>**3** They shall not dwell in the land of
Jehovah; And return shall Ephraim to Egypt, And in Assyria they shall
eat what is unclean:

<span id="xxiii.ix-p6"></span>**4** To Jehovah they shall not pour wine,
And acceptable to him shall not be their libations; Their sacrifices
shall be to them as the bread of mourners, — Whosoever will eat shall be
polluted; For their bread for their soul, It shall not come into the
house of Jehovah.

<span id="xxiii.ix-p7"></span>**5** What will ye do on the solemn day,
On the festal-day of Jehovah?

<span id="xxiii.ix-p8"></span>**6** For, behold, they are gone away on
account of desolation; — Egypt will gather them, Memphis will bury them.
The wished-for store of their silver will the nettle possess, — The
thorn shall be in their tents.

<span id="xxiii.ix-p9"></span>**7** The days of visitation have come,
The days of retribution have come: Israel shall know the prophet to be
foolish, *And* mad the man of the spirit, — For the number of thy
iniquity and great hatred.

<span id="xxiii.ix-p10"></span>**8** The watchman of Ephraim for my God,
the prophet, Is a snare of a fowler on all his ways, A hateful thing in
the house of his God. — (**327**)

<span id="xxiii.ix-p11"></span>**9** They are deeply fixed, corrupt are
they as in the days of Gibeah: He will remember their iniquity, he will
visit their sins.

<span id="xxiii.ix-p12"></span>**10** As grapes in the desert I found
Israel, As the first fruit of the fig-tree, at its beginning, I saw your
fathers: — They went in into Baalpeor, And separated themselves unto
shame, And became abominable like their lovers.

<span id="xxiii.ix-p13"></span>**11** Ephraim! — as a bird has fled
their glory — (**336**) From the birth, and from the womb, and from the
conception:

<span id="xxiii.ix-p14"></span>**12** For if they bring up their
children, I shall exterminate them, that they shall not be men: —
Surely, woe to them, when I shall depart from them!

<span id="xxiii.ix-p15"></span>**13** Ephraim, as I have seen in Tyrus,
Is a *tree* planted in a house: (**339**) Yet Ephraim *is* to bring
forth to the slaughter his children!

<span id="xxiii.ix-p16"></span>**14** “Give to them, Jehovah, — what
wilt thou give? Give to them an abortive womb and dry breasts.”

<span id="xxiii.ix-p17"></span>**15** All their evil is in Gilgal; For
there I conceived hatred against them: On account of the wickedness of
their works, From my house I will cast them out; I will not continue to
love them; — All their princes are apostates.

<span id="xxiii.ix-p18"></span>**16** Smitten has Ephraim been; Their
root has dried up, — fruit they will not bear: And if they bring forth,
I will slay The wished—for fruit of their womb. —

<span id="xxiii.ix-p19"></span>**17** Cast them away will my God; For
they hearkened not to him: And they shall be wanderers among the
nations.

<span id="xxiii.x"></span>

<span id="xxiii.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xxiii.x-p3"></span>**1** A vine robbed is Israel; Fruit will
he lay up for himself: (**351**) According to the abundance of his fruit
Hath he abounded towards altars; According to the goodness of his land
Hath he done good to statues.

<span id="xxiii.x-p4"></span>**2** Divided has been their heart; They
shall now be proved guilty: — He will overturn their altars, He will
destroy their statues.

<span id="xxiii.x-p5"></span>**3** For now they will say, — “We have no
king, Because we feared not Jehovah; And a king, what will he do for
us?” —

<span id="xxiii.x-p6"></span>**4** They have spoken words only, —
Swearing falsely, — making a covenant: (**356**) Judgment grows up as
wormwood in the furrows of the field.

<span id="xxiii.x-p7"></span>**5** For the calves of Bethaven, (**359**)
Tremble will the inhabitants of Samaria; For mourn over it will its
people, And its priests, who rejoice in it, over its glory: For it shall
depart from it;

<span id="xxiii.x-p8"></span>**6** And itself shall to Assyria be
carried, A present to king Jareb: — Shame shall Ephraim receive, And
ashamed shall Israel be of his counsel.

<span id="xxiii.x-p9"></span>**7** Cut down shall be the king of
Samaria, As a foam on the surface of the waters. (**363**)

<span id="xxiii.x-p10"></span>**8** Perish shall the high places of Aven
— the sin of Israel; The thorn and the thistle shall come up on their
altars; And they shall say to the mountains, “Cover us,” And to the
hills, “Fall on us.”

<span id="xxiii.x-p11"></span>**9** From the days of Gibeah hast thou,
Israel, sinned: There they stood, — the battle in Gibeah, Against the
children of iniquity, laid not hold on them.

<span id="xxiii.x-p12"></span>**10** It is my wish, and I will chastise
them; And assembled against them shall nations be, When they shall be
bound together by their two furrows. (**371**)

<span id="xxiii.x-p13"></span>**11** Ephraim is an heifer, trained to
love the treading of corn; But I passed over on her beautiful neck; — To
ride will I make Ephraim, — Plough shall Judah, — harrow for himself
shall Jacob.

<span id="xxiii.x-p14"></span>**12** Sow for yourselves in
righteousness, Gather for your measure kindness; Plough for yourselves
what has been ploughed: And time it is to seek Jehovah, till he come,
And rain righteousness upon you: —

<span id="xxiii.x-p15"></span>**13** Ye have ploughed ungodliness,
iniquity have ye reaped; Ye have eaten the fruit of falsehood: For you
have trusted in your own way, In the multitude of thy valiant ones.

<span id="xxiii.x-p16"></span>**14** A tumult shall therefore rise among
thy people, And every one of thy fortresses shall be laid waste,
According to the devastation of Shalman in Betharbel: In the day of
battle shall the mother, With the children, be dashed in pieces. —

<span id="xxiii.x-p17"></span>**15** Thus shall Bethel do to you, On
account of wickedness — of your wickedness: In one morning shall utterly
perish the king of Israel.

<span id="xxiii.xi"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xxiii.xi-p3"></span>**1** When Israel was a child, then I
loved him: And from Egypt I called my son. —

<span id="xxiii.xi-p4"></span>**2** They called them; — so they turned
away from their presence; — To Baalim they offered sacrifices, And to
graven images they burnt incense.

<span id="xxiii.xi-p5"></span>**3** And I, my walking was on foot, To
raise up Ephraim by his arms: And they knew not that I healed them.

<span id="xxiii.xi-p6"></span>**4** By the cords of man I drew them, by
the chains of love: And I was to them as those who raise up the yoke on
the cheeks; And I have extended meat to them.

<span id="xxiii.xi-p7"></span>**5** They shall not return to the land of
Egypt, Assur shall rule over them; For they have been unwilling to
return:

<span id="xxiii.xi-p8"></span>**6** And fall shall the sword on their
cities, And destroy their bars; And it shall destroy on account of their
counsels.

<span id="xxiii.xi-p9"></span>**7** For my people are bent on defection
from me; When to the Most High they call them, No one at all raises up
himself.

<span id="xxiii.xi-p10"></span>**8** How shall I set thee aside,
Ephraim? Shall I deliver thee up, Israel? How shall I make thee as
Sodom? Shall I set thee as Zeboim? Inverted within me is my heart,
Rolled back again are my repentings:

<span id="xxiii.xi-p11"></span>**9** I will not execute the fury of my
wrath, I will not return to destroy Ephraim; For God am I, and not man,
In the midst of thee, holy; — And I will not enter the city.

<span id="xxiii.xi-p12"></span>**10** After Jehovah shall they walk, And
as a lion will he roar; When he shall roar, then dread shall children
from the sea, —

<span id="xxiii.xi-p13"></span>**11** They shall dread as a sparrow in
Egypt, And as a dove in the land of Assur; And I will make them to dwell
in their own houses, saith Jehovah.

<span id="xxiii.xi-p14"></span>**12** Surrounded me hath Ephraim with
falsehood; And with fraud, the house of Israel: But Judah as yet rules
with his God; And together with the saints he is faithful.

<span id="xxiii.xii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xxiii.xii-p3"></span>**1** Ephraim feeds on the wind, and
pursues the east wind; Daily he multiplies falsehood and devastation: A
covenant they make with the Assyrian, And oil is carried into Egypt.

<span id="xxiii.xii-p4"></span>**2** Jehovah has also a contention with
Judah; And he will visit Jacob; — according to his ways, According to
his works, he will requite him.

<span id="xxiii.xii-p5"></span>**3** In the womb he laid hold on his
brother’s foot, And by his strength he had power with God;

<span id="xxiii.xii-p6"></span>**4** And he had power with the Angel and
prevailed; He wept and entreated him: In Bethel he found him; — and
there he spoke with us,

<span id="xxiii.xii-p7"></span>**5** Even Jehovah, God of hosts, —
Jehovah is his memorial,

<span id="xxiii.xii-p8"></span>**6** And thou, to thy God return;
Goodness and judgment observe, And hope in thy God always.

<span id="xxiii.xii-p9"></span>**7** Canaan! — in his hand is the
balance of fraud; He loves to plunder:

<span id="xxiii.xii-p10"></span>**8** Yet Ephraim said, “I am however
become rich; I have found wealth for myself; In all my labors they shall
not find in me An iniquity, which is a sin.”

<span id="xxiii.xii-p11"></span>**9** But I, Jehovah, thy God from the
land of Egypt. Will yet make thee to dwell in tents, As in the days of
the assembly.

<span id="xxiii.xii-p12"></span>**10** I have also spoken by the
Prophets, And visions have I multiplied, And through the Prophets used
similitudes: —

<span id="xxiii.xii-p13"></span>**11** Is there (still) iniquity in
Gilead? — Surely vain have they been: In Gilgal they have sacrificed
oxen, And their altars have been as heaps On the furrows of the field.

<span id="xxiii.xii-p14"></span>**12** Even Jacob fled to the land of
Syria, And Israel served for a wife, And for a wife he kept *sheep:*

<span id="xxiii.xii-p15"></span>**13** And by a Prophet did Jehovah
bring Israel out of Egypt, And by a Prophet he was preserved: —

<span id="xxiii.xii-p16"></span>**14** (Yet) Ephraim has provoked him by
his high places; (**446**) But his blood shall on him remain, And his
reproach  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) will his Lord return
to him.

<span id="xxiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p3"></span>**1** When Ephraim spoke there was
trembling; He exalted himself in Israel: But he sinned by Baal and died.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p4"></span>**2** And now they have added to their
sin, And have made for themselves what is molten, From their silver,
according to their own understanding, Even idols — all being the work of
artificers: To each other they, who sacrifice men, say, — “Let them kiss
the calves.”

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p5"></span>**3** They shall therefore be like a
morning cloud, Like the dew that rises up early, Like the chaff which is
driven by a whirlwind from the floor, And like the smoke from the
chimney.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p6"></span>**4** But I, Jehovah, am thy God from
the land of Egypt; And a god besides me thou shouldst not know; For a
Savior, there is none except me.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p7"></span>**5** I knew thee in the desert, in the
land of droughts:

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p8"></span>**6** According to their pastures they
were filled; (**459**) They were filled, and their heart was elevated:
And hence they forgat me.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p9"></span>**7** I will therefore be to them as a
lion, As a leopard in the way I will lie in wait;

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p10"></span>**8** I will meet them as a bereaved
bear, And rend the inclosure of their heart; I will devour them as a
lion; — The beast of the field shall tear them.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p11"></span>**9** Destroyed art thou, Israel,
Though in me was thy help: (**464**)

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p12"></span>**10** I will be *the same;* — thy
king, where is he? To save thee in all thy cities, — And thy princes? —
of whom thou hast said — “Give me a king and princes.”

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p13"></span>**11** I gave thee a king in my anger,
And took *him* away in my fury.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p14"></span>**12** Sealed up is the iniquity of
Ephraim, Laid up in store is his sin.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p15"></span>**13** The sorrows of one in travail
shall come on him; He is an unwise son; For he should not stand long in
the breaking forth of children.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p16"></span>**14** From the power of the grave
would I deliver them, From death would I redeem them; I would be thy
perdition, O death; I would be thy destruction, O grave: — Repentance is
hid from my eyes.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p17"></span>**15** Though among his brethren he may
increase, Yet there shall come an east wind The wind of Jehovah,
ascending from the desert; And it will dry up his spring, And dried
shall be his fountain; It will spoil the store of every desirable
vessel.

<span id="xxiii.xiii-p18"></span>**16** Desolated shall be Samaria, For
she has provoked her God: By the sword shall they fall; Their infants
shall be dashed in pieces, Their pregnant women shall be ripped up.

<span id="xxiii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p3"></span>**1** Return, Israel, to Jehovah thy God;
For thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p4"></span>**2** Take with you words, and turn to
Jehovah, And say to him, — “Take away all iniquity, and bring good; And
we shall render *to thee* the calves of our lips.

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p5"></span>**3** The Assyrian shall not save us, On
a horse we shall not mount, And we shall not henceforth say, — Our
gods,’ to the works of our hands; For in thee will the fatherless find
mercy.”

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p6"></span>**4** I will heal their defections, I
will love them freely; For turned aside is my fury from him.

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p7"></span>**5** I will be as dew to Israel; He
shall flourish as the lily, He shall fix his roots as Libanus;

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p8"></span>**6** Spread shall his branches, And as
that of the olive shall be his comeliness, And his fragrance like that
of Libanus.

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p9"></span>**7** Refreshed shall they be who shall
dwell under his shadow; They shall revive as the corn, and germinate
like the vine His odor shall be like that of the wine of Libanus.

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p10"></span>**8** Ephraim *shall say,* “What have I
to do any more with idols?” I have heard, and showed him favor, — “I
shall be to thee a shady fir-tree; — From me is thy fruit found.” Who is
wise? and he will understand these things;

<span id="xxiii.xiv-p11"></span>**9** Who is intelligent? and he will
know them: For right are the ways of Jehovah, And the just shall walk in
them; But in them will the ungodly stumble.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc26022.htm#fr_101) <span
id="xxiii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span> This number refers to the page where
another rendering is proposed.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc26022.htm#fr_102) <span
id="xxiii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xxiii.ii-p3"></span> The portions supposed to be in the
original in a poetical metre are placed here in parallel lines, not
because they are so arranged by Calvin, but for the purpose of setting
forth the meaning in a clearer light. It is proper also to say, that the
sectional divisions are those of the Editor.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc26022.htm#fr_103) <span
id="xxiii.xii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.xii-p17"></span> Is it not the reproach of Jacob,
mentioned above, he having been in a servile state? — *Ed*.

<span id="xxiii.xii-p18"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc26023)
