[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc26009)  [Next](cc26011.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>Chapter 4

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#001.md)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear the word of the LORD, ye children
of Israel: for the LORD hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the
land, because *there is* no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in
the land.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite verbum Jehova, filii Israel,
quia lis Jehovae cum incolis terrae; quia nulla fides, (*aut*, veritas,
nulla fidelitas,) et nulla beneficientia, etnulla cognito Dei in terra.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** By swearing, and lying, and killing,
and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood
toucheth blood.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Maledicere, et mentiri, et occidere, et
furari, et adulterium committere perruperunt, et sanguines sanguinibus
fuerunt continui.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span><span id="xi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>This is a new discourse by the Prophet,
separate from his former discourses. We must bear in mind that the
Prophets did not literally write what they delivered to the people, nor
did they treat only once of those things which are now extant with us;
but we have in their books collected summaries and heads of those
matters which they were wont to address to the people. Hosea, no doubt,
very often descanted on the exile and the restoration of the people,
forasmuch as he dwelt much on all the things which we have hitherto
noticed. Indeed, the slowness and dullness of the people were such, that
the same things were repeated daily. But it was enough for the Prophets
to make and to write down a brief summary of what they taught in their
discourses.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>Hosea now relates how vehemently he reproved
the people, because every kind of corruption so commonly prevailed, that
there was no sound part in the whole community. We hence see what the
Prophet treats of now; and this ought to be observed, for hypocrites
wish ever to be flattered; and when the mercy of God is offered to them,
they seek to be freed from every fear. It is therefore a bitter thing to
them, when threatening are mingled, when God sharply chides them. “What!
we heard yesterday a discourse on God’s mercy, and now he fulminates
against us. He is then changeable; if he were consistent, would not his
manner of teaching be alike and the same today?” But men must be often
awakened, for forgetfulness of God often creeps over them; they indulge
themselves, and nothing is more difficult than to lead them to God; nay,
when they have made some advances, they soon turn aside to some other
course.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>We hence see that men cannot be taught,
except God reproves their sins by his word; and then, lest they despond,
gives them a hope of mercy; and except he again returns to reproofs and
threatening. This is the mode of address which we find in all the
Prophets.

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>I now come to the Prophet’s words: *Hear*, he
says, *the word of Jehovah, ye children of Israel, the Lord has a
dispute,* *etc*. The Prophet, by saying that the Lord had a dispute with
the inhabitants of the land, intimates that men in vain flatter
themselves, when they have God against them, and that they shall soon
find him to be their Judge, except they in time anticipate his
vengeance. But he also reminds the Israelites that God had a dispute
with them, that they might not have to feel the severity of justice, but
reconcile themselves to God, while a seasonable opportunity was given
them. Then the Prophet’s introduction had this object in view — to make
the Israelites to know that God would be adverse to them, except they
sought, without delay, to regain his favor. The Lord then, since he
declared that he would contend with them, shows that he was not willing
to do so. for had God determined to punish the people, what need was
there of this warning? Could he not instantly execute judgment on them?
Since, then, the Prophet was sent to the children of Israel to warn them
of a great and fatal danger, God had still a regard for their safety:
and doubtless this warning prevailed with many; for those who were
alarmed by this denunciation humbled themselves before God, and hardened
not themselves in wickedness: and the reprobate, though not amended,
were yet rendered twice less excusable.

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>The same is the case among us, whenever God
threatens us with judgment: they who are not altogether intractable or
unhealable, confess their guilt, and deprecate God’s wrath; and others,
though they harden their hearts in wickedness, cannot yet quench the
power of truth; for the Lord takes from them every pretext for
ignorance, and conscience wounds them more deeply, after they have been
thus warned

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>We now then understand what the Prophet meant
by saying, that God had a dispute with the inhabitants of the land. But
that the Prophet’s intention may be more clear to us, we must bear in
mind, that he and other faithful teachers were wearied with crying, and
that in the meantime no fruit appeared. He saw that his warnings were
heedlessly despised, and that hence his last resort was to summon men to
God’s tribunal. We also are constrained, when we prevail nothing, to
follow the same course: “God will judge you; for no one will bear to be
judged by his word: whatever we announce to you in his name, is counted
a matter of sport: he himself at length will show that he has to do with
you.” In a similar strain does Zechariah speak,

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>‘They shall look on him whom they have
pierced,’  
(<span id="xi.i-p14.2"></span>[Zec
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span id="xi.i-p14.2"></span>:.md)

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span>and to the same purpose does Isaiah say, that
the Spirit of the Lord was made sad.

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>‘Is it not enough,’ he says, ‘that ye should
be vexatious to men, except ye be so also to my God?’ (<span
id="xi.i-p16.1"></span>[Isa 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013.md)<span
id="xi.i-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>The Prophet joined himself with God; for the
ungodly king Ahab, by tempting God, did at the same time trifle with his
Prophets.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>There is then here an implied contrast
between the dispute which God announces respecting the Israelites, and
the daily strifes he had with them by his Prophets. For this reason also
the Lord said,

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>‘My Spirit shall no more strive with man, for
he is flesh,’  
(<span id="xi.i-p19.2"></span>[Ge
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span>God indeed says there, that he had waited in
vain for men to return to the right way; for they were refractory beyond
any hope of repentance: he therefore declared, that he would presently
punish them. So also in this place, ‘“The Lord has a trial at law”; he
will now himself plead his own cause: he has hitherto long exercised his
Prophets in contending with you; yea, he has wearied them with much and
continual labour; ye remain ever like yourselves; he will therefore
begin now to plead effectually his own cause with you: he will no more
speak to you by the mouth, but by his power, show himself a judge.’ The
Prophet, however, designedly laid down the word, *dispute,* that the
Israelites might know that God would severely treat them, not without
cause, nor unjustly, as though he said, “God will so punish you as to
show at the same time that he will do so for the best reason: ye elude
all threatenings; ye think that you can make yourselves safe by your
shifts: there are no evasions by which you can possibly hope to attain
any thing; for God will at length uncover all your wickedness.” In
short, the Prophet here joins punishment with God’s justice, or he
points out by one word, a real (so to speak) or an effectual contention,
by which the Lord not only reproves men in words, but also visits with
judgment their sins.

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>It follows, *Because there is no truth*, no
kindness, no knowledge of God. The dispute, he said, was to be with the
inhabitants of the land: by *the inhabitants of the land,* he means the
whole body of the people; as though he said, “Not a few men have become
corrupt, but all kinds of wickedness prevail everywhere.” And for the
same reason he adds, that there was no truth”, etc. *in the land;* as
though he said, “They who sin hide not themselves now in lurking-places;
they seek no recesses, like those who are ashamed; but so much
licentiousness is everywhere dominant, that the whole land is filled
with the contempt of God and with crimes.” This was a severe reproof to
proud men. How much the Israelites flattered themselves, we know; it was
therefore necessary for the Prophet to speak thus sharply to a
refractory people; for a gentle and kind warning proves effectual only
to the meek and teachable. When the world grows hardened against God,
such a rigorous treatment as the words of the Prophet disclose must be
used. Let those then, to whom is intrusted the charge of teaching, see
that they do not gently warn men, when hardened in their vices; but let
them follow this vehemence of the Prophet.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>We said at the beginning, that the Prophet
had a good reason for being so warm in his indignation: he was not at
the moment foolishly carried away by the heat of zeal; but he knew that
he had to do with men so perverse, that they could not be handled in any
other way. The Prophet now reproves not only one kind of evil, but
brings together every sort of crimes; as though he said, that the
Israelites were in every way corrupt and perverted. He says first, that
there was among them no faithfulness, and no kindness. He speaks here of
their contempt of the second table of the law; for by this the impiety
of men is sooner found out, that is, when an examination is made of
their life: for hypocrites vauntingly profess the name of God, and
confidently (<span id="xi.i-p22.1"></span>*plenis buccis* — with full
cheeks) arrogate faith to themselves; and then they cover their vices
with the external show of divine worship, and frigid acts of devotion:
nay, the very thing mentioned by Jeremiah is too commonly the case, that

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span>‘the house of God is made a den of
thieves,’  
(<span id="xi.i-p23.2"></span>[Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)<span id="xi.i-p23.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>Hence the Prophets, that they might drag the
ungodly to the light, examine their conduct according to the duties of
love: “Ye are right worshipers of God, ye are most holy; but in the
meantime, where is truth, where is mutual faithfulness, where is
kindness? If ye are not men, how can ye be angels? Ye are given to
avarice, ye are perfidious, ye are cruel: what more can be said of you,
except that each of you condemns all the rest before God, and that your
life is also condemned by all?’

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span>By saying that *truth* or *faithfulness* was
extinct, he makes them to be like foxes, who are ever deceitful: by
saying that there was *no kindness,* he accuses them of cruelty, as
though he said, that they were like lions and wild beasts. But the
fountain of all these vices he points out in the third clause, when he
says, that they had *no knowledge of God:* and the knowledge of God he
takes for the fear of God which proceeds from the knowledge of him; as
though he said, “In a word, men go on as licentiously, as if they did
not think that there is a God in heaven, as if all religion was effaced
from their hearts.” For as long as any knowledge of God remains in us,
it is like a bridle to restrain us: but when men become wanton, and
allow themselves every liberty, it is certain that they have forgotten
God, and that there is in them now no knowledge of God. Hence the
complaints in the Psalms,

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>‘The ungodly have said in their heart, There
is no God,’  
(<span id="xi.i-p26.2"></span>[Ps
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p26.2"></span>:.md)

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>‘Impiety speaks in my heart, There is no
God.’ Men cannot run headlong into brutal stupidity, while a spark of
the true knowledge of God shines or twinkles in their minds. We now then
perceive the real meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span><span id="xi.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>But after having said that they were full of
perfidiousness and cruelty, he adds, *By cursing, and lying, and
killing,* *etc*., <span id="xi.i-p29.1"></span>אלה, *ale,* means to
swear: some explain it in this place as signifying to forswear; and
others read the two together, <span id="xi.i-p29.2"></span>אלה וכחש,
*ale ucachesh,* to swear and lie, that is to deceive by swearing. But as
<span id="xi.i-p29.3"></span> אלה“alah” means often to curse, the
Prophet here, I doubt not, condemns the practice of cursing, which was
become frequent and common among the people.

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span>But he enumerates particulars in order more
effectually to check the fierceness of the people; for the wicked, we
know, do not easily bend their neck: they first murmur, then they
clamour against wholesome instruction, and at last they rage with open
fury, and break out into violence, when they cannot otherwise stop the
progress of sound doctrine. How ever this may be, we see that they are
not easily led to own their sins. This is the reason why the Prophet
shows here, by stating particulars, in how many ways they provoked God’s
wrath: ‘Lo,’ he says ‘cursings, lyings, murder, thefts, adulteries,
abound among you.’ And the Prophet seems here to allude to the precepts
of the law; as though he said, “If any one compares your life with the
law of God, he will find that you avowedly and designedly lead such a
life, as proves that you fight against God, that you violate every part
of his law.”

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span>But it must be here observed, that he speaks
not of such thieves or murderers as are led in our day to the gallows,
or are otherwise punished. On the contrary, he calls them thieves and
murderers and adulterers, who were in high esteem, and eminent in honor
and wealth, and who, in short, were alone illustrious among the people
of Israel: such did the Prophet brand with these disgraceful names,
calling them murderers and thieves. So also does Isaiah speak of them,
‘Thy princes are robbers and companions of thieves,’ (<span
id="xi.i-p31.1"></span>[Isa 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#023.md)<span
id="xi.i-p31.1"></span>.) And we already reminded you, that the Prophet
addresses not his discourses to few men, but to the whole people; for
all, from the least to the greatest, had fallen away.

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>He afterwards says, *They have broken out*.
The expression no doubt is to be taken metaphorically, as though he
said, “There are now no bonds, no barriers.” For the people so raged
against God, that no modesty, no shame on account of the law, no
religion, no fear, prevailed among them, or checked their intractable
spirit. Hence *they broke out*. By the word, breaking out, the Prophet
sets forth the furious wantonness seen in the reprobate; when freed from
the fear of God, they abandon themselves to what is sinful, without any
moderation, without any restraint.

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span>And to the same purpose he subjoins, *Bloods
are contiguous to bloods*. By bloods he means all the worst crimes: and
he says that bloods were close to bloods, because they joined crimes
together, and as Isaiah says, that iniquity was as it were a train; so
our Prophet says here, that such was the common liberty they took to
sin, that wherever he turned his eyes, he could see no part free from
wickedness. Then bloods are contiguous to bloods, that is, everywhere is
seen the horrible spectacle of crimes. This is the meaning. It now
follows —

<span id="xi.ii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#003.md)<span id="xi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Therefore shall the land mourn, and
every one that dwelleth therein shall languish, with the beasts of the
field, and with the fowls of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also
shall be taken away.

<span id="xi.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Propterea Ingebit (*vel,* succidetur;
<span id="xi.ii-p3.1"></span>עמל *enim utrunque significat)* omnis
habitans in ea, in bestia agri, in volucre coeli atque etaim piscibus
maris collingentur omnes, *vel,* tollentur e medio.)

<span id="xi.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.ii-p5"></span><span id="xi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii-p6"></span>The Prophet now expresses more clearly the
dispute which he mentions in the first verse; and it now evidently
appears, that it was not a judgment expressed in words, for God had in
vain tried to bring the people to the right way by threats and reproofs:
he had contended enough with then; they remained refractory; hence he
adds, “Now mourn shall the whole land”; that is, God has now resolved to
execute his judgment: there is therefore no use for you any more to
contrive any evasion, as you have been hitherto wont to do; for God
stretches forth his hand for your ultimate destruction. Mourn,
therefore, shall the land, and *cut off shall be every one that dwells
in it*, as I prefer to render it; unless the Prophet, it may be, means,
that though God should for a time suspend the last judgment, yet the
Israelites would gain nothing, seeing that they would, by continual
languor, pine away. But as he mentions mourning in the first place, the
former meaning, that God would destroy all the inhabitants, seems more
appropriate. He adds*, gathered shall they be all*, or *destroyed*, (for
either may suit the place,) *from the beast of the field, and the bird
of heaven, to the fishes of the sea*. The Prophet here enlarges on the
greatness of God’s wrath; for he includes even the innocent beasts and
the birds of heaven, yea, the fishes of the sea. When Godly vengeance
extends to brute animals, what will become of men?

<span id="xi.ii-p7"></span>But some one may here object and say, that it
is unworthy of God to be angry with miserable creatures, which deserve
no such treatment: for why should God be angry with fishes and beasts?
But an answer may be easily given: As beasts, and birds, and fishes,
and, in a word, all other things, have been created for the use of men,
it is no wonder that God should extend the tokens of his curse to all
creatures, above and below, when his purpose is to punish men. We seek,
indeed, for the most part, some vain comforts to delight us, or to
moderate our sorrows when God shows himself angry with us: but when God
curses innocent animals for our sake, we then dread the more, except,
indeed, we be under the influence of extreme stupor.

<span id="xi.ii-p8"></span>We now then understand why God here denounces
destruction on brute animals as well as on birds and fishes of the sea;
it is, that men may know themselves to be deprived of all his gifts; as
when a person, in order to expose a wicked man to shame, pulls down his
house and burns his whole furniture: so also does God do, who has
adorned the world with so much and such varied wealth for our sake, when
he reduces all things to a waste: He thereby shows how grievously
offended he is with us, and thus constrains us to become humble. This
then is the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="xi.iii"></span>

<span id="xi.iii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xi.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are at
this day as guilty before thee as the Israelites of old were, who were
so rebellious against thy Prophets, and that as thou hast often tried
sweetly to allure us to thyself without any success, and as we have not
hitherto ceased, by our continual obstinacy, to provoke thy wrath, — O
grant, that being moved at least by the warnings thou givest us, we may
prostrate ourselves before thy face, and not wait until thou puttest
forth thy hand to destroy us, but, on the contrary, strive to anticipate
thy judgment; and that being at the same time surely convinced that thou
art ready to be reconciled to us in Christ, we may flee to Him as our
Mediator; and that relying on his intercession, we may not doubt but
that thou art ready to give us pardon, until having at length put away
all sins, we come to that blessed state of glory which has been obtained
for us by the blood of thy Son. Amen.

<span id="xi.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.iv-p1"></span>Lecture Tenth

<span id="xi.v"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p1"></span><span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#004.md)<span id="xi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p2"></span>**4.** Yet let no man strive, nor reprove
another: for thy people *are* as they that strive with the priest.

<span id="xi.v-p3"></span>**4.** Caeterum, vir no objurget et non
corripiat virum: quia populus tuus tanquam objurgatores sacerdotis.
 <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)

<span id="xi.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xi.v-p6"></span><span id="xi.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p7"></span>The Prophet here deplores the extreme
wickedness of the people, that they would bear no admonitions, like
those who, being past hope, reject every advice, admit no physicians,
and dislike all remedies: and it is a proof of irreclaimable wickedness,
when men close their ears and harden their hearts against all salutary
counsels. Hence the Prophet intimates, that, together with their great
and many corruptions, there was such waywardness, that no one dared to
reprove the public vices.

<span id="xi.v-p8"></span>He adds this reason, *For the people are as
chiders of the priest*, or, *they really contend with the priest*: for
some take <span id="xi.v-p8.1"></span>כ, *caph,* in this place, not as
expressive of likeness, but as explaining and affirming what is said,
‘They altogether strive with the priest.’ But I prefer the former sense,
which is, that the Prophet calls all the people the censors of their
pastors: and we see that froward men become thus insolent when they are
reproved; for instantly such an objection as this is made by them, “Am I
to be treated like a child? Have I not attained sufficient knowledge to
understand how I ought to live?” We daily meet with many such men, who
proudly boast of their knowledge, as though they were superior to all
Prophets and teachers. And no doubt the ungodly make a show of wit and
acuteness in opposing sound doctrine: and then it appears that they have
learnt more than what one would have thought, — for what end? only that
they may contend with God.

<span id="xi.v-p9"></span>Let us now return to the Prophet’s words.
*But*, he says: <span id="xi.v-p9.1"></span>אך, *ak* is not to be taken
here as in many places for “verily:” but it denotes exception, “In the
meantime”. *But*, or, *in the meantime*, *let no one chide and reprove
another*. In a word, the Prophet complains, that while all kinds of
wickedness abounded among the people, there was no liberty to teach and
to admonish, but that all were so refractory, that they would not bear
to hear the word; and that as soon as any one touched their vices, there
were great doctors, as they say, ready to reply.

<span id="xi.v-p10"></span>And he enlarges on the subject by saying,
that they *were as chiders of the priest;* for he declares, that they
who, with impunity, conducted themselves so wantonly against God, were
not yet content in being so wayward as to repel all reproofs, but also
willfully rose up against their own teachers: and, as I have already
said, common observation sufficiently proves, that all profane despisers
of God are inflated with such confidence, that they dare to attack
others. Some conjecture, in this instance, that the priest was so base,
as to become liable to universal reprobation; but this conjecture is of
no weight, and frigid: for the Prophet here did not draw his pen against
a single individual, but, on the contrary, sharply reproved, as we have
said, the perverseness of the people, that no one would hearken to a
reprover. Let us then know that their diseases were then incurable, when
the people became hardened against salutary counsels, and could not bear
to be any more reproved. It follows —

<span id="xi.vi"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#005.md)<span id="xi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p2"></span>**5.** Therefore shalt thou fall in the day,
and the prophet also shall fall with thee in the night, and I will
destroy thy mother.

<span id="xi.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Et corrues interdin et corruet etiam
Propheta tecum nocte, et abolebo matrem tuam.

<span id="xi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.vi-p5"></span><span id="xi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vi-p6"></span>The copulative is to be taken here for an
illative, *Fall, therefore, shalt thou*. Here God denounces vengeance on
refractory men; as though he said, “As ye pay no regard to my authority,
when by words I reprove you, I will not now deal with you in this way;
but I will visit you for this contempt of my word.” And thus God is wont
to do: he first tries men, or he makes the trial, whether they can be
brought to repentance; he severely reproves them, and expostulates with
them: but having tried all means by words, he then comes to the last
remedy, by exercising his power; for, as it has been said, he deigns no
longer to contend with men. Hence the Lord, when he saw that his
Prophets were despised, and that their whole teaching was a matter of
sport, determined, as it appears from this passage, that the people
should shortly be destroyed.

<span id="xi.vi-p7"></span>Some render <span
id="xi.vi-p7.1"></span>היום, *eium*, to-day, and think that a short time
is denoted: but as the Prophet immediately subjoins, *And fall together
shall the Prophet with thee”,* <span id="xi.vi-p7.2"></span>לילה*, lile,
in the night,* I explain it thus, — that the people would be destroyed
together, and then that the Prophets, even those who, in a great
measure, brought such vengeance on the people, would be drawn also into
the same ruin. Fall shalt thou then in the day, and fall in the night
shall the Prophet, that is, “The same destruction shall at the same time
include all: but if ruin should not immediately take away the Prophets,
they shall not yet escape my hand; they shall follow in their turn.”
Hence the Prophet joins day and night together in a continued order; as
though he said, “I will destroy them all from the first to the last, and
no one shall rescue himself from punishment; and if they think that
those shall be unpunished who shall be later led to vengeance, they are
mistaken; for as the night follows the day, so also some will draw
others after them into the same ruin.” Yet at the same time the Prophet,
I doubt not, means by this metaphor, *the day*, that tranquil and joyous
time during which the people indulged their pride. He then means that
the punishment he predicted would be sudden: for except the ungodly see
the hand of God near, they ever, as it has been observed before, laugh
to scorn all threatening. God then says that he would punish the people
*in the day*, even at mid-day, while the sun was shining; and that when
the dusk should come, the Prophets would also follow in their turn.

<span id="xi.vi-p8"></span>It is evident enough that Hosea speaks not
here of God’s true and faithful ministers, but of impostors, who
deceived the people by their blandishments, as it is usually the case:
for as soon as any Prophet sincerely wished to discharge his office for
God, there came forth flatterers before the public, — “This man is too
rigid, and makes a wrong use of God’s name, by denouncing so grievous a
punishment; we are God’s people.” Such, then, were the Prophets, we must
remember, who are here referred to; for few were those who then
faithfully discharged their office; and there was a great number of
those who were indulgent to the people and to their vices.

<span id="xi.vi-p9"></span>It is afterwards added, *I will also consume
thy mother*. The term, *mother*, is to be taken here for the Church, on
account of which the Israelites, we know, were wont to exult against
God; as the Papists do at this day, who boast of their mother church,
which, as they say, is their shield of Ajax. When any one points out
their corruptions, they instantly flee to this protection, — “What! Are
we not the Church of God?” Hence when the Prophet saw that the
Israelites made a wrong use of this falsely-assumed title, he said, ‘I
will also destroy your mother,’ that is, “This your boasting, and the
dignity of Abraham’s race, and the sacred name of Church, will not
prevent God from taking dreadful vengeance on you all; for he will tear
from the roots and abolish the very name of your mother; he will
disperse that smoke of which you boast, inasmuch as you hide your crimes
under the title of Church.” It follows —

<span id="xi.vii"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#006.md)<span id="xi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p2"></span>**6.** My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge: because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject
thee, that thou shalt be no priest to me: seeing thou hast forgotten the
law of thy God, I will also forget thy children.

<span id="xi.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Preriit (perierunt *ad verbum: sed
quia* <span id="xi.vii-p3.1"></span>עם *estnomen collectivum, ideo
promiscuoe conjungitur utrique numero,* populus meus absque scientia:
quia tu scientiam repulisti, etiam rplellam te: ne sacerdotio fungaris
mihi: et quia oblitus es legis Dei tui, obliviscar filiorum tuorum ego
quoque.

<span id="xi.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.vii-p5"></span><span id="xi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.vii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet distinctly touches on the
idleness of the priests, whom the Lord, as it is well known, had set
over the people. For though it could not have availed to excuse the
people, or to extenuate their fault, that the priests were idle; yet the
Prophet justly inveighs against them for not having performed the duty
allotted to them by God. But what is said applies not to the priests
only; for God, at the same time, indirectly blames the voluntary
blindness of the people. For how came it, that pure instruction
prevailed not among the Israelites, except that the people especially
wished that it should not? Their ignorance, then, as they say, was
gross; as is the case with many ungodly men at this day, who not only
love darkness, but also draw it around them on every side, that they may
have some excuse for their ignorance.

<span id="xi.vii-p7"></span>God then does here, in the first place,
attack the priests, but he includes also the whole people; for teaching
prevailed not, as it ought to have done, among them. The Lord also
reproaches the Israelites for their ingratitude; for he had kindled
among them the light of celestial wisdom; inasmuch as the law, as it is
well known, must have been sufficient to direct men in the right way. It
was then as though God himself did shine forth from heaven, when he gave
them his law. How, then, did the Israelites perish through ignorance?
Even because they closed their eyes against the celestial light, because
they deigned not to become teachable, so as to learn the wisdom of the
eternal Father. We hence see that the guilt of the people, as it has
been said, is not here extenuated, but that God, on the contrary,
complains, that they had malignantly suppressed the teaching of the law:
for the law was fit to guide them. The people perished without
knowledge, because they would perish.

<span id="xi.vii-p8"></span>But the Prophet denounces vengeance on the
priests, as well as on the whole people, *Because knowledge hast thou
rejected*, he says, *I also will thee reject, so that the priesthood
thou shalt not discharge for me.* This is specifically addressed to the
priests: the Lord accuses them of having rejected knowledge. But
knowledge, as Malachi says, was to be sought from their lips, (<span
id="xi.vii-p8.1"></span>[Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007.md)<span
id="xi.vii-p8.1"></span>) and Moses also touches on the same point in
<span id="xi.vii-p8.2"></span>[De
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010.md)<span id="xi.vii-p8.2"></span>.
It was then an extreme wickedness in the priests, as though they wished
to subvert God’s sacred order, when they sought the honor and the
dignity of the office without the office itself: and such is the case
with the Papists of the present day; they are satisfied with its dignity
and its wealth. Mitred bishops are prelates, are chief priests; they
vauntingly boast that they are the heads of the Church, and would be
deemed equal with the Apostles: at the same time, who of them attends to
his office? nay, they think that it would be in a manner a disgrace to
give attention to their office and to God’s call.

<span id="xi.vii-p9"></span>We now then see what the Prophet meant by
saying, *Because thou hast knowledge rejected, I also will thee reject,
so that thou shalt not discharge for me the priesthood*. In a word, he
shows that the divorce, which the priests attempted to make, was absurd,
and contrary to the nature of things, that it was monstrous, and in
short impossible. Why? Because they wished to retain the title and its
wealth, they wished to be deemed prelates of the Church, without
knowledge: God allows not things joined together by a sacred knot to be
thus torn asunder. “Dost thou then,” he says, “take to thyself the
office without knowledge? Nay, as thou hast rejected knowledge, I will
also take to myself the honor of the priesthood, which I previously
conferred on thee.”

<span id="xi.vii-p10"></span>This is a remarkable passage, and by it we
can check the furious boasting of the Papists, when they haughtily force
upon us their hierarchy and the order, as they call it, of their clergy,
that is, of their corrupt dregs: for God declares by his word, that it
is impossible that there should be any priest without knowledge. And
further, he would not have priests to be endued with knowledge only, and
to be as it were mute; for he would have the treasure deposited with
them to be communicated to the whole Church. God then, in speaking of
sacerdotal knowledge, includes also preaching. Though one indeed be a
literate, as there have been some in our age among the bishops and
cardinals, — though then there be such he is not yet to be classed among
the learned; for, as it has been said, sacerdotal learning is the
treasure of the whole Church. When therefore a boast is made of the
priesthood, with no regard to the ministration of the word, it is a mere
mockery; for teacher and priest are, as they say, almost convertible
terms. We now perceive the meaning of the first clause.

<span id="xi.vii-p11"></span>It then follows, *Because thou hast
forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children*. Some
confine this latter clause to the priests, and think that it forms a
part of the same context: but when any one weighs more fully the
Prophet’s words, he will find that this refers to the body of the
people.

<span id="xi.vii-p12"></span>This Prophet is in his sentences often
concise, and so his transitions are various and obscure: now he speaks
in his own person, then he assumes the person of God; now he turns his
discourse to the people, then he speaks in the third person; now he
reproves the priests, then immediately he addresses the whole people.
There seemed to be first a common denunciation, ‘Thou shalt fall in the
day, the Prophet in the night shall follow, and your mother shall
perish.’ The Prophet now, I doubt not, confirms the same judgment in
other words: and, in the first place, he advances this proposition, that
the priests were idle, and that the people quenched the light of
celestial instruction; afterwards he denounces on the priests the
judgment they deserved, ‘I will cast thee away,’ he says, ‘from the
priesthood;’ now he comes to all the Israelites, and says, *Thou hast
forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children*. Now this
fault was doubtless what belonged to the whole people; there was no one
exempt from this sin; and this forgetfulness was fitly ascribed to the
whole people. For how it happened, that the priests had carelessly
shaken off from their shoulders the burden of teaching the people? Even
because the people were unwilling to have their ears annoyed: for the
ungodly complain that God’s servants are troublesome, when they daily
cry against their vices. Hence the people gladly entered into a truce
with their teachers, that they might not perform their office: thus the
oblivion of God’s law crept in.

<span id="xi.vii-p13"></span>As then the Prophet had denounced on the
priests their punishment, so he now assures the whole people that God
would bring a dreadful judgment on them all, that he would even blot out
the whole race of Abraham, *I will forget*, he says, *thy children*. Why
was this? The Lord had made a covenant with Abraham, which was to
continue, and to be confirmed to his posterity: they departed from the
true faith, they became spurious children; then God rightly testifies
here, that he had a just cause why he should no longer count this
degenerate people among the children of Abraham. How so? “For ye have
forgotten my law,” he says: “had you remembered the law, I would also
have kept my covenant with you: but I will no more remember my covenant,
for you have violated it. Your children, therefore, deserve not to be
under finch a covenant, inasmuch as ye are such a people.” It follows —

<span id="xi.viii"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p1"></span><span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#007.md)<span id="xi.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p2"></span>**7.** As they were increased, so they
sinned against me: *therefore* will I change their glory into shame.

<span id="xi.viii-p3"></span>**7.** Secundum multiplicari eorum, sic
peccaverunt mihi: gloriam eorum in ignominiam mutabo.

<span id="xi.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.viii-p5"></span><span id="xi.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.viii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet amplifies the wickedness
and impiety of the people, by adding this circumstance, that they the
more perversely wantoned against God, the more bountiful he was to them,
yea, when he poured upon them riches in full exuberance. Such a
complaint we have before noticed: but the Prophets, we know, did not
speak only once of the same thing; when they saw that they effected
nothing, that the contempt of God still prevailed, they found it
necessary to repeat often what they had previously said. Here then the
Prophet accuses the Israelites of having shamefully abused the
indulgence of God, of having allowed themselves greater liberty in
sinning, when God so kindly and liberally dealt with them.

<span id="xi.viii-p7"></span>Some confine this to the priests, and think
the meaning to be, that they sinned more against God since he increased
the Levitical tribe and added to their wealth: but the Prophet, I doubt
not, meant to include the whole people. He, indeed, in the last verse,
separated the crimes of the priests from those of the people, though in
the beginning he advanced a general propositions: he now returns to that
statement, which is, that all, from the highest to the lowest, acted
impiously and wickedly against God. Now we know that the Israelites had
increased in number as well as in wealth; for they were prosperous, as
it has been stated, under the second Jeroboam; and thought themselves
then extremely happy, because they were filled with every abundance.
Hence God shows now that they had become worse and less excusable, for
they were grown thus wanton, like a horse well-fed, when he kicks
against his own master, — a comparison which even Moses uses in his
song, (<span id="xi.viii-p7.1"></span>[De
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="xi.viii-p7.1"></span>..md)
We now see what the Prophet means. Hence, when he says <span
id="xi.viii-p7.2"></span>כרובם, *carubem, according to their
multiplying,* I explain this not simply of men nor of wealth, but of
every kind of blessing: for the Lord here, in a word, accuses the people
of ingratitude, because the more kind and liberal he was to them, the
more obstinately bent they were on sinning.

<span id="xi.viii-p8"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *Their glory will I
turn to shame*. He here denounces God’s judgment on proud men, which
they feared not: for men, we know, are blinded by prosperity. And it is
the worst kind of drunkenness, when we seem to ourselves to be happy;
for then we allow ourselves every thing that is contrary to God, and are
deaf to all instruction, and are, in short, wholly intractable. But the
Prophet says, *I will commute this glory into shame*, which means,
“There is no reason for them to trust in themselves, and foolishly to
impose on themselves, by fixing their eyes on their present splendor;
for it is in my power,” the Lord says, “to change their glory.” We then
see that the Prophet meant here to shake off from the Israelites their
vain confidence; for they were wont to set up against God their riches,
their glory, their power, their horses and chariots. “This is your
glorying; but in my hand and power is adversity and prosperity; yea,”
the Lord says, “on me alone depends the changing of glory into shame.”
But at the same time, the Prophet intimates, that it could not be that
God would thus prostitute his blessings to unworthy men as to swine: for
it is a kind of profanation, when men are thus proud against God, while
he bears with them, while he spares them. This combination then applies
to all who abuse God’s kindness; for the Lord intends not that his favor
should be thus profaned. It follows —

<span id="xi.ix"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p1"></span><span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008.md)<span id="xi.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p2"></span>**8.** They eat up the sin of my people, and
they set their heart on their iniquity.

<span id="xi.ix-p3"></span>**8.** Peccatum populi mei comedent et ad
iniquitatem eorum tollent animam ejus, (*ad verbum,* levabunt animam
ejus.)

<span id="xi.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.ix-p5"></span><span id="xi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p6"></span>This verse has given occasion to many
interpreters to think that all the particulars we have noticed ought to
be restricted to the priests alone: but there is no sufficient reason
for this. We have already said, that the Prophet is wont frequently to
pass from the people to the priests: but as a heavier guilt belonged to
the priests, he very often inveighs against them, as he does in this
place, *They eat*, he says, *the sin of my people, and lift up to their
iniquity his soul*, that is, ‘every one lifts up his own soul,’ or,
‘they lift up the soul of the sinner by iniquity;’ for the pronoun
applies to the priests as well as to the people. The number is changed:
for he says,<span id="xi.ix-p6.1"></span>יאכלו, *iacalu* and <span
id="xi.ix-p6.2"></span>ישאו *ishau,*  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) in the plural number, *They will eat the
sin,* and *will lift up,* *etc*., in the third person; and then *his
soul* it may be, their own; it is, however, a pronoun in the singular
number: hence a change of number is necessary. We are then at liberty to
choose  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) , whether the Prophet says
this of the people or of the priests: and as we have said, it may apply
to both, but in a different sense.

<span id="xi.ix-p11"></span>We may understand him as saying, that the
priests lifted up their souls to the iniquity of the people, because
they anxiously wished the people to be given to many vices, for they
hoped thereby to gain much prey, as the case is, when any one expects a
reward from robbers: he is glad to hear that they become rich, for he
considers their riches to be for his gain. So it was with the priests,
who gaped for lucre; they thought that they were going on well, when the
people brought many sacrifices. And this is usually the case, when the
doctrine of the law is adulterated, and when the ungodly think that this
alone remains for them, — to satisfy God with sacrifices, and similar
expiations. Then, if we apply the passage to the priests, the lifting up
of the soul is the lust for gain. But if we prefer to apply the words to
sinners themselves, the sense is, ‘Upon their iniquity they lift up
their soul,’ that is, the guilty raise up themselves by false comforts,
and extenuate their vices; or, by their own flatteries, bury and
entirely smother every remnant of God’s fear. Then, according to this
second sense, to lift up the soul is to deceive, and to take away all
doubts by vain comforts, or to remove every sorrow, and to erase every
guilt by a false notion.

<span id="xi.ix-p12"></span>I come now to the meaning of the whole.
Though the Prophet here accuses the priests, yet he involves, no doubt,
the whole people, and deservedly, in the same guilt: for how was it that
the priests expected gain from sacrifices? Even because the doctrine of
the law was subverted. God had instituted sacrifices for this end, that
whosoever sinned, being reminded of his guilt, might mourn for his sin,
and further, that by witnessing that sad spectacle, his conscience might
be more wounded: when he saw the innocent animal slain at the altar, he
ought to have dreaded God’s judgment. Besides, God also intended to
exercise the faith of all, in order that they might flee to the
expiation which was to be made by the promised Mediator. And at the same
time, the penalty which God then laid on sinners, ought to have been as
a bridle to restrain them. In a word, the sacrifices had, in every way,
this as their object, — to keep the people from being so ready or so
prone to sin. But what did the ungodly do? They even mocked God, and
thought that they had fully done their duty, when they offered an ox or
a lamb; and afterwards they freely indulged themselves in their sins.

<span id="xi.ix-p13"></span>So gross a folly has been even laughed to
scorn by heathen writers. Even Plato has so spoken of such sacrifices,
as to show that those who would by such trifles make a bargain with God,
are altogether ungodly: and certainly he so speaks in his second book on
the Commonwealth, as though he meant to describe the Papacy. For he
speaks of purgatory, he speaks of satisfactions; and every thing the
Papists of this day bring forward, Plato in that book distinctly sets
forth as being altogether sottish and absurd. But yet in all ages this
assurance has prevailed, that men have thought themselves delivered from
God’s hand, when they offered some sacrifice: it is, as they imagine, a
compensation.

<span id="xi.ix-p14"></span>Hence the Prophet now complains of this
perversion, *They eat*, he says, (for he speaks of a continued act,)
*the sins of my people, and* *to iniquity they lift up the heart of
each;* that is, When all sin, one after the other, each one is readily
absolved, because he brings a gift to the priests. It is the same thing
as though the Prophet said, “There is a collusion between them, between
the priests and the people.” How so? Because the priests were the
associates of robbers, and gladly seized on what was brought: and so
they carried on no war, as they ought to have done, with vices, but on
the contrary urged only the necessity of sacrifices: and it was enough,
if men brought things plentifully to the temple. The people also
themselves showed their contempt of God; for they imagined, that
provided they made satisfaction by their ceremonial performances, they
would be exempt from punishment. Thus then there was an ungodly compact
between the priests and the people: the Lord was mocked in the midst of
them. We now then understand the real meaning of the Prophet: and thus I
prefer the latter exposition as to ‘the lifting up of the soul,’ which
is, that the priests lifted up the soul of each, by relieving their
consciences, by soothing words of flattery, and by promising life, as
Ezekiel says, to souls doomed to die, (<span
id="xi.ix-p14.2"></span>[Eze
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#019)<span id="xi.ix-p14.2"></span>..md)
It now follows —

<span id="xi.ix-p15"></span> 

<span id="xi.x"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p1"></span><span id="xi.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#009.md)<span id="xi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p2"></span>**9.** And there shall be, like people, like
priest: and I will punish them for their ways, and reward them their
doings.

<span id="xi.x-p3"></span>**9.** Et erit, sicut populus sic erit
sacerdos: et visitabo super eum vias ejus et opera ejus rependam ci.

<span id="xi.x-p4"></span>**10.** For they shall eat, and not have
enough: they shall commit whoredom, and shall not increase: because they
have left off to take heed to the LORD.

<span id="xi.x-p5"></span>**10.** Comedent enim et non saturabuntur,
scortabuntur et non augescent (*vel,* crescent, *id est,*

<span id="xi.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.x-p7"></span><span id="xi.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.x-p8"></span>The Prophet here again denounces on both a
common punishment, as neither was free from guilt. *As the people*, he
says, *so shall be the priest*; that is “I will spare neither the one
nor the other; for the priest has abused the honor conferred on him; for
though divinely appointed over the Church for this purpose, to preserve
the people in piety and holy life, he has yet broken through and
violated every right principle: and then the people themselves wished to
have such teachers, that is, such as were mute. I will therefore now”
the Lord says, “inflict punishment on them all alike. As the people
then, so shall the priest be.”

<span id="xi.x-p9"></span>Some go farther, and say, that it means that
God would rob the priests of their honor, that they might differ nothing
from the people; which is indeed true: but then they think that the
Prophet threatens not others as well as the priests; which is not true.
For though God, when he punishes the priests and the people for the
contempt of his law, blots out the honor of the priesthood, and so
abolishes it as to produce an equality between the great and the
despised; yet the Prophet declares here, no doubt, that God would become
the vindicator of his law against other sinners as well as against the
priests. This subject expands wider than what they mean. The rest we
must defer till to-morrow.

<span id="xi.xi"></span>

<span id="xi.xi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xi.xi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that, since thou hast
hitherto so kindly invited us to thyself, and daily invites us, and
often interposes also thy threatening to rouse our inattention, and
since we have been inattentive to thy reproofs, as well as to thy
paternal kindness, — O grant, that we may not, to the last, proceed in
this our wickedness, and thus provoke the vengeance thou here denounces
on men past recovery; but that we may anticipate thy wrath by true
repentance, and be humbled under thy hand, yea, be thy word, that thou
mayest receive us into favor, and nourish us in thy paternal bosom,
through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="xi.xii"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p1"></span>Lecture Eleventh

<span id="xi.xii-p2"></span>One thing escaped me in yesterday’s lecture,
on which I shall now briefly touch. It may be asked why the Prophet
says, that the priest was to be robbed of his honour, who was not a true
nor a legitimate priest; for there was among the Israelites, we know, no
temple in which God was rightly worshipped. For though it was customary
with them to profess the name of the true God, yet we are aware that all
their pretenses were vain. Since the lord had chosen one sanctuary only
at Jerusalem, it hence follows, that all the priests among the people of
Israel were false. It could not then be that God had taken from them
their honor. But it is nothing new for God to punish the ungodly, by
taking from them what they seem to possess.

<span id="xi.xii-p3"></span>The case is the same this day as to the
Papacy; for they who vaunt themselves as being clergy and priests are
mere apes: (<span id="xi.xii-p3.1"></span>*merae larvae*) as, however,
they retain the title, what the Prophet threatened to the false priests
of his age may be justly said to them, that their shame shall be made
manifest, so that they shall cease to boast of their dignity, by which
they now deceive the simple and ignorant.

<span id="xi.xii-p4"></span>We now then understand the Prophet’s
meaning: his meaning is the same as when he said before, “I will draw
thee to the desert, and then the ephod shall cease, and the seraphim
shall cease.” There was, we know, no ephod which the Lord approved,
except that alone which the legitimate priest did wear: but as there was
emulation between the Israelites and the Jews, and as they who had
departed from the true and pure worship of God, did yet boast that they
worshipped the God of Abraham, the Lord here declares, that he would not
suffer them to lurk under such masks.

<span id="xi.xii-p5"></span><span id="xi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xii-p6"></span>I now return to that passage of the Prophet,
in which he says, *They shall eat and shall not be satisfied*, and
again, *They shall play the wanton and shall not increase; because
Jehovah have they left off to attend to*. The Prophet here again
proclaims the judgment which was nigh the Israelites. And first, he
says, *They shall eat and shall not be satisfied*; in which he alludes
to the last verse. For the priests gaped for gain, and their only care
was to satisfy their appetites. Since then their cupidity was
insatiable, which was also the cause why they conceded sinful liberty to
the people, he now says, *They shall eat and shall not be satisfied.*
The Prophet intimates further by these words, that men are not sustained
by plenty or abundance of provisions, but rather by the blessing of God:
for a person may devour much, yet the quantity, however large, may not
satisfy him; and this we find to be often the case as to a voracious
appetite; for in such an instance, the staff of bread is broken, that
is, the Lord takes away support from bread, so that much eating does not
satisfy. And this is the Prophet’s meaning, when he says, *They shall
eat and shall not be satisfied* The priests thought it a happy time with
them, when they gathered great booty from every quarter; God on the
contrary declares, that it would be empty and useless to them; for no
satisfying effect would follow: however much they might greedily swallow
up, they would not yet be satisfied.

<span id="xi.xii-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *They shall play the
wanton and shall not increase;* that is, “However much they might give
the reins to promiscuous lusts, I will not yet suffer them to propagate:
so far shall they be from increasing or generating an offspring by
lawful marriages, that were they everywhere to indulge in illicit
intercourse, they would still continue barren.” The Prophet here, in a
word, testifies that the ungodly are deceived, when they think that they
can obtain their wishes by wicked and unlawful means; for the Lord will
frustrate their desires. The avaricious think, when they have much, that
they are sufficiently defended against all want; and when penury presses
on all others, they think themselves beyond the reach of danger. But the
Lord derides this folly: “Gather, gather great heaps; but I will blow on
your riches, that they may vanish, or at least yield you no advantage.
So also strive to beget children; though one may marry ten wives, or
everywhere play the wanton, he shall still remain childless.” Thus we
see that a just punishment is inflicted on profane men, when they
indulge their own lusts: they indeed promise to themselves a happy
issue; but God, on the other hand, pronounces upon them his curse.

<span id="xi.xii-p8"></span>He then adds, *They have left Jehovah to
attend*, that is that they may not attend or serve him. Here the Prophet
points out the source and the chief cause of all evils, and that is,
because the Israelites had forsaken the true God and his worship. Though
they indeed retained the name of God, and were wont, even boldly, to set
up this plea against the Prophets, that they were the children of
Abraham, and the chosen of the supreme God, he yet says that they were
apostates. How so? Because whosoever keeps faith with God, keeps himself
also under the tuition of his word, and wanders not after his own
inventions; but the Israelites indulged themselves in any thing they
pleased. Since then it is certain that they had shaken off the yoke of
the law, it is no wonder that the Prophet says, that they had departed
from the Lord. But we ought to notice the confirmation of this truth,
that no one can continue to keep faith with God, except he observes his
word and remains under its tuition. Let us now proceed —

<span id="xi.xiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#011.md)<span id="xi.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Whoredom and wine and new wine take
away the heart.

<span id="xi.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Scortatio et vinum et mustum
auterent cor (*alli verunt,* occupant cor.)

<span id="xi.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiii-p6"></span>The verb <span id="xi.xiii-p6.1"></span>לקח
*lakech,* means to take away; and this sense is also admissible that
wine and wantonness take possession of the heart; but I take its simpler
meaning, to take away. But it is not a general truth as most imagine,
who regard it a proverbial saying, that wantonness and wine deprive men
of their right mind and understanding: on the contrary, it is to be
restricted, I doubt not, to the Israelites; as though the Prophet had
said, that they were without a right mind, and like brute animals,
because drunkenness and fornication had infatuated or fascinated them.
But we may take both in a metaphorical sense; as fornication may be
superstition, and so also drunkenness: yet it seems more suitable to the
context to consider, that the Prophet here reproaches the Israelites for
having petulantly cast aside every instruction through being too much
given to their pleasures and too much cloyed. Since then the Israelites
had been enriched with great plenty, God had given way to abominable
indulgences, the Prophet says, that they were without sense: and this is
commonly the case with such men. I will not therefore treat here more at
large of drunkenness and fornication.

<span id="xi.xiii-p7"></span>It is indeed true, that when any one
becomes addicted to wantonness, he loses both modesty and a right mind,
and also that wine is as it were poisonous, for it is, as one has said,
a mixed poison: and the earth, when it sees its own blood drank up
intemperately, takes its revenge on men. These things are true; but let
us see what the Prophet meant.

<span id="xi.xiii-p8"></span>Now, as I have said, he simply directs his
discourse to the Israelites, and says, that they were sottish and
senseless, because the Lord had dealt too liberally with them. For, as I
have said, the kingdom of Israel was then very opulent, and full of all
kinds of luxury. The Prophet then touches now distinctly on this very
thing: “How comes it that ye are now so senseless, that there is not a
particle of right understanding among you? Even because ye are given to
excesses, because there is among you too large an abundance of all good
things: hence it is, that all indulge their own lusts; and these take
away your heart.” In short, God means here that the Israelites abused
his blessings, and that excesses blinded them. This is the meaning. Let
us now go on —

<span id="xi.xiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#012.md)<span id="xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** My people ask counsel at their
stocks, and their staff declareth unto them: for the spirit of whoredoms
hath caused *them* to err, and they have gone a whoring from under their
God.

<span id="xi.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Populus meus in ligno suo interrogat
(*vel*, lignum suum sonsulit) et baculus ejus respondit ei (*ad verbum*,
respondebit; *sed significat actum continuum*:)quia spiritus
fornicationum decepit, et fornicati sunt a Deo suo (a subtus Deo suo,
*hoc est, ne amplius subjecti sint Deo vel pareant.*)

<span id="xi.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xi.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet calls here the Israelites the
people of God, not to honor them, but rather to increase their sin; for
the more heinous was the perfidy of the people, that having been chosen,
they had afterwards forsaken their heavenly Father. Hence *My people*:
there is here an implied comparison between all other nations and the
seed of Abraham, whom God had adopted; “This is, forsooth! the people
whom I designed to be sacred to myself, whom of all nations in the world
I have taken to myself: they are my heritage. Now this people, who ought
to be mine, consult their own wood, and their staff answers them!” We
hence see that it was a grievous and severe reprobation when the Lord
reminded them of the invaluable kindness with which he had favored the
children of Abraham.

<span id="xi.xiv-p7"></span>So at this day our guilt will be more
grievous, if we continue not in the pure worship of God, since God has
called us to himself and designed us to be his peculiar flock. The same
thing that the Prophet brought against the Israelites may be also
brought against the Papists; for as soon as infants are born among them,
the Lord signs them with the sacred symbol of baptism; they are
therefore in some sense (<span id="xi.xiv-p7.1"></span>*aliqua ex
parte*) the people of God. We see, at the same time, how gross and
abominable are the superstitions which prevail among them: there are
none more stupid than they are. Even the Turks and the Saracenes are
wise when compared with them. How great, then, and how shameful is this
baseness, that the Papists, who boast themselves to be the people of
God, should go astray after their own mad follies!

<span id="xi.xiv-p8"></span>But the Prophet says the Israelites
“consulted” their own wood, or inquired of wood. He no doubt accuses
them here of having transferred the glory of the only true God to their
own idols, or fictitious gods. They consult, he says, their own wood,
and the *staff* answers them. He seems, in the second clauses to allude
to the blind: as when a blind man asks his staff, so he says the
Israelites asked counsel of their wood and staff. Some think that
superstitions then practiced are here pointed out. The augurs we know
used a staff; and it is probable that diviners in the East employed also
a staff, or some such thing, in performing their incantations.  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) Others explain these words allegorically,
as though wood was false religion, and staff the ungodly prophets. But I
am inclined to hold to simplicity. It then seems to me more probable,
that the Israelites, as I have already stated, are here condemned for
consulting wood or dead idols, instead of the only true God; and that it
was the same thing as if a blind man was to ask counsel of his staff,
though the staff be without any reason or sense. A staff is indeed
useful, but for a different purpose. And thus the Prophet not only
contemptuously, but also ironically, exposes to scorn the folly of those
who consult their gods of wood and stone; for to do so will no more
avail them than if one had a staff for his counselor.

<span id="xi.xiv-p10"></span>He then subjoins, *for the spirit of
fornication has deceived them* Here again the Prophet aggravates their
guilt, inasmuch as no common blame was to be ascribed to the Israelites;
for they were, he says, wholly given to fornication *The spirit*, then,
*of fornication deceived them*: it was the same as if one inflamed with
lust ran headlong into evil; as we see to be the case with brutal men
when carried away by a blind and shameful passion; for then every
distinction between right and wrong disappears from their eyes — no
choice is made, no shame is felt. As then such heat of lust is wont
sometimes to seize men, that they distinguish nothing, so the Prophet
says with the view of shaming the people the more, that they were like
those given to fornication, who no longer exercise any judgment, who are
restrained by no shame. *The spirit*, then, *of fornication has deceived
them:* but as this similitude often meets us, I shall not dwell upon it.

<span id="xi.xiv-p11"></span>*They have played the wanton*, he says,
*that they may not obey the Lord.* He does not say simply, ‘from their
God,’ but ‘from under’ <span id="xi.xiv-p11.1"></span>מתחת, *metachet,*
*They have* then *played the wanton, that they might no more obey God,*
or *continue under his government*. We may hence learn what is our
spiritual chastity, even when God rules us by his word, when we go not
here and there and rashly follow our own superstitions. When we abide
then under the government of our God, and with fixed eyes look on him,
then we chastely preserve our faithfulness to him. But when we follow
idols, we then play the wanton and depart from God. Let us now proceed —

<span id="xi.xv"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013.md)<span id="xi.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p2"></span>**13.** They sacrifice upon the tops of the
mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and
elms, because the shadow thereof *is* good: therefore your daughters
shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery.

<span id="xi.xv-p3"></span>**13.** Super capita montium sacrificabunt
(id est, sacrificant) et super colles adolent suffitum, sub quercu et
sub plantano et sub tilia (alii <span id="xi.xv-p3.1"></span>אלה
vertunt, Terebinthum: sed eho non laboro,) quia bona umbra ejus:
propterea filiae vestrae scortabuntur, et nurus vestra adulterae erunt.

<span id="xi.xv-p4"></span>**14.** I will not punish your daughters when
they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery: for
themselves are separated with whores, and they sacrifice with harlots:
therefore the people *that* doth not understand shall fall.

<span id="xi.xv-p5"></span>**14.** Non visitabo super filias vestras,
quia scortatae sint, et super nurus vestra, quia adulteria commiserint:
nam ipsi cum meretricibus dividunt se (separant se cum meretricibus,) et
cum scortis sacrificant: et populus non intelligens (non intelligit, ad
verbum; sed debet verti, Populus qui non intelligit) corruet (alii
vertunt, erit perversus, <span id="xi.xv-p5.1"></span>לבט.)

<span id="xi.xv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xi.xv-p7"></span><span id="xi.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p8"></span>The Prophet shows here more clearly what was
the fornication for which he had before condemned the people, — that
they worshipped God under trees and on high places. This then is
explanatory, for the Prophet defines what he before understood by the
word, fornication; and this explanation was especially useful, nay,
necessary. For men, we know, will not easily give way, particularly when
they can adduce some color for their sins, as is the case with the
superstitious: when the Lord condemns their perverted and vicious modes
of worship, they instantly cry out, and boldly contend and say, “What!
is this to be counted fornication, when we worship God?” For whatever
they do from inconsiderate zeal is, they think, free from every blame.
So the Papists of this day fix it as a matter beyond dispute that all
their modes of worship are approved by God: for though nothing is
grounded on his word, yet good intention (as they say) is to them more
than a sufficient excuse. Hence they dare proudly to clamour against
God, whenever he condemns their corruptions and abuses. Such presumption
has doubtless prevailed from the beginning.

<span id="xi.xv-p9"></span>The Prophet, therefore, deemed it needful
openly and distinctly to show to the Israelites, that though they
thought themselves to be worshipping God with pious zeal and good
intention, they were yet committing fornication. “It is fornication,” he
says, “when ye sacrifice under trees.” “What! has it not ever been a
commendable service to offer sacrifices and to burn incense to God?”
Such being the design of the Israelites, what was the reason that God
was so angry with them? We may suppose them to have fallen into a
mistake; yet why did not God bear with this foolish intention, when it
was covered, as it has been stated, with honest and specious zeal? But
God here sharply reproves the Israelites, however much they pretended a
great zeal, and however much they covered their superstitions with the
false title of God’s worship: “It is nothing else,” he says, “but
fornication.”

<span id="xi.xv-p10"></span>*On tops of mountains*, he says, *they
sacrifice, and on hills they burn incense, under the oak and the poplar
and the teil-tree,* *etc*. It seemed apparently a laudable thing in the
Israelites to build altars in many places; for frequent attendance at
the temples might have stirred them up the more in God’s worship. Such
is the plea of the Papists for filling their temples with pictures; they
say, “We are everywhere reminded of God wherever we turn our eyes; and
this is very profitable.” So also it might have seemed to the Israelites
a pious work, to set up God’s worship on hills and on tops of mountains
and under every tall tree. But God repudiated the whole; he would not be
in this manner worshipped: nay, we see that he was grievously
displeased. He says, that the faith pledged to him was thus violated; he
says, that the people basely committed fornication. Though the Prophet’s
doctrine is at this day by no means plausible in the world, so that
hardly one in ten embraces it; we shall yet contend in vain with the
Spirit of God: nothing then is better than to hear our judge; and he
pronounces all fictitious modes of worship, however much adorned by a
specious guise, to be adulteries and whoredoms.

<span id="xi.xv-p11"></span>And we hence learn that good intention, with
which the Papists so much please themselves, is the mother of all
wantonness and of all filthiness. How so? Because it is a high offense
against heaven to depart from the word of the Lord: for God had
commanded sacrifices and incense to be nowhere offered to him but at
Jerusalem. The Israelites transgressed this command. But obedience to
God, as it is said in <span id="xi.xv-p11.1"></span>[1 Samuel
15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#000.md)<span id="xi.xv-p11.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) is of more value with him than all
sacrifices.

<span id="xi.xv-p13"></span>The Prophet also distinctly excludes a
device in which the ungodly and hypocrites take great delight: *good,*
he says, *was its shade*; that is, they pleased themselves with such
devices. So Paul says that there is a show of wisdom in the inventions
and ordinances of men, (<span id="xi.xv-p13.1"></span>[Col
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#023)<span id="xi.xv-p13.1"></span>..md)
Hence, when men undertake voluntary acts of worship, — which the Greeks
call <span id="xi.xv-p13.2"></span>εθελοθρησκείας superstitions, being
nothing else than will-worship, — when men undertake this or that to do
honor to God, there appears to them a show of wisdom, but before God it
is abomination only. At this practice the Prophet evidently glances,
when he says that the shade of the poplar, or of the oak, or of
teil-tree, was good; for the ungodly and the hypocrites imagined their
worship to be approved of God, and that they surpassed the Jews, who
worshipped God only in one place: “Our land is full of altars, and
memorials of God present themselves everywhere.” But when they thought
that they had gained the highest glory by their many altars, the Prophet
says, that the shade indeed was good, but that it only pleased wantons,
who would not acknowledge their baseness.

<span id="xi.xv-p14"></span>He afterwards adds, *Therefore your
daughters shall play the wanton, and your daughters-in-law shall become
adulteresses: I will not visit your daughters and daughters-in-law* Some
explain this passage as though the Prophet said, “While the parents were
absent, their daughters and daughters-in-law played the wanton.” The
case is the same at this day; for there is no greater liberty in
licentiousness than what prevails during vowed pilgrimages: for when any
one wishes to indulge freely in wantonness, she makes a vow to undertake
a pilgrimage: an adulterer is ready at hand who offers himself a
companion. And again, when the husband is so foolish as to run here and
there, he at the same time gives to his wife the opportunity of being
licentious. And we know further, that when many women meet at unusual
hours in churches, and have their private masses, there are there hidden
corners, where they perpetrate all kinds of licentiousness. We know,
indeed, that this is very common. But the Prophet’s meaning is another:
for God here denounces the punishment of which Paul speaks in the Romans
 <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) when he says, ‘As men have
transferred the glory of God to dead things, so God also gave them up to
a reprobate mind,’ that they might discern nothing, and abandon
themselves to every thing shameful, and even prostitute their own
bodies.

<span id="xi.xv-p16"></span>Let us then know, that when just and due
honor is not rendered to God, this vengeance deservedly follows, that
men become covered with infamy. Why so? Because nothing is more
equitable than that God should vindicate his own glory, when men corrupt
and adulterate it: for why should then any honor remain to them? And
why, on the contrary, should not God sink them at once in some extreme
baseness? Let us then know, that this is a just punishment, when
adulteries prevail, and when vagrant lusts promiscuously follow.

<span id="xi.xv-p17"></span><span id="xi.xv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p18"></span>He then who worships not God, shall have at
home an adulterous wife, and filthy strumpets as his daughters, boldly
playing the wanton, and he shall have also adulterous daughters-in-law:
not that the Prophet speaks only of what would take place; but he shows
that such would be the vengeance that God would take: ‘Your daughters
therefore shall play the wanton, and your daughters-in-law shall be
adulteresses;’ and *I will not punish your daughters and your
daughters-in-law;* that is, “I will not correct them for their
scandalous conduct; for I wish them to be exposed to infamy.” For this
truth must ever stand firm,

<span id="xi.xv-p19"></span>‘Him who honors me, I will honor: and him
who despises my name, I will make contemptible and ignominious,’  
(<span id="xi.xv-p19.2"></span>[1Sa
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)<span id="xi.xv-p19.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.xv-p20"></span>God then declares that he will not visit
these crimes, because he designed in this way to punish the ungodly, by
whom his own worship had been corrupted.

<span id="xi.xv-p21"></span>He says, *Because they with strumpets
separate themselves*. Some explain this verb <span
id="xi.xv-p21.1"></span>פדר, *pered,* as meaning, “They divide husbands
from their wives:” but the Prophet, no doubt, means, that they separated
themselves from God, in the same manner as a wife does, when she leaves
her husband and gives herself up to an adulterer. The Prophet then uses
the word allegorically, or at least metaphorically: and a reason is
given, which they do not understand who take this passage as referring
literally to adulteries; and their mistake is sufficiently proved to be
so by the next clause, ‘and with strumpets they sacrifice.’ The
separation then of which he speaks is this, that they sacrificed with
strumpets; which they could not do without violating their faith pledged
to God. We now apprehend the Prophet’s real meaning: ‘*I will not
punish,*’ he says, ‘wantonness and adulteries in your families.’ Why?
“Because I would have you to be made infamous, for ye have first played
the wanton.”

<span id="xi.xv-p22"></span>But there is a change of person; and this
ought to be observed: for he ought to have carried on his discourse
throughout in the second person, and to have said, “Because *ye* have
separated with strumpets, and accompany harlots;” this is the way in
which he ought to have spoken: but through excess, as it were, of
indignation, he makes a change in his address, ‘They,’ he says, ‘have
played the wanton,’ as though he deemed them unworthy of being spoken
to. They have then played the wanton with strumpets. By “strumpets”, he
doubtless understands the corruptions by which God’s worship had been
perverted, even through wantonness: “they sacrifice”, he says, “with
strumpets”, that is, they forsake the true God, and resort to whatever
pollutions they please; and this is to play the wanton, as when a
husband, leaving his wife, or when a wife, leaving her husband, abandon
themselves to filthy lust. But it is nothing strange or unwonted for
sins to be punished by other sins. What Paul teaches ought especially to
be borne in mind, that God, as the avenger of his own glory, gives men
up to a reprobate mind, and suffers them to be covered with many most
disgraceful things; for he cannot bear with them, when they turn his
glory to shame and his truth to a lie.

<span id="xi.xv-p23"></span>He afterwards adds, *And the people, not
understanding, shall stumble*. They who take the verb <span
id="xi.xv-p23.1"></span>לבט, *labeth,* as meaning, “to be perverted,”
understand it here in the sense of being “perplexed:” nor is this sense
inappropriate. *The people* then *shall not understand and be
perplexed;* that is, They shall not know the right way. But the word
means also “to stumble,” and still oftener “to fall;” and since this is
the more received sense, I am disposed to embrace it: *The people* then,
*not understanding, shall stumble*

<span id="xi.xv-p24"></span>The Prophet here teaches, that the pretence
of ignorance is of no weight before God, though hypocrites are wont to
flee to this at last. When they find themselves without any excuse they
run to this asylum, — “But I thought that I was doing right; I am
deceived: but be it so, it is a pardonable mistake.” The Prophet here
declares these excuses to be vain and fallacious; for the people, who
understand not, shall stumble and that deservedly: for how came this
ignorance to be in the people of Israel, but that they, as it has been
before said, willfully closed their eyes against the light? When,
therefore, men thus willfully determine to be blind, it is no wonder
that the Lord delivers them up to final destruction. But if they now
flatter themselves by pretending, as I have already said, a mistake, the
Lord will shake off this false confidence, and does now shake it off by
his word. What then ought we to do? To learn knowledge from his word;
for this is our wisdom and our understanding, as Moses says, in the
fourth chapter of Deuteronomy.  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md)

<span id="xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="xi.xvi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xi.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as we are
so disposed and inclined to all kinds of errors, to so many and so
various forms of superstitions, and as Satan also ceases not to lay in
wait for us, and spreads before us his many snares, — O grant, that we
may be so preserved in obedience to thee by the teaching of thy word,
that we may never turn here and there, either to the right hand or to
the left, but continue in that pure worship, which thou hast prescribed,
so that we may plainly testify that thou art indeed our Father by
continuing under the protection of thy only-begotten Son, whom thou hast
given to be our pastor and ruler to the end. Amen.

<span id="xi.xvi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.xvii"></span>

<span id="xi.xvii-p1"></span>Lecture Twelfth

<span id="xi.xviii"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p1"></span><span id="xi.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015.md)<span id="xi.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p2"></span>**15.** Though thou, Israel, play the
harlot, *yet* let not Judah offend; and come not ye unto Gilgal, neither
go ye up to Bethaven, nor swear, The Lord liveth.

<span id="xi.xviii-p3"></span>**15.** Si scortaris tu Israel, ne
offendat Jehudah; ne veniatis in Gilgal, et me ascendatis Beth-aven, et
ne juretis, Vivit Jehova.

<span id="xi.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xi.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet here complains that Judah also
was infected with superstitions, though the Lord had hitherto
wonderfully kept them from pollutions of this kind. He compares Israel
with Judah, as though he said, “It is no wonder that Israel plays the
wanton; they had for a long time shaken off the yoke; their defection is
well known: but it is not to be endured, that Judah also should begin to
fall away into the same abominations.” We now then perceive the object
of the comparison. From the time that Jeroboam led after him the ten
tribes, the worship of God, we know, was corrupted; for the Israelites
were forbidden to ascend to Jerusalem, and to offer sacrifices there to
God according to the law. Altars were at the same time built, which were
nothing but perversions of divine worship. This state of things had now
continued for many years. The Prophet therefore says, that Israel was
like a filthy strumpet, void of all shame; nor was this to be wondered
at, for they had cast away the fear of God: but that Judah also should
forsake God’s pure worship as well as Israel, — this the Prophet
deplores, *If then thou Israel playest the wanton, let not Judah at
least offend*

<span id="xi.xviii-p7"></span>We here see first, how difficult it is for
those to continue untouched without any stain, who come in contact with
pollutions and defilements. This is the case with any one that is living
among Papists; he can hardly keep himself entire for the Lord; for
vicinity, as we find, brings contagion. The Israelites were separated
from the Jews, and yet we see that the Jews were corrupted by their
diseases and vices. There is, indeed, nothing we are so disposed to do
as to forsake true religion; inasmuch as there is naturally in us a
perverse lust for mixing with it some false and ungodly forms of
worship; and every one in this respect is a teacher to himself: what
then is likely to take place, when Satan on the other hand stimulates
us? Let all then who are neighbors to idolaters beware, lest they
contract any of their pollutions.

<span id="xi.xviii-p8"></span>We further see, that the guilt of those
who have been rightly taught is not to be extenuated when they associate
with the blind and the unbelieving. Though the Israelites boasted of the
name of God, they were yet then alienated from pure doctrine, and had
been long sunk in the darkness of errors. There was no religion among
them; nay, they had hardly a single pure spark of divine light. The
Prophet now brings this charge against the Jews, that they differed not
from the Israelites, and yet God had to that time carried before them
the torch of light; for he suffered not sound doctrine to be
extinguished at Jerusalem, nor throughout the whole of Judea. The Jews,
by not profiting through this singular kindness of God, were doubly
guilty. This is the reason why the Prophet now says, *Though Israel is
become wanton, yet let not Judah offend*

<span id="xi.xviii-p9"></span>*Come ye not to Gilgal*, he says, *and
ascend not into Beth- aven*. Here again he points out the superstitions
by which the Israelites had vitiated the pure worship of God; they had
built altars for themselves in Bethel and Gilgal, where they pretended
to worship God.

<span id="xi.xviii-p10"></span>Gilgal, we know, was a celebrated place;
for after passing through Jordan, they built there a pillar as a
memorial of that miracle; and the people no doubt ever remembered so
remarkable an instance of divine favor: and the place itself retained
among the people its fame and honorable distinction. This in itself
deserved no blame: but as men commonly pervert by abuse every good
thing, so Jeroboam, or one of his successors, built a temple in Gilgal;
for the minds almost of all were already possessed with some reverence
for the place. Had there been no distinction belonging to the place, he
could not have so easily inveigled the minds of the people; but as a
notion already prevailed among them that the place was holy on account
of the miraculous passing over of the people, Jeroboam found it easier
to introduce there his perverted worship: for when one imagines that the
place itself pleases God, he is already captivated by his own
deceptions. The same also must be said of Bethel: its name was given it,
we know, by the holy father Jacob, because God appeared there to him.

<span id="xi.xviii-p11"></span>‘Terrible,’ he said, ‘is this place; it
is the gate of heaven,’  
(<span id="xi.xviii-p11.2"></span>[Ge
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017.md)<span
id="xi.xviii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="xi.xviii-p12"></span>He hence called it Bethel, which means
the house of God. Since Jacob sacrificed there to God, posterity thought
this still allowable: for hypocrites weigh not what God enjoins, but
catch only at the Fathers’ examples, and follow as their rule whatever
they hear to have been done by the Fathers.

<span id="xi.xviii-p13"></span>As then foolish men are content with bare
examples, and attend not to what God requires, so the Prophet distinctly
inveighs here against both places, even Bethel and Gilgal. “*Come not”,*
he says, *to Gilgal, and ascend not into Beth-aven* But we must observe
the change of name made by the Prophet; for he calls not the place by
its honorable name, Bethel, but calls it the house of iniquity. It is
indeed true that God revealed himself there to his servant Jacob; but he
intended not the place to be permanently fixed for himself, he intended
not that there should be a perpetual altar there: the vision was only
for a time. Had the people been confirmed in their faith, whenever the
name of the place was heard, it would have been a commendable thing; but
they departed from the true faith, for they despised the sure command of
God, and preferred what had been done by an individual, and were indeed
influenced by a foolish zeal. It is no wonder then that the Prophet
turns praise into blame, and allows not the place to be, as formerly,
the House of God, but the house of iniquity. We now see the Prophet’s
real meaning.

<span id="xi.xviii-p14"></span>I return to the reproof he gives to the
Jews: he condemns them for leaving the legitimate altar and running to
profane places, and coveting those strange modes of worship which had
been invented by the will or fancy of men. “What have you to do,” he
says, “with Gilgal or Bethel? Has not God appointed a sanctuary for you
at Jerusalem? Why do ye not worship there, where he himself invites
you?” We hence see that a comparison is to be understood here between
Gilgal and Bethel on the one hand, and the temple, built by God’s
command on mount Zion, in Jerusalem, on the other. Moreover, this
reproof applies to many in our day. So to those who sagaciously consider
the state of things in our age, the Papists appear to be like the
Israelites; for their apostasy is notorious enough: there is nothing
sound among them; the whole of their religion is rotten; every thing is
depraved. But as the Lord has chosen us peculiarly to himself, we must
beware, lest they should draw us to themselves, and entangle us: for, as
we have said, we must ever fear contagion; inasmuch as nothing is more
easy than to become infected with their vices, since our nature is to
vices ever inclined.

<span id="xi.xviii-p15"></span>We are further reminded how foolish and
frivolous is the excuse of those who, being satisfied with the examples
of the Fathers, pass by the word of God, and think themselves released
from every command, when they follow the holy Fathers. Jacob was indeed,
among others, worthy of imitation; and yet we learn from this place,
that the pretence that his posterity made for worshipping God in Bethel
was of no avail. Let us then know that we cannot be certain of being
right, except when we obey the Lord’s command, and attempt nothing
according to men’s fancy, but follow only what he bids. It must also be
observed, that a fault is not extenuated when things, now perverted,
have proceeded-from a good and approved origin. As for instance the
Papists, when their superstitions are condemned, ever set up this
shield, “O! this has arisen from a good source.” But what sort of thing
is it? If indeed we judge of it by what it is now, we clearly see it to
be an impious abomination, which they excuse by the plea that it had a
good and holy beginning.

<span id="xi.xviii-p16"></span>Thus in baptism we see how various and
how many deprivations they have mixed together. Baptism has indeed its
origin in the institution of Christ: but no permission has been given to
men to deface it by so many additions. The origin then of baptism
affords the Papists no excuse, but on the contrary renders double their
sin; for they have, by a profane audacity, contaminated what the Son of
God has appointed. But there is in their mass a much greater
abomination: for the mass, as we know, is in no respect the same with
the holy supper of our Lord. There are at least some things remaining in
baptism; but the mass is in nothing like Christ’s holy supper: and yet
the Papists boast that the mass is the supper. Be it so, that it had
crept in, and that through the craft of Satan, and also through the
wickedness or depravity of men: but whatever may have been its
beginning, it does not wipe away the extreme infamy that belongs to the
mass: for, as it is well known, they abolish by it the only true
sacrifice of Christ; they ascribe to their own devices the expiation
which was made by the death of the Son of God. And here we have not only
to contend with the Papists, but also with those wicked triflers, who
proudly call themselves Nicodemians. For these indeed deny that they
come to the mass, because they have any regard for the Papistic figment;
but because they say that there is set forth a commemoration of Christ’s
supper and of his death. Since Bethel was formerly turned into
Beth-aven, what else at this day is the mass? Let us then ever take
heed, that whatever the Lord has instituted may remain in its own
purity, and not degenerate; otherwise we shall be guilty, as it has been
said, of the impious audacity of those who have changed the truth into a
lie. We now understand the design of what the Prophet teaches, and to
what purposes it may be applied.

<span id="xi.xviii-p17"></span>He at last subjoins, *And swear not,
Jehovah liveth* The Prophet seems here to condemn what in itself was
right: for to swear is to profess religion, and to testify our
profession of it; particularly when men swear honestly. But as this
formula, which the Prophet mentions, was faultless, why did God forbid
to swear by his name, and even in a holy manner? Because he would reign
alone, and could not bear to be connected with idols; for

<span id="xi.xviii-p18"></span>“what concord,’ says Paul, ‘has Christ
with Belial? How can light agree with darkness?’ (<span
id="xi.xviii-p18.1"></span>[2Co
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#015.md)<span
id="xi.xviii-p18.1"></span>:)

<span id="xi.xviii-p19"></span>so God would allow of no concord with
idols. This is expressed more fully by another Prophet, Zephaniah, when
he says,

<span id="xi.xviii-p20"></span>‘I will destroy those who swear by the
living God,  
and swear by their king,’ (<span id="xi.xviii-p20.2"></span>[Zep
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005)<span id="xi.xviii-p20.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.xviii-p21"></span>God indeed expressly commands the
faithful to swear by his name alone in <span
id="xi.xviii-p21.1"></span>[Deuteronomy
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#000.md)<span id="xi.xviii-p21.1"></span>
 <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) and in other places: and further,
when the true profession of religion is referred to, this formula is
laid down,

<span id="xi.xviii-p23"></span>‘They shall swear, The Lord liveth,’
(<span id="xi.xviii-p23.1"></span>[Jer
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002)<span id="xi.xviii-p23.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xi.xviii-p24"></span>But when men associated the name of God
with their own perverted devices, it was by no means to be endured. The
Prophet then now condemns this perfidy, *Swear not, Jehovah liveth;* as
though he said, “How dare these men take God’s name, when they abandon
themselves to idols? for God allows his name only to his own people.”
The faithful indeed take God’s name in oaths as it were by his leave.
Except the Lord had granted this right, it would have certainly been a
sacrilege. But we borrow God’s name by his permission: and it is right
to do so, when we keep faith with him, when we continue in his service;
but when we worship false gods, then we have nothing to do with him, and
he takes away the privilege which he has given us. Then he says, ‘Ye
shall not henceforth blend the name of the only true God with idols.’
For this he cannot endure, as he declares also in Ezekial,

<span id="xi.xviii-p25"></span>Go ye, serve your idols; I reject all
your worship.’  
\[<span id="xi.xviii-p25.2"></span>[Eze
20:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#039.md)<span
id="xi.xviii-p25.2"></span>\]

<span id="xi.xviii-p26"></span>The Lord was thus grievously offended,
even when sacrifices were offered to him. Why so? Because it was a kind
of pollution, when the Jews professed to worship him, and then went
after their ungodly superstitions. We now then perceive the meaning of
this verse. It follows —

<span id="xi.xix"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p1"></span><span id="xi.xix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016.md)<span id="xi.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p2"></span>**16.** For Israel slideth back as a
backsliding heifer: now the Lord will feed them as a lamb in a large
place.

<span id="xi.xix-p3"></span>**16.** Quia sicut juvenca indomita,
indomitus Israel: nunc pascet Jehova quasi agnum tenerum (nam <span
id="xi.xix-p3.1"></span>כבש *proprie significat*, Agnum tenerum; *hoc
est, qui adhuc est anniculus:* <span id="xi.xix-p3.2"></span>איל *autem
vocant arietem qui annum unum excessit*) in loco spatioso.

<span id="xi.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xix-p5"></span><span id="xi.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xix-p6"></span>The Prophet compares Israel here to an
untamable heifer. Some render it, “A straying heifer”, and we may render
it, “A wanton heifer.” But to others a defection seems to have been more
especially intended, because they had receded or departed from God: but
this comparison is not so apposite. They render it, “As a backsliding,”
or “receding heifer:” but I prefer to view the word as meaning, one that
is petulant or lascivious: and the punishment which is subjoined, *The
Lord will now feed them as a tender lamb in a spacious place,* best
agrees with this view, as we shall immediately see.

<span id="xi.xix-p7"></span>It must, in the first place, be understood,
that Israel is compared to a heifer, and indeed to one that is wanton,
which cannot remain quiet in the stall nor be accustomed to the yoke: it
is hence subjoined, *The Lord will now feed them as a lamb in a spacious
place* The meaning of this clause may be twofold; the first is, that the
Lord would leave them in their luxuries to gorge themselves according to
their lust, and to indulge themselves in their gormandizing; and it is a
dreadful punishment, when the Lord allays not the intemperateness of
men, but suffers them to wanton without any limits or moderation. Hence
some give this meaning to the passage, *God will now feed them as a
lamb*, that is, like a sheep void of understanding, and in a large
place, even in a most fruitful field, capable of supplying food to
satiety. But it seems to me that the Prophet meant another thing, even
this, that the Lord would so scatter Israel, that they might be as a
lamb in a spacious place. It is what is peculiar to sheep, we know, that
they continue under the shepherd’s care: and a sheep, when driven into
solitude, shows itself, by its bleating, to be timid, and to be as it
were seeking its shepherd and its flock. In short, a sheep is not a
solitary animal; and it is almost a part of their food to sheep and
lambs to feed together, and also under the eye of him under whose care
they are. Now there seems to be here a most striking change of figure:
*They are*, says the Prophet, *like unnamable heifers*, for they are so
wanton that no field can satisfy their wantonness, as when a heifer
would occupy the whole land. “Such then,” he says, “and so outrageous is
the disobedience of this people, that they can no longer endure, except
a spacious place be given to each of them. I will therefore give them a
spacious place: but for this end, that each of them may be like a lamb,
who looks around and sees no flock to which it may join itself.”

<span id="xi.xix-p8"></span>This happened when the land was stripped of
its inhabitants; for then a small number only dwelt in it. Four tribes,
as stated before, were first drawn away; and then they began to be like
lambs in a spacious place; for God terrified them with the dread of
enemies. The remaining part of the people was afterwards either
dispersed or led into exile. They were, when in exile, like lambs, and
those in a wide place. For though they lived in cottages, and their
condition was in every way confined, yet they were in a place like the
desert; for one hardly dared look on another, and waste and solitude met
their eyes wherever they turned them. We see then what the Prophet meant
by saying, *They are like an untamable* or *a wanton* *heifer:* “I will
tame them, and make them like lambs; and when scattered, they will fear
as in a wilderness, for there will be no flock to which they can come.”
Let us proceed —

<span id="xi.xx"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p1"></span><span id="xi.xx-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#017.md)<span id="xi.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p2"></span>**17.** Ephraim *is* joined to idols: let him
alone.

<span id="xi.xx-p3"></span>**17.** Adjunxit se (*vel*, associavit)
idolis Ephraim: dimitte eum.

<span id="xi.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xx-p5"></span><span id="xi.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xx-p6"></span>As if wearied, God here bids his Prophet to
rest; as though he said, “Since I prevail nothing with this people, they
must be given up; cease from thy work.” God had set Hosea over the
Israelites for this end, to lead them to repentance, if they could by
any means be reformed: the duty of the Prophet, enjoined by God, was, to
bring back miserable and straying men from their error, and to restore
them again to the obedience of pure faith. He now saw that the Prophet’s
labour was in vain, without any success. Hence he was, as I have said,
wearied, and bids the Prophet to desist: *Leave them,* he says; that is,
“There is no use for thee to weary thyself any more; I dismiss thee from
thy labour, and will not have thee to take any more trouble; for they
are wholly incurable.” For by saying that they had joined themselves to
idols, he means, that they could not be drawn from that perverseness in
which they had grown hardened; as though he said, “This is an alliance
that cannot be broken.” And he alludes to the marriage which he had
before mentioned: for the Israelites, we know, had been joined to God,
for he had adopted them to be a holy people to himself; they afterwards
adopted impious forms of worship. But yet there was a hope of recovery,
until they became wholly attached to their idols, and clave so fast to
them, that they could not be drawn away. This alliance the Prophet
points out when he says, *They are joined to idols*

<span id="xi.xx-p7"></span>But he mentions the tribe of Ephraim, for the
kings, (I mean, of Israel,) we know, sprang from that tribe; and at the
same time he reproaches that tribe for having abused God’s blessing. We
know that Ephraim was blessed by holy Jacob in preference to his elder
brother; and yet there was no reason why Jacob put aside the first-born
and preferred the younger, except that God in this case manifested his
own good pleasure. The ingratitude of Ephraim was therefore less
excusable, when he not only fell away from the pure worship of God, but
polluted also the whole land; for it was Jeroboam who introduced ungodly
superstitions; he therefore was the source of all the evil. This is the
reason why the Prophet now expressly mentions Ephraim: though it is a
form of speaking, commonly used by all the Prophets, to designate
Israel, by taking a part for the whole, by the name of Ephraim.

<span id="xi.xx-p8"></span>But this passage is worthy of being noticed,
that we may attend to God’s reproofs, and not remain torpid when he
rouses us; for we ought ever to fear, lest he should suddenly reject us,
when he is wearied with our perverseness, or when he conceives such a
displeasure as not to deign to speak to us any more. It follows —

<span id="xi.xxi"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#018.md)<span id="xi.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p2"></span>**18.** Their drink is sour: they have
committed whoredom continually: her rulers *with* shame do love, Give
ye.

<span id="xi.xxi-p3"></span>**18.** Putruit potus eorum; scortando
scortati sunt: dilexerunt, Afferte, turpiter (*vel*, ignominiam <span
id="xi.xxi-p3.1"></span>קלון) principes ejus.

<span id="xi.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxi-p5"></span><span id="xi.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxi-p6"></span>The Prophet, using a metaphor, says here
first, that their drink had become putrid; which means, that they had so
intemperately given themselves up to every kind of wickedness, that all
things among them had become fetid. And the Prophet alludes to shameful
and beastly excess: for the drunken are so addicted to wine, that they
emit a disgusting smell, and are never satisfied with drinking, until by
spewing, they throw up the excessive draughts they have taken. The
Prophet then had this in view. He speaks not, however, of the drinking
of wine, this is certain: but by drunkenness, on the contrary, he means
that unbridled licentiousness, which then prevailed among the people.
Since then they allowed themselves every thing they pleased without
shame, they seemed like drunken men, insatiable, who, when wholly given
to wine, think it their highest delight ever to have wine on the palate,
or to fill copiously the throat, or to glut their stomach: when drunken
men do these things, then they send forth the offensive smell of wine.
This then is what the Prophet means, when he says, *Putrid has become
their drink;* that is, the people observe no moderation in sinning; they
offend not God now, in the common and usual manner, but are wholly like
beastly men, who are nothing ashamed, constantly to belch and to spew,
so that they offend by their fetid smell all who meet them. Such are
this people.

<span id="xi.xxi-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, *By wantoning they have
become wanton* This is another comparison. The Prophet, we know, has
hitherto been speaking of wantonness in a metaphorical sense, signifying
thereby, that Israel perfidiously abandoned themselves to idols, and
thus violated their faith pledged to the true God. He now follows the
same metaphor here, ‘By wantoning they have become wanton.’ Hence he
reproaches and represents them as infamous on two accounts, — because
they cast aside every shame, like the drunken who are so delighted with
wine, that through excess they send forth its offensive smell, — and
because they were like wantons.

<span id="xi.xxi-p8"></span>At last he says, *Her princes have
shamefully loved, Bring ye* Here, in a peculiar way, the Prophet shows
that the great sinned with extreme licentiousness; for they were given
to bribery: and the eyes of the wise, we know, are blinded, and the
hearts of the just are perverted, by gifts. But the Prophet designedly
made this addition, that we might know that there were then none among
the people who attempted to apply a remedy to the many prevailing vices;
for even the rulers coveted gain; no one remembered for what purpose he
had been called. Hence it happened that every one indulged himself with
impunity in whatever pleased him. How so? Because there were no censors
of public morals. Here we see in what a wretched state the people are,
when there are none to exercise discipline, when even the judges gape
for gain, and care for nothing but for gifts and riches; for then what
the Prophet describes here as to the people of Israel must happen. *Her
princes,* then, *have loved, Bring ye.*

<span id="xi.xxi-p9"></span>Respecting the word <span
id="xi.xxi-p9.1"></span>קלון, *kolun,* we must shortly say, that Hosea
does not simply allude to any kinds of gifts, but to such gifts as
proved that there was a public sale of justice; as though he said, “Now
the judges, when they say, Bring ye, when they love, Bring ye, make no
distinction whatever between right and wrong, and think all this lawful;
for the people are become insensible to such a disgraceful conduct:
hence they basely and shamefully seek gain.”

<span id="xi.xxii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xi.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou hast
at this time deigned in thy mercy to gather us to thy Church, and to
enclose us within the boundaries of thy word, by which thou preserves us
in the true and right worship of thy majesty, — O grant, that we may
continue contented in this obedience to thee: and though Satan may, in
many ways, attempt to draw us here and there, and we be also ourselves,
by nature, inclined to evil, O grant, that being confirmed in faith, and
united to thee by that sacred bond, we may yet constantly abide under
the guidance of thy word, and thus cleave to Christ thy only-begotten
Son, who has joined us for ever to himself, that we may never by any
means turn aside from thee, but be, on the contrary, confirmed in the
faith of his gospel, until at length he will receive us all into his
kingdom. Amen.

<span id="xi.xxii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirteenth

<span id="xi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#019.md)<span id="xi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p2"></span>**19.** The wind hath bound her up in her
wings,  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) and they shall be ashamed
because of their sacrifices.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p7"></span>**19.** Ligavit ventus eam in alis suis, et
pudefient a sacrificiis suis (*vel*, ligavit ventum in alis suis:
*ambigua enim est locutio apud Hebraeos: atque utrobis modolegas, genus
verbi relativis non convenit, quae foeminina sunt; sed frequenter
occurrunt ejusmodi exempla: libera igitur erit optio.*)

<span id="xi.xxiv-p8"></span> 

<span id="xi.xxiv-p9"></span><span id="xi.xxiv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p10"></span>If this rendering be approved, *The wind
hath bound her in its wings*, the meaning is, that a sudden storm would
sweep away the people, and thus would they be made ashamed of their
sacrifices. So the past tense is to be taken for the future. We may
indeed read the words in the past tense, as though the Prophet was
speaking of what had already taken place. The wind, then, has already
swept away the people; by which he intimates, that they seemed to have
struck long and deep roots in their superstitions, but that the Lord had
already given them up to the wind, that it might hold them tied in its
wings. And wings, we know, is elsewhere ascribed to the wind, <span
id="xi.xxiv-p10.1"></span>[Ps
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003.md)<span id="xi.xxiv-p10.1"></span>.
And thus the verse will be throughout a denunciation of vengeance.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p11"></span>The other similitude or metaphor is the
most appropriate, and harmonizes better with the subject; for were not
men to support their minds with vain confidence, they could never with
so much audacity despise God’s word. Hence they are said to tie the wind
in their wings; being unmindful of their own condition, they attempt as
by means of the wind to fly; but when they proudly raise up themselves,
they have no support but the wind. Let us now proceed —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc26010.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="xi.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.v-p4"></span> Amidst the variety of expositions given of
this clause, the one adopted by Calvin, and substantially in our own
version, is evidently the best. *Newcome’s* version seems wide of the
mark. *Horsley’s* rendering agrees materially with our own: — ‘For thy
people are exactly like this: who will contend with the priest.’

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc26010.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="xi.ix-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p7"></span> These verbs are in the future tense; but the
future in Hebrew is often used, as Calvin says in another place, to
express a continued act, or an habitual practice.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc26010.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="xi.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ix-p8"></span> This choice can hardly be conceded.
‘People,’ in Hebrew, is in the singular number, and the pronouns
referring to people are commonly put in the same number; but not so in
our language. ‘His’ here evidently belongs to the people, and not to the
priests, and ought to be rendered ‘their,’ as in our version. The verse
literally translated is as follows, only the future is taken for the
present tense: —

<span id="xi.ix-p9"></span>‘The sin of my people they eat,  
And to their (own) iniquity they raise up their heart.’

<span id="xi.ix-p10"></span>To render ‘sin,’ as *Newcome* and *Horsley*
do, ‘sin-offerings,’ is to destroy the whole force of the passage, that
through the superstition of the people they gained their living. And
‘iniquity’ means, no doubt, idolatry, to which the priests raised up the
people’s heart, or attached them. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc26010.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="xi.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xiv-p9"></span> This was probably similar to divination by
arrows, mentioned in <span id="xi.xiv-p9.1"></span>[Eze
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#021.md)<span id="xi.xiv-p9.1"></span>.
There is a practice of this kind still among the Arabs, as Adam Clarke
mentions in his comment on this verse. They take three arrows without
head, and write onone, *Command me, Lord*; on the other, *Forbid me,
Lord*; and the third is left a *blank.* These are put in a bag, and one
is drawn. If the first is drawn, they do what they intend; if the
second, they abstain for a year; if the third, they draw again. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc26010.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="xi.xv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p12"></span> <span id="xi.xv-p12.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md)<span id="xi.xv-p12.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc26010.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="xi.xv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p15"></span> <span id="xi.xv-p15.1"></span>[Ro
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028.md)<span id="xi.xv-p15.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc26010.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="xi.xv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xv-p25"></span> <span id="xi.xv-p25.1"></span>[De
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006.md)<span id="xi.xv-p25.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc26010.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="xi.xviii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="xi.xviii-p22"></span> <span id="xi.xviii-p22.1"></span>[De
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013.md)<span id="xi.xviii-p22.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc26010.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="xi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xi.xxiv-p3"></span> *Newcome’s* version of this sentence is
far-fetched, —

<span id="xi.xxiv-p4"></span>‘A wind shall distress her in her borders.

<span id="xi.xxiv-p5"></span>*Horsley’s* is the same with ours, only
expressed in the present tense, —

<span id="xi.xxiv-p6"></span>‘The wind binds her up in its wings.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc26011.md)
