[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26010)  [Next](cc26012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>Chapter 5

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hear ye this, O priests; and hearken,
ye house of Israel; and give ye ear, O house of the king; for judgment
*is* toward you, because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net
spread upon Tabor.

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite hoc sacerdotes, et attendite
domus, et domus regis auscultate, quia vobis judicam (*hoc est*,
judicium in vos dirigitur) nam laqueus fuistis (*hoc est*, tanquam
laqueus, *sabaudienda est* <span id="xii.i-p3.1"></span>כ, *nota
similitudinis et addenda ad nomen* <span id="xii.i-p3.2"></span>פח,
fuistis *ergo* tanquam laques) in Mizpah, et rete expansum super Tabor.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span><span id="xii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>The Prophet here again preaches against the
whole people: but he mainly directs his discourse to the priests and the
rulers; for they were the source of the prevailing evils: the priests,
intent on gain, neglected the worship of God; and the chief men, as we
have seen, were become in every way corrupt. Hence the Prophet here
especially inveighs against these orders, and at the same time, records
some vices which then prevailed among the people, and that through the
fault of the priests and rulers. But before I pursue farther the subject
of the Prophets something must be said of the words.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>When he says, *To you is judgment*, some
explain it, “It is your duty to do judgment,” to maintain government,
that every one may discharge his own office; for judgment is taken for
rectitude; the word <span id="xii.i-p7.1"></span>משפט, *mesgepheth,*
means a right order of things. Hence they think that the priests and
rulers are here condemned for discharging so badly their office, because
they had no care for what was right. But this sense is too strained. The
Prophet, therefore, I doubt not, summons here the priests and the king’s
counselors to God’s tribunal, that they might give an answer there; for
the contempt of God, we know, prevailed among the great; they were
secure, as though exempt from judgment, as though released from laws and
all order. *To you*, then *is judgment;* that is, God addresses you by
name, and declares that he will be your avenger, though ye heedlessly
despise his judgment.

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>Some again take <span
id="xii.i-p8.1"></span>מצפה, *metsephe,* for a beacon, and thus
translate, “Ye have been a snare instead of a beacon.” But this mistake
is refuted by the second clause, for the Prophet adds immediately, *a
net expanded over Tabor:* and it is well known that Mizpah and Tabor
were high mountains, and for their height celebrated and renowned; we
also know that hunting was common on these mountains. The Prophet, then,
no doubt means here, that both the priests and the king’s counselors
were like snares and nets: “As fowlers and hunters were wont to spread
their nets and snares on mount Mizpah and on Tabor; so the people also
have been ensnared by you.” This is the plain meaning of the words. Some
conjecture, that robbers were there located by the kings of Israel to
intercept the Israelites, when they found any ascending into Jerusalem,
as we now see everywhere persons lying in wait, that no one from the
Papacy may come over to us. But this conjecture is too far fetched. I
have already explained the Prophet’s meaning: he makes use, as we have
said, of a similitude.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>Let us now return to what he teaches: *Hear
this,* he says, *ye Priests, and attend, ye house of Israel, and give
ear, ye house of the king* The Prophet, indeed, includes the whole
people in the second clause, but turns his discourse expressly to the
priests and the king’s counselors; which ought to be specially noticed;
for it is indeed, as we shall hereafter see, the general subject of this
chapter. He did not without reason attack the princes, because the main
fault was in them; nor the priests, because they were dumb dogs, and had
also led away the people from God’s pure worship into false
superstitions; and so great was their avidity for filthy lucre that they
perverted the law and every thing that was before pure among the people.
It is no wonder then that the Prophet, while treating a general subject,
suitable to all orders indiscriminately, should yet denounce judgment on
the priests and the king’s counselors. With regard to these counselors,
they, in order to confirm the kingdom, had also approved of false and
spurious forms of worship, as it has been before stated; and they had
also followed other vices; for the Prophet, I doubt not, condemns here
other corruptions besides superstitions, and those which we know
everywhere prevailed among the people, and of which something has been
already said.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>And to show his earnestness, he uses three
sentences: *Ye priests, hear this;* then, *house of Israel, attend;* and
in the third place, *house of the king, give ear;* as though he said,
“In vain do they seek subterfuges, for the Lord will execute on them the
judgment he now declares:” and yet he gives them opportunity and time
for repentance, inasmuch as he bids them to attend to this denunciation.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>Now this passage teaches, that even kings
are not exempted from the duty of learning what is commonly taught, if
they wish to be counted members of the Church; for the Lord would have
all, without exception, to be ruled by his word; and he takes this as a
proof of men’s obedience, their submission to his word. And as kings
think themselves separated from the general class of men, the Prophet
here shows that he was sent to the king and his counselors. The same
reason holds good as to priests; for as the dignity of their order is
the highest, so this impiety has prevailed in all ages, that the priests
think themselves at liberty to do what they please. The Prophet
therefore shows, that they are not raised up so much on high, but that
the Lord shines eminently above their heads with his word. Let us know,
lastly, that in the Church the word of God so possesses the highest
rank, that neither priests, nor kings, nor their counselors, can claim a
privilege to themselves, as though their conduct was not to be subject
to God’s word.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>This then is a remarkable passage for
establishing the word of God: and thus we see how abominable is the
boast of the Papal clergy of this day; for they spread before us the
mask of the priesthood, when the word of God is brought forward, as
though they would outshine by the splendor of their dignity the whole
Law, all the Prophets, and the very Gospel. But the Lord here upholds
his word against all degrees of men, and shows that both kings and
priests must be brought down from their eminence, that they may obey the
word. Yea, we must bear in mind what I have before said, that though the
whole people had sinned, yet kings and priests are here in a special
manner reproved, because they deserved a heavier punishment, inasmuch as
by their depraved examples they had corrupted the whole people.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>When he compares them to snares and nets, I
do not then confine this to one thing; but as the contagion among the
whole people had proceeded from the priests and the king’s counselors,
and also from the king himself, the Prophet compares them, not without
reason, to snares; not only because they were the authors of
superstitions, but also because they perverted judgment and all equity.
Let us go on —

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#002)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** And the revolters are profound to
make slaughter, though I *have* *been* a rebuker of them all.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Et jugulando declinantes
profundaverunt:  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) ego autem
correctio illis omnibus.

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>The verb <span
id="xii.ii-p11.1"></span>שחט, *shecheth,* means, to kill, to sacrifice;
and this place is usually explained of sacrifices; and this opinion I do
not reject. But though the Prophet spake of sacrifices, he no doubt
called sacrificing, in contempt, killing: as though one should call the
temple, the shambles, and the killing of victims, slaughtering, so also
the Prophet says, *In sacrificing and killing, they, having turned
aside, have become deeply fixed;* that is, By turning aside to their own
sacrificing, they have completely hardened their hearts, so that their
depravity is incurable. For by saying that they had gone deep, the
meaning is, that they were so addicted to their own superstitions, that
they could not be restored to a sound mind, however often admonished by
the Prophets. Yet this verb has another meaning in Scripture, even this,
that men flatter themselves with their own counsels, and think that by
twining together reasons of their own, they can deceive God: and this
metaphor the Prophets employ with regard to profane despisers of God,
whom they call <span id="xii.ii-p11.2"></span>לצים, *latism*, mockers:
for these, while they deceive men, think that they have nothing to do
with God. The same we see at this day: courtiers and proud men of the
same character, flatter themselves with their own deceptions, and
complacently laugh at our simplicity; because they think that wisdom was
born with them, and that it is enclosed as it were within their brains.
But I know not whether this idea is suitable to this passage. That
simpler meaning which I have already stated, I prefer, and that is, that
the Israelites were so obstinate in their superstitions, that they
perversely despised all counsels, all admonitions, yea, that they
petulantly resisted every instruction.

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>But each word must be noticed: *turning
aside in sacrificing*, he says, “they became deep”. By saying, that they
had turned aside in sacrificing, he no doubt makes a distinction between
false and strange forms of worship and the true worship of God,
prescribed in the law. The frequency of sacrificing could not indeed
have been condemned in itself either as to the Israelites or the Jews;
but they turned aside, that is, departed from what the law prescribes.
Hence the more zealously they engaged in sacrificing, and the more
victims they offered to God, the more they provoked God’s vengeance
against themselves. We then see that the Prophet points out here as by
the finger the sin he reproved in the people of Israel, and that was, —
they sacrificed not according to God’s command and according to the
ritual of the law, but turned aside and followed their own devices.
Hence it is, that in contempt and in scorn he calls their sacrificing,
killing, or cutting the throat: “they are,” he says “executioners,” or,
“they are butchers. What is it to me, that they bring their victims with
great pomp and show? That they use so many ceremonies? I repudiate,” the
Lord says, “the whole of this; it is profane butchering; these
slaughterings have nothing in common with the worship which I approve.”

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>That our sacrifices then may please God,
they must be according to the rule of his word; for ‘obedience,’ as it
has been said already, ‘is better than all sacrifices,’ (<span
id="xii.ii-p13.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span id="xii.ii-p13.1"></span>.)
But when men retake themselves to false forms of worship or such as are
invented, nothing then is holy or acceptable to God, but an abominable
filth. And further, the Prophet, as I have said, not only accuses the
people of having turned aside to perverted forms of worship, but also of
having become obstinately fixed in them. They have become deep, he says,
in their superstitions: as he said before, that they were fast joined to
their idols, that they could not be torn away from them; so also he says
now, that they were deeply rooted in their iniquity.

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span>It follows, *And I have been*, or *will
be*, *a correction to them all* Some think that the Prophet in the
person of God threatens the Israelites, that God declares that he
himself would become the avenger, because the people had so stubbornly
followed wicked superstitions, — “I sit as a judge in heaven, nor will I
suffer you to fall away with impunity, since you are become so hardened
in your wickedness.” But they are more correct who think that their sin
was more increased by this circumstance, that God by his Prophets had
not ceased to recall the Israelites to a sound mind, since they might
not have been wholly irreclaimable: I have been to them a correction;
that is, “They cannot excuse themselves and say, that they had fallen
through error and ignorance; for there has been in them a wilful
obstinacy, as I have not ceased to show them the right way by my
Prophets. *I have,* then, *been a correction to them;* but I could not
bend them, so indomitable has been that stubbornness, or rather madness,
with which they were inflamed towards their idols.” It is now seen which
of the two views I deem the most correct.

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>But I will adduce a third: God may be
thought to be here complaining that he had been an object of dislike to
the Israelites, as though he said, “When I sent my Prophets, they could
not bear to be admonished, because my word was too bitter for them.”
Reproofs are not easily endured by men. We indeed know, that those who
are ill at ease with themselves, are yet not willing to hear any
reproof: every one who deceives himself, wishes to be deceived by
others. As then the ears of men are so tender and delicate, that they
will patiently receive no reproof, this meaning seems not inappropriate,
*I have been to them all a correction,* that is, “My doctrine has been
by them rejected because it had in it too much asperity.” But the other
explanation, which I have mentioned as the second, has been more
approved: I was, however, unwilling to omit what seems to me to be no
less suitable.

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span>We may now choose or receive either of
these two expositions, — either that the Lord here takes away from the
Israelites the excuse of error, because he had continued to reprove
their vices by his Prophets, — or that he expostulates with the
Israelites for having rejected his word on the ground that it was too
rigid and severe: yet this main thing will still remain the same, that
the people of Israel were not only apostates, having fallen away from
the lawful worship of God into their own superstitions but were also
contumacious and refractory in their wickedness, so that they would
receive no instruction, no salutary counsels. Let us proceed —

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#003)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**3.** I know Ephraim, and Israel is not
hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom, *and* Israel
is defiled.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Ego cognovi Ephraim, et Israel non
esta absconditus a me: quia tu scortatus es Ephraim, pollutus est
Israel.

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>God shows here that he is not pacified by
the vain excuses which hypocrites allege, and by which they think that
the judgment of God himself can be turned away. We see what great
dullness there is in many, when God reproves them, and brings to light
their vices; for they defend themselves with vain and frivolous excuses,
and think that they thus put a restraint on God, so that he dares not
urge them any more. In this way hypocrites elude every truth. But God
here testifies, that men are greatly deceived when they thus judge, by
their own perception, of that celestial tribunal to which they are
summoned; *I*, he says, *know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me*
There is to be understood an implied contrast, as though he said, that
they were ignorant of themselves; for they covered their vices, as I
have said, with frivolous excuses. God testifies that his eyes were not
dazzled with such fine pretenses. “How much soever, then, Ephraim and
Israel may excuse themselves, they shall not escape my judgment: vain
and absurd are these shifts which they use; I indeed am not ignorant.”

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>Let us then learn not to belie, by our own
notions, the judgment of God; and when he reproves us by his word, let
us not delude ourselves by our own fancies; for they who harden
themselves in such a state of security gain nothing. God sees more
keenly than men. Let use then, beware of spreading a veil over our sins,
for God’s eyes penetrate through all such excuses.

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span>That he names Ephraim particularly, was not
done, we know, without reason. From that tribe sprang the first
Jeroboam: it was therefore by way of honor that the name of Ephraim was
given to the ten tribes. But the Prophet names Ephraim here, who thought
themselves superior to the other tribes, by way of reproach: *I know
them, and Israel is not hid from me* He afterwards expresses what he
knew of the people, which was, that *Ephraim was wanton,* and that
*Israel was polluted;* as though he said “Contend as you please; but you
will do so without profit: I have indeed my ears stunned by your lies;
but after you have adduced everything, after you have sedulously pleaded
your own cause, and have omitted nothing which may serve for an excuse,
the fact still will be, that you are wantons and polluted.” In short,
the Prophet confirms in this second clause what I have before stated,
that men, when they flatter themselves, deceive themselves; for God in
the meantime condemns them, and allows no disguise of this kind. Israel
and Ephraim gloried, then, in their superstitions, as though they held
God bound to them: “This is wantonness,” he says, “This is pollution.”
The Prophet indeed does here cut off the handle from all those
self-deceptions which men use as reasons, when they defend fictitious
forms of worship; for God from on high proclaims, that all are polluted
who turn aside from his word.

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#004)<span id="xii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>**4.** They will not frame their doings to
turn unto their God: for the spirit of whoredoms *is* in the midst of
them, and they have not known the Lord

<span id="xii.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Non adjicient studia sua, ut
convertanur ad Deum suum: quia spiritus fornicationum in medio ipsorum,
et Jehovam non noverunt.

<span id="xii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.iv-p5"></span><span id="xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p6"></span>Some translate thus, “their inclinations
allow them not to turn themselves;” and this meaning is probable, that
is, that they were so much given to their own superstitions, that they
were not now free, or at liberty, to return to the right way; as though
the Prophet said, “They are entirely enslaved by their own diabolical
inventions, that their inclinations will not allow them to repent.” But
the former meaning (it is also more generally approved) seems more
adapted to the context. *They will not apply,* he says, *their endeavors
to turn to their God* Here God declares that it was all over with the
people, and that no hope whatever remained: as he said before, “Leave
them, why shouldest thou do anything more? for they will not receive
wholesome instruction; as they are entirely given up to destruction,
there is now no reason for thee to be solicitous about their salvation,
for that would be useless;” — so also he says in this place, *They will
not apply their endeavors to turn to their God*

<span id="xii.iv-p7"></span>If the Prophet speaks here in his own
person, the meaning is, “Why do I weary myself? God has indeed commanded
me to reprove this people; but I find that my labour is in vain; for I
have to do with brute animals, or with stones rather than with men;
there is in them no reason, no discernment; for the devil has fascinated
their minds: never, then, will they apply their endeavors to turn to
their God.” If we prefer to view the sentence as spoken in the person of
God, still the doctrine will remain nearly the same: God here declares
that the people were incurable. *Never*, then, *will they apply their
endeavors*. How so? For they are sunk, as it were, into a deep gulf, and
their obstinacy is like the abyss. Inasmuch, then, as they are thus
fixed in their superstitions, they will never *apply their endeavors to
turn to their God*

<span id="xii.iv-p8"></span>But God in the meantime not only shows here,
that there was no more any remedy for the diseases of the people; but he
also gravely and severely reprobates their iniquity, because they
thought not of seeking reconciliation with their God; as though he said,
“What, then, do I require of these wretched men, but to return to their
God? This they ought to have done of their own accord; but now, when
they are admonished, they care not; on the contrary, they fiercely
resist wholesome instruction. Is not this a strange and monstrous
madness?” We hence see that there is an important meaning in the words,
*They will not apply their endeavors to return to their God;* for the
Prophet might have simply said, “to return to Jehovah,” or “to God;” but
he says, *to their God,* and he says so, because God had made himself
familiarly known to them, nay, brought them up in his own bosom, as
though they were his children and he their Father: they had forsaken him
and had become apostates; and when the Lord would now reprove this
perfidy, was it not strange that the people should close their ears and
harden their hearts against every instruction? We hence see how sharp
this reproof is.

<span id="xii.iv-p9"></span>And he says, *Because the spirit of
wantonness is in the midst of them;* that is, they are so pleased with
their own filthiness, that there is no shame, no fear. But the reason of
this comparison, which I have before explained, must be borne in mind.
As a wife, though not faithful to her husband, yet retains still some
modesty, as long as she continues at home, and while she is in any place
classed with faithful and chaste women; but when she once enters a
brothel, and openly prostitutes herself to all, when she knows that her
baseness is universally known, she then throws off every shame, and
entirely forgets her own character: so also the Prophet says, that *the
spirit of wantonness was in the midst* of the people of Israel; as
though he said, “The Israelites are so imbrued with their superstitions,
that they cannot now be touched or moved by any reverence for God; they
cannot be restored to the right way, for the devil has demented them,
and having cast off every shame, they are like abominable strumpets.”

<span id="xii.iv-p10"></span>And he afterwards adds, *Jehovah they have
not known* By this sentence the Prophet extenuates not the sin of the
people, but, on the contrary, amplifies their ingratitude, because they
had forgotten their God, who had so indulgently treated them. As they
had been redeemed by God’s hand, as the teaching of the law had
continued among them, as they had been preserved to that day through
God’s constant kindness, it was truly an evidence of monstrous
ignorance, that they could in an instant adopt ungodly forms of worship,
and embrace those corruptions which they knew were condemned in the law.
It was surely an inexcusable wickedness in the people thus to withdraw
themselves from their God. This is the reason why the Prophet now says,
that *they knew not Jehovah.* But if they were asked the cause, they
could not have said that they had no light; for God had made known to
them the way of salvation. Hence, that they knew not Jehovah, was to be
imputed to their perverseness; for, closing their eyes, they knowingly
and willfully ran headlong after those wicked devices, which they knew,
as it had been stated before, to be condemned by God.

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
continues daily to exhort us, and though thou sees us often turning
aside from the right course, thou yet ceases not to stretch forth thy
hand to us, and also to rouse us by reproofs, that we may repent, — O
grant, that we may not be permitted to reject thy word with such
perverseness as thou condemnest here in thine ancient people by the
mouth of thy Prophet; but rule us by thy Spirit, that we may meekly and
obediently submit to thee, and with such teachableness, that if we have
not hitherto been willing to become wise, we may not at least be
incurable, but suffer thee to heal our diseases, so that we may truly
repent, and be so wholly given to obey thee, as never to attempt any
thing beyond the rule of thy word, and without that wisdom which thou
hast revealed to us, not only by Moses and thy Prophets, but also by thy
only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Fourteenth

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#005)<span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>**5.** And the pride of Israel doth testify
to his face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity;
Judah also shall fall with them.

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et respondebit (*vel*,
testificabitur superbia Israel ad faciem ejus: Israel ergo et Ephraim
concident in sua iniquitate; concidet etiam Jehudah cum ipsis.

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span><span id="xii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet having condemned the Israelites
on two accounts — for having departed from the true God — and for having
obstinately refused every instruction, now adds, that God’s vengeance
was nigh at hand. “Testify then shall the pride of Israel in his face”;
that is, Israel shall find what it is thus to resist God and his
Prophets. The Prophet no doubt applies the word, pride, to their
contempt of instruction, because they were so swollen with vain
confidence, as to think that wrong was done them whenever the Prophets
reproved them. It must at the same time be observed, that they were thus
refractory, because they were like persons inebriated with their own
pleasures; for we know that while men enjoy prosperity, they are more
insolent, according to that old proverb, “Satiety begets ferocity.”

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span>Some think that the verb <span
id="xii.vii-p7.1"></span>ענה, *one,* means here “to be humbled;” and
this sense is not unsuitable: “The pride of Israel shall then be humbled
before his face.” But another exposition has been most approved; I am
therefore inclined to embrace it, and that is, that God needed no other
witness to convict Israel than their own pride; and we know that when
any one becomes hardened, he thinks that there is to be no judgment, and
has no thought of rendering an account to God, for his pride takes away
every fear. For this reason the Prophet says, “God will convict you,
because ye have been hitherto so proud, that he could effect nothing by
his warnings.”

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span>But he adds, *Israel and Ephraim shall fall
in their iniquity* He pursues the same subject, which is, that they in
vain promised impunity to themselves, for the Lord had now resolved to
punish them. He adds, *Judah also shall fall with them* The Prophet may
seem to contradict himself; for when he before threatened the people of
Israel, he spoke of the safety of Judah, — ‘Judah shall be saved by his
God, not by the sword, nor by the bow.’ Since then the Prophet had
before distinguished or made a difference between the ten tribes and the
kingdom of Judah, how is it that he now puts them all together without
any distinction? To this I answer, that the Prophet speaks here not of
those Jews who continued in true and pure religion, but of those who had
with the Israelites alienated themselves from the only true God, and
joined in their superstitions. He then refers here to the degenerate and
not to the faithful Jews; for to all who worshipped God aright,
salvation had been already promised. But as many as had abandoned
themselves to the common superstitions, he declares that a common
punishment was nigh them all. *The Jews then shall fall together,* that
is, “As many of the Jews as have followed impious forms of worship and
other deprivations, shall not escape God’s judgment.” We now then
perceive the true meaning of the Prophet. It now follows —

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#006)<span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>**6.** They shall go with their flocks and
with their herds to seek the Lord; but they shall not find *him*; he
hath withdrawn himself from them.

<span id="xii.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Cum ovibus suis et cum armentis
suis ibunt ad quaerendum Jehovam, et non invenient: subduxit se ab
illis.

<span id="xii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet here laughs to scorn the
hypocrisy of the people, because they thought they had ready at hand a
way of dealing with God, which was, to pacify him with their sacrifices.
He therefore shows that neither the Israelites nor the Jews would gain
any thing by accumulating burnt-offerings, for they could not in this
way return into favor with God. He thereby intimates that God requires
true repentance, and that he will not be reconciled to men, except from
the heart they seek him and consecrate themselves to his service; and
not because they offer brute beasts. The faithful, no doubt, expiated
their sins at that time by sacrifices, but only typically: for they knew
for what end and purpose God had made the law concerning sacrifices, and
that was, that the sinner, being reminded by the sight of the victim,
might confess himself to be worthy of eternal death, and thus flee to
God’s mercy and look to Christ and his sacrifice; for in him, and
nowhere else, is to be found true and effectual expiation. For this end
then had God instituted sacrifices: so the faithful, while offering
sacrifices, did not suppose any satisfaction to be done by the external
work, nor even imagined it to be the price of redemption; but they
exercised themselves in these rites in faith and repentance.

<span id="xii.viii-p7"></span>The Prophet now, by implication, sets
oxen, and rams, and lambs, in opposition to spiritual sacrifices; for a
contrast is to be understood in the words, *They shall come with their
sheep, etc*. What bring they to God’s presence? They bring, he says,
only their rams, they bring oxen; but God commands what is far
different: he commands men to consecrate themselves to him, and that in
a spiritual manner, and as to external rites, to refer them to Christ,
and to the true expiation, which was yet hid in hope. Since then the
Israelites brought only their oxen and lambs to God, they in vain
expected him to be propitious to them; for he is not pacified by such
trifles; inasmuch as every one who separates the outward sacrifice from
its design, brings nothing but what is profane. Indeed, the true and
lawful consecration is by the word; and by the word we are guided to
faith in Christ, we are guided to repentance: when these are neglected
and disregarded, and men securely trust in their sacrifices, they do
nothing but mock God. We hence see that the Prophet exposes not here
without reason this folly of the Israelites, that they sought God *with
their flocks and their herds*

<span id="xii.viii-p8"></span>And he says, *They shall come,* or *shall
go*, *to seek God* By this sentence he intimates that hypocrites
sedulously labour to reconcile God to themselves; and we even see with
what zeal they weary themselves; and of this there is a remarkable
instance at this day in the Papists; for they spare no diligence, when
they seek to pacify God. But the Prophet says that this labour is vain
and foolish. “Let them go,” he says, that is, “Let them weary
themselves; but they shall do so without profit, for they shall not find
God.” But when he says, that *they would come to seek Jehovah,* he is
not to be understood as saying, that they would really do so; for
hypocrites turn aside from God by circuitous courses and windings,
rather than seek access to him. But yet they propose it as their final
intention, as they speak, to seek God: they do not indeed come
afterwards to him; nay, they dread his face, and shun it as much as they
can; and yet when one asks them what they intend by sacrificing and by
performing other rites, the answer is ready on their lips, “We worship
God,” that is, “We desire to worship him.” Since then hypocrites are
wont to boast of this, the Prophet speaks by way of concession, and
says, *They shall come to seek God, but shall not find him*

<span id="xii.viii-p9"></span>The Papists of this day pursue a similar
course, when they go round their altars, when they gad away to perform
vowed pilgrimages, when they whisper their prayers, when they hear and
buy masses; for to what purpose are all these things, but by interposing
these veils to escape God’s judgment? They know themselves to be exposed
to his judgment; their conscience forces them to pacify God: but what do
they in the meantime? “I will find out a way in which God will not
pursue me: let this then be the price of redemption, let this be a
compensation.” In a word, we see that the Papists mock God with their
ceremonies, that they have nothing else in view but to seek
hiding-places: and hence the Lord by his Prophet complains, that his
temple was like a den of robbers, (<span id="xii.viii-p9.1"></span>[Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)<span id="xii.viii-p9.1"></span>:)
for men securely sin, when they publicly offer such expiations. Nay, the
Papists, when they mutter their prayers, say that the final intention is
pleasing to God, though they may wander in their thoughts: for if, when
they begin to pray, it should come to their minds, that God is prayed
to, though they may not attend to their prayers, though they may pollute
themselves with many depraved lusts yet, if with the mouth they utter
prayers, they maintain that the final intention pleases God. — Why?
Because their design is to seek God. This is, indeed, extremely sottish
and puerile: but, as I have already said, the Prophet does not press
this point, but concedes to the Israelites what they pretended, “Ye seek
God; but yet ye run not in the right way; and these circuitous courses
will not lead you to God.” How so? “For ye recede farther from him.” So
Isaiah says, ‘She will greatly weary herself in her ways:’ but in the
meantime she followed not the right way, but, on the contrary, turned
aside after various errors, and thus receded from the Lord, and came not
to him.

<span id="xii.viii-p10"></span>By saying, that *God had removed* or
*separated himself from them,* he intimates that he is not propitious
but to the faithful, who think not so grossly of him, as to seek to feed
him with the flesh of oxen or other sacrifices, or to pacify him with
disagreeable odour; but who seek him spiritually and from the heart, who
bring true repentance. It now follows —

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007)<span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** They have dealt treacherously against
the Lord: for they have begotten strange children: now shall a month
devour them with their portions.

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Contra Jehovam (*vel*, cum Jehova)
perfide egerunt: quia filios alienos genuerunt: nunc vorabit eos mensis
cum portionibus suis.

<span id="xii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.ix-p5"></span><span id="xii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p6"></span>He says that *they had acted perfidiously
with God,* for they had violated his covenant. We must bear in mind what
I have said before of the mutual faith which God stipulates with us,
when he binds himself to us. God then covenants with us on this
condition, that he will be our Father and Husband; but he requires from
us such obedience as a son ought to render to his father; he requires
from us that chastity which a wife owes to her husband. The Prophet now
charges the people with unfaithfulness, because they had despised the
true God, and prostituted themselves to idols.

<span id="xii.ix-p7"></span>And he also aggravates this crime by saying,
that they had *begotten strange children:* for he intimates, that their
condition had become so vitiated, that there remained no better hope as
to their posterity. Some explain the words, that they had begotten
strange children, in this way, — that they had taken wives from heathen
nations, contrary to the law. But this sense is very frigid. Others
understand, that they had begotten spurious children, because they
brought up their children badly, having, from their infancy, attached
them to depraved superstitions. This is indeed true, but the prophet, as
I have already said, looked further; he meant that the Israelites had
not only become alienated from God, but had also taken away every hope
as to the future. It may indeed be, and it sometimes happens, that men
for a time abandon themselves to many vices, and afterwards return to
the right way; but when corruption has so prevailed that the children
are infected with the same vices, and impiety itself takes full
possession of them, then the state of things is past recovery. We now
then see that the Prophet means, that the Israelites were not only
covenant-breakers with respect to God, but that they had also led their
children into the same perfidy, so that there was no hope of repentance.

<span id="xii.ix-p8"></span>He therefore subjoins the punishment,
*Devour them shall a month together with their portions*  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) Some restrict the word, month, to the
times of the new moon, or to the new moons; and these days, we know,
were festivals among the Jews: but this seems too far-fetched and
strained. The Prophet therefore, I doubt not, takes here a month for a
short time; and so the Hebrew scholars explain it, and yet they do not
sufficiently unfold this form of speaking. Now, the Prophets are wont to
use various figures, when they intend to mark out a short time. Isaiah
says, ‘Yet for three years, as the time of a hireling:’ for hirelings
were wont to hire themselves for three years; hence he says, This is the
time fixed by the Lord as the appointed day. Contracts, also, we know,
were then monthly, as they are at this day yearly, both with reference
to the interest of money and other exchanges. Since, then, they usually
made agreements for single months, the Prophet here, I have no doubt,
takes a month metaphorically for a certain and fixed time. I do not
therefore agree with the Hebrew scholars, who say that only a short time
is expressed by the Prophet, but he expresses not only a short, but also
a fixed time; and he did this that the Israelites might not vainly look
for any deferring or respite, for hypocrites ever procrastinate and
extend time by vain delusions. The Prophet therefore says here*, A month
shall devour them,* which means, “Vengeance is now suspended over their
heads, and this they shall not escape.”

<span id="xii.ix-p10"></span>And he says, “with their portions”. He
intimates here, no doubt, that though they then overflowed with
abundance, yet nothing would be a help to them to keep them from being
destroyed, for the hand of God was against them. We indeed know, that as
long as men are well furnished with provisions and protection, they are
not very solicitous about their state, but heedlessly despise whatever
dangers there may be in the world: therefore the Prophet says, that
though they were opulent and well supplied, though they possessed every
kind of defense, yet nothing would avail for their safety, but a month
should devour them, together with all their wealth. It follows —

<span id="xii.x"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p1"></span><span id="xii.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008)<span id="xii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p2"></span>**8.** Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, *and*
the trumpet in Ramah: cry aloud *at* Bethaven, after thee, O Benjamin.

<span id="xii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Clangite cornu in Gibeah, canite tuba
in Ramah, buccinate etiam in Beth-aven, post te Benjamin.

<span id="xii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.x-p5"></span><span id="xii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p6"></span>The Prophet speaks here more emphatically,
and there is in these words a certain lively representation; for the
Prophet assumes here the character of a herald, or he introduces heralds
who declare and proclaim war. The truth itself ought indeed to storm not
only our ears, but also our hearts, and be more powerful than any
trumpet: but we yet see how unconcerned we are. Hence the Lord is
constrained here to clothe his servant with the character of a herald,
or at least he bids his servant to send forth heralds to proclaim war
everywhere throughout the whole kingdom of Israel. This was not,
properly speaking, the office of a Prophet; but we see that Ezekiel was
ordered by the Lord to besiege Jerusalem for a time, — and why? Because
his whole teaching, after the Jews had been a thousand times threatened,
became frigid: God then added visions, which more effectually roused
torpid men. So also does Hosea in this place, *Shout with the trumpet in
Gibeah, blow the cornet in Ramah, and sound the horn in Beth-aven;* for
God, as we have said, is pursuing Israel, and will not suffer them to
rest; so that the Israelites might know that God threatens not in vain,
that his reproofs are not bugbears, but that he deals in earnest when he
reproves the ungodly, and that execution, as they say, will follow what
he teaches. In the same manner does Paul also say,

<span id="xii.x-p7"></span>‘Vengeance is prepared by us, and is in
readiness against all those who extol themselves against the greatness
of Christ, how great soever they may be,’  
(<span id="xii.x-p7.2"></span>[2 Cor.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span id="xii.x-p7.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.x-p8"></span>As, then, the ungodly are wont to make this
objection, that the Prophets preach nothing but words, Hosea here
testifies that he did not in vain terrify men, but that the effect, as
they say, would immediately follow, unless they reconciled themselves to
God.

<span id="xii.x-p9"></span>Now, as we perceive the Prophet’s purpose,
let us take care to receive by faith that peace which the Lord daily
proclaims to us by his messengers. For what is the Gospel but what Paul
declares it to be?

<span id="xii.x-p10"></span>‘We discharge the office of ambassadors,’ he
says, ‘for Christ, that ye may be reconciled to God, and in Christ’s
name we exhort you to return into favor with God,’  
(<span id="xii.x-p10.2"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="xii.x-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.x-p11"></span>We then see that all the ministers of the
Gospel are God’s heralds, who invite us to peace, and promise that God
is ready to grant us pardon, if with the heart we seek him. But if we
receive not this message and this embassy, there will remain for us the
dreadful judgment, of which the Prophet now speaks, and our impiety will
procure for us this awful doom. As though God then were now declaring
war against all the ungodly and the despisers of his grace, the Prophet
says that they shall find that God is armed for vengeance.

<span id="xii.x-p12"></span>Moreover, the Prophet doubtless has here
mentioned *Gibeah, Ramah,* and “Beth-aven”, because in these places
great assemblies usually met; and it may be also that they were strong
fortresses. Since then the Israelites thought themselves unconquerable,
because they had invincible strongholds against their enemies, the
Prophet here expressly declares war against them. Everywhere then sound
ye the trumpet, or blow the horn, or blow the cornet, especially in the
chief places of the kingdom.

<span id="xii.x-p13"></span>*After thee, O Benjamin.* Benjamin is here
to be taken, by a figure of speech, for the whole of Israel, because he
was a brother of Joseph by the same mother: the tribe of Benjamin is
therefore everywhere joined with Ephraim. It is at the same time
certain, that the Prophet confines not here his address to one tribe,
but includes, under one tribe or one part, the whole kingdom of Israel.
It follows —

<span id="xii.xi"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#009)<span id="xii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Ephraim shall be desolate in the day
of rebuke: among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall
surely be.

<span id="xii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Ephraim in vastitatem erit in die
correctionis: in tribibus Israel docui veritatem (intelligere feci, *ad
verbum.*)

<span id="xii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xi-p5"></span><span id="xii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet asserts, without any
figure, that their chastisement would not be slight or paternal, but
that God would punish the Israelites as they deserved, that he would
reduce them to nothing. God, we know, sometimes spares the ungodly,
while he chastises them: signs of his wrath daily appear through the
whole world; but at the same time they are moderate punishments which
God inflicts on men; and he in a manner invites them to repentance, when
he thus mercifully chastises their sins. But the Prophet says here, that
God would no longer act in this manner; for he would destroy and wholly
blot out the whole kingdom of Israel. They had been already often
warned, not only in words, but also in deeds and had often felt the
wrath of God; but they still persisted in their course. And now, as God
saw that they were wholly stupid, he says, *Now, in the day of
correction, Ephraim shall be for desolation;* as though he said, “I will
not correct Israel as heretofore, for they have been before in various
ways chastised, but have not repented; I will therefore now lay aside
those paternal corrections which I have hitherto used, for I have in
vain applied such remedies: I will then henceforth so correct Israel,
that they shall be entirely destroyed.” We now comprehend the Prophet’s
meaning.

<span id="xii.xi-p7"></span>But this is a remarkable passage; for men
are always slow and dilatory; even when God pricks them, as it were,
with goads, they remain slothful in their sins. God adds corrections,
one after the other; and when he sees men continuing as it were out of
their senses, he then testifies that it is no time for reproof, but that
final destruction is at hand. We hence see that every hope is here cut
off from the Israelites, that they might not think that they would be
punished in the usual way for their sins; for as soon as the Lord would
begin to reprehend them, he would destroy and blot out their names:
*Israel* then *shall be for desolation in the day of correction*

<span id="xii.xi-p8"></span>He then adds, *through the tribes of Israel
I have made known the truth.* Some regard this sentence as spoken in the
person of God, and refer it to the first covenant which God made with
the whole people; and so consider this to be the sense, “I do not now of
a sudden proceed to take vengeance on the Israelites; for I have
begotten this people, nourished them, brought them up to manhood. Since
this is the case, there is now no reason for them to complain, that I am
too precipitant in taking vengeance.” This is one meaning: but I rather
incline to their opinion, who regard this as spoken in the person of the
Prophet; I do not yet follow altogether their opinion, for they suppose
that the fault of the people in being unteachable is alone set forth: *I
have made known the truth through the tribes of Israel,* as though the
Prophet had said, “This people is unworthy that God should chastise them
in a paternal manner, for they have hardened themselves in their
wickedness; and though they have been more than sufficiently taught
their duty, they have yet openly despised God, and have done this, not
through ignorance, but through perverseness: since then the people of
Israel have blinded and demented themselves, as it were, willfully, what
now remains, but that God will bring them to desolation?” So they
expound this place. But it seems to me that a protestation is what suits
this passage: *I have made known the truth through the tribes of
Israel,* as though he said, “This is fixed and ratified, which I now
declare, and it shall certainly be; let then no one seek any escape for
himself, for God threatens not now, as often before, for the purpose of
recalling men to repentance, but declares what he will do.”

<span id="xii.xi-p9"></span>That this may be better understood, the mode
of speaking in familiar use among all the Prophets is to be noticed:
they often threaten, and then give hope of pardon, and promise
salvation, so that they seem to exhibit some sort of contradiction: for
after having fulminated against the people, they come at once to preach
grace, they offer salvation, they testify that God will be propitious.
At first sight the Prophets seem not to be consistent with themselves.
But the solution is easy, for they threatened vengeance to men under
condition; afterwards, when they saw some fruit, they then set forth the
mercy of God, and began to be heralds of peace, to reconcile men to God,
and make an agreement between them. Thus our Prophet often threatened
the Israelites; and had they repented, the hope of salvation would not
have been cut off from them. But after he had found them to be so
obstinate that they would not receive any instruction, he then said, *I
have announced the truth through the tribes of Israel,* that is, God
does not now say, “Except ye repent, you are lost;” but he speaks
positively; because he sees that the well known doctrine has been
despised: this then is the truth. It is the same as if he said, “This is
the last denunciation, which shall be fixed and unalterable.”

<span id="xii.xi-p10"></span>And Jeremiah also speaks in the same
manner: his book is full of various threatenings; and yet they are
conditional threatening. But after God had taken the matter in hand, he
began to act in a different way: “I now call you no more to repentance,
I contend not with you, I do not now set forth God as a judge, that ye
may flee to him for mercy; all these things are come to an end; what
remains now”, he says, “is the last command, to show that you are now
past hope.” This is the true and real meaning of the Prophet here; and
whosoever will consider the whole context, will easily perceive that
this was the Prophet’s intention. He had said before, “Ephraim shall be
for desolation in the day of correction,” that is, “The Lord will no
longer reprove Ephraim as heretofore, but will entirely destroy him:”
then he adds, *I have promulgated or published the truth through the
tribes of Israel:* “Now,” he says, “know ye that vengeance will come
shortly, and that it is ratified before God; know also that I speak
authoritatively, as if the hand of God were now stretched forth before
your eyes.” Now follows —

<span id="xii.xii"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are already
by nature the children of wrath, and yet thou hast deigned to receive us
into favour, and hast set before us a sacred pledge of thy favor in
thine only-begotten Son, and that as we have not yet ceased often to
provoke thy wrath against us, and also to fall away by shameful perfidy
from the covenant thou hast made with us, — O grant, that being at least
touched by thy admonitions, we may not harden our hearts in wickedness,
but be pliant and teachable, and thus endeavor to return unto favor with
thee, that through the interceding sacrifice of thy Son, we may find
thee a propitious Father, and be for the future so wholly devoted to
thee, that those who shall follow and survive us may be confirmed in the
worship of thy majesty, and in true religion, through the same Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="xii.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Fifteenth

<span id="xii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#010)<span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p2"></span>**10.** The princes of Judah were like them
that remove the bound: *therefore* I will pour out my wrath upon them
like water.

<span id="xii.xiv-p3"></span>**10.** Fuerunt principes Jehudah, quasi
transferentes terminum (*vel potest omitti* <span
id="xii.xiv-p3.1"></span>כ, *nota similitudinis, et saepe etiam ita
sumitur*; Fuerunt *igitur* principes Jehudah transferentes terminum:)
super eos effundam quasi aquas furorem meum (*vel*, indignationis meae.)

<span id="xii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet transfers the blame of all
the evils which then reigned in the tribe of Judah to their princes. He
says, that the people had fallen away and departed from God through
their fault, and he uses a most fit similitude. We know that there is
nothing certain in the possessions of men, except the boundaries of
fields be fixed; for no one can otherwise keep his own. But by the
metaphor of boundaries in fields, the Prophet refers to the whole
political order. The meaning is, that all things were now in a state of
disorder and confusion among the Jews; because their leaders who ought
to have ruled the people and kept them in obedience, had destroyed the
whole order of things. We now then understand what the Prophet had
really in view.

<span id="xii.xiv-p7"></span>But it must be observed that the tribe of
Judah had been hitherto kept separate, as it were by limits, as God’s
heritage; for Israel had become alienated. The possession of God had
been diminished by the defection of Jeroboam; and he retained only one
tribe and a half in his service. The Prophet says now, that the Jews had
mixed with the Israelites, and had thus become themselves alienated from
the Lord; for the princes themselves had taken away the boundaries, that
is, they had, through indolence and other vices, destroyed all reverence
for God, all care for religion, and also every concern for what was just
and right: he therefore severely threatens them, “I will pour out”, he
says, “my wrath upon them like waters”.

<span id="xii.xiv-p8"></span>By this metaphor, he means that God would
deal much more severely with them than with the common people: “I,” he
says, “will with full force pour forth upon them my fury, as if it were
the deluge of antiquity.” The meaning is, “I will overwhelm them in my
vengeance, because they have done more evil by their bad examples, than
if they had been private individuals.” We hence see that the corruption
of the people is imputed to the princes, and therefore God’s more
dreadful vengeance is denounced on them.

<span id="xii.xiv-p9"></span>But we must bear in mind what I have before
said, that the Prophet gives here metaphorically the name of boundaries
to the lawful worship of God, and to whatever he had enjoined on the
people, that they might be his certain possession, as fields among men
are usually separated by bounds that every one may keep his own. It
follows. —

<span id="xii.xv"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011)<span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p2"></span>**11.** Ephraim *is* oppressed *and* broken
in judgment, because he willingly walked after the commandment.

<span id="xii.xv-p3"></span>**11.** Praedae expositus est Ephrain
(*vel*, direptus est; <span id="xii.xv-p3.1"></span>עשק *significat
diripere et praedari*,) fractus judicio: quia volens ambulavit post
mandata.

<span id="xii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xv-p5"></span><span id="xii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p6"></span>Here again the Prophet shows that the
vengeance of God would be just against Israel, because they willingly
followed the impious edicts of their king. The people might indeed have
appeared to be excusable, since religion had not been changed by their
voice, or by public consent, or by any contrivance of the many, but by
the tyrannical will of the king alone: Jeroboam was not induced by
superstition, but by subtile wickedness, to erect altars elsewhere, and
not at Jerusalem. The people then might have appeared to be without
blame; for the king alone devised this artifices to secure himself from
danger. But the Prophet shows that all were implicated in the same guilt
before God, because the people adopted with alacrity the impious forms
of worship which the king had commanded. He therefore says, that
*Ephraim is exposed to plunder, that he is broken by judgment,* (or,
“shall be broken,” for the words may be rendered in the future tense.)
That the people then were thus torn, and were also to bear in future far
more grievous things, was not, as he says, because they had to suffer
all these things undeservedly, for they were not innocent. — How so?
Because they willingly followed the commands of their king; for the king
did not force them to forsake the doctrine of the law, but every one
went voluntarily after impious superstitions. Since then they willingly
obeyed their king, they could not now excuse themselves, they could not
object that this was done by one man, and that they were not admitted to
consult with him. Their promptitude proved them to be perfidious.

<span id="xii.xv-p7"></span>Some render <span
id="xii.xv-p7.1"></span>הואיל, *evail,* to begin,” and <span
id="xii.xv-p7.2"></span>יאל, *ial,* is often taken in this sense: but as
it oftener signifies, “to be willing,” the Prophet no doubt means here,
that the Israelites had not been compelled by force and fear to go
astray after superstitions; but that they were prompt and ready to obey,
for there was in them no fear of God, no religion. If any one should now
ask, whether they are excusable, who are tyrannically drawn away into
superstitions, as we see to be done under the Papacy, the answer is
ready, that those are not here absolved who regarded men more than God:
nor is terror, as we know, a sufficient excuse, when we prefer our own
life to the glory of God, and when, anxious to provide for ourselves and
to avoid the cross, we deny God, or turn aside from making a confession
of the right and pure faith: but the fault is rendered double, when men
easily comply with any thing commanded by tyrants; for they show, that
they were already fully inclined to despise God and to deny true
religion. Hence the impiety of Jeroboam discovered the common
ungodliness and wickedness of the whole people; for as soon as he raised
his finger and bid them to worship God corruptly, all joyfully followed
the impious edict. There was an occasion then offered to them; but the
evil dwelt before in their hearts; for they were not so inclined and
prompt to obey God. We now then see what the Prophet had in view.

<span id="xii.xv-p8"></span>He says that God would justly punish all the
Israelites, yea, even all the common people; for though Jeroboam alone
had commanded them to worship God corruptly, yet all of them willingly
embraced what he wished to be done: and thus it became manifest that
they had in them no fear of God. We now see how vain is the excuse of
those who say that they ought to obey kings, and at the same time
forsake the word of God: for what does the Prophet reprove here, but
that the Israelites had been too submissive to their king? “But this in
itself was worthy of praise.” True, when the king commanded nothing
contrary to God’s word; but when he perverted God’s worship, when he set
up corrupt superstitions, then the people ought to have firmly resisted
him: but as they were too pliant, nay, willingly allowed themselves to
be drawn away from the true worship of God, the Prophet says here, that
they had no reason to complain, that they were too sharply and too
severely chastised by the Lord. It follows —

<span id="xii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012)<span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p2"></span>**12.** Therefore *will* I *be* unto
Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.

<span id="xii.xvi-p3"></span>**12.** Et ego tanquam tinea ipsi Ephraim,
et tanquam putredo (*vel*, caries; *quanquam alii vertunt*, Teredinem,
*qui est etiam vermiculus, qui nascitur in lignis*) domui Jehudah.

<span id="xii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p6"></span>God now denounces punishment in common on
the two kingdoms; but he speaks not as before, he says not that his fury
would be like a deluge, to overwhelm and drown the people. What then? He
compares himself to little worms which gnaw wood and consume cloths; or
he compares himself to rottenness; for, as we have said, the second word
is to be so taken, as <span id="xii.xvi-p6.1"></span>רקב, *rekob,* is
properly rottenness, and is derived from <span
id="xii.xvi-p6.2"></span>רקב, *rekab,* to rot;” it is then rottenness or
putrescence. But as I have said, some would render it, “a grub;” and
there is a probable reason for this, because he first mentioned moth;
and these two, moth and grub  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) ,
would be more suitable to each other, than moth and rottenness. However,
the meaning of the Prophet is by no means obscure, and that is, that the
Lord would by a slow corrosion consume both the people; that though he
would not by one onset destroy them, yet they would pine away until they
became wholly rotten. This is the meaning.

<span id="xii.xvi-p8"></span>But we must observe why the Prophet used
this metaphor. It was, that the Israelites and the Jews might
understand, that though the Lord would in some measure withhold his hand
from resting heavily upon them, and that though he would spare them, yet
they would not be safe, because they would by little and little feel a
slow decay, that would consume them. And the Lord meant in this way to
turn the people to repentance; but he effected nothing: for such was
their hardness, that they felt not this slow decay; as those who are
stupid are not moved, except they feel a most grievous pain; they think
that they are doing well, and they struggle against their own disease:
many such we see. Hence the Prophet here reminds them, that though the
Lord should not openly fulminate against the Israelites and the Jews,
they yet in vain flattered themselves, because the Lord would be to them
a moth and a worm; that is, that however gradually he might consume
them, they would yet be greatly deceived, if they did not perceive that
they had to do with him.

<span id="xii.xvi-p9"></span>The chief instruction is, that God does not
always punish men in the same way; for he deals with them differently,
either to promote their salvation, or to render them in this way more
inexcusable. Hence God sometimes pours forth his severity, and at
another time he slowly chastises us. But whatever may be the way, we are
reminded that we ought not to sleep, whenever the Lord awakens us; nor
should we wait until he appears as a lion or a bear, until he devours
us, until he rages against us in dreadful fury. We are then reminded
that there is no reason why we should wait for this; but that when God
consumes us by degrees, it ought instantly to occur to us, that though
the moth and the worm are but very small insects, hardly seen by the
eyes, yet a hard and firm tree is consumed by these little worms, or by
its own cariousness; and that cloths are consumed with putridity, when
once the moth enters into them; we see valuable furniture perishing.
Since it is so, there is no reason for men to be secure when God shows
any sign of his wrath, though he pours not forth his horrible vengeance,
but is as a hidden putrefaction. We now perceive what Hosea means in
this verse. It now follows —

<span id="xii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013)<span id="xii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** When Ephraim saw his sickness, and
Judah *saw* his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to
king Jareb: yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound.

<span id="xii.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Et vidit Ephraim dolorem suum
(morbum suum *potius*,) et Jehudah vulnus suum: profectus wst Ephraim ad
Assur, et misit ad regem Jareb: ipse tamen non potuit mederi vobis, et
non sanabit a vobis vulnus (*dicunt Hebraei*, sanare ab aliquo vulnus
*pro* auferre vulnus: *potius Latine dicendum est*, non sanabit vos a
plaga.)

<span id="xii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p6"></span>Here the Lord complains that he had in
vain chastised the Israelites by the usual means, for they thought that
they had remedies ready for themselves, and turned their minds to vain
hopes. This is usually done by most men; for when the Lord deals mildly
with us, we perceive not his hand, but think that what evils happen to
us come by chance. Then, as if we had nothing to do with God, we seek
remedies, and turn our minds and thoughts to other quarters. This then
is what God now reproves in the Jews and the Israelites: *Ephraim,* he
says, *saw his disease, and Judah his wound* What then did he do?
*Ephraim went to Assyria,* he says, *and sent to king Jareb,* that is,
“They returned not to me, but thought that they had remedies in their
own hand; and thus vain became the labour which I have taken to correct
them.” This is the meaning.

<span id="xii.xvii-p7"></span>He says that *Ephraim had seen his
disease, and Judah his wound:* but it is not right so to take this, as
if they well considered the causes of these; for the ungodly are blind
to the causes of evils, and only attend to their present grief. They are
like intemperate men, who, when disease seizes them, feel heat, feel
pain in the head, and other symptoms, at the same time there is no
concern for the disease, neither do they inquire how they procured these
pains for themselves, that they might seek fit remedies.

<span id="xii.xvii-p8"></span>So *Ephraim knew his disease*, but at the
same time overlooked the cause of his disease, and was only affected by
his present pain. So also *Judah knew his wound;* but he understood not
that he was struck and wounded by the hand of God; but was only affected
with his pain, like brute beasts who feel the stroke and sigh, while
they have, in the meantime, neither reason nor judgment to understand
whence, or for what cause the evil has come to them. In a word, the
Prophet here condemns this brutish stupidity in both people; for they
did not so far profit under God’s rod as to return to him, but, on the
contrary, they sought other remedies; because stupor had taken such hold
on their minds, that they did not consider that they were chastised by
God, and that this was done for just reasons. As then no such thing came
to their mind, but they only felt themselves ill and grieved as brutes
do, they went to the Assyrian, and sent to king Jareb.

<span id="xii.xvii-p9"></span>The Prophet seems here to inveigh only
against the ten tribes; but though he expressly speaks of the kingdom of
Israel, there is no doubt but that he accused also the Jews in common
with them. Why then does he name only Ephraim?  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) Even because the beginning of this evil
commenced in the kingdom of Israel: for they were the first who went to
the king of Assur, that they might, by his help, resist their neighbors,
the Syrians: the Jews afterwards followed their example. Since then the
Israelites afforded a precedent to the Jews to send for aids of this
kind, the Prophet expressly confines his discourse to them. But there is
no doubt, as I have already said, but that the accusation was common.

<span id="xii.xvii-p11"></span>We now perceive what the Prophet meant:
*Ephraim,* he says, *saw his disease, and Judah his wound;* that is,
“Though I have, like a moth and a worm, consumed the kingdom of Israel
as well as the kingdom of Judah, and they have felt themselves to be, as
it were, decaying, and though their disease ought to have led them to
repentance, they have yet turned their thoughts elsewhere; they have
even supposed that they could be made whole by seeking a remedy either
from the Assyrians or some others: thus it happened that they hastened
to Assyria, and sought help from king Jareb.” We then see, in short,
that the stupidity and hardness of the people are here reproved, because
they were not turned by these evils to repentance.

<span id="xii.xvii-p12"></span>Some think Jareb to have been a city in
Assyria; but there is no ground for this conjecture. Others suppose that
Jareb was a neighboring king to the Assyrian, and was sent to when the
Assyrian, from a friend and a confederate, became an enemy, and invaded
the kingdom of Israel; but this conjecture also has no solid grounds. It
may have been the proper name of a man, and I prefer so to take it. For
it seemed not necessary for the Prophet to speak here of many
auxiliaries; but after the manner of the Hebrews, he repeats the same
thing twice. Some render it, “to revenge;” because they sent for that
king, even the Assyrian, as a revenger. But this exposition also is
forced. More simple appears to me what I have already said, that they
sent for the Assyrian, that is, for king Jareb.

<span id="xii.xvii-p13"></span>Then it follows, *Yet could he not heal
you, nor will he cure you of your wound* Here God declares that whatever
the Israelites might seek would be in vain. “Ye think,” he says, “that
you can escape my hand by these remedies; but your folly will at length
betray itself, for he will avail you nothing; that is, king Jareb will
not heal you.” In this clause the Prophet shows, that unless we
immediately return to God, when he warns us by his scourges, it will be
in vain for us to look here and there for remedies: for in this world
many allurements come in our way; but when we hope for any relief, the
Lord will at length show that we have been deluded. There is, then, but
one remedy, — to go directly to God; and this is what the Prophet means,
and this is the application of the present doctrine. He had said before
that Ephraim had felt his disease and Judah his wounds; that is, “I have
led them thus far, that they have acknowledged themselves to be ill; but
they have not gone on as they ought to have done, so as to return to me:
on the contrary, they have turned aside to king Jareb and to other
delusions.” Then it follows, “But these remedies have turned ant rather
for harm to you; they certainly have not profited you.” A confirmation
of this sentence follows —

<span id="xii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014)<span id="xii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** For I *will be* unto Ephraim as a
lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah: I, *even* I, will tear
and go away; I will take away, and none shall rescue *him*

<span id="xii.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Quia ego tanquam leo ipsi
Ephraim, et tanquam leunculus domui Jehudah: ego, ego rapiam, et abibo;
tollam et nemo eripiet.

<span id="xii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="xii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xviii-p6"></span>As I have said, the Prophet confirms this
truth, that Israel had recourse in vain to false physicians, when they
left God. How so? Because the whole world, were it to favor us, could
not yet help us, against the will of God and his opposing power. But God
here declares that he would be adverse to the Israelites; as though he
said, “Provide human aids as much as you please; but will the Assyrian
be superior to me in power? Can he hinder me from pursuing you as I have
determined?” Thus God shows that he would deal in a new and different
manner with the Israelites and the Jews: “I will not,” he says, “be any
longer like a moth and a worm; I shall come like a lion to you, with an
open mouth to devour you: now let the Assyrian king come forth, when I
shall thus go armed against you; can he put any hindrance in my way,
that I should not execute my vengeance, as it shall seem good to me?” We
now then perceive the design of the Prophet.

<span id="xii.xviii-p7"></span>He had said, that God would punish the
Israelites and the Jews, by consuming them by degrees, that there might
be more time for repentance: but he says that this would be useless, for
they would not think that it was done seriously. They would therefore
deceive themselves with vain fallacies. What would then at last remain?
Even this, “I will,” he says, “put on a new form and go to battle: I
will be to you *as a lion and a young lion;* I will rage against you as
a fierce wild beast: your grievance shall not now be from moths and
worms; but you shall have an open and dreadful contest with the lion and
the young lion. What then will the Assyrian king avail you?” And this
place teaches, that men, when they attempt to oppose vain helps to the
wrath of God, gain only this, that they more and more provoke and
inflame his wrath against themselves. After God has first gnawed, he
will at length devour; after he has pricked, he will deeply wound; after
he has struck, he will wholly destroy. All this we bring on ourselves by
our perverse attempts, when we try to seek escapes for ourselves.
Except, then, we would willingly kindle God’s displeasure, that he may
appear as a lion and rage against us with the whole force of his wrath,
let us take heed, that we deceive not ourselves by vain reliefs.

<span id="xii.xviii-p8"></span>He therefore says, *I, I will take away,*
or, “tear,” or, “tear in pieces;” for <span
id="xii.xviii-p8.1"></span>שרף, *shereph,* properly means this, and it
agrees better with the rest of the context. “I will then, as lions and
young lions are wont to do, tear in pieces, limb from limb, the whole
people.” Then he says, I will *go away* as a lion, who, after he has
enjoyed his prey, departs a conqueror with more courage being not put to
flight, for he is moved by no fear. So also the Prophet says, “Let the
Assyrian king come, he will not constrain me to retreat, nor will he
rescue the spoil from me: and when I shall be satiated with your
destruction, I shall not then have any fear on account of the Assyrian
king, that I should stealthily flee away, as foxes are wont to do; I
will not craftily contend; but I will go forth openly, my violence will
be sufficient to put him to flight: I will thus depart of my own accord;
for your subsidies will occasion me no fear. *I will take away,* he
says, and none shall rescue.” We now comprehend the whole meaning of the
Prophet.

<span id="xii.xix"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p1"></span><span id="xii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015)<span id="xii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p2"></span>**15.** I will go *and* return to my place,
till they acknowledge their offence, and seek my face: in their
affliction they will seek me early.

<span id="xii.xix-p3"></span>**15.** Ibo, revertar ad locum meum, donex
agnoscant se peccasse (*ad verbum est*, peccare,) et quaerant faciem
meam: ubi fuerit ipsis afflictio, properabunt ad me (*vel*, me
quaerent.)

<span id="xii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xix-p5"></span><span id="xii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p6"></span>The word <span
id="xii.xix-p6.1"></span>שחר, *shicker,* signifies the morning: hence
the verb means, “to seek early,” or, “to rise early,” as men do when
they apply themselves diligently to anything: but in many places of
Scripture it is taken simply in the sense of seeking; and this simple
meaning seems most suitable to this place, *They will seek me in their
tribulation* God here declares, that after having been dreadfully fierce
against both the kingdoms of Judah and Israel, he would for a time rest
quietly and wait from heaven what they would do. He then adds, “They
will at length return to a sane mind: when they shall perceive the
finishing part, they will then, having lost their perverseness,
acknowledge their sins and be truly humbled.” This is the meaning.

<span id="xii.xix-p7"></span>The mode of speaking seems apparently
strange, when God says, that he will go away; for he neither so hides
himself in heaven, that he neglects human affairs, nor withdraws his
hand, but that he sustains the world by the continued exercise of his
power, nor even takes away his Spirit from men, especially when he would
lead them to repentance; for men never of their own accord turn
themselves to God, but by his hidden influence. What then does he mean
by this, *I will go and return to my place?* Why, indeed, he speaks here
of the external state of the people: then the meaning is, “After the two
kingdoms shall be cut off, I will then for a time hide my face from both
the people; and they will think that I care not for their salvation;
they will think that they are far removed from me.” We hence see that
the Prophet here only refers to what would be the external condition of
the people; and then we also see, that these forms of speech are
accommodated to the perceptions of men. So God also himself speaks in
<span id="xii.xix-p7.1"></span>[Isaiah
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#000)<span id="xii.xix-p7.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) though for a different purpose;
yet the Prophet expresses there in reality the same thing; ‘I will
rest,’ he says, ‘and I will wait in my tabernacle.’ What was that rest
of God, and what was his tabernacle? Why, when God exercised his
judgments, we are then constrained to feel his presence, and when he
kindly favors us and exhibits the kindness of a Father, he then really
shows himself propitious to us: but when he neither visits us for our
sins, nor gives us tokens of his favor, he seems to withdraw himself
from us, and to show no regard for our life. We now then understand that
the Prophet speaks of the time of exile; as though he said, “After God
shall execute against you his extreme judgment, and ye shall be liken
away into exile, God will then forsake you, as if he in no way regarded
you, but were unmindful of you; for he will leave you there to rest,
even in Chaldea and Assyria; and then he will not send forth any light
of salvation. God therefore will be as it were idle in heaven.” This is
one thing.

<span id="xii.xix-p9"></span>But the Prophet shows at the same time the
final issue, that is, that they will afterwards return to the Lord; and
that this is also the purpose of God he affirms, *Till they
acknowledge,* he says, *that they have sinned* For it is the beginning
of healing, when men consider the cause of their disease. He had said
before that Israel saw his disease, but not in a right way; for the
origin of the disease was hid from him, and continued as yet hid. But
now the Prophet distinctly shows that it is to seek God, when people
acknowledge and confess their sins. This word continually occurs in
Scripture when sacrifices are spoken of. Hence men are said then to sin,
when they go forth before God, making a true confession, when they
acknowledge their guilt and pray for pardon. So also in this place he
says, *Until they confess that they have sinned I will for a time hide
myself* And he adds, “They will seek my face”. This is the second thing
in attaining salvation — to seek the face of God: for we are reconciled
to God, we know, by repentance and faith; not that repentance procures
pardon for us, but because it is necessarily required; it is a cause, as
they say, which is indispensable.

<span id="xii.xix-p10"></span>The first step then towards healing, as we
have already said, is to be touched with grief, when we perceive that we
have provoked the wrath of God, and when thus our sins displease us. But
he who is thus become in himself a sinner, that is, who begins to be his
own judge, ought afterwards to add this second thing — to seek the face
of God, that is, to present himself a suppliant before God, and to ask
for pardon; and this arises from faith. It is then to repentance that
the word <span id="xii.xix-p10.1"></span>אשם, *ahsim,* belongs, which is
to “acknowledge sin:” and to “seek the face of God,” properly belongs to
faith.

<span id="xii.xix-p11"></span>Now let us see what is the application of
this doctrine as to both people. When the Israelites and the Jews lived
in exile, it was of great benefit for them to have this testified, that
God was hiding his face for a time, that he might afford them time to
repent; this is one thing. Now when men considerately attend to this,
that they are to seek God, that they may repent, they are encouraged;
and this is the sharpest goad to rouse men, that they may no longer be
torpid in their vices: and this is what the Prophet meant. When the Lord
shall banish into exile both the Jews and the Israelites, let them not
think that though for a time he will seem to cast them away they are
wholly deserted; for as yet a convenient time for repentance will be
given them. He afterwards describes the way of reconciliations that is,
that they shall *acknowledge that they have sinned,* and then that they
shall seek the face of God.

<span id="xii.xix-p12"></span>And at the same time he makes known the
fruit of affliction, and says, *When affliction shall be to them, then
they will seek me* The Prophet here shows, that exile, though very
bitter to Israel, would yet be useful; as when a physician gives a
bitter draughts or is compelled to use strong medicine to cure an
inveterate disease; so the Prophet shows that this punishment would be
useful to the people, and even pleasant, however bitter it might be for
a time. How so? For they will return to the Lord; and he says
distinctly, “They will seek me”. He includes in this expression both
faith and repentance; for he separates not the two clauses as before,
but shows generally that the end of affliction would be, that the people
would turn themselves to God. With respect to the expression, “to seek
early,” I have said already that I do not approve of that meaning; for
neither the Israelites nor the Jews, sought God early, but were with
difficulty at lasts after a long period, and a long series of seventy
years, led to repentance. What sort of seeking early was this? I do not
then approve of rendering the word, ‘They shall seek me early;’ but, as
I have said the simple idea of “seeking” is more suitable.

<span id="xii.xx"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xii.xx-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we continue to
kindle often thy wrath against us by our innumerable sins, — O grant,
that when thou warnest and wouldest restore us to the right way, we may
at least be pliant, and without delay attend to the scourges of thy
hand, and not wait for extreme severity, but timely repent; and that we
may truly and from the heart seek thee, let us not put on false
repentance, but strive to devote ourselves wholly to thee, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc26011.htm#fr_21) <span
id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span> Respecting this clause, Poole says, <span
id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>*locus obscurissimus* — a most obscure place.
But of all the explanations given, the one offered by Calvin seems the
best. Horsley’s version seems fanciful, —

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>‘Prickers have made deep slaughter.’

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>By ‘Prickers’ he means attendants on the
chase. Newcome’s version seems more probable, —

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>*‘And the revolters have made deep the
slaughter of* victims*;’*

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>that is, multiplied their sacrifices; but
this comports not well with the clause which follows. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc26011.htm#fr_22) <span
id="xii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p9"></span> “With their portions,” *i.e.*, their
allotments: they shall be totally dispossessed of their country; and the
boundaries of the separate allotments of the several tribes shall be
confounded and obliterated. —*Bp. Horsley*

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc26011.htm#fr_23) <span
id="xii.xvi-p6.3"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p7"></span> “That it signifies some kind of worm or
maggot I have no doubt, because the rule of the parallelism demands some
gnawing insect, that may correspond with <span
id="xii.xvi-p7.1"></span>עש, the moth.” — *By. Horsley*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc26011.htm#fr_24) <span
id="xii.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p10"></span> *Horsley* thought that there is a word
left out before “sent,” and supposed it to be “Judah,” that the two
parts of the verse might correspond, as Judah as well as Ephraim is
mentioned in the former part of the verse. Had he well weighed the
reason here given by Calvin, he would not have thought such an addition
necessary. Conjectural emendations for the most part arise from the same
cause, — from not understanding the design and purpose of the sacred
writer. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc26011.htm#fr_25) <span
id="xii.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p8"></span> <span id="xii.xix-p8.1"></span>[Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004)<span id="xii.xix-p8.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc26012)
