[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26019)  [Next](cc26021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>Chapter 14

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
14:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Israel, return unto the Lord thy
God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity.

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Revertere Israel ad Jehovam Deum tuum;
quia orruisti in iniquitate tua.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Take with you words, and turn to the
Lord: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive *us* graciously:
so will we render the calves of our lips.

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tollite vobiscum verba, et
convertimini ad Jehovam: et dicite ei, Omnem tolle iniquitatem, et sume
(*vel*, attolle) bonum; et solvemus vitulos labiorum nostrorum.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span><span id="xxi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>Here the Prophet exhorts the Israelites to
repentance, and still propounds some hope of mercy. But this may seem
inconsistent as he had already testified that there would be no remedy
any more, because they had extremely provoked God. The Prophet seems in
this case to contradict himself. But the solution is ready at hand, and
it is this, — In speaking before of the final destruction of the people,
he had respect to the whole body of the people; but now he directs his
discourse to the few, who had as yet remained faithful. And this
distinction, as we have reminded you in other places, ought to be
carefully noticed; otherwise we shall find ourselves perplexed in many
parts of Scripture. We now then see for what purpose the Prophet annexed
this exhortation, after having asserted that God would be implacable to
the people of Israel; for with regard to the whole body, there was no
hope of deliverance; God had now indeed determined to destroy them, and
he wished this to be made known to them by the preaching of Hosea. But
yet God had ever some seed remaining among his chosen people: though the
body, as a whole, was putrid and corrupt; yet some sound members
remained, as in a large heap of chaff some grains may be found
concealed. As God then had preserved some (as he is wont always to do,)
he sets forth to them his mercy: and as they had been carried away, as
it were by a tempest, when iniquity so prevailed among the people, that
there was nothing sound, the Prophet addresses them here, because they
were not wholly incurable.

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>Let us then know that the irreclaimable, the
whole body of the people, are now dismissed; for they were so obstinate
that the Prophet could address them with no prospect of success. Then
his sermon here ought to be especially applied to the elect of God, who,
having fallen away for a time, and become entangled in the common vices
of the age, were yet not altogether incurable. The Prophet now exhorts
them and says *Return, Israel, to Jehovah thy God; for thou hast fallen
by thine iniquity* This reason is added, because men will never repent
unless they are made humble; and whence comes true and genuine humility,
except from a sense of sin? Unless then men become displeased with
themselves, and acknowledge that they are worthy of perdition, they will
never be touched by a genuine feeling of penitence. These two things are
then wisely joined together by Hosea, that Israel had fallen by their
iniquities, and then, that it was time to return to Jehovah. How so?
Because, when we are convinced that we are worthy of destruction, nays
that we are already doomed to death for having so often provoked God,
then we begin to hate ourselves; and a detestation of sin drives us to
seek repentance.

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>But he says, *Turn thou, Israel, to thy God*
The Prophet now kindly invites them; for he could not succeed by severe
words without mingling a hope of favour, as we know that there can be no
hope of repentance without faith. Then the Prophet not only shows what
was necessary to be done, but says also, ‘Thou art Israel, thou art an
elect people.’ He does not, however, as it has been already stated,
address all indiscriminately, but those who were the true children of
Abraham, though they had for a time degenerated. “Turn thou, Israel,
then to thy God; for how much soever thou hast for a time fallen away,
yet God has not rejected thee: only return to him, and thou shalt find
favour, for he is placable to his own people.”

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span><span id="xxi.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>He afterwards shows the way of repentance:
and this passage deserves to be noticed; for we know that men bring
forward mere trifles when they speak of repentance. Hence when the word,
repentance, is mentioned, men imagine that God is to be pacified with
this or that ceremony, as we see to be the case with those under the
Papacy. And what is their repentance? Even this, — if on certain days
they fast, if they mutter short prayers, if they undertake vowed
pilgrimages, if they buy masses, — if with these trifles they weary
themselves, they think that the right and the required repentance is
brought before God: but all this is altogether absurd. As then the world
understands not what repentance means, and to what it leads, the Prophet
here sets forth true repentance by its fruits. He therefore says, *Take
with you words, and turn to Jehovah; and say to him, Take away all
iniquity and* *bring good,* *and we will render to thee the calves of
our lips* When he bids them to take or find words to present instead of
sacrifice, he no doubt alluded to what the law teaches.

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>First, it is certain that the Prophet speaks
not of feigned words; for we know what God declares by Isaiah,

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>‘This people draw nigh me with their lips,  
but their heart is from me far distant,’ (<span
id="xxi.i-p14.2"></span>[Isa
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="xxi.i-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span>But he bids them to take words, by which
they might show what was conceived and felt in their heart. Then he
means this first, that their words should correspond with their feeling.

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>It must, secondly, be noticed, that the
Prophet speaks not here of any sort of words, but that there is to be a
mutual relation between the words of God and the words of men. How are
we then to bring words to God, such as prove the genuineness of our
piety? Even by being teachable and submissive; by suffering willingly
when he chastises us, by confessing what we deserve when he reproves us,
by humbly deprecating vengeance when he threatens us, by embracing
pardon when he promises it. When we thus take words from God’s mouth,
and bring them to him, this is to take words according to what the
Prophet means in this place. We hence see the import of the Prophet’s
exhortation, when he bids us to take words: but I cannot proceed further
now.

<span id="xxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xxi.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we now carry
about us this mortal body, yea, and nourish through sin a thousand
deaths within us, — O grant, that we may ever by faith direct our eyes
towards heaven, and to that incomprehensible power, which is to be
manifested at the last day by Jesus Christ our Lord, so that in the
midst of death we may hope that thou wilt be our Redeemer, and enjoy
that redemption, which he completed when he rose from the dead; and not
doubt but that the fruit which he then brought forth by his Spirit will
come also to us, when Christ himself shall come to judge the world; and
may we thus walk in the fear of thy name, that we may be really gathered
among his members, to be made partakers of that glory, which by his
death he has procured for us. Amen.

<span id="xxi.iii"></span>

<span id="xxi.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-seventh

<span id="xxi.iii-p2"></span>*Take with you words and turn to Jehovah
and say to him, Take away all iniquity, and bring good, and we will pay
thee the calves of our lips.* We mentioned in our last lecture the sort
of words the Prophet here bids the Israelites to take, while exhorting
them to repent: for as they had been hitherto deaf and mute, he commands
them to be not only attentive to the word of the Lord, but also prompt
to respond, that there might be a mutual consent between the doctrine
heard and their own confession. He now explains himself and says, Take
away all iniquity, and bring good. These are the words with which he
bids them to come to God. He dictates to them the confession which the
Lord requires.

<span id="xxi.iii-p3"></span>He first bids them to ask remission and the
pardon of sins; for if a sinner desires to return into favour with God,
and yet does not confess his guilt, he adopts a way the most strange.
The very beginning must be a confession, such as the Prophet here
describes. For the Israelites, by asking God to remit their sins, at the
same time confessed themselves to be guilty before Him; yea, they
condemned themselves that they might obtain gratuitous absolution. And
emphatical is what they said, *Take away all iniquity.* Thus they
confessed themselves to be guilty not only of one sin, but also of many
sins, for which God might justly punish them, had he not been propitious
to them. In short, they acknowledge here their various and multiplied
guilt.

<span id="xxi.iii-p4"></span>But they add, *Bring good* This sentence is
commonly explained as if the Israelites said, that they had hitherto
been barren and empty of good works, but that now being reconciled, they
would be useful and profitable servants of God. But this sense seems not
to me suitable to this place; for he afterwards subjoins the evidence of
gratitude, *We shall pay the calves of our lips.* He here speaks, I
doubt not, of God’s blessing, which flows from the gratuitous pardon of
sins: for God does not simply receive us into favour, but also really
shows that he is not in vain reconciled to us; for he adds the fruits of
his paternal love, by favouring us with his kindness. As then the
Prophet commanded the Israelites to bring words before God, so now he
introduces them as praying that God would bring good: and Scripture is
wont commonly to join these two together, — the favour of God, by which
he freely remits sins, — and his blessing, which he grants to his
children, after he has embraced them in his paternal love. Hence *bring
good;* that is, “O Lord, first receive us into favour, and then prove in
reality that thou art propitious to us, even by outward benefits.”

<span id="xxi.iii-p5"></span>It now follows, *And we shall pay,* or
*render*, *the calves of our lips* In this passage, the faithful confess
that they have nothing with which they can pay God in return, when he
has bountifully granted them all things, except that they will celebrate
his goodness in their praises, and confess that they owe all things to
him. This is then a remarkable passage; for it sets forth God’s goodness
towards men, and then it teaches that men can render no mutual
compensation, but can only bring praises by which they celebrate God’s
goodness, and nothing more, as it is said in <span
id="xxi.iii-p5.1"></span>[Ps. 116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#013)<span id="xxi.iii-p5.1"></span>,

<span id="xxi.iii-p6"></span>‘What shall I repay the Lord for all the
benefits which he has conferred on me? The cup of salvation will I take,
and on the name of the Lord will I call.’

<span id="xxi.iii-p7"></span>There also the Prophet testifies that God
is not liberal towards men because he expects or demands any thing from
them, for what can they give? but that he still requires thanksgiving,
and that he is content with the sacrifice of praise, as we find it also
said in <span id="xxi.iii-p7.1"></span>[Ps
116:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#017)<span id="xxi.iii-p7.1"></span>.
But we learn the same thing from this passage, *O Lord,* they say,
*bring good;* that is, “Though we have in various ways exposed ourselves
to thy judgement, having by our innumerable sins provoked thy wrath, yet
let thy goodness surpass all our iniquities; having made us clean, bring
also that good which has been hitherto, as it were, far away from us.”
For while God shows signs of his wrath, we are destitute of all his
blessings. They therefore ask God, after restoring them to favour, to
manifest to them his kindness. And what do they at last say? “O Lord, we
promise thee no compensation, for thou requires none, nor is it in our
power to give any; but we *will pay to thee the calves of the lips;*
that is, “We will confess that we owe all things to thee; for it is only
the sacrifice of praise that we can render thee, when thou hast loaded
us with all kinds of blessings.”

<span id="xxi.iii-p8"></span>And calves of the lips the Prophet fitly
calls the praises which God requires as the chief sacrifice; for under
the law, some offered calves when they paged their vows. But the Prophet
shows that God regards not external sacrifices, but only those exercises
which men perform in another way, even the sacrifices of thanksgiving.
This then is the meaning of the metaphor; as though he said, “The calves
which are wont to be offered are not the true sacrifices in which God
delights, but tend rather to show that men are to offer praise to God.”
We now then perceive the meaning of this verse. It follows —

<span id="xxi.iv"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p1"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003)<span id="xxi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Asshur shall not save us; we will not
ride upon horses: neither will we say any more to the work of our hands,
*Ye are* our gods: for in thee the fatherless findeth mercy.

<span id="xxi.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Assur (Assyrius) non servabit nos:
super equum non ascendemus, et non dicemus posthac, Dii nostri, operi
manuum nostrorum; quia in te misericordiam consequetur pupillus.

<span id="xxi.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxi.iv-p5"></span><span id="xxi.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.iv-p6"></span>This verse ought to be joined with the last,
as the Israelites show here more clearly and fully in what they had
sinned, and, at the same time, give proof of their repentance; for when
they say, *The Assyrian shall not save us, we shall not mount on horses,
we shall not say to the work of hands, Our gods,* it is to be understood
as a confession, that they had in these various ways roused against
themselves the vengeance of God; for they had hoped for safety from the
Assyrians, ran here and there, and had thus alienated themselves from
God; they had also fled to statues and idols, and had transferred to
dumb images the honour due to the only true God. We hence see, that
though the faithful speak of future time, they yet indirectly confess
that they had grievously sinned, had forsaken the only true God, and
transferred their hopes to others, either to the Assyrians or to
fictitious gods. But at the same time, they promise to be different in
future; as though he said, that they would not only be grateful to God
in celebrating his praises, but that their way of living would be also
new, so as not to abuse the goodness of God. This is the substance of
what is here said.

<span id="xxi.iv-p7"></span>By saying, *The Assyrian shall not save us,*
they doubtless condemned, as I have already stated, the false confidence
with which they were before deluded, when they sought deliverance by
means of the Assyrians. There is, indeed, no doubt, but that the
Israelites were ever wont to pretend to trust in the name of God; but in
thinking themselves lost without the succour of the Assyrians, they most
certainly defrauded God of his just honour, and adorned men with spoils
taken from him. For except we be convinced that God alone is sufficient
for us, even when all earthly aids fail us, we do not place in him our
hope of salvation; but, on the contrary, transfer to mortals what
belongs alone to him. For this sacrilege the Israelites therefore
condemn themselves, and, at the same time, show that the fruit of their
repentance would be, to set their minds on God, so as not to be drawn
here and there as before, or to think that they could be preserved
through the help of men. Let us hence learn, that men turn not to God,
except when they bid adieu to all creatures, and no longer fix their
hopes on them. This is one thing.

<span id="xxi.iv-p8"></span>What follows, *On a horse we shall not
mount,* may be explained in two ways; — as though they said, that they
would no longer be so mad as to be proud of their own power, or consider
themselves safe because they were well furnished with horses and
chariots; — but the clause may be more simply explained, as meaning,
that they would not as before wander here and there to procure for
themselves auxiliaries; *We shall not* then *mount a horse,* but
continue quiet in our country; and this sense seems more appropriate. I
do not then think that the Prophet brings forward any new idea, but I
read the two sentences conjointly, *The Assyrian shall not save us, we
shall not then mount on a horse,* that is, that we may ride in haste;
for they had wearied themselves before with long journeys: as soon as
any danger was at hand, they went away afar off into Assyria to seek
help, when God commanded them to remain quiet.

<span id="xxi.iv-p9"></span>The meaning of this will be better
understood by referring to other passages, which correspond with what is
here said. God says by Isaiah, ‘On horses mount not; but ye said, We
will mount: then mount,’ says he, (<span id="xxi.iv-p9.1"></span>[Isa
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#016)<span id="xxi.iv-p9.1"></span>.)
Here is a striking intimation, that the Jews against God’s will rode and
hastened to seek aids. “I see you,” he says, “to be very prompt and
swift: then mount, but it shall be for the purpose of fleeing.” We see
what was the design of this reproof of the Prophet; it was to show that
the Jews, who ought to have remained still and quiet, fled here and
there for the sake of seeking assistance. So also in this place, when
they would show the fruit of their repentance, they say, “We will not
hereafter mount a horse, for the Lord, who promises to be our aid, is
not to be sought as one far off: we will not then any more fatigue
ourselves in vain.” It seems to me that this is what is meant by the
Prophet.

<span id="xxi.iv-p10"></span>Then he adds, *And we shall not say, Our
gods, to the work of our hands.* As they had spoken of the false trust
they placed in men, so now they condemn their own superstition. And
these are the two pests which are wont to bring destruction on men; for
nothing is more ruinous than to transfer our hope from God; and this is
done in two ways, either when men trust in their own strength, or pride
themselves on human aids and despise God, as if they can be safe without
him, — or when they give up themselves to false superstitions. Both
these diseases ever prevail in the world, when men entangle themselves
in their own superstitions, and form for themselves new gods, from whom
they expect safety; as we see to be the case with those under the
Papacy. God is almost of no account with them, Christ is not sufficient.
For how comes it that they contrive so many patrons for themselves, that
they devise so many guardianships, except that they despise the help of
God, or so extenuate it, that they dare not to hope for salvation from
him? We hence see that superstition draws men away from God, and becomes
thus the cause of the worst destruction. But there are some, who are not
thus given up to superstitions, but who derive a hope from their own
valour or wisdom; for the children of this world are inflated with their
own strength; and when princes have their armies prepared, when they
have fortified cities, when they possess abundance of money, when they
are strengthened by many compacts, they are blinded with false
confidence. So then this verse teaches us, that these are two
destructive pests, which commonly draw men away from real safety; and if
then we would repent sincerely from the heart, we must purge our minds
from these two evils, so that we may not ascribe any thing to our own
strength or to earthly helps, nor form any idols to be in the place of
God, but feel assured that God alone is a sufficient help to us.

<span id="xxi.iv-p11"></span>But it follows, *For in thee will the
fatherless find mercy*. Here the Israelites show that it is necessary
for us to be depressed that we may remain dependent on God alone; for
those are compared to the fatherless who are so humbled, that they cast
away all vain hopes, and, conscious of their nakedness and want, recumb
on God alone. Hence, that God’s mercy may find a way open to come to us,
we must become fatherless. Now what this metaphor means is well known to
us. The fatherless, we know, are, first, destitute of aid, and,
secondly, of wisdom; and they are also without strength. They are then
dependent on the aid of another, and stand in need of direction; in
short, their safety depends on the assistance of others. Thus, also, we
are really fatherless, when we rely not on our own prudence, nor recumb
on our own strength, nor think that we can be safe through the aids
which come from the earth, but cast all our hopes and cares on God
alone. This is one thing. *The fatherless* then shall find mercy *in
thee;* that is, “When thou, Lord, dost so afflict us, that we become
wholly cast down, then we shall find mercy in thee; and this mercy will
be sufficient for us, so that we shall no more wander and be drawn aside
by false devices, as it has hitherto been the case with us.” When,
therefore, they say, *in God* will the fatherless find mercy, they mean
that the grace offered by the Lord will be sufficient, so that there
will be no need any more of seeking aid from any other. We now
understand what the Prophet means in this verse. It follows —

<span id="xxi.v"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p1"></span><span id="xxi.v-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)<span id="xxi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p2"></span>**4.** I will heal their backsliding, I will
love them freely: for mine anger is turned away from him.

<span id="xxi.v-p3"></span>**4.** Sanabo defectiones eorum, diligam eos
sponte (*vel*, liberaliter;) quia aversus est furor meus ab eo.

<span id="xxi.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxi.v-p5"></span><span id="xxi.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.v-p6"></span>God here confirms what we have observed
respecting his gratuitous reconciliation, nor is the repetition useless;
for as men are disposed to entertain vain and false hopes, so nothing is
more difficult than to preserve them in dependence on the one God, and
to pacify their minds, so that they disturb not nor fret themselves, as
experience teaches us all. For when we embrace the promises of free
pardon, our flesh ever leads us to distrust, and we become harassed by
various fancies. “What! can you or dare you promise with certainty to
yourself that God will be propitious to you, when you know that for many
reasons he is justly angry with you?” Since, then, we are so inclined to
harbour distrust, the Prophet again confirms the truth which we have
before noticed, which is, that God is ready to be reconciled, and that
he desires nothing more than to receive and embrace his people.

<span id="xxi.v-p7"></span>Hence he says, *I will heal their defections*
The way of healing is by a gratuitous pardon. For though God, by
regenerating us by his Spirit, heals our rebellion, that is, subdues us
unto obedience, and removes from us our corruptions, which stimulate us
to sin; yet in this place the Prophet no doubt declares in the person of
God, that the Israelites would be saved from their defections, so that
they might not come against them in judgement, nor be imputed to them.
Let us know then that God is in two respects a physician while he is
healing our sins: he cleanses us by his Spirit, and he abolishes and
buries all our offences. But it is of the second kind of healing that
the Prophet now speaks, when he says, *I will heal their turnings away:*
and he employs a strong term, for he might have said, “your faults or
errors” but he says, “your defections from God;” as though he said,
“Though they have so grievously sinned, that by their crimes they have
deserved hundred deaths, yet I will heal them from these their atrocious
sins, and I will love them freely.”

<span id="xxi.v-p8"></span>The word <span id="xxi.v-p8.1"></span>נדבה,
*nudebe,* may be explained either freely or bountifully. *I will* then
*love them bountifully,* that is, with an abounding and not a common
love; or *I will love them freely,* that is gratuitously. But they who
render the words “I will love them of mine own accord,” that is, not by
constraint, pervert the sense of the Prophet; for how frigid is the
expression, that God is not forced to love us; and what meaning can
hence be elicited? But the Lord is said to love us freely, because he
finds in us no cause of love, for we are unworthy of being regarded or
viewed with any favour; but he shows himself liberal and beneficent in
this very act of manifesting his love to the unworthy.

<span id="xxi.v-p9"></span>We then perceive that the real meaning of the
Prophet is this, that though the Israelites had in various ways provoked
the wrath of God, and as it were designedly wished to perish, and to
have him to be angry with them; yet the Lord promises to be propitious
to them. In what way? Even in this, for he will give proof of his
bounty, when he will thus gratuitously embrace them. We now see how God
becomes a Father to us, and regards us as his children, even when he
abolishes our sins, and also when he freely admits us to the enjoyment
of his love. And this truth ought to be carefully observed; for the
world ever imagines that they come to God, and bring something by which
they can turn or incline him to love them. Nothing can be more inimical
to our salvation than this vain fancy.

<span id="xxi.v-p10"></span>Let us then learn from this passage, that
God cannot be otherwise a Father to us than by becoming our physician
and by healing our transgressions. But the order also is remarkable, for
God puts love after healing. Why? Because, as he is just, it must be
that he regards us with hatred as long as he imputes sins. It is then
the beginning of love, when he cleanses us from our vices, and wipes
away our spots. When therefore it is asked, how God loves men, the
answer is, that he begins to love them by a gratuitous pardon; for while
God imputes sins, it must be that men are hated by him. He then
commences to love us, when he heals our diseases.

<span id="xxi.v-p11"></span>It is not without reason that he adds, that
*the fury* of God *is turned away* from Israel. For the Prophet intended
to add this as a seal to confirm what he taught; for men ever dispute
with themselves when they hear that God is propitious to them. “How is
this, that he heals thine infirmities? for hitherto thou hast found him
to be angry with thee, and how art thou now persuaded that his wrath is
pacified?” Hence the Prophet seals his testimony respecting God’s love,
when he says, that his wrath has now ceased. *Turned away then is my
fury* “Though hitherto I have by many proofs, manifested to thee my
wrath, yet I now come to thee as one changed. Judge me not then by past
time, for I am now pacified to thee, and *my fury is from thee turned
away* It follows —

<span id="xxi.vi"></span>

<span id="xxi.vi-p1"></span><span id="xxi.vi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005)<span id="xxi.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.vi-p2"></span>**5.** I will be as the dew unto Israel: he
shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

<span id="xxi.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Ego quasi ros Israeli; florebit quasi
lilium (*alii vertunt,* rosam:) figet radices suas quasi Libanus (*vel,*
quasi Libani.)

<span id="xxi.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxi.vi-p5"></span><span id="xxi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.vi-p6"></span>The Prophet now again repeats what he had
said, that God, after restoring the people to favour, would be so
beneficent, as to render apparent the fruit of reconciliation. Seeing
that the Israelites had been afflicted, they ought to have imputed this
to their own sins, they ought to have perceived by such proofs, the
wrath of God. They had been so stupid as to have on the contrary
imagined, that their adversities happened to them by chance. The Prophet
had been much engaged in teaching this truth, that the Israelites would
be ever miserable until they turned to God, and also, that all their
affairs would be unhappy until they obtained pardon. He now speaks of a
change, that God would not only by words show himself propitious to
them, but would also give a proof by which the Israelites might know
that they were now blessed, because they had been reconciled to God; for
his blessing would be the fruit of his gratuitous love. Thus then ought
this sentence, *I will be to Israel as the dew,* to be connected: He
intimates that they were before dry, because they had been deprived of
God’s favour. He compares them to a rose or lily: for when the fields or
meadows are burnt up by the heat of the sun, and there is no dew
distilling from heaven, all things wither. How then can lilies and roses
flourish, except they derive moisture from heaven, and the dew refreshes
the grounds that they may put forth their strength? The reason then for
the similitude is this, because men become dry and destitute of all
vigour, when God withdraws his favour. Why? Because God must, as it
were, distil dew, otherwise, as it has been said, we become wholly
barren and dry. *I will be* then *as dew to Israel*

<span id="xxi.vi-p7"></span>And further, *He shall Flourish as the lily,
and his roots he shall send forth* Some render <span
id="xxi.vi-p7.1"></span>ויך, *vaic*, “and he will strike;” and <span
id="xxi.vi-p7.2"></span>נכה, *nuke,* means to strike. Others render the
words, “His branches will extend:” but the verb is in the singular
number, and the noun, “roots,” is in the plural. The Prophet then speaks
of Israel, that he strikes his roots; but he means to fix in a
metaphorical sense: he will then fix his roots. As when we strike, we
fetch a blow, and extend our arms; so he will spread forth his roots as
Libanus. This is the second effect of God’s favour and blessing; which
means, that the happiness of the people would be perpetual. With regard
to the rose or lily, the meaning of the metaphor is, that God would
suddenly, and as in a moment, vivify the Israelites, though they were
like the dead. as in one night the lily rises, and unexpectedly also the
rose; so sudden would be the change signified by this metaphor. But as
the lilies and the roses soon wither, it was not enough to promise to
Israel that their salvation would come suddenly; but it was needful to
add this second clause, — that though they would be like lilies and
roses, they yet would be also like tall trees, which have deep roots in
the ground, by which they remain firm and for a long time flourish.

<span id="xxi.vi-p8"></span>We now then perceive the meaning of the
Prophet. He mentions here the twofold effect of God’s blessing as to the
Israelites, — that their restoration would be sudden, as soon as God
would distil like the dew his favour upon them, and also that this
happiness would not be fading, but enduring and permanent. And the words
may be rendered, *as Libanus,* or as *those of Libanus: as Libanus he
shall cast forth his roots,* as the trees which grow there; or, he shall
cast forth his roots as the trees which are in Libanus. But as to the
sense there is no difference. It follows —

<span id="xxi.vii"></span>

<span id="xxi.vii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.vii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
14:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#006)<span id="xxi.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.vii-p2"></span>**6.** His branches shall spread, and his
beauty shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.

<span id="xxi.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Ibunt rami ejus, et erit quasi
olivae decor ejus, et odor ei quasi Libani.

<span id="xxi.vii-p4"></span>**7.** They that dwell under his shadow
shall return; they shall revive *as* the corn, and grow as the vine: the
scent thereof *shall be* as the wine of Lebanon.

<span id="xxi.vii-p5"></span>**7.** Revertentur incolae umbrae ejus (qui
habitant sub ejus umbra) et se vivificabunt tritico (*vel*, quasi
triticum,) et germinabunt tanquam vitis: odor ejus (alii vertunt,
Memoriam; sed male; nam <span id="xxi.vii-p5.1"></span>זכר*, saicar,
proprie memoriam significat, a verbo* <span
id="xxi.vii-p5.2"></span>זכר*,* quod est Recordari; sed metaphorice
etiam Hebraei odorem vocant memoriam; quia etiamsi res non videtur,
tamen diffundit suam fragrantiam: odor igitur ejus tanquam vini Libani.

<span id="xxi.vii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxi.vii-p7"></span><span id="xxi.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.vii-p8"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same subject,
but joins the beginning of the first verse with the second clause of the
former verse. He had said that the roots of the people would be deep
when God should restore them. Now he adds, that their *branches shall go
on* He mentions here “to go on” metaphorically for extending far; for
branches of trees seem to go on, when they extend and spread themselves
far and wide. *His branches,* then, *shall go on;* which means, that a
tree, after striking roots, remains not in the same state, but grows and
spreads forth its branches in all directions. In short, God promises a
daily increase to his blessing, after he has once begun to show himself
bountiful to the people of Israel. “I will then be bountiful at the
beginning; and further, he says, my blessing shall, as time passes,
increase and be multiplied.”

<span id="xxi.vii-p9"></span>He afterwards adds, *His comeliness shall
be like the olive* The Prophet accumulates similitudes, that he might
more fully confirm the people. And we certainly see that the minds of
men grow faint, when they look for prosperity from this or that quarter;
for there is hardly one in a hundred who is fully persuaded that when
God is propitious, all things turn out well and happily: for men regard
not the love of God when they wish things to be well with them, but
wander here and there through the whole world; and now they seek
prosperity from themselves, then from the earth, now from the air, then
from the sea. Since then it is so difficult to impress this truth fully
on the hearts of men, that the love of God is the fountain of all
blessings, the Prophet has collected together a number of similitudes to
confirm what he teaches. Then *his comeliness,* he says, *shall be like
the olive;* and further, *his fragrance like that of Libanus:* and
odoriferous trees, we know, grow on Mount Libanus. But by these various
similes the Prophet shows that the state of the people would be
prosperous and happy as soon as they should be received by God into
favour. He afterwards adds, *the dwellers under his shadow shall
return;* but I defer this till to-morrow.

<span id="xxi.viii"></span>

<span id="xxi.viii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xxi.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are so
miserable as soon as thou withdrawest thy favour from us, — O grant,
that we may deeply feel this conviction, and thus learn to be humble
before thee, and to hate our ownselves, and that we may not in the mean
lime deceive ourselves by such allurements as commonly prevail, to put
our hope in creatures or in this world, but raise our minds upwards to
thee, and fix on thee our hearts, and never doubt, but that when thou
embraces us with thy paternal love, nothing shall be wanting to us. And
in the meantime, may we suppliantly flee to thy mercy, and with true and
genuine confession, acknowledge this to be our only protection — that
thou deign to receive us into favour, and to abolish our sins, into
which we not only daily fall, but by which we also deserve eternal
death, so that we may daily rise through thy free pardon, till at length
our Redeemer Christ thy Son shall appear to us from heaven. Amen.

<span id="xxi.viii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xxi.ix"></span>

<span id="xxi.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-eighth

<span id="xxi.ix-p2"></span><span id="xxi.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ix-p3"></span>*The dwellers under his shadow shall
return*, (so it is literally;) *they shall revive themselves with corn*,
(or, *revive as the corn*;) *they shall grow as the vine: his odour
shall be as the wine of Libanus*. The Prophet proceeds with the same
subject, that God would show himself bountiful to his people, that it
might plainly appear from their different state that they had before
suffered just punishment. And he says, *The dwellers under his shadow
shall return.* But the verb <span id="xxi.ix-p3.1"></span>ישבו,
*ishibu*, in this place rightly means, “to be refreshed,” as in <span
id="xxi.ix-p3.2"></span>[Ps 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.ix-p3.2"></span>; where the law of God is spoken of as <span
id="xxi.ix-p3.3"></span>משיבת, *meshibet*, converting the soul; which
signifies the same as refreshing or restoring the soul. So the Prophet
intimates, that after the Israelites shall begin to flourish again,
their shadow would be vivifying, such as would restore and refresh those
lying under it. He calls the “dwellers under his shadow”, all those who
belong to the people; and compares the common state of the people of
Israel to a tree full of leaves, which extends its branches far and
wide, so that they who flee under its shadow are defended from the heat
of the sun. We now see the design of this metaphor, and what the Prophet
means by the verb <span id="xxi.ix-p3.4"></span>ישבו, *ishibu*

<span id="xxi.ix-p4"></span>He afterwards adds *They shall vivify
themselves with corn,* or, *revive as corn*. If we read the word in the
nominative case, the preposition <span id="xxi.ix-p4.1"></span>כ,
*caph,* is to be understood. The ablative case is more approved by some,
“They shall vivify themselves with corn.” But the former sense seems
more suitable; for, as I have said yesterday, the Prophet, as he handles
a truth difficult to be believed, does on this account accumulate
similitudes, such as serve for confirmation. Hence *they shall revive as
corn;* that is, they shall increase. As from one grain, we know, many
stalks proceed; so also, since the prophet speaks of the increase of the
people after their restoration to God’s favour, he says that they would
grow like corn.

<span id="xxi.ix-p5"></span>But he adds, *They shall germinate as the
vine* This similitude strengthens what I have just said, that the people
are compared both to trees and to corn, and also to vines. And what is
said of dwellers ought not to appear strange, for he wished more fully
to express how this common benefit would come, that is, to every one. He
afterwards adds, *His odour* shall be *as the wine of Libanus;* that is,
when they shall germinate as the vine, they shall not produce common or
sour wine, but the sweetest, such as is made on Mount Libanus, and which
is of the best odour. But the Prophet means no other thing than that the
Israelites will be happy, and that their condition will be prosperous
and joyful, when they shall be converted from their superstitions and
other vices, and shall wholly surrender themselves to be governed by
God. This is the meaning. Let us now proceed —

<span id="xxi.x"></span>

<span id="xxi.x-p1"></span><span id="xxi.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008)<span id="xxi.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.x-p2"></span>**8.** Ephraim *shall say*, What have I to do
any more with idols? I have heard *him*, and observed him: I *am* like a
green fir tree. From me is thy fruit found.

<span id="xxi.x-p3"></span>**8.** Ephraim, quid mihi adhuc cum idolis?
 <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) Ego respondi et respexi eum
(*vel*, exaudivi:) Ego tanquam abies frondosa: a me fructus tuus
inventus est.

<span id="xxi.x-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxi.x-p6"></span><span id="xxi.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.x-p7"></span>The Prophet again introduces the Israelites
speaking as before, that they would deplore their blindness and folly,
and renounce in future their superstitions. The confession then which we
have before noticed is here repeated; and it is a testimony of true
repentance when men, being ashamed, are displeased with themselves on
account of their sins, and apply their minds to God’s service, and
detest their whole former life. To this subject belongs what the Prophet
now says. It is a concise discourse; but yet its brevity contains
nothing obscure. *Ephraim,* he says, *What have I to do with idols?*
There is indeed a verb understood, ‘Ephraim “shall say”, What have I to
do with idols?’ But still it is evident enough what the Prophet means.
There is then in these words, as I have said, a sincere confession; for
the ten tribes express their detestation of their folly, that they had
alienated themselves from the true God, and became entangled in false
and abominable superstitions: hence they say, *What have we to do with
idols?* and when they add, *any more,* they confess that their former
life had been corrupt and vicious: at the same time they announce their
own repentance, when they say that they would have nothing more to do
with fictitious gods.

<span id="xxi.x-p8"></span>The reason follows, because God will hear and
look on Israel, so as to become to him a *shady tree.* Some so explain
this, as though God promised to be propitious to Israel after they had
manifested their repentance. But they pervert the sense of the Prophet;
for, on the contrary, he says, that after the Israelites shall perceive,
and find even by the effect, that God is propitious to them, they will
then say, “How foolish and mad we were, while we followed idols? It is
now then time that our souls should recumb on God.” Why? “Because we see
that there is nothing better for us than to live under his safeguard and
protection; for he hears us, he regards us, he is to us like a shady
tree, so that he protects us under his shadow.” We now perceive how
these two clauses are connected together; for God shows the reason why
Ephraim will renounce his idols because he will perceive that he was
miserably deceived as long as he wandered after his idols. How will he
perceive this? Because he will see that he is now favoured by the Lord,
and that he was before destitute of his help. When God then shall give
such a proof to his people, he will at the same time produce this
effect, that they will cast away all false confidences, and confess that
they were miserable and wretched while they were attached to idols. He
therefore says, *I have heard and favoured him* What is then later in
the words of the Prophet goes before; it precedes in order of things
this clause, Ephraim shall say, *What have I to do with idols?*

<span id="xxi.x-p9"></span>In saying, *I will be as a shady fir-tree,*
and adding at the same time, *From me is thy fruit found,* the two
similitudes seem not to accord; for, as it is well known, the fir-tree
bears no fruit. Why then is fruit mentioned? The answer is that these
two similitudes are not connected. For when God compares himself to a
fir-tree, he speaks only of protection: and we know that when one seeks
a cooling shade, he may find it under a fir-tree; besides, it is always
green, as we all know, when leaves fall from other trees; and further,
its height and thickness afford a good shadow. The reason, then, why God
promises to be like a fir-tree to his people is this, because all who
will fly under his shadow shall be preserved from the heat. But the
meaning of the second similitude, that God would supply his people with
fruit, is different. The Prophet had said before that the Israelites
would be like a tree, which fixes its roots deep in the ground. He now
transfers the name of a tree to God. Both these things are true; for
when God makes us fruitful we are branches set in the best vine; and it
is also true, that the whole fruit we have is from him; for all vigour
would fail us, except God were to supply us with moisture, and even life
itself. We now then see that there is no inconsistency in the words of
the Prophet, as the object is different *From me* then *is thy fruit
found;* as though God said, that the Israelites, if wise, would be
content with his favour; for they who seek support from him will be
satisfied; because they will find from him fruit sufficiently rich and
abundant. We now then understand what is meant. But it follows —

<span id="xxi.xi"></span>

<span id="xxi.xi-p1"></span><span id="xxi.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)<span id="xxi.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xi-p2"></span>**9.** Who *is* wise, and he shall
understand these *things*? prudent, and he shall know them? for the ways
of the Lord *are* right, and the just shall walk in them: but the
transgressors shall fall therein.

<span id="xxi.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Quis sapiens, et intelliget haec?
Intelligens, et cognoscet ea? Quia rectae viae Jehovae, et justi
ambulabunt in illis; et impii impingent in illis.

<span id="xxi.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxi.xi-p5"></span><span id="xxi.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet, I have no doubt, very often
inculcated what he here says, and frequently recalled it to mind, for we
know that he had a constant struggle with extreme obstinacy. It was not
only for one day that he found the people hard and perverse, but through
the whole course of his preaching. Since then the Israelites continued,
either openly to despise the Prophet’s teaching, or at least to regard
as fables what they heard from his mouth, or to chide him in words, and
even to threaten him, when he treated them with severity and when the
Prophet saw that the wickedness of the people was irreclaimable, he,
being armed with confidence, no doubt went forth very often among them,
and said “Ye think that you shall be unpunished, while ye make a mock of
what I teach; ye shall surely find at last that the ways of the Lord are
right.” And I have already reminded you, that the Prophets, after having
harangued the people at large and in many words, reduced at last into
brief heads what they had taught; for it is not probable, that since
Hosea had so long discharged the office of a teacher, he had spoken only
these few things, which might have been gone through in three hours.
This is absurd. But when he had diligently attended to the office
deputed to him, he afterwards, as I have said, collected together these
few chapters, that the remembrance of his teaching might be perpetuated.
What he was constrained then often to repeat, he now lays down at the
end of his book, that it might be as it were a complete sealing up of
his teaching.

<span id="xxi.xi-p7"></span>*Who is wise,* he says, *and he will
understand these things? who is intelligent, and he will know them?*
This interrogatory mode is expressive; for Hosea was amazed at the
fewness of those who yielded themselves to be taught by God. The
Israelites no doubt, arrogated to themselves great wisdom, as ungodly
men are wont to do. For they seem to themselves to be then especially
acute, when they laugh at every thing like piety, when they treat God’s
name with scorn, and indulge themselves, as we see at this day, in their
own impiety. And this diabolical rage lays hold on many, because they
think that they would be very simple and stupid, were they to embrace
any thing the Scripture contains. “O! what is faith but foolish
credulity?” This is the thought that comes to their minds. There are
also filthy dogs, who hesitate not to vomit forth such a reproach as
this, “Only believe! But what is this thy believing, but wilfully to
give up all judgement and all choice, and to allow thyself to be like
mute cattle driven here and there? If then thou art wise, believe
nothing.” Thus godless men speak; and hence, as I have said, they pride
themselves on their own acuteness, when they can shake off every fear of
God and all regard for divine truth. There were many such, we may easily
believe, in the time of the Prophet. Since then the whole land was
filled with dreadful contempt of God, and yet men commonly thought
themselves wise, nay, imagined in their deep thoughts, as Isaiah says,
 <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) that they could deceive God, he
now asks, *Who is wise, and he will understand?* As though he said, “I
indeed see, that if I believe you, ye are all wise; for, imitating the
giants, ye dare to rise up against God, and ye think yourselves
ingenious when ye elude every truth, when ye proudly tread religion
under foot; in this way ye are all wise. But at the same time, if there
be any grain of wisdom in you, you must surely acknowledge me to be sent
by God, and that what I declare is not the invention of men, but the
word of the living God.” We now then see what force there is in this
question, when the Prophet says, *Who is wise, and he will understand
these things? Who is intelligent, and he will know them?*

<span id="xxi.xi-p9"></span>We at the same time see that the Prophet
here condemns all the wisdom of men, and as it were thunders from heaven
against the pride of those who thus presumptuously mock God; for how
much soever they imagined themselves to be pre-eminent, he intimates
that they were both blind and stupid and mad. *Who* then *is wise?* he
says. But at the same time, he shows that the true wisdom of men is to
obey God and to embrace his word; as it is said in another place, that
wisdom and the beginning of wisdom is the fear of God, (<span
id="xxi.xi-p9.1"></span>[Pr 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007)<span
id="xxi.xi-p9.1"></span>.) Whosoever then wishes to be truly wise, he
must begin with the fear of God and with reverence to his word; for
where there is no religion, men cannot certainly understand any thing
aright. Let us suppose men endued, not only with great clearness of
mind, but also with the knowledge of all the sciences; let them be
philosophers, let them be physicians, let them be lawyers, let nothing
be wanting to them, except that they have no true knowledge of eternal
life, would it not be better for them to be mere cattle than to be thus
wise, to exercise their minds for a short time on fading things, and to
know that all their highly valued treasure shall perish with their life?
Surely to be thus wise is far more wretched than if men were wholly void
of understanding. Justly then does the Prophet intimate here that those
were not only foolish, but also mad, and wholly destitute of all
understanding, who regarded not celestial truth, and were deaf to the
Prophets, and discerned not when God spake, nor understood the power of
his word. All then who are not thus wise, the Prophet justly says, are
utterly void of all prudence and judgement: he therefore repeats the
same thing, *Who is wise, and he will understand these things? Who is
intelligent, and he will know them?* that is, “If any excels others, he
ought surely to show in this particular his wisdom, and if any one is
endued with common understanding, he ought to know what this doctrine
means, in which the image and glory of God shine forth brightly. All
then who know and understand nothing in this respect are no doubt
altogether foolish.”

<span id="xxi.xi-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *For right are the ways
of Jehovah* He alleges this truth in opposition to the profane rashness
of men, who haughtily reject God, and dare to despise his word. *Right,*
he says*, are the ways of the Lord:* and by saying that they are right,
he no doubt glances at the abominable blasphemies which the ungodly have
recourse to, when they wish to render the word of God not only odious
and contemptible, but also absurd, so as not to deserve any respect.
Thus we see at this day, that godless men not only in words reject both
the Law and the Prophets, but also search out pretences, that they may
appear to be doing right in destroying all faith in the oracles of God.
For instance, they seek out every sort of contradiction in Scripture,
every thing not well received, every thing different from the common
opinion, — all these absurdities, as they call them, they collect
together, and then they draw this conclusion, that all those are fools,
who submit to any religion, since the word of God, as they say, contains
so many absurd things. This raving madness prevailed then no doubt in
the world: and the Prophet, by saying that *right are the ways of
Jehovah*, means, that how much soever the ungodly may clamour, or
murmur, or taunt, nothing is yet done by the Lord but what is right, and
free from every blame and defect. However much then the ungodly may
vomit forth slanders against the word of God, it is the same as if they
threw dust into the air to darken the light of the sun; just so much
they effect, he seems to say, by their audacity: for perfect rectitude
will ever be found *in the ways of the Lord;* his word will ever be
found free from every stain or defect.

<span id="xxi.xi-p11"></span>He then adds, *And the just shall walk in
them, but in them shall the ungodly stumble* By saying that the just
shall walk in them, he confirms the last sentence by experience, for the
just really find *the ways of the Lord to be right* We ought also to be
furnished with this assurance, if we would boldly repel all the impious
calumnies, which are usually heaped together by profane men against the
word of God: for if we know not what it is to walk in the ways of the
Lord, we shall surely, as soon as any thing is alleged against them, be
suspended in doubt, or be wholly upset; for we see that many, not deeply
rooted in the word of God, instantly quail, as soon as any thing is said
against it, because they know not what it is to walk in the ways of the
Lord; but they who walk in the Lord’s ways courageously fight against
all the temptations of the world; they carry on the context that they
may attain celestial life; they feel assured that though now miserable
for a time, they shall yet be blessed, for they have embraced the grace
of God in Christ; they are sustained too by their own conscience, so
that they can look down on all the reproaches and slanders of the world,
and proceed onward in their course. They then who thus walk in the ways
of the Lord are unconquerable; yea, were the whole world to oppose them,
and were the ungodly with their profane words to infect the whole
atmosphere, the godly would still pursue their course until they reached
the end. *All the ways of Jehovah are therefore right, the just shall
walk in them; but in them shall the ungodly stumble,* or *fall*; for
<span id="xxi.xi-p11.1"></span>כשל, *cashel,* means both, but I prefer
rendering it “stumble,” as it seems more suitable to the design of the
Prophet. The just then find a plain and an even way in the word of the
Lord, and nothing stands in their path to obstruct their course, and by
daily advances they attain that to which the Lord calls them, even their
celestial inheritance. The just shall thus walk in the Lord’s ways,
because the Lord will lead them, as it were, by his hand; faith will be
to them for hundred eyes, and also for wings: and hope, at the same
time, sustains them; for they are armed with promises and
encouragements; they have also stimulants, whenever the Lord earnestly
exhorts them; they have, besides, in his threatenings, such terrors as
keep them awake. Thus then the faithful find in the word of the Lord the
best ways, and they follow them. But what of the ungodly? They imagine
all doubts, even the least, to be mountains: for as soon as they meet
with any thing intricate or obscure, they are confounded, and says “I
would gladly seek to know the Holy Scriptures but I meet with so many
difficulties.” Hence when a doubt is suggested, they regard it as a
mountain; nay, they purposely pretend doubts, that they may have some
excuse, when they wish to evade the truth, and turn aside that they may
not follow the Lord. *The ungodly,* then, *stumble* in the ways of
Jehovah. But this ought to be read adversatively, “Though the ungodly
stumble, yet the just shall always walk in the ways of Jehovah;” which
means, that there is no reason why the ungodly should stop or retard us
by their continual stumbling, and by exclaiming that the word of God is
full of what gives offence; for we shall find in it an even way, only
let us ascribe to God this glory, that he is just, and that his ways are
right. This is the meaning of the sentence.

<span id="xxi.xi-p12"></span>End of the Prophecies of Hosea

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc26020.htm#fr_99) <span
id="xxi.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.x-p4"></span> *Horsley* renders the first clause thus, —
“Ephraim! What have I to do any more with idols?” He considers it “the
exultation of Jehovah over idols;” but the expression is so strange,
taken in this sense, that the opinion cannot be entertained. It is
doubtless the confession of Ephraim, as most commentators regard it.
*Newcome’s* emendation, founded only on the Septuagint, is no less
admissible, — “What hath Ephraim to do any more with idols?” He changes
<span id="xxi.x-p4.1"></span>לי into <span id="xxi.x-p4.2"></span>לו.
Our version and Calvin’s is no doubt the best, most striking, and
affording the best sense. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc26020.htm#fr_100) <span
id="xxi.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.xi-p8"></span> <span id="xxi.xi-p8.1"></span>[Isa
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015)<span id="xxi.xi-p8.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Addenda to Hosea](cc26021)
