[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc26006)  [Next](cc26008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>Chapter 1

<span id="viii.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i-p1"></span>Lecture first

<span id="viii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p1"></span><span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** The word of the LORD that came unto
Hosea— the son of Beeri— in the days of Uzziah— Jotham— Ahaz— *and*
Hezekiah— kings of Judah— and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash—
king of Israel.

<span id="viii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Sermo Jehovae— qui fuit ad Hoseam
filium Beri— diebus Uzia— Jotham— Achaz— Ezechiae— regum Jehuda— et
diebus Jarobeam filii Joas regis Israel.

<span id="viii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.ii-p5"></span><span id="viii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii-p6"></span>This first verse shows the time in which
Hosea prophesied. He names four kings of Judah, — Uzziah, Jotham, Ahab,
Hezekiah. Uzziah, called also Azariah, reigned fifty-two years; but
after having been smitten with leprosy, he did not associate with men,
and abdicated his royal dignity. Jotham, his son, succeeded him. The
years of Jotham were about sixteen, and about as many were those of king
Ahab, the father of Hezekiah; and it was under king Hezekiah that Hosea
died. If we now wish to ascertain how long he discharged his office of
teaching, we must take notice of what sacred history says, — Uzziah
began to reign in the twenty seventh year of Jeroboam, the son of Joash.
By supposing that Hosea performed his duties as a teacher, excepting a
few years during the reign of Jeroboam, that is, the sixteen years which
passed from the beginning of Uzziah’s reign to the death of Jeroboam, he
must have prophesied thirty-six years under the reign of Uzziah. There
is, however, no doubt but that he began to execute his office some years
before the end of Jeroboam’s reign.

<span id="viii.ii-p7"></span>Here, then, there appear to be at least
forty years. Jotham succeeded his father, and reigned sixteen years; and
though it be a probable conjecture, that the beginning of his reign is
to be counted from the time he undertook the government, after his
father, being smitten with leprosy, was ejected from the society of men,
it is yet probable that the remaining time to the death of his father
ought to come to our reckoning. When however, we take for granted a few
years, it must be that Hosea had prophesied more than forty-five years
before Ahab began to reign. Add now the sixteen years in which Ahab
reigned and the number will amount to sixty-one. There remain the years
in which he prophesied under the reign of Hezekiah. It cannot, then, be
otherwise but that he had followed his office more than sixty years, and
probably continued beyond the seventieth year.

<span id="viii.ii-p8"></span>It hence appears with how great and with
how invincible courage and perseverance he was endued by the Holy
Spirit. But when God employs our service for twenty or thirty years we
think it very wearisome, especially when we have to contend with wicked
men, and those who do not willingly undertake the yoke, but
pertinaciously resist us; we then instantly desire to be set free, and
wish to become like soldiers who have completed their time. When
therefore, we see that this Prophet persevered for so long a time, let
him be to us an example of patience so that we may not despond, though
the Lord may not immediately free us from our burden.

<span id="viii.ii-p9"></span>Thus much of the four kings whom he names.
He must indeed have prophesied (as I have just shown) for nearly forty
years under the king Uzziah or Azariah, and then for some years under
the king Ahab, (to omit now the reign of Jotham, which was concurrent
with that of his father,) and he continued to the time of Hezekiah: but
why has he particularly mentioned Jeroboam the son of Joash, since he
could not have prophesied under him except for a short time? His son
Zachariah succeeded him; there arose afterward the conspiracy of
Shallum, who was soon destroyed; then the kingdom became involved in
great confusion; and at length the Assyrian, by means of Shalmanazar,
led away captive the ten tribes, which became dispersed among the Medes.
As this was the case, why does the Prophet here mention only one king of
Israel? This seems strange; for he continued his office of teaching to
the end of his reign and to his death. But an answer may be easily
given: He wished distinctly to express, that he began to teach while the
state was entire; for, had he prophesied after the death of Jeroboam, he
might have seemed to conjecture some great calamity from the then
present view of things: thus it would not have been prophecy, or, at
leas, this credit would have been much less. “He now, forsooth! divines
what is, evident to the eyes of all.” For Zachariah flourished but a
short time; and the conspiracy alluded to before was a certain presage
of an approaching destruction, and the kingdom became soon dissolved.
Hence the Prophet testifies here in express words, that he had already
threatened future vengeance to the people, even when the kingdom of
Israel flourished in wealth and power, when Jeroboam was enjoying his
triumphs, and when prosperity inebriated the whole land.

<span id="viii.ii-p10"></span>This, then, was the reason why the Prophet
mentioned only this one king; for under him the kingdom of Israel became
strong, and was fortified by many strongholds and a large army, and
abounded also in great riches. Indeed, sacred history tells us, that God
had by Jeroboam delivered the kingdom of Israel, though he himself was
unworthy, and that he had recovered many cities and a very wide extent
of country. As, then, he had increased the kingdom, as he had become
formidable to all his neighbours, as he had collected great riches, and
as the people lived in ease and luxury, what the Prophet declared seemed
incredible. “Ye are not,” he said, “the people of the Lord; ye are
adulterous children, ye are born of fornication.” Such a reproof
certainly seemed not seasonable. Then he said, “The kingdom shall be
taken from you, destruction is nigh to you.” “What, to us? and yet our
king has now obtained so many victories, and has struck terror into
other kings.” The kingdom of Judah, which was a rival, being then nearly
broken down, there was no one who could have ventured to suspect such an
event.

<span id="viii.ii-p11"></span>We now, then, perceive why the Prophet
here says expressly that he had prophesied under Jeroboam. He indeed
prophesied after his death, and followed his office even after the
destruction of the kingdom of Israel, but he began to teach at a time
when he was a sport to the ungodly, who exalted themselves against God,
and boldly despised his threatening as long as he spared and bore with
them; which is ever the case, as proved by the constant experience of
all ages. We hence see more clearly with what power of the Spirit God
had endued the Prophet, who dared to rise up against so powerful a king,
and to reprove his wickedness, and also to summon his subjects to the
same judgement. When, therefore, the Prophet conducted himself so
boldly, at a time when the Israelites were not only sottish on account
of their great success, but also wholly insane, it was certainly nothing
short of a miracle; and this ought to avail much to establish his
authority. We now then, see the design of the inscription contained in
the first verse. It follows —

<span id="viii.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p1"></span><span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002)<span id="viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p2"></span>**2.** The beginning of the word of the
Lord by Hosea. And the Lord said to Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of
whoredoms and children of whoredoms: for the land hath committed great
whoredom, *departing* from the Lord

<span id="viii.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Principiam quo loquutus est Jehova
per Hoseam, (alii vertunt, cum Hosea; ad verbum est, in Hosea; est
liters beth.) Dixit Jehova ad Hoseam, Vade, sume tibi uxorem
scortationum et filios scortationem, quia scortando scortabitur terra,
(hoc est, scortata est,) ne sequatur Jehovam..

<span id="viii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.iii-p5"></span><span id="viii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p6"></span>The Prophet shows here what charge was
given him at the beginning, even to declare open war with the
Israelites, and to be, as it were, very angry in the person of God, and
to denounce destruction. He begins not with smooth things, nor does he
gently exhort the people to repentance, nor adopt a circuitous course to
soften the asperity of his doctrine. He shows that he had used nothing
of this kind, but says, that he had been sent like heralds or messengers
to proclaim war. The beginning, then, of what the Lord spake by Hosea
was this, “This people are an adulterous race, all are born, as it were,
of a harlot, the kingdom of Israel is the filthiest brothel; and I now
repudiate and reject them, I no longer own them as my children.” This
was no common vehemence. We hence see that the word *beginning* was not
set down without reason, but advisedly, that we may know that the
Prophet, as soon as he undertook the office of teaching, was vehement
and severe, and, as it were, fulminated against the kingdom of Israel.

<span id="viii.iii-p7"></span>Now, if it be asked, why was God so
greatly displeased? why did he not first recall the wretched men to
himself, since the usual method seems to have been, that the Prophet
tried, by a kind and paternal address, to restore those to a sound mind
who had departed from the pure worship of God, — why, then, did not God
adopt this ordinary course? But we hence gather that the diseases of the
people were incurable. The Prophet, no doubt, intimates here distinctly,
that he was sent by God, when the state of things was almost past
recovery. We indeed know that God is not wont to deal so severely with
men, but when he has tried all other remedies; and this may doubtless be
easily learned from the records of Scripture. The ten tribes,
immediately after their revolt from the family of David, having
renounced the worship of God, embraced idolatry and ungodly
superstitions. They ought to have retained in their minds the
recollection of this oracle,

<span id="viii.iii-p8"></span>‘The Lord has chosen mount Zion, where he
has desired to be worshipped; this,’ he said ‘is my rest forever; here
will I dwell, for I have chosen it,’ (<span
id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>[Ps. 132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="viii.iii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.iii-p9"></span>And this prediction, we know, had not been
once or ten times repeated, but a hundred times, that it might be more
firmly fixed in the hearts of men. Since, then, they ought to have had
this truth fully impressed on their hearts, that the Lord would have
himself worshipped nowhere except on mount Zion, it was monstrous
stupidity in them to erect a new temple and to make the calves. That the
people, then, had so quickly fallen away from God was an instance of the
most perverse madness. But, as I have said, they had reached the highest
point of impiety. When God punished so great sins by Jehu, the people
ought then to have returned to the pure worship of God, and there was
some reformation in the land; but they ever reverted to their own
nature, yea, the event proved that they only dissembled for a short
time; so blinded they were by a diabolical perverseness, that they ever
continued in their superstitions. It is not, then, to be wondered at,
that the Lord made this beginning by Hosea, “*Ye are all born of
fornication*, your kingdom is the filthiest brothel; ye are not my
people, ye are not beloved.” Who, then, will not allow, that God, by
fulminating in so dreadful a manner against this people, dealt justly
with them, and for the best reason? The contumacy of the people was so
indomitable that it could be overcome in no other way. We now understand
why the Prophet used this expression, *The beginning of speaking which
God made*

<span id="viii.iii-p10"></span>Then it follows, *in Hosea*. He had said
in the first verse, *The word of Jehovah which was to Hosea*; he now
says, <span id="viii.iii-p10.1"></span>נהושע, *beusho*, in Hosea; and he
adds God spake and said to Hosea, repeating the preposition used in the
first verse. The word of the Lord is said to have been to Hosea, not
simply because God addressed the Prophet, but because he sent him forth
with certain commissions, for in this sense is the word of God said to
have been to the Prophets. God addresses his word also indiscriminately
to others whomsoever he is pleased to teach by his word, but he speaks
to and addresses his Prophets in a peculiar way, for he makes them the
ministers and heralds of his word, and puts, as it were, into their
mouth what they afterwards bring forth to the people. So Christ says,
that the word of God came to kings, because he constitutes and appoints
them to govern mankind. “If he calls them gods,” he says, “to whom the
word of God came;” and that psalm, we know, was written with a special
reference to kings. We now perceive what this sentence in the first
verse contains. *The word of God came to Hosea*; for the Lord did not
simply address the Prophet in a common way, but furnished him with
instructions, that he might afterwards teach the people, as it were, in
the person of God himself.

<span id="viii.iii-p11"></span>It is now added in the second verse, *The
beginning of* *speaking, such as the Lord made by Hosea*. They who give
this rendering, “with Hosea,” seem to explain the Prophet’s meaning
frigidly. The letter <span id="viii.iii-p11.1"></span>ב, *beth*, I know,
has this sense often in Scripture; but the Prophet, no doubt, in this
place represents himself as the instrument of the Holy Spirit. God then
spake *in Hosea*, or by Hosea, for he brought forth nothing from his own
brain, but God spake by him; this is a form of speaking with which we
shall often meet. On this, indeed, depends the whole authority of God’s
servants that they give not themselves loose reins, but faithfully
deliver, as it were, from hand to hand, what the Lord has commanded
them, without adding any thing whatever of their own. God then spake in
Hosea. It afterwards follows, *The Lord said to Hosea*. Now this, which
is said the third time, or three times repeated, is nothing else than
the commission in different forms. He first said in general, “The word
of the Lord which was to Hosea;” now he says, *The Lord spake thus,* and
he expresses distinctly what the word was which he referred to in the
first verse.

<span id="viii.iii-p12"></span>*Go*, he says, *take to thee a wife of
wantonness, and the* *children of wantonness*; and the reason is added,
*for by* *fornicating, or wantoning, has the land grown wanton*. He
doubtless speaks here of the vices which the Lord had long endured with
inexpressible forbearance. *By wantoning then has the land grown wanton,
that it should not follow Jehovah.*

<span id="viii.iii-p13"></span>Here interpreters labour much, because it
seems very strange that the Prophet should take a harlot for a wife.
Some say that this was an extraordinary case.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) Certainly such a license could not have been
borne in a teacher. We see what Paul requires in a bishop, and no doubt
the same was required formerly in the Prophets, that their families
should be chaste and free from every stain and reproach. It would have
then exposed the Prophet to the scorn of all, if he had entered a
brothel and taken to himself a harlot; for he speaks not here of an
unchaste woman only, but of a woman of wantonness, which means a common
harlot, for a woman of wantonness is she called, who has long habituated
herself to wantonness, who has exposed herself to all, to gratify the
wish of all, who has prostituted herself, not once nor twice, nor to few
men, but to all. That this was done by the Prophet seems very
improbable. But some reply as I have said, that this ought not to be
regarded as a common rule, for it was an extraordinary command of God.
And yet it seems not consistent with reason, that the Lord should thus
gratuitously render his Prophet contemptible; for how could he expect to
be received on coming abroad before the public, after having brought on
himself such a disgrace? If he had married a wife such as is here
described, he ought to have concealed himself for life rather than to
undertake the Prophetic office. Their opinion, therefore, is not
probable, who think that the Prophet had taken such a wife as is here
described.

<span id="viii.iii-p16"></span>Then another reason, utterly
unresolvable, militates against them; for the Prophet is not only bidden
to take a wife of wantonness, but also children of wantonness, begotten
by whoredom. It is, therefore, the same as if he himself had committed
whoredom.  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) For if we say that he
married a wife who had previously conducted herself with some indecency
and want of chastity, (as Jerome at length argues in order to excuse the
Prophet,) the excuse is frivolous, for he speaks not only of the wife,
but also of the children, inasmuch as God would have the whole offspring
to be adulterous, and this could not be the case in a lawful marriage.
Hence almost all the Hebrews agree in this opinion, that the Prophet did
not actually marry a wife, but that he was bidden to do this in a
vision. And we shall see in the third chapter (<span
id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>[Ho
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)<span id="viii.iii-p17.1"></span>)
almost the same thing described; and yet what is narrated there could
not have been actually done, for the Prophet is bidden to marry a wife
who had violated her conjugal fidelity, and after having bought her, to
retain her at home for a time. This, we know, was not done. It then
follows that this was a representation exhibited to the people.

<span id="viii.iii-p18"></span>Some object and say, that the whole
passage, as given by the Prophet, cannot be understood as relating a
vision. Why not? For the vision, they say, was given to him alone, and
God had a regard to the whole people rather than to the Prophet. But it
may be, and it is probable, that no vision was presented to the Prophet,
but that God only ordered him to proclaim what had been given him in
charge. When, therefore, the Prophet began to teach, he commenced
somewhat in this way: “The Lord places me here as on a stage, to make
known to you that I have married a wife, a wife habituated to adulteries
and whoredoms, and that I have begotten children by her.” The whole
people knew that he had done no such thing; but the Prophet spake thus
in order to set before their eyes a vivid representation. Such then, was
the vision, a figurative exhibition, not that the Prophet knew this by a
vision, but the Lord had bidden him to relate this parable, (so to
speak,) or this similitude, that the people might see, as in a living
portraiture, their turpitude and perfidiousness. It is, in short, an
exhibition, in which the thing itself is not only set forth in words,
but is also placed, as it were, before their eyes in a visible form. The
reason is added, *for by wantoning has the land grown wanton*

<span id="viii.iii-p19"></span>We now then see how the words of the
Prophet ought to be understood; for he assumed a character, when going
forth before the public, and in this character he said to the people,
that God had bidden him to take a harlot for his wife, and to beget
adulterous children by her. His ministry was not on this account made
contemptible, for they all knew that he had ever lived virtuously and
temperately; they all knew that his household was exempt from every
reproach; but here he exhibited in his assumed character, as it were, a
living image of the baseness of the people. This is the meaning, and I
see nothing strained in this explanation; and we, at the same time, see
the meaning of this clause, *By wantoning has the* *land grown wanton.*
Hosea might have said this in one word, but he had to address the deaf,
and we know how great and how stupid is the madness of those who delight
themselves in their own superstitions, they cannot bear any reproof. The
Prophet then would not have been attended to, unless he had exhibited,
as in a mirror before their eyes, what he wished to be understood by
them, as though he had said, “If none of you can so know himself as to
own his public baseness, if ye are all so obstinate against God, at
least know now by my assumed character, that you are all adulterous, and
derive your origin from a filthy brothel, for God declares thus
concerning you; and as you are not willing to receive such a
declaration, it is now set before you in my assumed character.”

<span id="viii.iii-p20"></span>*That it should not follow Jehovah*,
literally, *From after Jehovah*, <span id="viii.iii-p20.1"></span>מאחרי,
*meachri*. We here see what is the spiritual chastity of God’s people,
and what also is the signification of the word wantoning. Then the
spiritual chastity of God’s people is to follow the Lord; and what else
is this to follow, but to suffer ourselves to be ruled by his word, and
willingly to obey him, to be ready and prepared for any work to which he
may call us? When then the Lord goes before us with his instruction and
shows the way, and we become teachable and obedient, and look up to him,
and turn not aside, either to the right or to the left hand, but bring
our whole life to the obedience of faith, — this is really to follow the
Lord; and it is a most beautiful definition of the spiritual chastity of
God’s people.

<span id="viii.iii-p21"></span>And we may also, from the opposite of
this, learn what it is to grow wanton; we do so when we depart from the
word of the Lord, when we give ear to false doctrines, when we abandon
ourselves to superstitions; when we, in short, wander after our own
devices, and keep not our thoughts under the authority of the word of
the Lord. But as to the word wantoning, more will be said in chapter 2;
but I only wished now briefly to touch on what the Prophet means when he
chides the Israelites for having all become wanton. Now follows —

<span id="viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.iv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="viii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast once
adopted us, and continues to confirm this thy favour by calling us
unceasingly to thyself, and dost not only severely chastise us, but also
gently and paternally invite us to thyself, and exhort us at the same
time to repentance, — O grant that we may not be so hardened as to
resist thy goodness, nor abuse this thine incredible forbearance, but
submit ourselves in obedience to thee; that whenever thou mayest
severely chastise us, we may bear thy corrections with genuine
submission of faith, and not continue untameable and obstinate to the
last, but return to thee the only fountain of life and salvation, that
as thou has once begun in us a good work, so thou mayest perfect it to
the day of our Lord. Amen.

<span id="viii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Second

<span id="viii.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p1"></span><span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Hos.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004)<span id="viii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p2"></span>**3.** So he went and took Gomer the
daughter of Diblaim; which conceived, and bare him a son.

<span id="viii.vi-p3"></span>**3.** Et profectus est et accepit Gomer,
filiam Diablaim: et concepit et peperit ei filium.

<span id="viii.vi-p4"></span>**4.** And the LORD said unto him, Call his
name Jezreel; for yet a little *while*, and I will avenge the blood of
Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the kingdom of
the house of Israel.

<span id="viii.vi-p5"></span>**4.** Et dixit Jehova ad eum, Voca nomen
Jizreel, quia adhuc pauxillum, et visitabo sanguines Jizreel super domum
Jehu, et cessare faciam (*hoc est*, abolebo) regnum domus Israel.

<span id="viii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="viii.vi-p7"></span><span id="viii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p8"></span>We said in yesterday’s Lecture, that God
ordered his Prophet to take a wife of whoredoms, but that this was not
actually done; for what other effect could it have had, but to render
the Prophet contemptible to all? and thus his authority would have been
reduced to nothing. But God only meant to show to the Israelites by such
a representation, that they vaunted themselves without reason; for they
had nothing worthy of praise, but were in every way ignominious. It is
then said, Hosea *went and took* to himself *Gomer, the daughter of
Diblaim* <span id="viii.vi-p8.1"></span>גמר, *Gomer*, means in Hebrew,
*to fail*; and sometimes it signifies actively, *to consume*; and hence
*Gomer* means consumption. But *Diblaim* are masses of figs, or dry figs
reduced to a mass. The Greeks call them <span
id="viii.vi-p8.2"></span>παλαθας. The Cabalists say here that the wife
of Hosea was called by this name, because they who are much given to
wantonness at length fall into death and corruption. So consumption is
the daughter of figs, for by figs they understand the sweetness of
lusts. But it will be more simple to say, that this representation was
exhibited to the people, that the Prophet set before them, instead of a
wife, consumption, the daughter of figs; that is, that he laid before
them masses of figs or <span id="viii.vi-p8.3"></span>παλαθας,
representing Gomer, which means consumption and that he adopted a
similar manner with mathematicians, when they describe their figures, —
“If this be so much, then that is so much.” We may then thus understand
the passage, that the Prophet here named for his wife the corrupt masses
of figs; so that she was consumption or putrefaction, born of figs,
reduced into such masses. For I still persist in the opinion I expressed
yesterday, that the Prophet did not enter a brothel to take a wife to
himself: for otherwise he must have begotten bastards, and not
legitimate children; for, as it was said yesterday, the case with the
wife and the children was the same.

<span id="viii.vi-p9"></span>We now then understand the true meaning of
this verse to be, that the Prophet did not marry a harlot, but only
exhibited her before the eyes of the people as though she were
corruption, born of putrified masses of figs.

<span id="viii.vi-p10"></span><span id="viii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p11"></span>It now follows, the wife *conceived*, —
the imaginary one, the wife as represented and exhibited. She
*conceived*, he says, *and bare a son: then said Jehovah to him, Call
his name Jezreel*. Many render <span id="viii.vi-p11.1"></span>יזרעאל,
*Izroal*, dispersion, and follow the Chaldean paraphraser. They also
think that this ambiguous term contains some allusion; for as <span
id="viii.vi-p11.2"></span>זרע, *zaro* is seed, they suppose that the
Prophet indirectly glances at the vain boasting of the people; for they
called themselves the chosen seed, because they had been planted by the
Lord; hence the name Jezreel. But the Prophet here, according to these
interpreters, exposes this folly to contempt; as though he said, “Ye are
Israel; but in another respect, ye are dispersion: for as the seed is
cast in various directions so the Lord will scatter you, and thus
destroy and cast you away. You think yourselves to have been planted in
this land, and to have a standing from which you can never be shaken or
torn away; but the Lord will, with his own hand, lay hold on you to cast
you away to the remotest regions of the world.” This sense is what many
interpreters give; nor do I deny but that the Prophet alludes to the
words sowing and seed; with this I disagree not: only it seems to me
that the Prophet looks farther, and intimates that they were wholly
degenerate, not the true nor the genuine offspring of Abraham.

<span id="viii.vi-p12"></span>There is, as we see, much affinity between
the names *Jezreel* and *Israel*. How honourable is the name, Israel, it
is evident from its etymology; and we also know that it was given from
above to the holy father Jacob. God, then, the bestower of this name,
procured by his own authority, that those called Israelites should be
superior to others: and then we must remember the reason why Jacob was
called Israel; for he had a contest with God, and overcame in the
struggle, (<span id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>[Ge
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)<span
id="viii.vi-p12.1"></span>.) Hence the posterity of Abraham gloried that
they were Israelites. And the prophet Isaiah also glances at this
arrogance, when he says,

<span id="viii.vi-p13"></span>‘Come ye who are called by the name of
Israel,’  
(<span id="viii.vi-p13.2"></span>[Isa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001)<span id="viii.vi-p13.2"></span>;)

<span id="viii.vi-p14"></span>as though he said, “Ye are Israelites, but
only as to the title, for the reality exists not in you.”

<span id="viii.vi-p15"></span>Let us now return to our Hosea. *Call*, he
says *his name Jezreel*;  <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) as though he
said, “They call themselves Israelites; but I will show, by a little
change in the word, that they are degenerate and spurious, for they are
Jezreelites rather than Israelites.” And it appears that Jezreel wag the
metropolis of the kingdom in the time of Ahab, and where also that great
slaughter was made by Jehu, which is related in <span
id="viii.vi-p16.2"></span>[2Ki 10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#000)<span
id="viii.vi-p16.2"></span> We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet to
be, that the whole kingdom had degenerated from its first beginning, and
could no longer be deemed as including the race of Abraham; for the
people had, by their own perfidy, fallen from that honour, and lost
their first name. God then, by way of contempt, calls them Jezreelites,
and not Israelites.

<span id="viii.vi-p17"></span>A reason afterwards follows which confines
this view, *For yet a little while, and I will visit the slaughters of
Jezreel upon the house of Jehu*. Here interpreters labour not a little,
because it seems strange that God should visit the slaughter made by
Jehu, which yet he had approved; nay, Jehu did nothing thoughtlessly,
but knew that he was commanded to execute that vengeance. He was,
therefore, God’s legitimate minister; and why is what God commanded
imputed to him now as a crime? This reasoning has driven some
interpreters to take “bloods” here for wicked deeds in general: ‘I will
avenge the sins of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu.’ Some say, “I will
avenge the slaughter of Naboth:” but this is wholly absurd, nor can it
suit the place, for, “upon the house of Jehu,” is distinctly expressed;
and God did not visit the slaughter on the house of Jehu, but on the
house of Ahab. But they who are thus embarrassed do not consider what
the Prophet has in view. For God, when he wished Jehu with his drawn
sword to destroy the whole house of Ahab, had this end as his object, —
that Jehu should restore pure worship, and cleanse the land from all
defilements. Jehu then was stirred up by the Spirit of God, that he
might re-establish God’s pure worship. When a defender of religion, how
did he act? He became contented with his prey. After having seized on
the kingdom for himself, he confirmed idolatry and every abomination. He
did not then spend his labour for God. Hence that slaughter with regard
to Jehu was robbery; with regard to God it was a just revenge. this view
ought to satisfy us as to the explanation of this passage; and I bring
nothing but what the Holy Scripture contains. For after Jehu seemed to
burn with zeal for God, he soon proved that there was nothing sincere in
his heart; for he embraced all the superstitions which previously
prevailed in the kingdom of Israel. In short, the reformation under Jehu
was like that under Henry King of England; who, when he saw that he
could not otherwise shake off the yoke of the Roman Antichrist than by
some disguise, pretended great zeal for a time: he afterwards raged
cruelly against all the godly, and doubled (<span
id="viii.vi-p17.1"></span>*duplicavit* — duplicated) the tyranny of the
Roman Pontiff: and such was Jehu.

<span id="viii.vi-p18"></span>When we duly consider what was done by
Henry, it was indeed an heroic valour to deliver his kingdom from the
hardest of tyrannies: but yet, with regard to him, he was certainly
worse than all the other vassals of the Roman Antichrist; for they who
continue under that bondage, retain at least some kind of religion; but
he was restrained by no shame from men, and proved himself wholly void
of every fear towards God. He was a monster, (<span
id="viii.vi-p18.1"></span>*homo belluinus* — a beastly man) and such was
Jehu.

<span id="viii.vi-p19"></span>Now, when the Prophet says, *I will avenge
the slaughters of Jezreel* upon the house of Jehu, it is no matter of
wonder. How so? For it was the highest honour to him, that God anointed
him king, that he, who was of a low family, was chosen a king by the
Lord. He ought then to have stretched every nerve to restore God’s pure
worship, and to destroy all superstitions. This he did not; on the
contrary, he confirmed them. He was then a robber, and as to himself, no
minister of God.

<span id="viii.vi-p20"></span>The meaning of the whole then is this: “Ye
are not Israelites, (there is here only an ambiguity as to the
pronunciation of one letter,) but Jezreelites;” which means, “Ye are not
the descendants of Jacob, but Jezreelites;” that is, “Ye are a
degenerate people, and differ nothing from king Ahab. He was accursed,
and under him the kingdom became accursed. Are ye changed? Is there any
reformation? Since then ye are obstinate in your wickedness, though ye
proudly claim the name of Jacob, ye are yet unworthy of such an honour.
I therefore call you Jezreelites.”

<span id="viii.vi-p21"></span>And the reason is added, *For yet a little
while, and I will visit the slaughters upon the house of Jehu*. God now
shows that the people were destitute of all glory. But they thought that
the memory of all sins had been buried since the time that the house of
Ahab had been cut off. “Why? I will avenge these slaughters,” saith the
Lord. It is customary, we know, with hypocrites, after having punished
one sin, to think that all things are lawful to them, and to wish to be
thus discharged before God. A thief will punish a murder, but he himself
will commit many murders. He thinks himself redeemed, because he has
paid God the price in punishing one man; but he lets go others, who have
been his accomplices, and he himself hesitates not to commit many unjust
murders. Since, then, hypocrites thus mock God, the Prophet now justly
shakes off such senselessness, and says*, I will avenge these
slaughters.* “Do ye think it a deed worthy of praise in Jehu, to destroy
and root out the house of Ahab? I indeed commanded it to be done but he
turned the vengeance enjoined on him to another end.” How so? Because he
became a robber; for he did not punish the sins of Ahab, because he did
the same himself to the end of life, and continued to do the same in his
posterity, for Jeroboam was the fourth from him in the kingdom. “Since,
then, Jehu did not change the condition of the country, and ye have ever
been obstinate in your wickedness, I will avenge these slaughters.”

<span id="viii.vi-p22"></span>This is a remarkable passage; for it shows
that it is not enough, nay, that it is of no moment, that a man should
conduct himself honourably before men, except he possesses also an
upright and sincere heart. He then who punishes evil deeds in others,
ought himself to abstain from them, and to measure the same justice to
himself as he does to others; for he who takes to himself a liberty to
sin, and yet punishes others, provokes against himself the wrath of God.

<span id="viii.vi-p23"></span>We now then perceive the true sense of
this sentence, *I will avenge the slaughters of Jezreel*, to be this,
that he would avenge the slaughters made in the valley of Jezreel on the
house of Jehu. It is added *and I will abolish the kingdom of the house
of Israel*. The house of Israel he calls that which had separated from
the family of David, as though he said, “This is a separated house.” God
had indeed joined the whole people together, and they became one body.
It was torn asunder under Jeroboam. This was God’s dreadful judgement;
for it was the same as if the people, like a torn body, had been cut
into two parts. But God, however, had hitherto preserved these two
parts, as though they were but one body, and would have become the
Redeemer of both people, had not a base defection followed. And the
Israelites having become, as it were, putrified, so as now to be no part
of his chosen people, our Prophet, by way of contempt and reproach,
rightly calls them the house of Israel. It now follows —

<span id="viii.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p1"></span><span id="viii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#005)<span id="viii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p2"></span>**5.** And it shall come to pass at that
day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.

<span id="viii.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et erit in die illa et conteram
arcum (*vel*— confringum) Israel in valle Jizreel.

<span id="viii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.vii-p5"></span><span id="viii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vii-p6"></span>This verse was intentionally added; for
the Israelites were so inflated with their present good fortune, that
they laughed at the judgement denounced. They indeed knew that they were
well furnished with arms, and men, and money; in short, they thought
themselves in every way unassailable. Hence the Prophet declares, that
all this could not prevent God from punishing them. “Ye are,” he says,
“inflated with pride; ye set up your velour against God, thinking
yourselves strong in arms and in power; and because ye are military men,
ye think that God can do nothing; and yet your bows cannot restrain his
hand from destroying you. But when he says, *I will break the bow*, he
mentions a part for the whole; for under one sort he comprehends every
kind of arms. But as to what the Prophet had in view, we see that his
only object was to break down their false confidence; for the Israelites
thought that they should not be exposed to the destruction which Hosea
had predicted; for they were dazzled with their own power, and thought
themselves beyond the reach of any danger, while they were so well
fortified on every side. Hence the Prophet says, that all their
fortresses would be nothing against God; for *in that day*, when the
ripe time for vengeance shall come, the Lord will break all their bows,
he will tear in pieces all their arms, and reduce to nothing their
power.

<span id="viii.vii-p7"></span>We are here warned ever to take heed, lest
any thing should lead us to a torpid state when God threatens us. Though
we may have strength, though fortune (so to speak) may smile on us,
though, in a word, the whole world should combine to secure our safety,
yet there is no reason why we should felicitate ourselves, when God
declares himself opposed to and angry with us. Why so? Because, as he
can preserve us when unarmed whenever he pleases, so he can spoil us of
all our arms, and reduce our power to nothing. Let this verse then come
to our minds whenever God terrifies us by his threatening; and what it
teaches us is, that he can take away all the defences in which we vainly
trust.

<span id="viii.vii-p8"></span>Now, as Jezreel was the metropolis of the
kingdom, the Prophet distinctly mentions the place, *I will break in
pieces the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel*; that is, the Lord
sees what sort of fortress there is in Samaria, in Jezreel; but he will
make an end of you there, in the very midst of the land. Ye think that
you have there a place of safety and a firm position; but the Lord will
bring you to nothing even in the valley of Jezreel. It follows —

<span id="viii.viii"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p1"></span><span id="viii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006)<span id="viii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And she conceived again — and bare
a daughter. And *God* said unto him — Call her name Loruhamah: for I
will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I will utterly
take them away.

<span id="viii.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et concepit adhuc (concepit
rursum) et peperit filiam: et dixit ei— Voca nomen ejus Loruchama— (*hoc
est*— non adepta misericordiam— *vel*— non dilecta: *sic enim Graeci
verterunt*— *et Paulus sequutus est illam receptam versionem capite*—
*ad Rom.*) quia non adjiciam amplius ut misericordia persequar (*vel*—
ut diligam) domum Israel— quia tollendo tollam eos.

<span id="viii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.viii-p5"></span><span id="viii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet shows in this verse that
things were become worse and worse in the kingdom of Israel, that they
sinned, keeping within no limits, that they rushed headlong into the
extremes of impiety. He has already told us, by calling them
Jezreelites, that they were from the beginning rejected and degenerate;
as though he said, “Your origin has nothing commendable in it; ye think
yourselves to be very eminent, because ye derive your descent from holy
Jacob; but ye are spurious children, born of a harlot: a brothel is not
the house of Abraham, nor is the house of Abraham a brothel. Ye are then
the offspring of debauchery.” But he now goes farther and says, that as
time advanced, they had ever been falling into a worse state; for this
word, Loruchamah, is a more disgraceful name than Jezreel: and the Lord
also denounces here his vengeance more openly, when he says,

<span id="viii.viii-p7"></span>*I will no more add to pursue with mercy
the house of Israel* <span id="viii.viii-p7.1"></span>רחם, *rechem*,
means to pity, and also to love: but this second meaning is derived from
the other; for <span id="viii.viii-p7.2"></span>רחם, *rechem*, is not
simply to love, but to show gratuitous favour. By calling the daughter,
then, Lo-ruchamah, God intimates that his favour was now taken away from
the people. We know, indeed, that the people had been freely chosen; for
if the cause of adoption be inquired for, it must be said to have been
the mere mercy and goodness of God. Now then God, in repudiating the
people, says, “Ye are like a daughter whom her father casts away and
disowns, because he deems her unworthy of his favour.” We now, then,
comprehend the design of the Prophet; for, after having shown the
Israelites to have been from the beginning spurious, and not the true
children of Abraham, he now adds, that, in course of time, they had
become so corrupt, that God would now utterly disown them, and would no
longer deem them as his house. He, therefore, charges them with
something more grievous than before, by saying, ‘Call this daughter
Lo-ruchamah;’ for she was born after Jezreel. Here he describes by
degrees the state of the people, that it continually degenerated. Though
they were at the beginning depraved; but they were now, after the lapse
of some time, utterly unworthy of God’s favour.

<span id="viii.viii-p8"></span>*I will no more add,* he says, *to pursue
with favour the house of Israel*. God here shows what constant
forbearance he had exercised towards this people. *I will no more add*,
he says; as though the Lord had said, “I do not now sally forth at the
first heat of wrath to take vengeance on you, as passionate men are wont
to do, who seize the sword as soon as any affront is given; I become not
so suddenly hot with anger. I have, therefore, hitherto borne with you;
but now your obstinacy is intolerable; I will not then bear with you any
more.” The Prophet, as we see, evidently intimates that the Israelites
had very long abused the Lord’s mercy, while he spared them, so that now
the ripe time of vengeance had come; for the Lord had, for many years
showed his favour to them, though they never ceased at any time to seek
destruction to themselves. Hence we learn, as stated yesterday, that the
Prophet’s vehemence was not hasty: for God had before given warnings,
more than sufficient, to the Israelites; he had also forgiven them many
sins; he had borne with them until the state of things proved that they
were altogether incurable. Since, then, the forbearance of God produced
no effect on them, it was necessary to come to this last remedy, that
the Lord should, as it were, with a drawn sword, appear as a judge to
take vengeance.

<span id="viii.viii-p9"></span>He afterwards says, <span
id="viii.viii-p9.1"></span>כי נשוא אשא להם, *ki neshua asha lem*. This
sentence is variously explained. Some think that the verb is derived
from the root <span id="viii.viii-p9.2"></span>נשה, *nesche*, with a
final <span id="viii.viii-p9.3"></span>ה, *he*; which means “to forget”,
as though it was said “By forgetting, I will forget them;” and the sense
is not unsuitable. The Chaldean paraphraser wholly departs from this
meaning, for he renders the clause, “By sparing, I will spare them.”
There is no reason for this; for God, as the context clearly shows, does
not yet promise pardon to them; this meaning, then, cannot stand. They
come nearer to the design of the Prophet who thus translate, “I will
bring to them,” that is, the enemy; for <span
id="viii.viii-p9.4"></span>נשא, *nesha*, signifies to take, and also to
bring into the middle. But I prefer embracing their opinion who consider
that <span id="viii.viii-p9.5"></span>להם, *lem*, is placed here for
<span id="viii.viii-p9.6"></span>אותם, *autem*; for the servile letter
<span id="viii.viii-p9.7"></span>ל, *lamed*, has often the same meaning
with the particle <span id="viii.viii-p9.8"></span>את, *at*, which is
prefixed to an objective case. Then the rendering is, literally given,
“For, by taking away, I will take them away:” and the Hebrews often use
this mode of speaking, and the sense is plainer, “By taking away, I will
take them away.” Some render the passage, “I will burn them;” but this
explanation is rather harsh. I am satisfied with the meaning, to take,
but I understand it in the sense of taking away. Then it is, “By taking
away, I will take them away.”  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)

<span id="viii.viii-p14"></span>And this is what the following verse
confirms; for when the Prophet speaks of the house of Judah, the Lord
says, “With mercy will I follow the house of Judah, and will save them.”
The Prophet sets “to save” and “to take away” in opposition the one to
the other.

<span id="viii.viii-p15"></span>We may then learn by the context what he
meant by these words, and that is, that Israel had hitherto stood
through the Lord’s mercy; as though he said, “How has it happened that
ye continue as yet alive? Do you think yourselves to be safe through
your own valour? Nay, my mercy has hitherto preserved you. Now, then,
when I shall withdraw my favour from you, your ruin will be inevitable;
you must necessarily perish, and be brought to nothing: for as I have
hitherto preserved you, so I will utterly tear you away and destroy
you.” A profitable lesson may be farther gathered from this passage, and
that is, that hypocrites deceive themselves when they boast of the
present favour of God, and, at the same time, exult without any fear
against him; for as God for a time spares and tolerates them, so he can
justly destroy and reduce them to nothing. But the next verse must be
also joined.

<span id="viii.ix"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p1"></span><span id="viii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007)<span id="viii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** But I will have mercy upon the house
of Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God, and will not save
them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.

<span id="viii.ix-p3"></span>**7** Et domum Jehudah misericordia
prosequar, (*vel*, favore; *vel*, diligam: *diximus enim jam de hoc
verbo*,) et servabo eos in Jehova Deo ipsorum, et non servabo eos in
arcu, neque in gladio, neque in prelio, neque in equis, neque in
equitibus

<span id="viii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.ix-p5"></span><span id="viii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p6"></span>This verse sufficiently proves what I said
yesterday, that the Prophet was specifically appointed to the kingdom of
Israel; for he seems here to speak favourably of the Jews, who yet, we
know, had been severely and deservedly reproved by their own teachers.
For what does Isaiah say, after having spoken of the dreadful
corruptions which then prevailed in the kingdom of Israel? ‘Come,’ he
says, ‘into the house of Judah, they at least continue as yet pure:
there,’ he says, ‘all the tables are full of vomiting; they are drunken;
there reigns also the contempt of God and all impiety,’ (<span
id="viii.ix-p6.1"></span>[Isa
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#008)<span id="viii.ix-p6.1"></span>.)
We see then that the Jews were not a virtuous people, of whom the
Prophet has spoken so honourably. For though the exterior worship of God
continued at Jerusalem, and the temple, at least under Uzziah and
Jotham, was free from every superstition, and also under king Hezekiah;
yet the morals of the people, we know, were very corrupt. Avarice, and
cruelty, and every kind of fraud, reigned there, and also filthy lusts.
The conduct, then, of that people was nothing better than that of the
Israelites. Why, then, does the Prophet dignify them with so great an
honour as to exempt them from God’s vengeance? Because he had an eye to
the people to whom he was appointed a Prophet. He therefore institutes a
comparison. He interferes not with the Jews, for he knew that they had
faithful pastors who reproved their sins; but he continued among his own
hearers. But this comparison served, in an especial manner, to touch the
hearts of the people of Israel; for the Prophet, we know, made this
reference particularly for this end, to condemn fictitious worship. He
now sets the worship at Jerusalem in opposition to all those
superstitions which Jeroboam first introduced, which Ahab increased, and
all their posterity followed. Hence he says, “I will show favour” to the
house of Judas.

<span id="viii.ix-p7"></span>That we may better understand the mind of
the Prophet, it may be well to repeat what we said yesterday: — The
kingdom of Judah was then miserably wasted. The kingdom of Israel had
ten tribes, the kingdom of Judah only one and a half, and it was also
diminished by many slaughters; yea, the Israelites had spoiled the
temple of the Lord, and had taken all the gold and silver they found
there. The Jews, then, had been reduced to a very low state, they hardly
dared to mutter; but the Israelites, as our Prophet will hereafter tell
us, were like beasts well fed. Since, then, they despised the Jews, who
seemed despicable in the eyes of the world, the Prophet beats down this
vain confidence, and says*, With mercy will I follow the house of Judah*
“The house of Judah seems now to be almost nothing, for they are few in
number, nor are they very strong, and wealth abounds not among them as
among you; but with them shall dwell my favour, and I will take it away
from you.”

<span id="viii.ix-p8"></span>It afterwards follows, *And I will save
them by Jehovah their God.* Salvation is here set in opposition to the
destruction which the Prophet mentioned in the last verse. But Hosea
shows that salvation depends not in the least either on arms or on any
of the intervenients  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) , as they say,
of this world; but has its foundation only on God’s favour. *I will save
them,* he says — why? *because my favour will I show them* This
connection ought to be carefully noticed. Where the Lord’s favour is,
there is life. ‘Thou art our God, then we shall never perish,’ as it is
written in <span id="viii.ix-p9.3"></span>[Hab
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)<span id="viii.ix-p9.3"></span>
Habakkuk. Hence the Prophet here connects salvation with God’s
gratuitous favour; for we cannot continue safe, but as long as God is
propitious to us. He has, on the other hand, declared that it would be
all over with the Israelites as soon as God would take away from them
his favour.

<span id="viii.ix-p10"></span>But he says, *By Jehovah their God.* An
antithesis is to be understood here between the false gods and Jehovah,
who was the God of the house of Judah. It is the same as though the
Prophet said, “Ye indeed profess the name of God, but ye worship the
devil and not God: for ye have nothing to do with Jehovah, with the God
who is the creator and maker of heaven and earth; for he dwells in his
own temple; he pledged his faith to David, when he commanded him to
build a temple for him on mount Zion; he dwells there between the
cherubim, as the Prophets invariably declare: but the true God is become
exiled from you.” We hence see how he condemns here all the worship
which the Israelites then so highly valued. Why did he do so? Because it
was not acceptable to God.

<span id="viii.ix-p11"></span>And this passage deserves to be noticed,
for we see how stupid men are in this respect. When once they are
persuaded that they worship God, they are seized by some fascination of
Satan so as to become delighted with all their own dotages, as we see to
be the case at this day with the Papists, who are not only insane, but
doubly frantic. If any one reproves them and says, that they worship not
the true God, they are instantly on fire — “What! does not God accept
our worship?” But the Prophet here shows by one word that Jehovah is not
in any place, except where he is rightly worshipped according to the
rule of his word. *I will save them*, he says — How? *By Jehovah their
God;* and God himself speaks: He might have said, “I will save them by
myself;” but it was not without reason that he used this circuitous mode
of speaking; it was to show the Israelites that they had no reason to
think that God would be propitious to them. How so? Because God had
chosen an habitation for himself on mount Zion and in Jerusalem. A
fuller declaration afterwards follows, I will save them *neither by the
bow, nor by the sword, nor by war, nor by horses, nor by horsemen* But
this clause, by God’s favour, I will explain tomorrow.

<span id="viii.x"></span>

<span id="viii.x-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="viii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we were from
our beginning lost, when thou wert pleased to extend to us thy hand, and
to restore us to salvation for the sake of thy Son; and that as we
continue even daily to run headlong to our own ruin, — O grant that we
may not, by sinning so often, so provoke at length thy displeasure as to
cause thee to take away from us the mercy which thou hast hitherto
exercised towards us, and through which thou hast adopted us: but by thy
Spirit destroy the wickedness of our heart, and restore us to a sound
mind, that we may ever cleave to thee with a true and sincere heart,
that being fortified by thy defence, we may continue safe even amidst
all kinds of danger, until at length thou gatherest us into that blessed
rest, which has been prepared for us in heaven by our Lord Jesus Christ.
Amen.

<span id="viii.xi"></span>

<span id="viii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Third

<span id="viii.xi-p2"></span>We have to explain first this clause, *I
will save the house of Judah neither by the bow, nor by the sword, nor
by war, nor by horses, nor by horsemen.* What the Prophet had touched
upon before is here more clearly expressed, and that is, that God has no
need of foreign aids, for he is content with his own power. But Hosea
continues his contrast; for the people of Israel, as they possessed much
carnal power, thought themselves, as they say, beyond the reach of
darts: but the kingdom of Judah was exposed to all dangers, as it was
not powerful in forces and arms. This folly the Prophet exposes to
contempt, and says, that safety is dependent on God alone, that men in
vain trust in their own valour, and that there is no reason why the
needy and destitute should despair of their safety, as God alone is
abundantly sufficient to preserve the faithful. The meaning then is,
that though the destitute condition of the kingdom of Judah was an
object of contempt to all, yet this would be no obstacle, that it should
not be preserved through God’s favour, though it obtained no aid from
men. And let us learn from this place, that we are not so preserved by
the Lord, that he never employs any natural means; and further, that
when he has no recourse to them, he is abundantly sufficient to secure
our safety. We ought then so to ascribe our safety to the Lord as not to
think that any thing comes to us through ourselves, or through angels,
or through men. Let us now proceed —

<span id="viii.xii"></span>

<span id="viii.xii-p1"></span><span id="viii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008)<span id="viii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xii-p2"></span>**8.** Now when she had weaned Loruhamah,
she conceived, and bare a son.

<span id="viii.xii-p3"></span>**8.** Et ablactavit Lo-ruchama, et
concepit et peperit filiam.

<span id="viii.xii-p4"></span>**9.** Then said *God*, Call his name
Loammi: for ye *are* not my people, and I will not be your *God*

<span id="viii.xii-p5"></span>**9.** Et dixit, Voca nomen ejus, Non
populus meus, (Lo-ammi:) quia vos non populus meus, et ego non ero vobis
(*hoc est*, non ero vester.)

<span id="viii.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="viii.xii-p7"></span><span id="viii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xii-p8"></span>The *weaning* the Prophet mentions here is
by some understood allegorically; as though he said, that the people
would for a time be deprived of prophecies, and of the priesthood, and
of other spiritual gifts: but this is frigid. The Prophet here, I have
no doubt, sets forth the patience of God towards that people. The Lord
then, before he had utterly cast away the Israelites, waited patiently
for their repentance, if, indeed, there was any hope for it; but when he
found them be ever like themselves, he then at length proceeded to the
last punishment. Hence Hosea says, that the daughter, who was the second
child, was weaned; as though he said, that the people of Israel had not
been suddenly cast away, for God had with long patience borne with them,
and thus suspended heavier judgement, until, having found their
wickedness to be unhealable, he at length commenced what follows, *Call*
the third child Lo-ammi.

<span id="viii.xii-p9"></span><span id="viii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xii-p10"></span>The reason is added *For ye are not my
people, and I will not hereafter be yours.* This, as I have said, is the
final disowning of them. They had been before called Jezreelites, and
then by the name of the daughter God testified that he was alienated
from them; but now the third name is still more grievous, *Ye are not my
people;* for God here abolishes, in a manner, the covenant he made with
the holy fathers, so that the people would cease to have any preeminence
over other nations. So then the Israelites were reduced to a condition
in which they differed nothing from the profane Gentiles; and thus God
wholly disinherited them. The Prophet, doubtless, was not well received,
when he denied them to be God’s people, who had yet descended from
Abraham according to the flesh, who had ever been so accounted, and who
continued proudly to boast of their election.

<span id="viii.xii-p11"></span>But let us hence learn, that those
awfully mistake who are blind to their own vices, because God spares and
indulges them. For we must ever remember what I have said before, that
the kingdom of Israel was then opulent; and yet the Prophet denies them,
who flourished in strength, and power, and riches, to be God’s people.
There is then no reason for hypocrites to felicitate themselves in
prosperity; but they ought, on the contrary, to have regard to God’s
judgement. But though these, as we see to be the case, heedlessly
despise God, yet this passage reminds us carefully to beware lest we
abuse the present favours of God. It follows —

<span id="viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="viii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010)<span id="viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xiii-p2"></span>**10** Yet the number of the children of
Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor
numbered; and it shall come to pass, *that* in the place where it was
said unto them, Ye *are* not my people, *there* it shall be said unto
them, *Ye are* the sons of the living God.

<span id="viii.xiii-p3"></span>**10.** Et erit numerus filiorum Israel
tanquam arena maris, quae non mensuratur et non numeratur, (non
mensurabitur nec numeratur, *ad verbum sed significant haec verba actum
continuum*, *et est indefinita etiam locutio*;) et erit in loco ubi
dicetur, (*hoc est*, ubi dictum fuerit eis,) Non populus meus vos; et
dicetur (*hoc est*, illic dicetur) Filii Dei vivi.

<span id="viii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="viii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xiii-p6"></span>Now follows consolation, yet not unmixed.
God seems here to meet the objections which we know hypocrites had in
readiness, whenever the Prophets denounced destruction on them; for they
accused God of being unfaithful if he did not save them. Arrogating to
themselves the title of Church, they concluded that it would be
impossible for them to perish for God would not be untrue in his
promises. “Why! God has promised that his Church shall be for ever: we
are his Church; then we are safe, for God cannot deny himself.” In what
they took as granted they were deceived; for though they usurped the
title of Church, they were yet alienated from God. We see that the
Papists swell with this pride at this day. To excuse all their errors
they set up against us this shield, “Christ promised to be with his own
to the end of the world. Can the spouse desert his Church? Can the Son
of God, who is the eternal Truth of the Father, fail in his
faithfulness?” The Papists magnificently extol the faithfulness of
Christ, that they may bind him to themselves: but at the same time, they
consider not that they are covenant breakers; they consider not that
they are manifestly the enemies of God; they consider not that they have
divorced themselves from him.

<span id="viii.xiii-p7"></span>The Prophet, therefore seeing that he had
to do with proud men, who were wont to arraign the justice of God, says,
*The number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea;*
that is, “When the Lord shall cut you off, still safe will remain this
promise which was given to Abraham;

<span id="viii.xiii-p8"></span>‘Look at the stars of heaven, number, if
thou can’t, the sand of the sea; so shall thy seed be,’” (<span
id="viii.xiii-p8.1"></span>[Ge
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)<span
id="viii.xiii-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii.xiii-p9"></span>We indeed know, that whenever the
Prophets severely reproved the people and denounced destruction, this
was ever opposed to them, “What! can it be that the Lord will destroy
us? What would then become of this promise, Thy seed shall be as the
stars of heaven and as the sand of the sea?” Hence the Prophet here
checks this vain-confidence, by which hypocrites supported themselves
against all threatening, “Though God may cut you off, he will yet
continue true and faithful to the promise, that Abraham’s seed shall be
innumerable as the sand of the sea.”

<span id="viii.xiii-p10"></span>I indeed admit that the Prophet here
gave hope of salvation to the faithful; for it is certain that there
were some remaining in the kingdom of Israel. Though the whole body had
revolted, yet God, as it was said to Elijah, had preserved to himself
some seed. The Prophet then was unwilling to leave the faithful, who
remained among that lost people, without hope of salvation; but, at the
same time, he had regard to hypocrites, as we have already stated. We
now see the design of the Prophet, for he teaches that there would be
such a vengeance as he had spoken of, though God would not yet be
forgetful of his word; he teaches that there would be such a casting
away of the people, though God’s election would yet remain firm and
unchangeable; in short, he teaches that the adoption by which God had
chosen the offspring of Abraham as his people would not be void. This is
the import of the whole. Then the number of the children of Israel shall
be as the sand of the sea, which is not to be measured nor numbered.

<span id="viii.xiii-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, *And it shall be in
the place where it had been said to them,* (*shall be said*, literally,)
*Ye are not my people; there it shall be said, Ye are the sons of the
living God* It has been asked, whether this prophecy belongs to the
posterity of those who had been dispersed. This, indeed, would be
strange; for so long a time has passed away since their exile, and
dejected and broken, they dwell at this day in mountains and in other
desert places; at least many of them are in the mountains of Armenia,
some are in Media and Chaldea; in short, throughout the whole of the
East. And since there has been no restoration of this people, it is
certain that this prophecy ought not to be restricted to seed according
to the flesh. For there was a prescribed time for the Jews, when the
Lord purposed to restore them to their country; and, at the end of
seventy years, a free return was granted them by Cyrus. Then Hosea
speaks not here of the kingdom of Israel, but of the Church, which was
to be restored by a return, composed both of Jews and of Gentiles. So
Paul, a fit interpreter of this passage, reminds us,

<span id="viii.xiii-p12"></span>‘Whom he has called, not only of the
Jews,  
but also of the Gentiles; as he says by Hosea,  
I will call a people, who were not mine, my people;  
and her beloved, who was not beloved: and it shall be,  
where it had been said to them, Ye are not my people;  
there shall they be called the sons of the living God,’  
(<span id="viii.xiii-p12.7"></span>[Ro
9:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)<span
id="viii.xiii-p12.7"></span>, etc.)

<span id="viii.xiii-p13"></span>Paul applies this passage, and that
rightly, to the whole body of the faithful, collected without any
difference, from the Jews as well as from the Gentiles: for otherwise,
as we have said, the correctness and truth of prophecy would not be
evident: and this view also agrees best with the design of the Prophet
which I have just explained. For, since hypocrites in a manner tie to
themselves the power of God, the Prophet says, that God can, if he
chooses, raise up in an instant a new Church, which would exceed in
number the sand of the sea. How so? God will create a Church for
himself. From what? From stones, from nothing: for, as Paul says
elsewhere,

<span id="viii.xiii-p14"></span>‘he calls those things which are not,  
as though they were,’  
(<span id="viii.xiii-p14.3"></span>[Ro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span
id="viii.xiii-p14.3"></span>.)

<span id="viii.xiii-p15"></span>At the same time, God, as it has been
said, by his goodness contended with the wickedness of that people; for
though they rejected his favour, yea, and obstinately thrust it away
from themselves, yet such perverseness did not hinder the Lord from
preserving a remnant for himself.

<span id="viii.xiii-p16"></span>Now, this passage teaches, that they are
very perverted in their notions, who, by their own feelings, form a
judgement of the state of the Church, and accuse God of being
unfaithful, when its external appearance does not correspond with their
opinion. So the Papists think; for except they see the splendour of
great pomp, they conclude that no Church remains in the world. But God
at one time so diminishes the Church, that it seems to be almost reduced
to nothing; at another time, he increases and multiplies it beyond all
hope, after having raised it, as it were, from death. Isaiah says in
<span id="viii.xiii-p16.1"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span
id="viii.xiii-p16.1"></span>,

<span id="viii.xiii-p17"></span>Were the number of the children of
Israel as the sand of the sea, a remnant only shall be saved.

<span id="viii.xiii-p18"></span>The Prophet there designedly exposes to
scorn the hypocrites, who falsely pleaded that prophecy, ‘Look on the
stars of heaven, and on the sand of the sea, if thou can’t number them;
so shall thy seed be.’ Since, then, Isaiah saw that hypocrites, relying
on that prophecy, were rising so perversely against him, he said, “Be it
so, be it so, that ye are as the stars of heaven, and as the sand of the
sea; yet a remnant only shall be saved;” which means, “The Lord will at
last cut you down, and reduce you to so small a number, that ye shall be
extremely few.” Now, on the other hand, Hosea says, That after the
Israelites shall be reduced to a very small number, that nothing but
waste and solitude will appear, then the Lord will restore the Church
beyond all human thoughts and will prove that he had not in vain
promised to Abraham that his seed would be as the sand of the sea.
Since, then, the Lord wonderfully defends his Church, and preserves it
in this world, so that at one time he seems to bury it, and then he
raises it from death; at one time he cuts it down as to its outward
appearance, and then afterwards he renews it; we ought to take heed,
lest we measure according to our own judgement and carnal reason, what
the Lord declares respecting the preservation of his Church. For its
safety is often hid from the eyes of men. However the case may be, God
does not bind himself here to human means, nor to the order of nature,
but his purpose is to surpass by his incredible power whatever the minds
of men can conceive.

<span id="viii.xiii-p19"></span>Thus then ought this passage, *The
number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea,* to be
expounded: God will gather his Church from all quarters, from the
Gentiles as well as from the Jews when the whole world will think it to
be extinct.

<span id="viii.xiii-p20"></span>*And it shall be in the place where it
had been said, Ye are not my people; there it shall be said, Ye are the
sons of the living God* The Prophet, in these words, amplifies by a
comparison the grace of God; as though he said, “When God shall restore
anew his Church, its state shall be more excellent than before.” How so?
“They shall not only,” he says, “be the people of God, but also the sons
of the living God;” which means, that God will more familiarly show
himself a Father to those, whom he will thus suddenly gather into one
body. I indeed allow that the ancients under the law were honoured with
this title; but we ought to attend to the present passage; for the
Prophet contrasts the two clauses, the one with the other: *And it shall
be in the place where it had been said, Ye are not my people; it shall
be said there, Ye are the sons of the living God* He might have said,
“And it shall be in the place where it had been said, Ye are not my
people; there it shall be said, Ye are not my people:” but he ascends
higher; God will confer more honour on his new people, for he will more
clearly manifest his favour to them by this title of adoption: and it
belongs in common to all, to the Gentiles as well as to the Israelites.
We ought not to apply this, as it is commonly done, exclusively to the
Gentiles: for Hosea speaks not here only of the Church which God
attained for himself from the Gentiles, but of the whole Israel of God,
a part of whom is the seed of Abraham. Let us then know that God here
offers his grace generally, to the Israelites as well as to the
Gentiles, and testifies, that after having justly cast away this people,
he would make all to know that he had not been unmindful of his
covenant, for he would attain to himself a much larger Church — from
whom? From the children of Abraham, as it has been said, as well as from
strangers.

<span id="viii.xiii-p21"></span>And there is an important meaning in the
verb, ‘It shall be said:’ *It shall be where it had been said, Ye are
not my people, there it shall be said,* — The Prophet means, that our
salvation appears not, before the Lord has begun to testify to us of his
good-will. Hence the beginning of our salvation is God’s call, when he
declares himself to be propitious to us: without his word, no hope
shines on us. Hosea might have said, ‘It shall be in the place where it
had been said, Ye are not my people, there they shall begin to be the
sons of God:’ but he expresses more, ‘It shall be where it had been
said, Ye are not my people, there it shall be said, Ye are the sons of
the living God.’

<span id="viii.xiii-p22"></span>As to the first clause, it must be
referred to the threatening which have been already explained; and in
this way was also checked the contumacy of the people, who heedlessly
despised all the Prophets. “What! God has bound himself to us: we are
the race of Abraham; then we are a holy and elect nation.” But the
Prophet here claims authority to himself as a teacher: “I am a herald of
God’s vengeance, and seriously proclaim to you your rejection: there is
then no reason why ye should now harden your hearts and close your ears;
for now at length will follow the execution of that vengeance which I
now declare to you.” The Prophet then declares here that he had not
rashly pronounced what we before noticed, that it was not an empty bug
bear, but that he had spoken in the Lord’s name; as Paul also says,

<span id="viii.xiii-p23"></span>‘Vengeance is prepared by us against all
them  
who extol themselves against Christ,’ (<span
id="viii.xiii-p23.2"></span>[2Co
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#006)<span
id="viii.xiii-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii.xiii-p24"></span>And we see also what was said to
Ezekiel, ‘Go and besiege Jerusalem; turn thy face, and stand there until
thou stormest it, until thou overthrowest it.’ The prophet was not
certainly furnished with an army, so that he could make an attack upon
Jerusalem: but God means there that there is power enough in his word to
destroy all the ungodly. So also Hosea signifies the same here: “When by
the word alone the Israelites shall be cast away it shall be said, Ye
are the sons of the living God.” Let us then know, that God rises upon
us with certain salvation, when we hear him speaking to us. It follows —

<span id="viii.xiv"></span>

<span id="viii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="viii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011)<span id="viii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xiv-p2"></span>**11.** Then shall the children of Judah
and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves
one head, and they shall come up out of the land; for great *shall be*
the day of Jezreel.

<span id="viii.xiv-p3"></span>**11.** Et congregabuntur filii Jehudah et
filii Israel simul— et ponent sibi caput unum— et ascendent e terra;
quia magnus dies Jizreel.

<span id="viii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="viii.xiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="viii.xiv-p6"></span><span id="viii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xiv-p7"></span>The Prophet speaks here peculiarly of the
children of Abraham; for though God would make no more account of them
than of other nations, he yet wished it to be ascribed to his covenant,
that they in honor excelled others; and the right of primogeniture, we
know, is everywhere given to them. Then as Abraham’s children were
first-begotten in the Church, even after the coming of Christ, God here
especially addresses them, *Ascend together from the land shall the
children of Israel and the children of Judah, and they shall assemble
together, and appoint for themselves one head* In the last verse, Hosea
spoke of the universal gathering of the Church; but now he confines his
address to the natural race of Abraham. Why? Because God commenced a
restoration with that people, when he extended his hand to the miserable
exiles to bring them back from the Babylonian captivity to their own
country. As then this was the beginning of the gathering, the Prophet,
not without reason, turns his address here to them, and thus sets them
in higher honor, not that they were worthy, not that they could by any
merit claim this dignity; but because God would not make void his
covenant, and because he had chosen them that they might be the
first-begotten, as it has been already stated, and as they are also
elsewhere called, ‘My first-begotten is Ephraim,’ (<span
id="viii.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Jer
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#009)<span id="viii.xiv-p7.1"></span>)
We now then understand the order and arrangement of the Prophet, which
is to be carefully noticed, and the more so, because interpreters
confound all these things, and make no distinctions, when yet the
Prophet has not here mingled together the children of Israel and the
children of Judah with the Gentiles, except for a certain purpose.

<span id="viii.xiv-p8"></span>Let us now consider the words of the
Prophet. *Assembled together,* he says, *shall be the children of Israel
and the children of Judah* No doubt, the Prophet has in view the
scattering, which had now lasted more than two hundred years, when
Jeroboam had led away the ten tribes. Inasmuch as the body became then
torn asunder, the Prophet says, *Together shall be gathered the children
of Judah and the children of Israel* And designedly does he thus speak,
lest the Israelites should felicitate themselves on their own power;
since they were a mutilated body without a head; for the king of Israel,
properly speaking, was not legitimate. The Lord had indeed anointed
Jeroboam; and afterwards Jehu, I admit, had been anointed; but is was
done for the sake of executing judgment. For when the Lord intended
really to bless the people, he chose David to rule over them; and then
he committed the government over all the children of Abraham to the
posterity of David. There was therefore no legitimate head over the
people of Israel. And the Prophet intended distinctly to express this by
saying, *Gathered together shall be the children of Judah and the
children of Israel;* which means this, “Ye are now secure, because
fortune smiles on you; because ye are overflowing with money and all
good things; because ye are terrible to your neighbors; because ye have
cities well fortified; but your safety depends on another thing, even on
this, that ye be one body under one head. For ye must be miserable
except God rules over you; and the only way in which this can be is,
that ye be under the government of David. Your separation, then, proves
your state to be accursed; your earthly happiness, in which you
felicitate yourselves, is unhappiness before God.” The Prophet then
reminded the people of Israel, that God would at last deal kindly with
them by restoring them to their first unity. The import of the whole
then is, that the children of Abraham shall then at length be blessed,
when they shall unite again in one body, and when one head shall rule
over them. They *shall* then *be gathered together, and appoint one
head.* The Prophet shows here also what kind of assembling this will be
which he mentions, which was to be this, they shall be gathered under
the government of one king. For whenever God speaks of the restoration
of the people, he ever calls the attention of the faithful to David:
‘David shall rule, there shall be one shepherd.’ Then one king and one
head shall be among them. We now perceive the design of the Prophet.

<span id="viii.xiv-p9"></span>But this passage clearly teaches, that the
unity of men is of no account before God, except it originates from one
head. Besides, it is well known that God set David over his ancient
people until the coming of Christ. Now, then, the Church of the Lord is
only rightly formed, when the true David rules over it; that is, when
all with one consent obey Christ, and submit to his bidding, (<span
id="viii.xiv-p9.1"></span>*pendebunt ab ejus nutu* hang on his nod:) and
how Christ designs to rule in his Church, we know; for the scepter of
his kingdom is the gospel. Hence, when Christ is honored with the
obedience of faith, all things are safe; and this is the happy state of
the Church, of which the Prophet now speaks. It seems, indeed, strange,
that what is peculiar to God should be transferred to men that is, to
appoint a king. But the Prophet has, by this expression, characterized
the obedience of faith; for it is not enough that Christ should be given
as a king, and set over men, unless they also embrace him as their king,
and with reverence receive him. We now learn, that when we believe the
gospel we choose Christ for our king, as it were, by a voluntary
consent.

<span id="viii.xiv-p10"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *They shall
ascend from the land*. He expresses more than at the beginning of the
verse; for he says, that God would restore them from exile to their own
country. He then promises what was very necessary, that exile would be
no hindrance to God to renew his Church; for it was the people’s ruin to
be removed far from their country, and consequently to be deprived of
their promised inheritance during their dispersion among heathen
nations. The Lord then takes away this difficulty, and distinctly
declares, that though for a time they should be as wholly destroyed,
they shall yet come again to their own land. They *shall*, therefore,
*ascend* (this is said with regard to Judea, for it is higher than
Chaldea) they *shall,* therefore, *ascend* from Chaldea and other places
in which they had been dispersed. We now understand what the Prophet
means by saying, *Gathered together shall be the children of Israel and
the children of Judah* that is, into one body; and further, they *shall
appoint* for themselves one head. This is the manner of the gathering;
and it must be also added, that the Church then obeys God, when all,
from the first to the last, consent to one head: for it is not enough to
be constrained, unless all willingly offer themselves to Christ; as it
is said <span id="viii.xiv-p10.1"></span>[Ps
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)<span
id="viii.xiv-p10.1"></span>, “There shall be a willing people in the day
in which the King will call his own.’ Then the Prophet intended to
express the obedience of faith, which the faithful will render to
Christ, when the Lord shall restore them.

<span id="viii.xiv-p11"></span>And they *shall ascend*, he says, *from
the land; for great shall be the day of Jezreel*. It may be asked, why
does he here call the day of Jezreel great; for it seems contrary to
prophecy? This passage may be explained in two ways. Great shall be the
day of Jezreel, some say, because God will sow the people whom he had
before scattered. So they think that the Prophet, as in a former
instance, alludes to the word, Jezreel. But the sense seems to me to be
another. I do not restrict this clause to the last, nor to the promise,
but apply it to the slaughter which has been before mentioned; for they
correspond with one another. *They shall ascend from the land; for great
shall be the day of Jezreel*. The Israelites were as yet resting in
their nests, and thought that they could not by any means be torn away;
besides, the kingdom of Judah did not then fear a near destruction. The
Prophet, therefore, intimates here, that there would be a need of some
signal and extraordinary remedy; for it shall be the severe and dreadful
slaughter in the day of Jezreel. We now perceive the real meaning of the
Prophet, *They shall ascend from the land; for*  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) *great shall be the day of Jezreel*

<span id="viii.xiv-p13"></span>They might, indeed, have otherwise
objected, and said, “Why dost thou thus prophesy to us about ascending?
What is this ascending? Do we not rest quietly in the inheritance which
God formerly promised to our fathers? What meanest thou, then, by this
ascending?” The Prophet here rouses them, and reminds them that they had
no reason to trust in their now quiet state, as wine settled on its
lees; and this very similitude is even used in another place, (<span
id="viii.xiv-p13.1"></span>[Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011)<span
id="viii.xiv-p13.1"></span>.) The Prophet here declares, that there
would be a most dreadful slaughter, which would call for the signal
mercy of God; for he would in a wonderful manner restore the people, and
draw them out like the dead from their graves: *for great* then shall be
the day of Jezreel; that is, “As the calamity which the Lord shall bring
on you will be grievous and dreadful, I do not in vain promise to you
this return and ascending.” This seems to be really the meaning of the
Prophet.

<span id="viii.xv"></span>

<span id="viii.xv-p1"></span>Prayer.

<span id="viii.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we have not
only been redeemed from Babylonian exile, but have also emerged from
hell itself; for when we were the children of wrath thou didst freely
adopt us, and when we were aliens, thou didst in thine infinite goodness
open to us the gate of thy kingdom, that we might be made thy heirs
through the Son, O grant that we may walk circumspectly before thee, and
submit ourselves wholly to thee and to thy Christ, and not feign to be
his members, but really prove ourselves to be his body, and to be so
governed by his Spirit, that thou mayest at last gather us together into
thy celestial kingdom, to which thou daily invitest us by the same
Christ our Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc26007.htm#fr_2) <span
id="viii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p14"></span> Much difference has prevailed on this
subject. That is it was a *real* transaction, has been the opinion of
not a few. *Poole* quotes *Basil, Augustine, Jerome,* and *Theodoret*,
as entertaining this view. Bishop *Horsley* agrees with them; but he
makes this wise remark, “This is in truth a question of little
importance to the interpretation of the prophecy, for the act was
equally emblematical, whether it was real or visionary only; and the
significance of the emblem, whether the act were done in reality or in
vision, will be the same.”

<span id="viii.iii-p15"></span>*Henry* seems to lean to the opinion that
it was a parable; and *Scott*, that it was a real transaction. The
notion of a parable is attended with the least difficulty, and
corresponds with the mode of teaching often adopted both in the Old and
New Testament. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc26007.htm#fr_3) <span
id="viii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.iii-p17"></span> This does not follow; for, as Bishop
*Horsley* justly observes, “the children of wantonness” were those
previously begotten. The Prophet was to take a woman who was a harlot,
*together* with her spurious children. This is he evident message of the
passage. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc26007.htm#fr_4) <span
id="viii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.vi-p16"></span> The explanation given of this word by
*Horsley* does not in the least correspond with the context, or with the
reason afterwards assigned for it. He interprets in “the seed of God,”
meaning the servants of God, according to the supposed etymology of the
word: but the first son of Hosea was called Jezreel, as stated expressly
on account of what was to take place in the city, or in the valley of
Jezreel. And to say that as the word is taken in its etymological sense
in <span id="viii.vi-p16.1"></span>[Ho
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#022)<span id="viii.vi-p16.1"></span>,
it ought to be so taken here, is no valid reason. When a word, as in
this case, has two meanings, it is the context that must be our guide,
and not the sense of it in another chapter. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc26007.htm#fr_5) <span
id="viii.viii-p9.10"></span>

<span id="viii.viii-p10"></span> Though Newcome and others agree with
Calvin in this sense, yet I still believe that the true rendering is
that which is substantially given in the margin of our version. The verb
here used, when followed by <span id="viii.viii-p10.1"></span>ל does not
mean to take away, but to pardon, to forgive, and the particle <span
id="viii.viii-p10.2"></span>כי is sometimes rendered, that, so that,
*ut.* Then the two lines may be thus translated: —

<span id="viii.viii-p11"></span>“I will no more show mercy to the house
of Israel,  
That by pardoning I should pardon them.”

<span id="viii.viii-p12"></span>The main drift of the passage is still
the same with what is assigned to it by Calvin. The version of Bishop
*Horsley* favors what I have offered: he renders the last line thus: —

<span id="viii.viii-p13"></span>“Insomuch as to be perpetually forgiving
them.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc26007.htm#fr_6) <span
id="viii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ix-p9"></span> <span
id="viii.ix-p9.1"></span>Mediis-media means. We use medium, but not
media; and yet we have no word as a substitute. “<span
id="viii.ix-p9.2"></span>Intervenients,” perhaps, is the most
intelligible word to the English reader. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc26007.htm#fr_7) <span
id="viii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.xiv-p12"></span> If this were rendered ‘though,’ as it is
by some, the meaning would be more evident; that is, they shall ascend
from the land, notwithstanding the greatness of the slaughter of
Jezreel, when they should be led captive. —*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc26008)
