[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc26011)  [Next](cc26013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>Chapter 6

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span>Lecture Sixteenth

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** Come, and let us return unto the
Lord: for he hath torn, and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he
will bind us up.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Venite et convertamur ad Jehovam,
quia ipse rapuit et sanabit nos; percussit et alligabit plagas nostras.

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>In the last chapter the Prophet said, that
the Israelites, after having been subdued by chastisements and
judgments, would again turn back from following error to seek God. But
as terror drives men away from approaching God, he now adds, that the
measure of afflictions would not be such as would discourage their minds
and produce despair; but rather inspire them with the assurance, that
God would be propitious to them: and that he might set this forth the
better, he introduces them as saying, *Come, let us go to the Lord:* and
this mode of speaking is very emphatical.

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>But we must know that the reason here
given, why the Israelites could return safely and with sure confidence
to God, is, that they would acknowledge it as his office to heal after
he has smitten, and to bring a remedy for the wounds which he has
inflicted. The Prophet means by these words, that God does not so punish
men as to pour forth his wrath upon them for their destruction; but that
he intends, on the contrary, to promote their salvation, when he is
severe in punishing their sins. We must then remember, as we have before
observed, that the beginning of repentance is a sense of God’s mercy;
that is, when men are persuaded that God is ready to give pardon, they
then begin to gather courage to repent; otherwise perverseness will ever
increase in them; how much soever their sin may frighten them, they will
yet never return to the Lord. And for this purpose I have elsewhere
quoted that remarkable passage in <span id="xiii.ii-p7.2"></span>[Psalm
130](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ii-p7.2"></span>,
‘With thee is mercy, that thou mayest be feared;’ for it cannot be, that
men will obey God with true and sincere heart, except a taste of his
goodness allures them, and they can certainly determine, that they shall
not return to him in vain, but that he will be ready, as we have said,
to pardon them. This is the meaning of the words, when he says, *Come,
and let us turn to the Lord; for he has torn and he will heal us;* that
is, God has not inflicted on us deadly wounds; but he has smitten, that
he might heal.

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>At the same time, something more is
expressed in the Prophet’s words, and it is this, that God never so
rigidly deals with men, but that he ever leaves room for his grace. For
by the word, *torn,* the Prophet alludes to that heavy judgment of which
he had before spoken in the person of God: the Lord then made himself to
be like a cruel wild beast, “I will be as a lion, I will devour, I will
tear, and no one shall take away the prey which I have once seized.” God
wished then to show that his vengeance would be dreadful against the
Israelites. Now, though God should deal very sharply with them, they
were not yet to despair of pardon. However, then, we may find God to be
for a time like a lion or a bear, yet, as his proper office is to heal
after he has torn, to bind the wounds he has inflicted, there is no
reason why we should shun his presence. We see that the design of the
Prophet’s words was to show, that no chastisement is so severe that it
ought to break down our spirits, but that we ought, by entertaining
hope, to stir up ourselves to repentance. This is the drift of the
passage.

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>It is further needful to observe, that the
faithful do here, in the first place, encourage themselves, that they
may afterwards lead others with them; for so the words mean. He does not
say, “Go, return to Jehovah;” but*, Come, let us return unto Jehovah* We
then see that each one begins with himself; and then that they mutually
exhort one another; and this is what ought to be done by us: when any
one sends his brethren to God, he does not consult his own good, since
he ought rather to show the way. Let every one, then, learn to stimulate
himself; and then, let him stretch out his hand to others, that they may
follow. We are at the same time reminded that we ought to undertake the
care of our brethren; for it would be a shame for any one to be content
with his own salvation, and so to neglect his brethren. It is then
necessary to join together these two things, — To stir up ourselves to
repentance, — and then to try to lead others with us. Let us now proceed
—

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002.md)<span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**2.** After two days will he revive us:
in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Vivificabit nos post biduum, die
tertio suscitabit nos, et vivemus in conspectu ejus (*vel*, coram facie
ejus.)

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>This place the Hebrew writers pervert, for
they think that they are yet to be redeemed by the coming of the
Messiah; and they imagine that this will be the third day: for God once
drew them out of Egypt, this was their first life; then, secondly, he
restored them to life when he brought them back from the Babylonish
captivity; and when God shall, by the hand of the Messiah, gather them
from their dispersion, this, they say, will be the third resurrection.
But these are frivolous notions. Not withstanding, this place is usually
referred to Christ, as declaring, that God would, after two days, and on
the third, raise up his Church; for Christ, we know, did not rise
privately for himself, but for his members, inasmuch as he is the
first-fruits of them who shall rise. This sense does not seem then
unsuitable, that is, that the Prophet here encourages the faithful to
entertain hope of salvation, because God would raise up his
only-begotten Son, whose resurrection would be the common life of the
whole Church.

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>Yet this sense seems to me rather too
refined. We must always mind this, that we fly not in the air. Subtle
speculations please at first sight, but afterwards vanish. Let every
one, then, who desires to make proficiency in the Scriptures always keep
to this rule — to gather from the Prophets and apostles only what is
solid.

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>Let us now see what the Prophet meant. He
here adds, I doubt not, a second source of consolation, that is, that if
God should not immediately revive his people, there would be no reason
for delay to cause weariness, as it is wont to do; for we see that when
God suffers us to languish long, our spirits fail; and those who at
first seem cheerful and courageous enough, in process of time become
faint. As, then, patience is a rare virtue, Hosea here exhorts us
patiently to bear delay, when the Lord does not immediately revive us.
Thus then did the Israelites say, *After two days will God revive us; on
the third day he will raise us up to life*

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>What did they understand by two days? Even
their long affliction; as though they said, “Though the Lord may not
deliver us from our miseries the first day, but defer longer our
redemption, our hope ought not yet to fail; for God can raise up dead
bodies from their graves no less than restore life in a moment.” When
Daniel meant to show that the affliction of the people would be long, he
says,

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>‘After a time, times, and half time,’
(<span id="xiii.iii-p10.1"></span>[Da
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>That mode of speaking is different, but
then as to sense it is the same. He says, ‘after a time,’ that is, after
a year; that would be tolerable: but it follows, ‘and times,’ that is,
many years: God afterwards shortens that period, and brings redemption
at a time when least expected. Hosea mentions here two years, because
God would not afflict his people for one day, but, as we have before
seen, subdue them by degrees; for the perverseness of the people had so
prevailed, that they could not be soon healed. As when diseases have
been striking roots for a long time, they cannot be immediately cured,
but there is need of slow and various remedies; and were a physician to
attempt immediately to remove a disease which had taken full possession
of a man, he certainly would not cure him, but take away his life: so
also, when the Israelites, through their long obstinacy, had become
nearly incurable, it was necessary to lead them to repentance by slow
punishments. They therefore said, *After two days God will revive us;*
and thus they confirmed themselves in the hope of salvation, though it
did not immediately appear: though they long remained in darkness, and
the exile was long which they had to endure, they yet did not cease to
hope: “Well, let the two days pass, and the Lord will revive us.”

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>We see that a consolation is here opposed
to the temptations, which take from us the hope of salvation, when God
suspends his favor longer than our flesh desires. Martha said to Christ,
‘He is now putrid, it is the fourth day.’  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) She thought it absurd to remove the stone
from the sepulchre, because now the body of Lazarus was putrified. But
Christ in this instance designed to show his own incredible power by
restoring a putrid body to life. So the faithful say here, *The Lord
will raise us up after two days:* “Though exile seems to be like the
sepulchre, where putridity awaits us, yet the Lord will, by his
ineffable power, overcome whatever may seem to obstruct our
restoration.” We now perceive, as I think, the simple and genuine sense
of this passage.

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>But at the same time I do not deny but
that God has exhibited a remarkable and a memorable instance of what is
here said in his only-begotten Son. As often then as delay begets
weariness in us, and when God seems to have thrown aside every care of
us, let us flee to Christ; for, as it has been said, His resurrection is
a mirror of our life; for we see in that how God is wont to deal with
his own people: the Father did not restore life to Christ as soon as he
was taken down from the cross; he was deposited in the sepulchre, and he
lay there to the third day. When God then intends that we should
languish for a time, let us know that we are thus represented in Christ
our head, and hence let us gather materials of confidence. We have then
in Christ an illustrious proof of this prophecy. But in the first place,
let us lay hold on what we have said, that the faithful here obtain hope
for themselves, though God extends not immediately his hand to them, but
defers for a time his grace of redemption.

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>Then he adds, *We shall live in his
sight,* or *before him*. Here again the faithful strengthen themselves,
for God would favor them with his paternal countenance, after he had
long turned his back on them, *We shall live before his face* For as
long as God cares not for us, a sure destruction awaits us; but as soon
as he turns his eyes to us, he inspires life by his look alone. Then the
faithful promise this good to themselves that God’s face will shine
again after long darkness: hence also they gather the hope of life, and
at the same time withdraw themselves from all those obstacles which
obscure the light of life; for while we run and wander here and there,
we cannot lay hold on the life which God promises to us, as the charms
of this world are so many veils, which prevent our eyes to see the
paternal face of God. We must then remember that this sentence is added,
that the faithful, when it pleases God to turn his back on them, may not
doubt but that he will again look on them. Let us now go on —

<span id="xiii.iv"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003.md)<span id="xiii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Then shall we know, *if* we follow
on to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning; and he
shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter *and* former rain unto the
earth.

<span id="xiii.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Et cognoscemus et persequemur ad
cognitionem Jehovae: sicut aurora dispositus est egressus ejus, et
veniet tanquam pluvia nobis, tanquam pluvia serotina pluvia terrae.
 <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md)

<span id="xiii.iv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iv-p7"></span><span id="xiii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p8"></span>In this verse the faithful pursue what we
have before considered, making the hope of salvation sure to themselves:
nor is it a matter of wonder that the Prophet dwells more fully on this
subject; for we know how prone we are to entertain doubt. There is
nothing more difficult, especially when God shows to us signs of his
wrath, than to recover us, so that we may be really persuaded that he is
our physician, when he seems to visit us for our sins. We must then, in
this case, earnestly strive, for it cannot be done without labour. Hence
the faithful now say, *We shall know, and we shall pursue to know
Jehovah.* They show then by these words that they distrust not, but that
light would arise after darkness; for this is the meaning of the words:
*We shall* then *know,* they say; that is, “Though there is now on every
side horrible darkness, yet the Lord will manifest his goodness to us,
even though it may not immediately appear.” They therefore add, *And we
shall pursue after the knowledge of Jehovah.* We now perceive the
purport of the words.

<span id="xiii.iv-p9"></span>Now this passage teaches us, that when God
hides his face, we act foolishly if we cherish our unbelief; for we
ought, on the contrary, as I have already said, to contend with this
destructive disease, inasmuch as Satan seeks nothing else but to sink us
in despair. This his device then ought to be understood by us, as Paul
reminds us, (<span id="xiii.iv-p9.1"></span>[2Co
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="xiii.iv-p9.1"></span>;.md)
and the Holy Spirit supplies us here with weapons, by which we may repel
this temptation of Satan, “What? Thou seest that God is angry with thee;
nor is it of any use to thee to attempt to come to him, for every access
is shut up.” This is what Satan suggests to us, when we are sensible of
our sins. What is to be done? The Prophet here propounds a remedy, *We
shall know;* “Though now we are sunk in thick darkness, though there
never shines on us, no, not even a spark of light, yet we shall know (as
Isaiah says, ‘I will hope in the Lord, who hides his face from Jacob’)
 <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) that this is the true exercise of
our faith, when we lift up our eyes to the light which seems to be
extinguished, and when in the darkness of death we yet continue to
promise to ourselves life, as we are here taught: We shall then *know;*
further, *We shall pursue after the knowledge of Jehovah;* though God
withdraws his face, and, as it were designedly, doubles the darkness,
and all knowledge of his grace be, as it were, extinct, we shall yet
*pursue after this knowledge;* that is, no obstacle shall keep us from
striving, and our efforts will at length make their way to that grace
which seems to be wholly excluded from us.”

<span id="xiii.iv-p11"></span>Some give this rendering, *We shall know,
and shall pursue on to know Jehovah,* and explain the passage thus, —
that the Israelites had derived no such benefit from the law of Moses,
but that they still expected the fuller doctrine, which Christ brought
at his coming. They then think that this is a prophecy respecting that
doctrine, which is now by the Gospel set forth to us in its full
brightness, because God has manifested himself in his Son as in a living
image. But this is too refined an exposition; and it is enough for us to
keep close to the design of the Prophet. He indeed introduces the godly
thus speaking for this reason — because there was need of great and
strong effort, that they might rise up to the hope of salvation; for it
was not to be the exile of one day, but of seventy years. When therefore
so heavy a trial awaited the godly, the Prophet here wished to prepare
them for the laborious warfare: *We shall then know, and follow on to
know Jehovah*

<span id="xiii.iv-p12"></span>Then he says*, As the morning shall come
to us his going forth,* — a similitude the most appropriate; for here
the faithful call to mind the continued succession of days and nights.
No wonder that God bids us to hope for his grace, the sight of which is
yet hid from us; for except we had learnt by long experience, who could
hope for sudden light when the darkness of night prevails? Should we not
think that the earth is wholly deprived of light? But seeing that the
dawn suddenly shines, and puts an end to the darkness of night, and
dispels it, what wonder is it that the Lord should shine forth beyond
our expectation? *His going forth* then *shall be like the morning.*

<span id="xiii.iv-p13"></span>He here calls a new manifestation the
going forth of God, that is, when God shows that he regards his people
with favor, when he shows that he is mindful of the covenant which he
made with Abraham; for as long as the people were exiled from their
country, God seemed not, as we have said, to look on them any more; nay,
the judgment of the flesh only suggested this, that God was far distant
from his people. He then calls it the going forth of God, when God
should show himself propitious to the captives, and should wholly
restore them; then *the going forth of God shall come, and shall be like
the morning* We now then see that he confirms them by the order of
nature, as Paul does, when he chides the unbelief of those to whom a
future resurrection seemed incredible, because it surpasses the thoughts
of the flesh; “O fool!” he says, “does thou not see that what thou
sowest first decays and then germinates? God now sets before thee in a
decaying seed an emblem of the future resurrection.” So also in this
place, since light daily rises to us, and the morning shines after the
darkness of night, what then will not the Lord effect by himself, who
works so powerfully by material things? When he will put forth his full
power, what, think we, will he do? Will he not much more surpass all the
thoughts of our flesh? We now then see why this similitude was added.

<span id="xiii.iv-p14"></span>He afterwards describes to us the effect
of this manifestation, *He shall come,* he says, *as the rain to us, as
the late rain, a rain to the earth* This comparison shows, that as soon
as God will deign to look on his people, his countenance will be like
the rain, which irrigates the earth. When the earth is dry after long
heat and long drought, it seems to be incapable of producing fruit; but
rain restores to it its moisture and vigor. Thus then the Prophet, in
the person of the faithful, does here strengthen the hope of a full
restoration. *He shall come to us as the rain, as the late rain*

<span id="xiii.iv-p15"></span>The Hebrews call the late rain <span
id="xiii.iv-p15.2"></span>מלקום, *melakush*, by which the corn was
ripened. And it seems that the Prophet meant the vernal rain by the word
<span id="xiii.iv-p15.3"></span>גשם, *geshem,* But the sense is clearly
this, that though the Israelites had become so dry that they had no
longer any vigor, there would yet be no less virtue in God’s grace than
in the rain, which fructifies the earth when it seems to be barren. But
when at the end he adds, *a rain to the earth,* I doubt not but that he
meant seasonable rain, which is pleasant and acceptable to the earth, or
which the earth really wants; for a violent shower cannot be called
properly a rain to the earth, because it is destructive and hurtful. It
follows —

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span><span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004.md)<span id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span>**4.** O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee?
O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness *is* as a morning
cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away.

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span>**4.** Quid faciam tibi Ephraim? quid faciam
tibi Jehudah? Nam bonitas vestra est quasi ros matutinus, quasi nebula
mane transiens.

<span id="xiii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.v-p5"></span><span id="xiii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p6"></span>Some so expound this passage as that God
would not once irrigate his people, but would continue this favor; as
though he said, “He is deceived, who thinks that the redemption, which I
bid you to hope from me, will be momentary, for I will, by a continued
progress, lead my people to a full fruition of salvation.” But this
sense is altogether foreign. The Prophet then, no doubt, introduces God
here as speaking thus, “What shall I do to you? because ye cannot
receive my favor, so great is your depravity.” The context seems indeed
to be in this way broken off; but we must remember this canon, that
whenever the Prophets make known the grace of God, they at the same time
add an exception, lest hypocrites falsely apply to themselves what is
offered to the faithful alone. The Prophets, we know, never threatened
ruin to the people, but that they added some promise, lest the faithful
should despair, which must have been the case, except some mitigation
had been made known to them. Hence the Prophets do this in common, —
they moderate their threatening and severity by adding a hope of God’s
favor. But at the same time, as hypocrites ever draw to themselves what
belongs only to the faithful, and thus heedlessly deride God, the
Prophets add another exception, by which they signify, that God’s
promise of being gracious and merciful to his people is not to be deemed
universal, and as appertaining to all indiscriminately.

<span id="xiii.v-p7"></span>I will more fully repeat this again: The
Prophets had to do with the whole people; they had to do with the few
faithful, for there was a small number of godly people among the
Israelites as well as among the Jews. When therefore the Prophets
reproved the people, they addressed the whole body: but at the same
time, as there was some remnant seed, they mingled, as I have said,
consolations, and mingled them, that the elect of God might ever recumb
on his mercy, and thus patiently submit to his rod, and continue in his
fear, knowing that there is in him a sure salvation. Hence the promises
which we see inserted by the Prophets among threats and chidings, ought
not to be referred in common to all, or indiscriminately to the people,
but only, as we have said, to the faithful, who were then but few in
number. This then is the reason why the prophets shook off
self-complacencies from the wicked despisers of God, when they added,
“Ye ought not to hope any salvation from the promise I set forth to
God’s children; for God throws not to dogs the bread which he has
destined for his children alone.” In the same strain we find another
Prophet speaking,

<span id="xiii.v-p8"></span>‘To what end is the day of the Lord to you?
It is a day of darkness, and not of light, a day of death, and not of
life,’ (<span id="xiii.v-p8.1"></span>[Am
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018)<span id="xiii.v-p8.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.v-p9"></span>For as often as they heard of the covenant
which God made with Abraham, that it would not be void, they thus
vaunted, “We are now indeed severely treated, but in a little while God
will rescue us from our evils; for he is our Father, he has not in vain
adopted us, he has not in vain redeemed and chosen our race, we are his
peculiar possession and heritage.” Thus then the presumptuous flatter
themselves; and this indeed they seem to have in common with the
faithful; for the faithful also, though in the deepest abyss of death,
yet behold the light of life; for by faith, as we have said, they
penetrate beyond this world. But at the same time they approach God in
real penitence, while the ungodly remain in their perverseness, and
vainly flatter themselves, thinking that whatever God promises belongs
to them.

<span id="xiii.v-p10"></span>Let us now then return to our Prophet. He
had said, “In their tribulation they will seek me:” he had afterwards,
in the words used by the people, explained how the faithful would turn
themselves to God, and what true repentance would bring with it. It now
follows, *What shall I do to thee, Ephraim? what shall I do to thee,
Judah?* that is, “What shall I do to all of you?” The people was now
divided into two kingdoms: the kingdom of Judah had its own name; the
ten tribes had, as it has been said, the common name of Israel. Then
after the Prophet gave hope of pardon to the children of God, he turns
himself to the whole body of the people, which was corrupt, and says,
“What shall I do now to you, both Jews and Israelites?” Now God, by
these words, intimates that he had tried all remedies, and found them
useless: “What more then,” he says, “shall I do to you? Ye are wholly
incurable, ye are inexcusable, and altogether past hope; for no means
have been omitted by me, by which I could promote your salvation; but I
have lost all my labour; as I have effected nothing by punishments and
chastisements, as my favor also has had no account among you, what now
remains, but that I must wholly cast you away?”

<span id="xiii.v-p11"></span>We now then see how varied is the mode of
speaking adopted by the Prophets; for they had to do, not with one class
of men, but with the children of God, and also with the wicked, who
continued obstinately in their vices. Hence then it was, that they
changed their language, and so necessarily. Alike is the complaint we
read in Isaiah chapter 1,  <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) except
that there mention is only made of punishments, ‘Why should I strike you
more? for I have hitherto effected nothing: from the sole of the foot to
the top of the head there is no soundness; and yet ye remain like
yourselves.’ In chapter 5  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) he
speaks of God’s favors, ‘What could have been done more to my vineyard
than what I have done?’ In these two places the Prophet shows that the
people were so lost, that they could not be brought into a sane mind;
for God had in various ways tried to heal them, and their diseases
remained incurable.

<span id="xiii.v-p14"></span>Let us now return to the words of Hosea,
*What shall I do to thee, Ephraim? What shall I do to thee Judah?* “I
indeed offer pardon to all, but ye still continue obstinately in your
sins; nay, my favor is by you scorned: I do not therefore now contend
with you; but declare to you that the door of salvation is closed.” Why?
“Because I have hitherto in various ways tried in vain to heal you.”

<span id="xiii.v-p15"></span>He afterwards says that their goodness was
like the morning dew, *Your goodness,* he says, is as the dew of the
morning.” Some take <span id="xiii.v-p15.1"></span>חסד, *chesad,* for
the kindness which God had exercised towards both the Israelites and the
Jews. Then it is, “Your kindness,” that is, the mercy which I have
hitherto exhibited to you, *is as the morning dew, as the cloud which
passes away early in the morning,* that is, “Ye immediately dry up my
favor;” and this seems not unsuitable, for we see that the unbelieving
by their wickedness absorb the mercy of God, so that it produces no
good, as when rain flows over a rock or a stone, while the stone within,
on account of its hardness, remains dry. As then the moisture of rain
does not penetrate into stones, so also the grace of God is spent in
vain and without advantage on the unbelieving.

<span id="xiii.v-p16"></span>But the Prophet speaks rather of their
goodness, that they made a show of feigned excellency, which vanished
like the morning dew; for as soon as the sun rises, it draws the dew
upwards, so that it appears no more; the clouds also pass away. The
Prophet says that the Jews and the Israelites were like the morning
clouds and the dew, because there was in them no solid or inward
goodness, but it was only of an evanescent kind; they had, as they say,
only the appearance of goodness.

<span id="xiii.v-p17"></span>We now then perceive the meaning of the
Prophet, that God here complains that he had to do with hypocrites.
Faith, we know, is regarded by him; there is nothing that pleases God
more than sincerity of heart. We know further, that doctrine is spread
in vain, except it be received in a serious manner. Then, as hypocrites
transform themselves in various ways, and make a display of some guises
of goodness, while they have nothing solid in them, God complains that
he loses all his labour: and he says at length that he will no longer
spend labour in vain on hypocritical men, who have nothing but falsehood
and dissimulation; and this is what he means, when he intimates that he
should do nothing more to the Israelites and the Jews.

<span id="xiii.vi"></span>

<span id="xiii.vi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xiii.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we do not, by
due gratitude, respond to thy favors, and after having tasted of thy
mercy, have willingly sought ruin to ourselves, — O grant, that we,
being renewed by thy Spirit, may not only remain constant in the fear of
thy name, but also advance more and more and be established; that being
thus armed with thy invincible power, we may strenuously fight against
all the wiles and assaults of Satan, and thus pursue our warfare to the
end, — and that being thus sustained by thy mercy, we may ever aspire to
that life which is hid for us in heaven, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

<span id="xiii.vi-p3"></span> 

<span id="xiii.vii"></span>

<span id="xiii.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Seventeenth

<span id="xiii.viii"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005.md)<span id="xiii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p2"></span>**5.** Therefore have I hewed *them* by
the prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth: and thy
judgments *are as* the light *that* goeth forth.

<span id="xiii.viii-p3"></span>**5.** Propterea secui (*vel*, excidi) in
Prophetis meis, occidi eos in verbis oris mei, et judicia tua  <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md) lux quae egreditur.

<span id="xiii.viii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.viii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p8"></span>God shows here, by his Prophet, that he
was constrained by urgent necessity to deal sharply and roughly with the
people. Nothing, we know, is more pleasing to God than to treat us
kindly; for there is not found a father in the world who cherishes his
children as tenderly: but we, being perverse, suffer him not to follow
the inclination of his nature. He is therefore constrained to put on, as
it were, a new character, and to chide us severely, according to the way
in which he here says, he had treated the Israelites; *I have cut them,
he says, by my prophets, and killed them by the words of my mouth*

<span id="xiii.viii-p9"></span>Some render the words otherwise, as
though God had killed the Prophets, meaning thereby the impostors, who
corrupted the pure worship of God by their errors. But this view seems
not to me in any way suitable; and we know that it was a common mode of
speaking among the Hebrews, to express the same thing in two ways. So
the Prophet speaks here, *I have cut* or *hewed* *them by my Prophets, I
have killed them by the cords of my mouth.* In the second clause he
repeats, I doubt not, what we have already briefly explained, namely,
that God had cut or hewed them by his Prophets.

<span id="xiii.viii-p10"></span>But we must see for what purpose God
declares here that he had commanded his Prophets to treat the people
roughly. Hypocrites we indeed know, however much in various ways they
mock God, are yet tender, and cannot bear any rebuke. Their sins are
gross, except when they disguise themselves; but at the same time, when
God begins to reprove, they expostulate and say, “What does this mean?
God everywhere declares that he is kind and merciful; but he fulminates
now against us: this seems not consistent with his nature.” Thus then
hypocrites would have God to be their batterer. He now answers, that he
had been constrained, not only for a just cause, but also necessarily,
to kill them, and to make his word by the Prophets like a hammer or an
ax. This is the reason, he says, why my Prophets have not endeavored
mildly and gently to allure the people. For God kindly and sweetly draws
or invites to himself those whom he sees to be teachable; but when he
sees so great a perverseness in men, that he cannot bend them by his
goodness, he then begins, as we have said, to put on a new character. We
now then under stand God’s design: that hypocrites might not complain
that they had been otherwise treated than what is consistent with God’s
nature, the Prophet here answers in God’s name, “Ye have forced me to
this severity; for there was need of a hard wedge, as they say, for a
hard knot: *I have* therefore *hewed you by my Prophets, I have hewed
you by the words of my mouth;* that is, I have used my word as an ax:
for ye were like knotty and tough wood; it was therefore necessary that
my word should be to you like an ax: and I have killed you by the words
of my mouth; that is my word has not been sweet food to you, as it is
wont to be to meek men; but it has been like a two-edged sword; it was
therefore necessary to slay you, as ye would not bear me to be a Father
to you.”

<span id="xiii.viii-p11"></span>It then follows *Thy judgments are light
that goes forth* Some understand by “judgments” prosperity as if God
were here reproaching the Israelites, that it was not his fault that he
did not win them: “I have not neglected to treat you kindly, and under
my protection to defend you; but ye are ungrateful.” But this is a
strained exposition. The greater part of interpreters explain the
passage thus, “That thy judgments might be a light going forth.” But I
do not see why we should change any thing in the Prophet’s words. God
then simply intimates here, that he had made known to the Israelites the
rule of a religious and holy life, so that they could not pretend
ignorance; for the Hebrews often understand “judgments” in the sense of
rectitude. I refer this to the instruction given them: *Thy judgments*
then, that is, the way of living religiously, was like light; which
means this, “I have so warned you, that you have sinned knowingly and
willfully. Hence, that you have been so disobedient to me, must be
imputed to your perverseness; for when ye were pliant, I certainly did
not conceal from you what was right: for as the sun daily shines on the
earth, so my teaching, has been to you as the light, to show to you the
way of salvation; but it has been with no profit.” We now then
understand what the Prophet meant by these words. It follows —

<span id="xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p2"></span>**6.** For I desired mercy, and not
sacrifice; and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.

<span id="xiii.ix-p3"></span>**6.** Quia misericordiam volo (*vel*, quia
humanitas placet mihi) et non sacrificuim; et cognitio Dei (placet mihi,
*subaudiendum est*) prae holocaustis.

<span id="xiii.ix-p4"></span>**7.** But they like men have transgressed
the covenant: there have they dealt treacherously against me.

<span id="xiii.ix-p5"></span>**7.** Et ipsi tanquam homines ransgressi
sunt pactum;  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) illic perfide egerunt
in me (*vel*, Tanquam hominis pactum transgressi sunt, *ut postea
videbimus.*)

<span id="xiii.ix-p7"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ix-p8"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p9"></span>God in this place declares that he desires
mercy, and not sacrifices; and he does so to prevent an objections and
to anticipate all frivolous pretenses. There is never wanting to
hypocrites, we well know, a cover for themselves; and so great is their
assurance, that they hesitate not sometimes to contend with God. It is
indeed their common practice to maintain that they worship God, provided
they offer sacrifices to him, provided they toil in ceremonies, and
accumulate many rites. They think then that God is made bound to them,
and that they have fully performed their duty. This evil has been common
in all ages. The Prophet therefore anticipates this evasion, and says,
*Mercy I desire, and not sacrifice;* as though he said, “I know what you
are ready to allege, and that you will say, that you offer sacrifices to
me, that you perform all the ceremonies; but this excuse is deemed by me
frivolous and of no moment.” Why? “Because I desire not sacrifices, but
mercy and faith.” We now understand the main object of this verse.

<span id="xiii.ix-p10"></span>It is a remarkable passage; the Son of God
has twice quoted it. The Pharisees reproached him for his intercourse
with men of bad and abandoned life, and he said to them in Matthew
 <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) ‘Mercy I desire, and not
sacrifice:’ he shows, by this defense, that God is not worshipped by
external ceremonies, but when men forgive and bear with one another, and
are not above measure rigid. Again, in the <span
id="xiii.ix-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p11.2"></span>,
 <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) when the Pharisees blamed the
disciples for gathering ears of corn, he said ‘But rather go and learn
what this is, Mercy I desire, and not sacrifice.’ Inasmuch as they were
so severe against his disciples, Christ shows that those who make
holiness to consist in ceremonies are foolish worshipers of God; and
that they also blamed their brethren without a cause, and made a crime
of what was not in itself sinful, and what could be easily defended by
any wise and calm expounder.

<span id="xiii.ix-p13"></span>But that we may more fully understand this
sentence of the Prophet, it must be observed, firsts that the outward
worship of God, and all legal ceremonies, are included under the name of
sacrifice and burnt-offerings. These words then comprise a part for the
whole. The same may be said of the word <span
id="xiii.ix-p13.1"></span>חסד, *chesad*, which means, mercy or kindness;
for the Prophet here, no doubt, sets faith or piety towards God, and
love towards neighbors, in opposition to all external ceremonies. “I
desire,” he says, “mercy;” or, “mercy pleases me more than sacrifice,
and the knowledge of God pleases me more than burnt-offerings.” The
knowledge of God here is doubtless to be taken for faith or piety,
because hypocrites suppose that God is rightly worshipped when they use
many ceremonies. The Prophet derides all such pomp and empty show, and
says, that the worshipping of God is far different; it being only done
when he is known. The chief point is, that God desires to be worshipped
otherwise than sensual men dream; for they only display their rites, and
neglect the spiritual worship of God, which stands in faith and love.

<span id="xiii.ix-p14"></span>These two clauses ought then to be read
conjointly — that kindness pleases God — and that faith pleases God.
Faith by itself cannot please God, since it cannot even exist without
love to our neighbor; and then, human kindness is not sufficient; for
were any one to abstain from doing any injury, and from hurting his
brethren in any thing, he might be still a profane man, and a despiser
of God; and certainly his kindness would be then of no avail to him. We
hence see that these two sentences cannot be separated, and that what
the Prophet says is equally the same as if he had connected piety with
love. The meaning is, that God values faith and kindness much more than
sacrifices and all ceremonies. But when the Prophet says that sacrifice
does not please God, he speaks, no doubt, comparatively; for God does
not positively repudiate sacrifices enjoined in his own law; but he
prefers faith and love to them; as we more clearly learn from the
particle <span id="xiii.ix-p14.1"></span>מ, *mem*, when he says, <span
id="xiii.ix-p14.2"></span>מעולות*, meoulut*, than burnt-offerings.” It
then appears that God is not inconsistent with himself, as though he
rejected sacrifices which he himself had appointed; but that he condemns
the preposterous abuse of them, in which hypocrites gloried.

<span id="xiii.ix-p15"></span>And here two things are to be noticed: God
requires not external ceremonies, as if they availed any thing of
themselves, but for a different end. Faith of itself pleases God, as
also does love; for they are, as they say, of the class of good works:
but sacrifices are to be regarded differently; for to kill an ox, or a
calf, or a lamb, what is it but to do what the butcher does in his
shambles? God then cannot be delighted with the slaughter of beasts;
hence sacrifices, as we have said, are of themselves of no account.
Faith and love are different. Hence the Lord says, in Jeremiah,

<span id="xiii.ix-p16"></span>‘Have I commanded your fathers, when I
brought them out of Egypt,  
to offer sacrifices to me?’  
\[<span id="xiii.ix-p16.3"></span>[Jer.
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022.md), [Jer.
23:0](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p16.3"></span>\]

<span id="xiii.ix-p17"></span>no such thing; ‘I never commanded them,’
he says, ‘but only to hear my voice.’ But what does the law in great
measure contain except commands about ceremonies? The answer to this is
easy, and that is, that sacrifices never pleased God through their own
or intrinsic value, as if they had any worth in them. What then? Even
this, that faith and piety are approved, and have ever been the
legitimate spiritual worship of God. This is one thing. It is further to
be noticed, that when the Prophets reprove hypocrites, they regard what
is suitable to them, and do not specifically explain the matters which
they handle. Isaiah says in one place, ‘He who kills an ox does the same
as if he had killed a dog,’ and a dog was the highest abomination;

<span id="xiii.ix-p18"></span>‘nay, they who offer sacrifices do the
same  
as if they had killed men,’ (<span id="xiii.ix-p18.2"></span>[Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003)<span id="xiii.ix-p18.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xiii.ix-p19"></span>What! to compare sacrifices with murders!
This seems very strange; but the Prophet directed his discourse to the
ungodly, who then abused the whole outward worship prescribed by the
law: no wonder then that he thus spake of sacrifices. In the same manner
also ought many other passages to be explained, which frequently occur
in the Prophets. We now then see that God does not simply reject
sacrifices, as far as he has enjoined them, but only condemns the abuse
of them. And hence what I have already said ought to be remembered, that
the Prophet here sets external rites in opposition to piety and faith,
because hypocrites tear asunder things which are, as it were,
inseparable: it is an impious divorce, when any one only obtrudes
ceremonies on God, while he himself is void of piety. But as this
disease commonly prevails among men, the Prophet adds a contrast between
this fictitious worship and true religion. It is also worthy of being
observed, that he calls faith the knowledge of God. We then see that
faith is not some cold and empty imagination, but that it extends much
farther; for it is then that we have faith, when the will of God is made
known to us, and we embrace it, so that we worship him as our Father.
Hence the knowledge of God is required as necessary to faith. The
Papists then talk very childishly about implicit faith: when a man
understands nothing, and has not even the least acquaintance with God,
they yet say that he is endued with implicit faith. This is a romance
more than foolish; for where there is no knowledge of God, there is no
religion, piety is extinct and faith is destroyed, as it appears evident
from this passage.

<span id="xiii.ix-p20"></span><span id="xiii.ix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p21"></span>God then subjoins a complaint, — *But they
like men have transgressed the covenant; there have they dealt
treacherously against me*. Here God shows that the Israelites boasted in
vain of their sacrifices and of all the pomps of their external worship,
for God did not regard these external things, but only wished to
exercise the faithful in spiritual worship. Then the import of the whole
is this, “My design was, when I appointed the sacrifices and the whole
legal worship, to lead you so to myself, that there might be nothing
carnal or earthly in your sacrificing; but ye have corrupted the whole
law; you have been perverse interpreters; for sacrifices have been
nothing else among you but mockery as if it were a satisfaction to me to
have an ox or a ram killed. You have then transgressed my covenant; and
it is nothing that the people say to me, that they have diligently
performed the outward ceremonies, for such a worship is not in the least
valued by me.”

<span id="xiii.ix-p22"></span>And he proceeds still farther and says,
*There have they dealt treacherously against me*. He had said before,
‘They have transgressed the covenant;’ as though he said, “If they
wished to keep my covenant, this was the first thing, — to worship me
spiritually, even in faith and love; but they, having despised true
worship, laid hold only on what was frivolous: they have therefore
violated my covenant.” But now he adds, that “there” appeared their
perfidy; yea, that they were convicted of violating their faith, and
shown to be covenant-breakers, by this, — that they abused the sacred
marks by which God had sanctioned his covenant, to cover their own
perfidy. There is then great importance in the adverb <span
id="xiii.ix-p22.1"></span>שם, *shim*, as if he had said, “In *that*
particular you have acted perfidiously:” for the Prophet means, that
when hypocrites especially raise their crests, they are convicted of
falsehood and perjury. But how? Because they set forth their own
ceremonies, as we see them introduced as speaking thus in <span
id="xiii.ix-p22.2"></span>[Isaiah
58](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p22.2"></span>,
 <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) ‘Wherefore have we fasted, and
thou hast not regarded?’ In this passage they accuse God of too much
rigor, because they lost all their toil when they worshipped so
laboriously, “We have then in vain spent labour and so diligently
worshipped him.” God answers: ‘Who has required this at your hands?’ So
also in this place the Prophet says, and more sharply, *There have they
dealt treacherously against me*: that is, “They think that my mouth
would be stopped by this defense only, when they brought forward their
sacrifices, and, after their manner, made a great display, as if they
were the best observers of religion; but I will show that in this very
thing they are covenant-breakers.” How? “Because there is no falsehood
worse than to turn the truth of God into a lie, and to adulterate his
pure doctrine.” And this is what all hypocrites do, when they thus turn
sacraments into gross abuses and false worship, when they build temples,
when they imagine that God is rightly worshipped whenever an ox or a ram
is offered. Since then hypocrites so grossly mock God and turn away
sacrifices from Christ, they turn away from the doctrine of repentance
and faith; in a word, they regard God only as a dead idol. When then
they thus deprave the whole worship of God and adulterate it, when they
so impiously corrupt the word of God and pervert his institutions, are
they not covenant-breakers? *There then they perfidiously acted against
me*. This ought to be carefully observed, because it has not been
noticed by interpreters.

<span id="xiii.ix-p24"></span>Some thus render the word <span
id="xiii.ix-p24.1"></span>אדם, *adam*, — “As the covenant of man have
they transgressed it,” transferring it to the genitive case, “And they
have transgressed the covenants as if it was that of man;” that is, as
if they had to do with a mortal man, so have they despised and violated
my holy covenant; and this exposition is not very unsuitable, except
that it somewhat changes the construction; for in this case the Prophet
ought to have said, “They have transgressed the covenant as that of a
man;” but he says, ‘They as a man,’ etc.  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) But this rendering is far from being that
of the words as they are, ‘They as men have transgressed the covenant.’
I therefore interpret the words more simply, as meaning, that they
showed themselves to be men in violating the covenant.

<span id="xiii.ix-p26"></span>And there is here an implied contrast or
comparison between God and the Israelites; as though he said, “I have in
good faith made a covenant with them, when I instituted a fixed worship;
but they have been men towards me; there has been in them nothing but
levity and inconstancy.” God then shows that there had not been a mutual
concord between him and the Israelites, as men never respond to God; for
he sincerely calls them to himself, but they act unfaithfully, or when
they have given some proof of obedience, they soon turn back again, or
despise and openly reject the offered instruction. We then see in what
sense the Prophet says that they had transgressed the covenant of God as
men.

<span id="xiii.ix-p27"></span>Others explain the words thus, “They have
transgressed as Adam the covenant.” But the word, Adam, we know, is
taken indefinitely for men. This exposition is frigid and diluted, “They
have transgressed as Adam the covenant;” that is, they have followed or
imitated the example of their father Adam, who had immediately at the
beginning transgressed God’s commandment. I do not stop to refute this
comment; for we see that it is in itself vapid. Let us now proceed —

<span id="xiii.x"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p1"></span><span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#008.md)<span id="xiii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p2"></span>**8.** Gilead *is* a city of them that work
iniquity, *and is* polluted with blood.

<span id="xiii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Galaad civitas operantium
iniquitatem, astuta a sanguine (*ad verbum ita est, vel,*retenta a
sanguine; *alii vertunt*, supplantata a sanguine; *alii*, inquinata a
sanguine.)

<span id="xiii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.x-p5"></span><span id="xiii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.x-p6"></span>I shall first speak of the subject, and then
something shall be added in its place of the words. The Prophet here
notices, no doubt, something special against Gilead, which through the
imperfection of history is now to us obscure. But in the first place, we
must remember, that Gilead was one of the cities of refuge; and the
Levites possessed these cities, which were destined for fugitives. If
any one killed a man by chance, that the relatives might not take
revenge, the Lord provided that he should flee to one of these cities
appointed for his safety. He was there safe among the Levites: and the
Levites received him under their protection, the matter being previously
tried; for a legal hearing of the cause must have preceded as to whether
he who had killed a man was innocent. We must then first remember that
this city was occupied by the Levites and the priests; and they ought to
have been examples to all others; for as Christ calls his disciples the
light of the world, so the Lord had chosen the priests for this purpose,
that they might carry a torch before all the people. Since then the
highest sanctity ought to have shone forth in the priests, it was quite
monstrous that they were like robbers, and that the holy city, which was
as it were the sanctuary of God, became a den of thieves.

<span id="xiii.x-p7"></span>It was then for this reason that the Prophet
especially inveighs against the city Gilead, and says *Gilead is a city
of the workers of iniquity, and is covered with blood* But if Gilead was
so corrupt, what must have been the case with the other cities? It is
then the same as if the Prophet had said, “Where shall I begin? If I
reprove the people indiscriminately, the priests will then think that
they are spared, because they are innocent; yea, that they are wholly
without blame: nay,” he says, “the priests are the most abandoned, they
are even the ringleaders of robbers. Since then so great corruptions
prevail among the order of priests, in whom the highest sanctity ought
to have shone forth, how great must be the licentiousness of the people
in all kinds of wickedness? And then what must be said of other cities,
since Gilead is so bad, which God has consecrated for a peculiar
purpose, that it might be a sort of sanctuary? Since then Gilead is a
den of robbers, what must be the other cities?” We now comprehend the
meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xiii.x-p8"></span>“Polluted with blood,” <span
id="xiii.x-p8.1"></span>עקובה מדם, *okube medam:* <span
id="xiii.x-p8.2"></span>עקב*, okob,* in Hebrew, means “to deceive,” and
also, “to hold” or “retain.” <span id="xiii.x-p8.3"></span>עקב, *okob,*
is the sole of the foot; hence <span id="xiii.x-p8.4"></span>עקב,
*okob,* signifies “to supplant.” And there is no doubt but that “to
deceive” is its meaning metaphorically. I will now come to the meaning
of the Prophet; he says that the city was <span
id="xiii.x-p8.5"></span>עקובה מדם, *okube, medan*; some say, “deceptive
in blood,” because they did not openly kill men, but by lying in wait
for them; and hence they elicit this sense. But I approve more of what
they hold who say, that the city was “full of blood;” not that such is
the strict sense of the Hebrew word; but we may properly render it,
“occupied by blood.” Why so? Because <span id="xiii.x-p8.6"></span>עקב,
*okob*, as I have said, means sometimes to hold, to stay, and to hinder.
We may then properly and fitly say, that Gilead was “occupied” or
“possessed by blood.” But here follows a clearer and a fuller
explanation of this sentence —

<span id="xiii.xi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#009.md)<span id="xiii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** And as troops of robbers wait for a
man, *so* the company of priests murder in the way by consent: for they
commit lewdness.

<span id="xiii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Et sicut expectant latrones hominum,
societas sacerdotum (*vel*, factio;) in via trucidant consensu, quia
cogitationem (*aut*, scelus) perficiunt.

<span id="xiii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xi-p5"></span><span id="xiii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p6"></span>The Prophet pursues more at large what he
had briefly touched; for he does, not now confine himself to the common
people, but directs his accusation against the sacerdotal order. “See,”
he says, “the priests conspire among themselves like robbers, that they
may slay wretched men, who may meet them in the way.” It is indeed
certain that the Prophet speaks not here of open murders; for it is not
credible that the priests had proceeded into so great a licentiousness,
that Gilead had become a slaughter-house. But the Prophets, we know, are
thus wont to speak, whenever they upbraid men with being sanguinary and
cruel; they compare them to robbers, and that justly. Hence he says,
*The faction of the priests kill men in the way,* as if they were
robbers conspiring together. And then he shows that the priests were so
void of every thing like the fear of God, that they perpetrated every
kind of cruelty as if they were wholly given to robberies. This is the
meaning.

<span id="xiii.xi-p7"></span>The word <span
id="xiii.xi-p7.1"></span>שכמה, *shicame,* is no doubt taken by the
Prophet for “consent.” What is meant by <span
id="xiii.xi-p7.2"></span>שכם, *shicam,* is properly the “shoulder;” but
it is metaphorically changed into the sense which I have mentioned; as
it is in the <span id="xiii.xi-p7.3"></span>[Zephaniah
3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#000.md)<span id="xiii.xi-p7.3"></span>
 <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) ‘They shall serve the Lord <span
id="xiii.xi-p8.2"></span>שכם אחד, *shicam ached*, with one shoulder;’
that is, “with one consent.” So also in this place, the priests conspire
together <span id="xiii.xi-p8.3"></span>שכמה, *shicame*, with consent.”
For they who think that the name of a place is intended are much
mistaken.

<span id="xiii.xi-p9"></span>Now in the last clause of the verse it is
made evident why the Prophet had said that the priests were like
robbers, ‘because,’ he says, ‘they do the thought,’ or ‘wickedness.’ The
verb to <span id="xiii.xi-p9.1"></span>זמם, *zamem* signifies “to
think,” as it has been already said: hence <span
id="xiii.xi-p9.2"></span>זמה, *zame* is “thought” in general; but is
often taken by the Hebrews in a bad sense, for a “bad design,” or
“wicked trick:” *They do* then *their conceived wickedness* We hence
learn that they were not open robbers, and publicly infamous in the
sight of men, but that they were robbers before God, because the city
was full of wicked devices, which were there concocted; and since they
executed their schemes, it is justly said of them by the Prophet, that
they imitated the licentiousness of robbers. Let us now go on —

<span id="xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
6:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p2"></span>**10.** I have seen an horrible thing in
the house of Israel: there *is* the whoredom of Ephraim, Israel is
defiled.

<span id="xiii.xii-p3"></span>**10.** In domo Israel vidi flagitium,
illic scortatio Ephraim, pollutus est Israel.

<span id="xiii.xii-p4"></span>**11.** Also, O Judah, he hath set an
harvest for thee, when I returned the captivity of my people.

<span id="xiii.xii-p5"></span>**11.** Etiam Jehudah posuit messem
(*vel*, plantam) tibi, dum ego reduco captivitatem populi mei (*vel*, in
reducendo me, *ad verbum*, captivitatem populi mei.)

<span id="xiii.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.xii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p8"></span>Here God declares that he is the fit judge
to take cognizance of the vices of Israel; and this he does, that he
might cut off the handle of vain excuses, which hypocrites often adduce
when they are reproved. Who indeed can at this day persuade the Papists
that all their worship is a filthy abomination, a mere profanation? We
see how furiously they rise up as soon as any one by a whisper dares to
touch their superstitions. Whence this? Because they wish their own will
to stand for reason. Why? Good intention, they say, is the judge; as if
this good intention were, forsooth, the queen, who ought to rule in
heaven and earth, and God were now excluded from all his rights. This
fury and this madness, even at this day, possess the Papists; and no
wonder, for Satan dementates men, when he leads them to corrupt and
degenerated forms of worship, and all hypocrites have been thus
inebriated from the beginning. This then is the reason why the Prophet
now says in the person of God, *I have seen,* or *do see*, *infamy in
the kingdom of Israel*. God does here by one word lay prostrate whatever
men may set up for themselves, and shows that there remains no more
defense for what he declares he does not approve, however much men may
value and applaud it. “What! you think this to be my worship; and in
your imagination, this is most holy religion, this is the way of
salvation, this is extraordinary sanctity; but I on the contrary
declare, that it is profanation, that it is turpitude, that it is
infamy. Go now,” he says, “pass elsewhere your fopperies, with me they
are of no value.”

<span id="xiii.xii-p9"></span>We now understand the meaning of the
Prophet, when he says*, In the house of Israel have I seen infamy:* and
by the house of Israel the Prophet means the whole kingdom of the ten
tribes. How so? “Because there is the fornication of Ephraim”; that is,
there idolatry reigns, which Jeroboam introduced, and which the other
kings of Israel followed.

<span id="xiii.xii-p10"></span>Thus we see that the Prophet spared
neither the king, nor his counselors, nor the princes of the kingdom;
and he did not spare before the priests. And this magnanimity becomes
all God’s servants, so that they cast down every height that rises up
against the word of the Lord; as it was said to Ezekiel,

<span id="xiii.xii-p11"></span>Chide mountains and reprove hills,’
(<span id="xiii.xii-p11.1"></span>[Ezek.
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#002.md), [Ezek.
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiii.xii-p11.1"></span>.)

<span id="xiii.xii-p12"></span>An example of this the Prophet sets
before us, when he compares priests to robbers, and then compares royal
temples to a brothel. Jeroboam had built a temple in which he thought
that God would be in the best manner worshipped; but this, says the
Prophet, is a brothel, this is filthy fornication.

<span id="xiii.xii-p13"></span><span id="xiii.xii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xii-p14"></span>Then he adds, *Judah also has set a
plantation for thee* That I may finish the chapter, I will briefly
notice this verse. Interpreters render it thus, “Also Judah, thou hast
set for thyself an harvest:” but the verb, as it is evident, is in the
third person; it cannot then be rendered otherwise than, ‘Also Judah has
set.’ They who render it in the second person, “Thou hast set for
thyself an harvest,” elicit this sense, “Thou also Judah, whom I have
chosen for myself, hast set for thyself an harvest, that is, thou hast
prepared a miserable harvest for thyself; for thou sowest ungodliness,
whose fruit thou shalt hereafter gather:” but this is strained. Now
since the word <span id="xiii.xii-p14.2"></span>קציר, *kotsir,*
signifies in Hebrew not only “harvest,” but also “a plant,” it may
properly be so taken in this place, *Also Judah, while I was returning
the captivity of my people, did set for himself a plant;* that is, he
propagated his own impieties. God indeed addresses here the Israelites,
and complains of Judah; for the Jews, we know, were retained by the
Lord, when the ten tribes separated. This defection of the ten tribes
did not cause religion to fail wholly among the whole people. There
remained the pure worship of God, at least as to the outward form, at
Jerusalem. The Lord then complains not here of Judah without a cause. He
had said before, ‘Judah shall be saved by his God;’ but now he says,
‘Judah also has set for himself a plant;’ that is, “superstitions have
been long and widely enough springing up among all Israel, they have
spread through all the corners of the land: and now Judah also,” he
says, “is planting his own shoots, for he draws the Israelites to
himself;” there is therefore a new propagation, and this is done, *While
I am returning the captivity of my people;* that is, “while I am seeking
to restore the scattering of my people.”

<span id="xiii.xii-p15"></span>In a word, God shows here that there was
no part any longer whole. When one undertakes the cure of a diseased
body, and when he sees at least some parts whole, he has some hope of
applying a remedy; but when not even a finger remains sound, what can
the physician do? So also the Lord says in this place, “There was at
least some hope of Judah, for some form of my worship remained there,
and the purer teaching of the law continued; but now Judah propagates
superstitions for Israel; observing that the whole land of Israel is
full of superstitions, he takes from thence shoots and slips, and
corrupts the remaining portion of the land, which has hitherto remained
sacred to me.” We now perceive, as I think, the genuine meaning of the
Prophet.

<span id="xiii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xiii.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are prone
to every kind of wickedness, and are so easily led away to imitate it,
when there is any excuse for going astray and any opportunity is
offered, — O grant, that being strengthened by the help of thy Spirit,
we may continue in purity of faith, and that what we have learnt
concerning thee, that thou art a Spirit, may so profit us, that we may
worship thee in spirit and with a sincere heart, and never turn aside
after the corruptions of the world, nor think that we can deceive thee;
but may we so devote our souls and bodies to thee, that our life may in
every part of it testify, that we are a pure and holy sacrifice to thee
in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc26012.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="xiii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span> <span id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>[Joh
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039.md)<span
id="xiii.iii-p13.1"></span>. — *fj.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc26012.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="xiii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p4"></span> The last clause, word for word, is the
following: — “And he shall come as a shower to us, as the crop-rain,
irrigating the earth.”

<span id="xiii.iv-p5"></span>The reference here seems to be only to “the
crop-rain,” the rain which ripened the crop. The only difficulty is
about the word rendered “irrigating.” Its leading idea is, to guide,
direct, regulate: and doubtless what regulates and determines the
produce of the earth is the rain. It may be rendered “regulating,” that
is, the fruitfulness of the earth. There is no other construction that
suits the place, without supposing something left out, as the
preposition <span id="xiii.iv-p5.1"></span>ל before “earth.” “*Which*
watereth the earth,” is the version of *Newcome.* —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc26012.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="xiii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.iv-p10"></span> <span id="xiii.iv-p10.1"></span>[Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018.md)<span id="xiii.iv-p10.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc26012.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="xiii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p12"></span> <span id="xiii.v-p12.1"></span>[Isa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005.md)<span id="xiii.v-p12.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc26012.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="xiii.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p13"></span> <span id="xiii.v-p13.1"></span>[Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004.md)<span id="xiii.v-p13.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc26012.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="xiii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.viii-p4"></span> There is no authority, as *Horsley*
says, for “my,” instead of “thy judgments,” in our version; for there as
no readings in the Hebrew MSS, which favors the change. The Bishop
refers to Calvin, and expressly approves of his exposition of this
passage. His own version is the following: —

<span id="xiii.viii-p5"></span>“And the precepts given thee were as the
onward-going light.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc26012.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p6"></span> “But they, like Adam, have transgressed
the covenant.” — *Newcome.* So *Horsley* renders it, and also *Grotius*;
but the Septuagint, Pagninus, and others, favor our version, and that of
Calvin. —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc26012.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p11"></span> <span id="xiii.ix-p11.1"></span>[Mt
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p11.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc26012.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p11.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p12"></span> <span id="xiii.ix-p12.1"></span>[Mt
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p12.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc26012.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p22.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p23"></span> <span id="xiii.ix-p23.1"></span>[Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003.md)<span id="xiii.ix-p23.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc26012.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="xiii.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ix-p25"></span> The words of the original are these, —
<span id="xiii.ix-p25.1"></span>והמה כאדם עברו ברית. The transposition
as proposed above is wholly impossible; no such meaning can be made of
the words. The translation preferred by Calvin is the only one that can
be admitted. The word <span id="xiii.ix-p25.2"></span>אדם is commonly
taken for men or mankind: the literal rendering is, — “But they like men
have transgressed the covenant.” —*Ed.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc26012.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="xiii.xi-p7.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.xi-p8"></span> <span id="xiii.xi-p8.1"></span>[Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009.md)<span id="xiii.xi-p8.1"></span>. —
*fj.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc26013.md)
