[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc26013)  [Next](cc26015.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>Chapter 8

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001.md)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** *Set* the trumpet to thy mouth. *He
shall come* as an eagle against the house of the Lord, because they have
transgressed my covenant, and trespassed against my law.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Super palatum tuum tuba, tanquam aquila
super domum Jehovae,  <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) quia
transgressi sunt foedus meum, et contra legem meam impie egerunt (*vel*,
perfide segesserunt.)

<span id="xv.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p10"></span><span id="xv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p11"></span>Interpreters nearly all agree in this, that
the Prophet threatens not the kingdom of Israel, but the kingdom of
Judah, at the beginning of this chapter, because he names the house of
God, which they take to be the temple. I indeed allow, that the Prophet
has spoken already, in two places, of the kingdom of Judah, but as it
were in passing. He has, it is true, introduced some reproofs and
threatening, but so that the distinction was quite clear; and we see
that he now goes to the kingdom of Judah, but in the second verse, he
names Israel, and yet continues his discourse. *To thy mouth,* he says,
*the trumpet,* *etc*.; and afterwards he adds, *To me* shall they cry,
My God; we know thee, Israel. Here, certainly, the discourse is
addressed to the ten tribes. I am therefore by no means induced to
explain the beginning of the chapter by applying it to the kingdom of
Judah: and I certainly do wonder that interpreters have mistaken in a
matter so trifling; for the house of God means not only the temple, but
also the whole people. As Israel retained this boast, that they were a
people holy to God, and that they were his family, he says, “Put or set
the trumpet to thy mouth, and proclaim the war, which is now nigh at
hand; for the enemy hastens, who is to attack the house of God, that is,
this holy people, who cover themselves with the name of God, and who,
trusting in their election and adoption, think that they shall be free
from all evils; war *shall come as an eagle* against this house of God.”

<span id="xv.i-p12"></span>Had the Prophet added any thing which could
be referred peculiarly to the kingdom of Judah, I should willingly
accede to their opinion, who think that the house of God is the
sanctuary. But let the whole context be read, and any one may easily
perceive, that the Prophet speaks of Israel no less in the first verse
than in the second and third. For, as it has been said, he lays down no
difference, but pursues throughout his teaching or discourse in the same
strain.

<span id="xv.i-p13"></span>He says first, *A trumpet to thy mouth,* or,
“Set to thy mouth the trumpet.” It is an exhibition, (*hypotyposis*;)
for we know that God, in order to affect more powerfully the people,
clothes his Prophets with various characters. The Prophet then is
introduced here as a herald who proclaims war, or a messenger, or by
whatever name you may be pleased to call him. Here then the Prophet is
commanded, not to speak with his mouth, but to show by the trumpet that
war was nigh, as though God himself by his trumpet declared war against
Israel, which was to be carried on soon after by earthly enemies. The
enemies were soon after to come, and the herald was to come in the usual
manner to declare war. The Greeks call them <span
id="xv.i-p13.1"></span>κηρρυκες, *proclaimers*, we say, “<span
id="xv.i-p13.2"></span>Les heraux“. As these earthly kings have their
proclaimers, or <span id="xv.i-p13.3"></span>κηρυκες, or heralds, or
messengers, who proclaim war; so the Lord sends his Prophet with the
usual charge to declare war: “Go then, and let the Israelites know, not
now by thy mouth, but even by thy throat, by the sound of the trumpet,
that I am an enemy to them, and that I am present with a strong army to
destroy them.” It is indeed certain that the Prophet did not use a
trumpet; but the Lord by this representations as I have already said
increased the reality of what was taught that the Israelites might
perceive, that it was not in sport or in play that the Prophet
threatened them, but that it was done seriously, as though they now saw
the heralds who was to proclaim war; for this was not usually done
except when the army is already prepared for battle.

<span id="xv.i-p14"></span>He then says, *As an eagle against the house
of Jehovah* We have already said what the Prophet means by the house of
Jehovah, even that people who thought that they would be exempt from
every evil, because they had been adopted by the Lord. Hence the
Israelites called themselves God’s household; and though under this
cover, they impiously and profanely abandoned themselves to every kind
of turpitude, yet they thought that they were on the best of terms with
God himself. “There shall come,” he says, “a common ruin to you all;
this boasting shall not prevent me from taking vengeance at last on your
sins.” But he adds *As an eagle,* that the Israelites might not think
that there was to be a long delay; for the impious procrastinate, when
they see any danger at hand. Hence, that the Israelites might not
continue torpid in their vices, the Prophet says, that the destruction
of which he spoke would be like the eagle; for in a moment the eagle
goes over an immense distance, and we wonder when we see it over our
heads, though a little before it did not appear. So also the Prophet
says, that destruction, though not yet seen, was however nigh at hand,
that being smitten with terror, though now late, yet as the Lord was
thus urging them, they might return to him.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
continues daily to restore us to thyself, both by scourges and by thy
word, though we cease not to go astray after sinful desires, — O grant,
that by the direction of thy Spirit, we may at length so return to thee,
that we may never afterwards fall away, but be preserved in pure and
true obedience, and thus constantly continue in the pure worship of thy
majesty and in true, obedience, that after this life past, we may at
last reach that blessed rest, which is reserved for us in heaven,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="xv.iii"></span>

<span id="xv.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-first

<span id="xv.iii-p2"></span>We were not able yesterday to complete the
first verse of the eighth chapter. It then remains for us to consider
the latter clause, in which the Prophet expresses the cause of the war
which he had previously proclaimed by God’s command. He says, that the
Israelites had transgressed the covenant of the Lord, and conducted
themselves perfidiously against his law. He repeats the same thing
twice, for the covenant and the law are synonymous; only the word, law,
in my view, is added as explanatory, as though he had said, that they
had violated the covenant of the Lord, which had been sanctioned or
sealed by the law. God then had made a covenant with Israel, which he
designed to be comprehended in the tables. Since then it was not unknown
to the Israelites what they owed to God, they were covenant-breakers. It
was then the doubling of their crime, as the Prophet shows, that they
had not fallen through mistake when they transgressed the covenant of
the Lord, for they had been more than sufficiently taught by the law
what faith and what purity the Lord required of them: at the same time,
the covenant which the Lord so openly made with them was yet neglected.
It follows —

<span id="xv.iv"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p1"></span><span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#002.md)<span id="xv.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p2"></span>**2.** Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we
know thee.

<span id="xv.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Mihi clamabunt, Deus mi, novimus te,
Israel.  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md)

<span id="xv.iv-p11"></span>**3.** Israel hath cast off *the thing that
is* good: the enemy shall pursue him.

<span id="xv.iv-p12"></span>**3.** Deseruit Israel bonum (*vel*,
abominatus est, repulit, *vel*, recessit procul a bono:) hostis
persequetur eum.

<span id="xv.iv-p13"></span> 

<span id="xv.iv-p14"></span><span id="xv.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p15"></span>By the Prophet saying, *To me shall they
cry,* some understand that the Israelites are blamed for not fleeing to
God; and they thus explain the Prophet’s words, “They ought to have
cried to me.” It seems to others to be an exhortation, “Let the
Israelites now cry to me.” But I take the words simply as they are, that
is that God here again touches the dissimulation of the Israelites,
*They will cry to me, We know thee;* and to this the ready answer is
*Israel has cast away good far from himself; the enemy shall pursue him*
I thus join together the two verses; for in the former the Lord relates
what they would do, and what the Israelites had already begun to do; and
in the latter verse he shows that their labour would be in vain, because
they ever cherished wickedness in their hearts, and falsely pretended
the name of God, as it has been previously observed, even in their
prayers. *Israel,* then *will cry to me, My God, we know thee.* Thus
hypocrites confidently profess the name of God, and with a lofty air
affirm that they are God’s people; but God laughs to scorn all this
boasting, as it is vain, and worthy of derision. They will then cry to
me; and then he imitates their cries, *My God, we know thee* When
hypocrites, as if they were the friends of God, cover themselves with
his shadow, and profess to act under his guardianship, and also boast at
the same time of their knowledge of true doctrine, and boast of faith
and of the worship of God; be it so, he says, that these cries are
uttered by their mouths, yet facts speak differently, and reprove and
expose their hypocrisy. We now then see how these two verses are
connected together, and what is the Prophet’s object.

<span id="xv.iv-p16"></span><span id="xv.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p17"></span>The verb <span id="xv.iv-p17.1"></span>זנח,
*zanech,* means “to remove far off,” and “to throw to a distance;” and
sometimes, as some think, “to detest.” There is here, I doubt not, an
implied contrast between the rejection of good and the pursuing of which
the Prophet speaks afterwards, *Israel has driven good far from
himself;* some expound <span id="xv.iv-p17.2"></span>טוב, *thub,* of God
himself, as if it was of the masculine gender: but the Prophet, I have
no doubt, simply accuses the Israelites of having receded from all
justice and uprightness; yea, of having driven far off every thing right
and just. *Israel*, then, *has repelled good; the enemy,* he says, *will
pursue him* There is a contrast between repelling and pursuing, as
though the prophet said, that the Israelites had by their defection
obtained this, that the enemy would now seize them. There is then no
better defense for us against all harms than attention to piety and
justice; but when integrity is banished from us, then we are exposed to
all evils, for we are deprived of the aid of God. We then see how
beautifully the Prophet compares these two things — the rejection of
good by Israel — and their pursuit by their enemies. He then adds —

<span id="xv.v"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p1"></span><span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#004.md)<span id="xv.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p2"></span>**4.** They have set up kings, but not by me:
they have made princes, and I knew *it* not: of their silver and their
gold have they made them idols, that they may be cut off.

<span id="xv.v-p3"></span>**4.** Ipsi regnare fecerunt et non ex me:
principatum instituerunt et nescivi: argentum suum et aurum suum
fecerunt sibi idola, propterea excidetur.

<span id="xv.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.v-p5"></span><span id="xv.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.v-p6"></span>The Prophet here notices two things, with
respect to which he reprobates the perfidy and impious perverseness of
the people, — they had, against the will of God, framed a religion for
themselves, — and they had instituted a new kingdom. The salvation of
that people, we know, was, as it were, founded on a certain kingdom and
priesthood; and by these two things God testified that he was allied to
the children of Abraham. We know where the happiness of the godly is
deposited, even in Christ; for Christ is to us the fulness of a blessed
life, because he is a king and a priest. Hence I have said, that through
a certain kingdom and priesthood did the favor of God towards the people
then shine forth. Now when the Israelites overturned the kingdom, which
God by his own authority instituted, and when they corrupted and
adulterated the priesthood, did they not, as it were, designedly
extinguish the favor of God, and strive to annihilate whatever was
needful for their salvation? This then is what the Prophet now speaks
of, that is, that the Israelites in changing the kingdom and priesthood
had undermined the whole appointment of God, and openly showed that they
were unwilling to be ruled by God’s hand; for they would have never
dared to turn asides even in the least degree, from the kingdom of
David, nor would they have dared to set up a new and spurious
priesthood, if any particle of the fear of God had prevailed in their
hearts.

<span id="xv.v-p7"></span>We now perceive the design of the Prophet,
which interpreters have not sufficiently considered; for some refer this
to the covenants, as it seemed strange to them, that the Israelites
should be so severely reproved for setting up Jeroboam as their king,
since Ahijah the Shilonite had already declared by God’s command, that
it would be so. But they attend not sufficiently to what the Prophet had
in view; for, as I have already said, when God instituted the
priesthood, there shone forth in it the image of Christ the Mediator,
whose office it is, to intercede with God that he might reconcile him to
men; and then in the person of David shone forth also the kingdom of
Christ. Now when the people tumultuously chose a new king for themselves
without any command from God, and when they built for themselves a new
temple and altar contrary to what the law prescribed, and when they
divided the priesthood, was not all this a manifest corruption, a denial
of religion? It is hence evident that the Israelites were in both these
respects apostates; for they forsook God in two ways, — first, by
separating from the house of David, — and then by forming for themselves
a strange worship, which God had not commanded in his law.

<span id="xv.v-p8"></span>With regard to the first, he says, *They have
caused to reign, but not through me; they have instituted a government,
and I knew it not,* that is, without my consent; for God is said not to
know what he does not approve, or that concerning which he is not
consulted. But some one may object and say, that God knew of the new
kingdom since he was the founder of it. To this the answer is, that God
so works, that this pretext does not yet excuse the ungodly, since they
aim at something else, rather than to execute his purpose. As for
instance, God designed to prove the patience of his servant Job: the
robbers who took away his property, were they excusable? By no means.
For what was their object, but to enrich themselves by injustice and
plunder? Since then they purchased their advantage at the expense of
another, and unjustly robbed a man who had never injured them, they were
destitute of every excuse. The Lord, however, did in the meantime
execute by them what he had appointed, and what he had already permitted
Satan to do. He intended, as it has been said, that his servant should
be plundered; and Satan, who influenced the robbers, could not himself
move a finger except by the permission of God; nay, except it was
commanded him. At the same time, the Lord had nothing in common or in
connection with the wicked, because his purpose was far apart from their
depraved lust. So also it must be said of what is said here by the
Prophet. As God intended to punish Solomon, so he took away the ten
tribes. He indeed suffered Solomon to reign to the end of his days, and
to retain the government of the kingdom; but Rehoboam, who succeeded
him, lost the ten tribes. This did not happen by chance; for God had so
decreed; yea, he had declared that it would be so. He sent Ahijah the
Shilonite to offer the kingdom to Jeroboam, who had dreamt of nothing of
the kind. God then ruled the whole by his own secret counsel, that the
ten tribes should desert their allegiance to Rehoboam, and that
Jeroboam, being made king, should possess the greater part of the
kingdom. This, I say, was done by God’s decree: but yet the people did
not think that they were obeying God in revolting from Rehoboam, for
they desired some relaxation, when they saw that the young king wished
tyrannically to oppress them; hence they chose to themselves a new king.
But they ought to have endured every wrong rather than to deprive
themselves of that inestimable blessing, of which God gave them a symbol
and pledge in the kingdom of David; for David, as it has been said, did
not reign as a common king, but was a type of Christ, and God had
promised his favor to the people as long as his kingdom flourished, as
though Christ did then dwell in the midst of the people. When therefore
the people shook off the yoke of David, it was the same as if they had
rejected Christ himself because Christ in his type was despised.

<span id="xv.v-p9"></span>We hence see how base was the conduct of the
people in joining themselves to Jeroboam. For that sedition was not
merely a proof of levity, as some people do often rashly upset the state
of things; it was not merely a rash levity, but an impious denial of
God’s favor, the same as if they had rejected Christ himself. They had
also, in this way, torn themselves from the body of the Church; and
though the kingdom of Israel surpassed the kingdom of Judah in wealth
and power, it yet became like a putrid member, for the whole soundness
depended on the head, from which the ten tribes had cut themselves off.
We now then see why the Prophet so sharply expostulates with the
Israelites for setting up a kingdom, but not through God; and solved
also is the question, how God here declares that was not through him,
which yet he had determined and testified by the mouth of his prophet,
Ahijah the Shilonite; that is, that God, as it has been said, had not
given a command to the people, nor permitted the people to withdraw
themselves from their allegiance to Rehoboam. God then denies that
kingdom, with respect to the people, was set up by his decree; and he
says that what was done was this, — that the people made a king without
consulting him; for the people ought to have attended to what pleased
him, to what the Lord himself conceded; this they did not, but suddenly
followed their own blind impulse.

<span id="xv.v-p10"></span>And this place is worthy of being observed;
for we hence learn that the same thing is done and not done by the Lord.
Foolish men at this day, not versed in the Scripture, excite great
commotions among us about the providence of God; yea, there are many
rabid dogs who bark at us, because we say, (what even Scripture teaches
everywhere,) that nothing is done except by the ordination and secret
counsel of God, and that whatever is carried on in this world is
governed by his hand. “How so? Is God, then a murderer? Is God, then a
thief? Or, in other words, are slaughters, thefts, and all kinds of
wickedness, to be imputed to him?” These men show, while they would be
deemed acute, how stupid they are, and also how absurd; nay, rather what
mad wild beasts they are. For the Prophet here shows that the same thing
was done and not done by the Lord, but in a different way. God here
expressly denies that Jeroboam was created king by him; on the other
hand, by referring to sacred history, it appears that Jeroboam was
created king, not by the suffrages of the people, but by the command of
God; for no such thing had yet entered the mind of the people, when
Ahijah was bidden to go to Jeroboam; and he himself did not aspire to
the kingdom, no ambition impelled him; he remained quiet as a private
man, and the Lord stirred him up and said, “I will have thee to reign.”
The people knew nothing of these things. After it was done, who could
have denied but that Jeroboam was set on the throne, as it were, by the
hand of God? All this is true; but with are regard to the people, he was
not created by God a king. Why? Because the Lord had commanded David and
his posterity to reign perpetually. We hence see that all things done in
the world are so disposed by the secret counsel of God, that he
regulates whatever the ungodly attempts and whatever even Satan tries to
do, and yet he remains just; and it avails nothing to lessen the fault
of evils when they say, that all things are governed by the secret
counsel of God. With regard to themselves, they know what the Lord
enjoins in his law; let them follow that rule: when they deviate from
it, there is no ground for them to excuse themselves and say that they
have obeyed God; for their design is ever to be regarded. We hence see
how the Israelites appointed a king, but not by God; for it was sedition
that impelled them, when, at the same time, the law enjoined that they
should choose no one as a king except him who had been elected by God;
and he had marked out the posterity of David, and designed that they
should occupy the royal throne till the coming of Christ.

<span id="xv.v-p11"></span>Then follows the other charge, — that *they
made to themselves idols from their gold and from their silver* God here
complains that his worship was not only fallen into decay, but that it
was also wholly corrupted by superstitions. It was an impiety not to be
borne, that the people had desired a new king for themselves; but it was
the summit of all evils, when the Israelites converted their gold and
their silver into idols. *They have made,* he says, *their gold and
silver idols;* that is, “I destined the gold and the silver, with which
they have been enriched, for very different purposes. When, therefore, I
was liberal to them, they abused my kindness, and from their gold and
their silver they made to themselves idols or gods.” Here, then, the
Prophet, by implication, sharply reproves the blind madness of the
people, that they made to themselves gods of corruptible things, which
ought, in the meantime, to be serviceable to them; for to what purpose
is money given us by the Lord, but for our daily use? Since, then, the
Lord has destined gold and silver for our service, what frenzy it is
when men work them into gods for themselves! But this main point must be
ever remembered, that the Israelites, in all things, betrayed their own
defection; for they hesitated not to overthrow the kingdom which God had
instituted for their salvation, and they dared to pervert the whole
worship of God, together with the priesthood, by introducing new
superstitions.

<span id="xv.v-p12"></span>Then follows a denunciation of punishment —
*Therefore Israel shall be cut off.* Were any, indeed, to object and say
that God was too rigid, there would be no reason for such an objection;
for they had betrayed and violated their pledged faith, and by
condemning and treading under foot both the kingdom and priesthood, they
had rejected his favor. We hence see that the Prophet threatens them now
with deserved destruction. Let us proceed —

<span id="xv.vi"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p1"></span><span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#005.md)<span id="xv.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p2"></span>**5.** Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast *thee*
off; mine anger is kindled against them: how long *will it be* ere they
attain to innocency?

<span id="xv.vi-p3"></span>**5.** Elongavit (*vel*, procul regecit; *est
idem verbum*, <span id="xv.vi-p3.1"></span>זנח) vitulus tuus (*vel*,
vitulum tuum) Samaria; excanduit furor meus in illos: quousque non
poterunt munditiem (*vel*, innocentiam.)

<span id="xv.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.vi-p5"></span><span id="xv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vi-p6"></span>The Prophet goes on with the same subject;
for he shows that Israel perished through their own fault, and that the
crime, or the cause of destruction, could not be transferred to any
other. There is some ambiguity in the words, which does not, however,
obscure the sense; for whether we read *calf* in the objective case, or
say, *thy calf has removed thee far off,* it will be the same. Some say,
“has forsaken thee,” as they do above, “Israel has forsaken good;” but
the sense of throwing away is to be preferred. Thy calf, then, *Samaria,
has cast thee off,* or, “The Lord has cast far off thy calf.” If we read
*thy calf* in the “objective” case, then the Prophet denounces
destruction not only on the Israelites, but also on the calf in which
they hoped. But the probable exposition is, that the calf had removed
far off, or driven far Samaria or the people of Samaria; and this, I
have no doubt, is the meaning of the words; for the Prophet, to confirm
his previous doctrine, seems to remind the Israelites again, that the
cause of their destruction was not anywhere to be sought but in their
wickedness, and especially because they, having forsaken the true God,
had made an idol for themselves, and formed the calf to be in the place
of God. Now, it was a stupidity extremely gross and perverse, that
having experienced, through so many miracles, the infinite power and
goodness of God, they should yet have betaken themselves to a dead
thing. They forged for themselves a calf! Must they not have been moved,
as it were, by a prodigious madness, when they did thus fall away from
the true God, who had so often and so wonderfully made himself known to
them?

<span id="xv.vi-p7"></span>Hence God says now *Thy calf O Samaria;* that
is “The captivity which now impends over thee will not happen by a
fortuitous chance, nor will it be right to ascribe it to the wrong done
by enemies, that they shall by force take thee to distant lands; but
*thy very calf drives thee away* God had indeed fixed thee in this land,
that it might be to thee a quiet heritage to the end; but thy calf has
not suffered thee to rest here. The land of Canaan was indeed thy
heritage, as it was also the Lord’s heritage; but after God has been
banished, and the calf has been introduced in his place, by what right
can you now remain in the possession of it? *Thy calf,* then, *expels
thee,* inasmuch as by thy calf thou hast first attempted to banish the
true God.” We now perceive the mind of the Prophet.

<span id="xv.vi-p8"></span>He afterwards says that *his anger kindled
against them* He includes here all the Israelites, and shows that it
cannot be otherwise, but that God would inflict on them extreme
vengeance, inasmuch as they were not teachable, (as we have before often
observed,) and could not be turned nor reformed by any admonitions.

<span id="xv.vi-p9"></span>*How long,* he says, *will they be not able
to attain cleanness*, or *innocence?* He here deplores the obstinacy of
the people, that at no period or space of time had they returned to a
sane mind, and that there was no hope of them in future. *How long* then
*will they not be able to attain innocence?* “Since it is so; that is,
since they are unimpressible, (<span
id="xv.vi-p9.1"></span>*incompatibiles*) as they commonly say, since
they are void of all purity or innocence, I am, therefore, now
constrained to adopt the last remedy, and, that is, to destroy them.”
Here God shuts the mouth of the ungodly, that they could not object that
the severity which he so rigidly exercised towards them was immoderate.
He refutes their calumnies by saying, that he had patiently borne with
them, and was still bearing with them. But he saw them to be so
obstinate in their wickedness, that no hope of them could be
entertained. It follows —

<span id="xv.vii"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p1"></span><span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#006.md)<span id="xv.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p2"></span>**6.** For from Israel *was* it also: the
workman made it; therefore it *is* not God: but the calf of Samaria
shall be broken in pieces.

<span id="xv.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Quia ex Israele etiam (*sic verto*)
artifex fecit eum, et non est Deus: quia in frusta (*vel*, fragmenta;
contritiones *alii verterent; alii,* scintillas: *sed clarus est
sensus*, *si ita vertatur*, in fragmenta) erit vitulus Samariae.

<span id="xv.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.vii-p5"></span><span id="xv.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.vii-p6"></span>The beginning of this verse is not rightly
explained, as I think, by those who so connect the pronoun demonstrative
<span id="xv.vii-p6.1"></span>הוא, *eva,* as if it had an interposed
copulative; and this ought to be noticed, for it gives a great emphasis
to the Prophet’s words. *Even this is from Israel* But what does the
Prophet mean? He means this, that the calf was from Israel, as they had
long before, at the beginning, formed to themselves a calf in the
desert. But we do not yet clearly apprehend the mind of the Prophet,
unless we perceive that there is here an implied comparison. For he
accuses the Israelites of being the first founders of this superstition,
and that they had not been, as it were, deceived by others; for they had
not borrowed this corruption from the Gentiles, as it had been at times
the case; but it was, so to speak, an intrinsic invention. *From
Israel,* he says, *it is;* that is, “I find that you are now the second
time the fabricators of this impious superstition. Could your fathers,
when they forged a calf for themselves in the desert, make excuse (as
they did) and say, that they were led by the faith of others? Could they
plead that this cause of offence was presented to them by the Gentiles,
and that they were ensnared, as it often happens, when some draw others
into error? By no means. As then your fathers, when no one tempted them
to superstition, became the founders of this new superstition through
their own inclination, and, as it were through the instigation of the
devil, so this calf is the second time from Israel, for ye cannot
otherwise account for its origin, ye cannot transfer the fault to other
nations; within, within,” he says, “has this evil been generated.” We
now perceive the meaning of the Prophet, which is, that this
superstition was not derived from others, but that Israel, under the
influence of no evil persuader, had devised for themselves, of their own
accord, this corruption, through which they had departed from the true
and pure worship of God. It ia indeed true, that oxen and calves were
worshipped in Egypt, and the same also might be said of other nations;
but rivalship did not influence the people of Israel. What then? It
cannot certainly be denied, but that they had stimulated themselves to
this impious denial of God.

<span id="xv.vii-p7"></span>The same thing may be brought against the
Papists of this day; that is, that the filthy mass of superstitions, by
which the whole worship of God is corrupted by them, has been produced
by themselves. If they object and say, that they have borrowed many
rites from the heathens: this is indeed true; but was it the imitation
of heathens which led them to these wicked inventions? By no means, but
their own lust has led them astray; for being not content with the
simple word of God, they have devised for themselves strange and
spurious modes of worship; and afterwards additions were made according
to the caprices of individuals: thus it has happened, that they are sunk
in the deepest gulf. Whence then have the Papists so many patrons, on
whom relying, then despise Christ the Mediator? Even because they have
adopted them for themselves. Whence also have they so many ungodly
ceremonies, by which they pervert the worship of God? Even because they
have fabricated them for themselves.

<span id="xv.vii-p8"></span>We now then see how grievous was the
accusation, that the calf was even from Israel. “There is no reason
then”, the Lord says, “for you to say that you have been deceived by bad
examples, like those who are mixed with profane heathens and contract
their vices, as contagion creeps in easily among men, for they are by
nature prone to vice; there is no reason,” he says, “for any one to make
an objection of this kind.” Why? “Because the calf your fathers made for
themselves in the desert was from Israel; and this calf also is from
Israel, for it was not thrust upon you by others, but Jeroboam, your
king, made it for you, and you willingly and applaudingly received it.”

<span id="xv.vii-p9"></span>*The workman,* he says, *made it, and it is
not God* Here the Prophet derides the stupidity oú the people; and there
are many other like places, which occur everywhere, especially in the
Prophets, in which God reprobates this madness of having recourse to
modes of worship so absurd. For what is more contrary to reason than for
man to prostrate himself before a dead piece of wood or before a atone,
and to seek salvation from it? The unbelieving indeed put on their
guises and say that they seek God in heaven, and, because idols and
images are types of God, that they come to him through them; but yet
what they do appears evident. These pretencea are then altogether vain,
for their stupidity is openly seen, when they thus bend their knees
before a wood or stone. Hence the Prophet here inveighs against this
senseless stupidity, because man had made the idol. “Can a mortal man
make a god? Ye do certainly ascribe divinity to the calf; is this in the
power of the workman? Man has not bestowed life on himself, and cannot
for one moment preserve that life which he has obtained at the pleasure
of another; how then can he make a god from wood or stone? What sort of
madness is this?”

<span id="xv.vii-p10"></span>He then adds, *It is not God, for in
fragments shall be the calf of Samaria* The Prophet shows here from the
event, how there was no power or no divinity in the calf, because it was
to be reduced *to fragments.* The event then would at length show how
madly the Israelites played the fool, when they formed to themselves a
calf, to be as it were the symbol of the divine presence. We now see
what the Prophet means: for he enhances the sin of Israel, because they
had not been enticed by others to depart from the pure and genuine
worship of God, but they had been their own deceivers. This is the
meaning. It follows —

<span id="xv.viii"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p1"></span><span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007.md)<span id="xv.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p2"></span>**7.** For they have sown the wind, and
they shall reap the whirlwind: it hath no stalk: the bud shall yield no
meal: if so be it yield, the strangers shall swallow it up.

<span id="xv.viii-p3"></span>**7.** Quia ventum serent (certe serunt
ventum, *inquit primo loco*) et turbinem metent: non est ei culmus,
germen non producet ferinam (non faciet, *ad verbum*;) si forte
produxerit, extranei vorabunt eam.

<span id="xv.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.viii-p5"></span><span id="xv.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet here shows by another figure
how unprofitably the Israelites exercised themselves in their perverted
worship, and then how vainly they excused their superstitions. And this
reproof is very necessary also in the present day. For we see that
hypocrites, a hundred times convicted, will not yet cease to clamour
something: in short, they cannot bear to be conquered; even when their
conscience reproves them, they will still dare to vomit forth their
virulence against God. They will also dare to bring forward vain
pretences: hence the Prophet says, that they have sown the wind, and
that they shall reap the whirlwind. It is an appropriate metaphor; for
they shall receive a harvest suitable to the sowing. The seed is cast on
the earth, and afterwards the harvest is gathered: *They have sown,* he
says, *the wind, they shall then gather the whirlwind,* or, *the
tempest*. To sow the wind is nothing else than to put on some appearance
to dazzle the eyes of the simple, and by craft and guise of words to
cover their own impiety. When one then casts his hand, he seems to throw
seed on the earth, but yet he sows the wind. So also hypocrites have
their displays, and set themselves in order, that they may appear wholly
like the pious worshipers of God.

<span id="xv.viii-p7"></span>We hence see that the design of the
Prophet’s metaphor, when he says that they sow the wind, is to show
this, that though they differ nothing from the true worshippers of God
in outward appearance, they yet sow nothing but wind; for when the
Israelites offered their sacrifices in the temple, they no doubt
conformed to the rule of the law, but at the same time came short of
obedience to God. There was no faith in their services: it was then
wind; that is, they had nothing but a windy and an empty show, though
the outward aspect of their service differed nothing from the true and
legitimate worship of God. They then sow the wind and reap the
whirlwind. But we cannot finish to-day.

<span id="xv.ix"></span>

<span id="xv.ix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xv.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since the rule of
thy true and lawful worship is sufficiently known to us, and thou
continues to exhort us to persevere in our course, and to abide in that
pure and simple worship which thou hast fully approved, — O grant, that
we may, in true obedience of faith, respond to thee: and though we now
see the whole world carried here and there, and all places full of the
awful examples of apostacy, and so much madness everywhere prevailing,
that men become more and more hardened daily, — O grant, that, being
fortified by invincible faith against these so many temptations, we may
persevere in true religion, and never at any time turn aside from the
teaching of thy word, until we be at length gathered to Christ our King,
under whom, as our head, thou hast promised that we shall ever be safe,
and until we attain that happy life which is laid up for us in heaven,
through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="xv.x"></span>

<span id="xv.x-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-second

<span id="xv.x-p2"></span>We were not able in the last lecture to finish
what the Prophet has said in the seventh verse; that is, that whatever
hope the Israelites entertained would be deceptive and fruitless; for
they imagined many deliverances as arising from nothing. He had before
condemned their wandering and perverse circuitous courses, now flying to
Egypt, then to Assyria, in order to seek assistance, and at the same
time overlooking and neglecting God. He therefore says now, that they
would have to gather fruit corresponding with what was sown: *They had
sown the wind, they shall reap,* he says, *the whirlwind* And by this
figure he signifies that their confidence was vain, that their counsels
were frivolous.

<span id="xv.x-p3"></span>He afterwards adds, that there would be no
stalk; and pursuing the same similitude, he says, *The bud shall yield
no meal; if so be it yields, strangers shall swallow it up* The meaning
is, that the Israelites went astray in their counsels, and had nothing
real; it was the same as if one had sown the wind. Then follows the
harvest of the whirlwind; for their seed would not spring up, no corn
would grow which would yield meal; but if their counsels attained any
fruit, or if they reaped any thing, strangers would devour it; for the
Lord would at length cause that their enemies would scatter whatever
they thought that they had attained. It further follows —

<span id="xv.xi"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#008.md)<span id="xv.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p2"></span>**8.** Israel is swallowed up: now shall they
be among the Gentiles as a vessel wherein *is* no pleasure.

<span id="xv.xi-p3"></span>**8.** Voratus est Israel, nunc erunt inter
gentes quasi vas in quo non est oblectatio (*hoc est*, vas rejectitium,
*vel*, contemptibile.)

<span id="xv.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xi-p5"></span><span id="xv.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xi-p6"></span>He uses the same word as before when he spake
of the meal, and says, that not only the provision of Israel shall be
devoured, but also the people themselves; and he upbraids the Israelites
with their miseries, that they might at length acknowledge God to be
adverse to them. For the Prophet’s object was this — to make them feel
their evils, that they might at length humble themselves and learn
suppliantly to pray for pardon. For it is a great wisdom, when we so far
profit under God’s scourges, that our sins come before our eyes.

<span id="xv.xi-p7"></span>He therefore says, *Israel is devoured and is
like a cast off vessel, even among the Gentiles,* when yet that people
excelled the rest of the world, as the Lord had chosen them for himself.
As they were a peculiar people, they were superior to other nations; and
then they were set apart for this end, that they might have nothing in
common with the Gentiles. But he says now that this people is dispersed,
and everywhere despised and cast off. This could not have been, except
God had taken away his protection. We hence see that the Prophet had
this one thing in view — to make the Israelites feel that God was angry
with them. It now follows

<span id="xv.xii"></span>

<span id="xv.xii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#009.md)<span id="xv.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xii-p2"></span>**9.** For they are gone up to Assyria, a
wild ass alone by himself: Ephraim hath hired lovers.

<span id="xv.xii-p3"></span>**9.** Quia ipsi ascenderunt in Assyriam,
onager (asinus sylvestris) solitarius (*aliqui tamen generaliter
accipiunt pro quavis fera; sylvestris ergo asinus solitarius*:) Ephraim
conduxit amores (*vel*, amatores conduxerunt; *est quidem verbum
pluralis numeri* ונתה, *sed Ephraim est collectivum nomen, ideo nihil
est obsurdi. Sequitur*)

<span id="xv.xii-p4"></span>**10.** Yea, though they have hired among
the nations, now will I gather them, and they shall sorrow a little for
the burden of the king of princes.

<span id="xv.xii-p5"></span>**10.** Quanivis conducant (*vel*,
conduxerint) inter gentes, nunc congregabo eos et dolebunt (*vel*,
incipient) paululum ab onere regis, principum (*hoc est*, regis et
principum, *subaudienda enim est copula inter nomen* ךלמ et םירש.)

<span id="xv.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xv.xii-p7"></span><span id="xv.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xii-p8"></span>Here again the Prophet derides all the
labour the people had undertaken to exempt themselves from punishment.
For though hypocrites dare not openly and avowedly to fight against God,
yet they seek vain subterfuges, by which they may elude him. So the
Israelites ceased not to weary themselves to escape the judgment of God;
and this folly, or rather madness, the Prophet exposes to scorn. *They
have gone up to Assyria,* he says, *as a wild ass alone; Ephraim had
hired lovers* In the first clause he indirectly reprobates the brutish
wildness of the people, as though he said, “They are like the wild
animals of the wood, which can by no means be tamed.” And Jeremiah uses
this very same similitude, when he complains of the people as being led
away by their own indomitable lust, being like the wild ass, who,
snuffing the wind, betakes himself, in his usual manner, to a
precipitant course, (<span id="xv.xii-p8.1"></span>[Jer
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024)<span id="xv.xii-p8.1"></span>..md)
Probably he touches also, in an indirect way, on the unbelief of the
people in having despised the protection of God; for the people ought
not to have thus hastened to Assyria, as if they were destitute of every
help, because they knew that they were protected by the hand of God. And
the Prophet here reproves them for regarding as nothing that help which
the Lord had promised, and which he was really prepared to afford, had
not the Israelites betaken themselves elsewhere. Hence he says,
*Ephraim, as a wild ass, has gone up to Assyria;* he perceived not that
he would be secure and safe, provided he sheltered himself under the
shadow of the hand of his God; but as if God could do nothing, he retook
himself to the Assyrians: this was ingratitude. And then he again takes
up the similitude which we have before noticed, that the people of
Israel had shamefully and wickedly departed from the marriage-covenant
which God had made with them: for God, we know, was to the Israelites in
the place of a husband, and had pledged his faith to them; but when they
transferred themselves to another, they were like unchaste women, who
prostitute themselves to adulterers, and desert their own husbands.
Hence the Prophet again reproves the Israelites for having violated
their faith pledged to God, and for being like adulterous women. He
indeed goes farther, and says, that they hired adulterers for wages.
Unchaste women are usually enticed by the charms of gain; for when
adulterers wish to corrupt a woman, they offer gifts, they offer money.
He says that this practice was inverted; and the same thing is expressed
by the Prophet Ezekiel; who, after having stated that women are usually
corrupted by having some gain or some advantage proposed to them, adds,

<span id="xv.xii-p9"></span>‘But thou wastest thine own property, and
settest not thyself to hire, but on the contrary thou hirest wantons,’  
(<span id="xv.xii-p9.2"></span>[Eze
16:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#031.md)<span
id="xv.xii-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="xv.xii-p10"></span>So the Prophet speaks here, though more
briefly, *Ephraim,* he says, *has hired lovers*

<span id="xv.xii-p11"></span><span id="xv.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xii-p12"></span>But it follows, *Though they have hired
among the nations, now will I gather them*. This place may be variously
expounded. The commonly received explanation is, that God would gather
the hired nations against Israel; but I would rather refer it to the
people themselves. But it admits of a twofold sense: the first is, that
the great forces which the people has on every side acquired for
themselves, would not prevent God from destroying them; for the verb
<span id="xv.xii-p12.1"></span>קבף, *kobets*, which they render, “to
gather,” often means in Hebrew to throw by a slaughter into an heap, as
we say in French, <span id="xv.xii-p12.2"></span>*Trousser*, (to
bundle.) And this meaning would be very suitable — that though they
extended themselves far and wide, by gathering forces on every side,
they would yet be collected in another way, for they would be brought
together into a heap. The second sense is this — that when Israel should
be drawn away to the Gentiles, the Lord would gather him; as though he
said, “Israel burns with mad lusts, and runs here and there among the
Gentiles; this heat is nothing else than dispersion; it is the same as
if he designedly wished to destroy the unity in which his safety
consists; but I will yet gather him against his will; that is, preserve
him for a time.”

<span id="xv.xii-p13"></span>It then follows, *They shall grieve a
little for the burden of the king and princes*. The word which the
Prophet uses interpreters expound in two ways. Some derive <span
id="xv.xii-p13.1"></span>יחלו, *ichelu*, from the verb <span
id="xv.xii-p13.2"></span>חל, *chel*, and others from <span
id="xv.xii-p13.3"></span>חלל, *chelal*, which means, “to begin;” and
therefore give this rendering, “They shall begin with the burden of the
king and princes;” that is, They shall begin to be burdened by the king
and princes. Others offer this version, “They shall grieve a little for
the burden of the king and princes;” that is, They shall be tributaries
before the enemies shall bring them into exile; and this will be a
moderate grief.

<span id="xv.xii-p14"></span>If the first interpretation which I have
mentioned be approved, then there is here a comparison between the
scourges with which God at first gently chastised the people, and the
last punishment which he was at length constrained to inflict on them;
as though he said, “They complain of being burdened by tributes; it is
nothing, or at least it is nothing so grievous, in comparison with the
dire future grief which their last destruction will bring with it.”

<span id="xv.xii-p15"></span>But this clause may well be joined with
that mitigation which I have briefly explained, and that is, that when
the people had willingly dispersed themselves, they had been preserved
beyond expectation, so that they did not immediately perish; for they
would have run headlong into destruction, had not God interposed an
hindrance. Thus the two verses are to be read conjointly, *They ascended
into Assyria as a wild ass*; that is, “They showed their unnameable and
wild disposition, when thus unrestrainedly carried away; and then they
offer me a grievous insult; for as if they were destitute of my help,
they run to the profane Gentiles, and esteem as nothing my power, which
would have been ready to help them, had they depended on me, and placed
their salvation in my hand.” He then reproaches their perfidy, that they
were like unchaste women, who leave their husbands, and abandon
themselves to lewdness. Then it follows, *Though they do this*, that is,
“Though having despised my aid, they seek deliverance from the profane
Gentiles, and though they despise me, and choose to submit themselves to
adulterers rather than to keep their conjugal faith with me, *I will yet
gather them*, when thus dispersed.” The Lord here enhances the sin of
the people; for he did not immediately punish their ingratitude and
wickedness, but deferred doing so for a time; and in his kindness he
would have led them to repentance, had not their madness been wholly
incurable: *though* then *they thus hire among the Gentiles, I will yet
gather them*, that is, “preserve them;” and for what purpose? That they
may grieve a little, and that is, that they may not wholly perish, as
persons running headlong into utter ruin; for they seemed designedly to
seek their last destruction, when they were thus wilfully and violently
carried away to profane nations. That is indeed a most dreadful tearing
of the body, which cannot be otherwise than fatal. *They shall*,
however, *grieve a little*; that is, “I will so act, that they may by
degrees return to me, even by the means of moderate grief.”

<span id="xv.xii-p16"></span>We hence see more clearly why the Prophet
said, that this grief would be small, which was to be from the burden of
the king and princes. It was designed by the Israelites to excite the
Assyrians immediately to war; and this would have turned out to their
destruction, as it did at last; but the Lord suspended his vengeance,
and at the same time mitigated their grief, when they were made
tributaries. The king and his counsellors were constrained to exact
great tributes; the people then grieved: but they had no other than a
moderate grief, that they might consider their sins and return to the
Lord; yet all this was without any fruit. Hence the less excusable was
the obstinacy of the people. We now perceive what the Prophet meant. It
now follows —

<span id="xv.xiii"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xv.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#011.md)<span id="xv.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Because Ephraim hath made many
altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin.

<span id="xv.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Quia multiplicavit Ephraim altaria
ad peccandum, erunt ei altaria ad peccandum.

<span id="xv.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xiii-p5"></span><span id="xv.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet here again inveighs against the
idolatry of the people, which was, however, counted then the best
religion; for the Israelites, as it has been said were become hardened
in their superstitions, and had long before fallen away from the pure
and lawful worship of God. And we know, that where error has once
prevailed, it attains firmness by length of time: hence the Israelites
had become hardened in their perverted and fictitious worship. They
thought that they did the most meritorious deed whenever they
sacrificed, while at the same time, they provoked in this way the wrath
of God more and more against themselves. And as they had become thus
hardened, the Prophet says, that *they multiplied for themselves altars
for the purpose of sinning,* and *that there would be altars for them to
sin* It was (as I have already said) most difficult to persuade theme
that their altars were for the purpose of sinnings and that the more
attentive they were in worshipping God, the more grievously they sinned.

<span id="xv.xiii-p7"></span>We see how Papists of this day glory in
their abominations. It is certain that they do nothing but what is
accursed before God; for there reigns among them every kind of
filthiness, and there is no purity whatever: they therefore continue to
offend God as it were designedly. Put at the same time it is their
highest holiness to multiply altars: the same also was the prevailing
error in the Prophet’s time. This was the reason why he said, that
*altars were multiplied in order to sin* Who at this day can persuade
the Papists, that many chapels as they build, are so many sins by which
they provoke the wrath of God? But the faithful ought to be content, not
with one altar, (for there is now no need of an altar,) but they ought
to be content with a common table. The Papists, on the contrary, build
altars to themselves without end, where they sacrifice; and they think
that God is thus bound to them as by so many chains: as many chapels as
are under the papacy are, they think, so many holds for God, (<span
id="xv.xiii-p7.1"></span>*dei carceres,*) and that God is there held
inclosed. But if any one should say, that so many fiends (<span
id="xv.xiii-p7.2"></span>*Diabolos*) dwell in such places, we know how
furiously angry they would be.

<span id="xv.xiii-p8"></span>It is then no superfluous repetition, when
the Prophet says, that *altars were multiplied in order to sin;* and
then, *that altars would be for sin:* for in the second clause, he
speaks of the punishment which God would inflict on superstitious men.
In the first clause, he shows that their good intentions were frivolous,
and that they were greatly deceived, when at their pleasure they devised
for themselves various forms of worship. This is one thing. Then it
follows, *There shall then be to them altars to sin;* as they would not
willingly repent, nor embrace salutary admonitions, God would at last
really show how much he valued what they called their good intentions;
for now a dreadful vengeance was at hand, which would prove to them,
that in increasing altars, they did nothing else but increase sins. It
then follows —

<span id="xv.xiv"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#012.md)<span id="xv.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** I have written to him the great
things of my law, *but* they were counted as a strange thing.

<span id="xv.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Scripsi ei pretiosa legis meae,
sicut alienum reputata sunt (quasi aliquid extraneum reputatum fuit.)

<span id="xv.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xiv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet shows here briefly, how we ought
to judge of divine worship, and thus intends to cut off the handle from
all devices, by which men usually deceive themselves, and form
disguises, when at any time they are reproved. For he sets the law of
God, and the rule it prescribes, in opposition to all the inventions of
men. Men think God unjust, except he receives as good and legitimate
whatever they imagine to be so; but God, as it is said in another place,
prefers obedience to all sacrifices. Hence the Prophet now declares,
that all the superstitions, which then prevailed among the people of
Israel, were condemned before God; for they obeyed not the law, but had
spurious and perverted modes of worship, which they had invented for
themselves. We then see the connection of what the Prophet says: he had
said in the last verse, that they had multiplied altars for the purpose
of sinning; but so great, as I have said, was the obstinacy of the
people, that they would by no means bear this to be told to them; he
then adds in the person of God, that his law had been given them, and
that they had departed from it.

<span id="xv.xiv-p7"></span>We hence see, that there is no need of using
many words in contending with the superstitious, who daringly devise
various kinds of worship, and wholly different from what God commands;
for they are to be distinctly pressed with this one thing, that
obedience is of more account with God than sacrifices, and further, that
there is a certain rule contained in the law, and that God not only bids
us to worship him, but also teaches us the way, from which it is not
lawful to depart. Since, then, the will of God is known and made plain,
why should we now dispute with men, who close their eyes and wilfully
turn aside, and deign not to pay any regard to God? *I have written*
then, the Lord says: and to give this truth more weight, he introduces
God as the speaker. It would have indeed been enough to say, “God has
delivered to you his law, why should you not seek knowledge from this
law, rather than from your own carnal judgment? Why do you wish thus
licentiously to wander, as if no restraint has been put upon you?” But
it is a more emphatical way of speaking, when God himself says, *I have
written my law, but they have counted it as something foreign;* that is,
as if it did not belong to them.

<span id="xv.xiv-p8"></span>But he says, that he *had written* to
Israel. He does not simply mention writing, but says, that the treasure
had been deposited among the people of Israel; and the worse the people
were, because they acknowledged not that so great an honor had been
conferred on them, for this was their peculiar inheritance. *I have
written* then *my law,* “and I have not written it indiscriminately for
all, but have written it for my elect people; but they have counted it
as something extraneous.” For the word may be rendered in either way.

<span id="xv.xiv-p9"></span>He adds, *The great things,* or, *the
precious,* or, *the honorable things* *of my law*. Had he said, “I have
written to you my law,” the legislator himself was doubtless worthy, to
whom all ought to submit with the greatest reverence, and to form their
whole life according to his will; but the Lord here extols his own law
by a splendid eulogy, and this he does to repress the wickedness of men,
who obscure its dignity and excellency: *I have written,* he says*, the
great things of my law* “How much soever they may despise my law, I have
yet set forth in it a wisdom which ought to be admired by the whole
world; I have in it brought to light the secrets of heavenly wisdom.
Since then it is so, what excuse can there be for the Israelites for
despising my law?” He says, that *they counted it as something foreign,*
when yet they had been brought up under its teaching, and the Lord had
called them to himself from their very infancy. Since then they ought to
have acknowledged the law of God as a banner, under which the Lord
preserved them, he here reproaches them for having counted it as
something extraneous. It then follows —

<span id="xv.xv"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p1"></span><span id="xv.xv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013.md)<span id="xv.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p2"></span>**13.** They sacrifice flesh *for* the
sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat *it; but* the Lord accepteth them
not; now will he remember their iniquity, and visit their sins: they
shall return to Egypt.

<span id="xv.xv-p3"></span>**13.** Sacrificia holocaustorum meorum
immolant carnem, et comedunt: Jehova gratum non habebit; nunc
recordabitur iniquitatis eorum, visitabit scelus ipsorum; ipsi Aegyptum
revertantur.

<span id="xv.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xv-p5"></span><span id="xv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xv-p6"></span>Interpreters think that the Israelites are
here derided because they trusted in their own ceremonies, and that
their sacrifices are reproachfully called flesh. But we must see whether
the words of the Prophet contain something deeper. For the word <span
id="xv.xv-p6.1"></span>הבהב, *ebeb,* some rightly expound, in my
judgment, as meaning “sacrifices,” either burnt or roasted; it is a word
of four letters. Others derive it from <span id="xv.xv-p6.2"></span>יהב,
*ieb,* which signifies “to give gifts;” and hence they render thus,
“sacrifices of my gifts;” and this is the more received opinion. I view
the Prophet here as not only blaming the Israelites for putting vain
trust in their own ceremonies, which were perverted and vicious; but
also as adducing something more gross, and by which it could be proved,
that their folly was even ridiculous, yea, to profane men and children.
When we only read, *The sacrifices of my gifts,* which they ought to
have offered to me, the sense seems frigid; but when we read, “The
sacrifices of my burnt-offerings! they offer flesh”, the meaning is, So
palpable is their contempt, that they cannot but be condemned even by
children. How so? Because for burnt-offerings they offer flesh to me;
that is they fear lest any portion of the sacrifices should be lost: and
when they ought, when offering burnt-sacrifices, to burn the flesh, they
keep it entire, that they may stuff themselves. Hence they make a great
display in sacrificing: and yet it appears to be palpable mockery, for
they turn burnt-offerings into peace-offerings, that the flesh may
remain entire for them to eat it. And no doubt, it has ever been a vice
dominant in hypocrites to connect gain with superstitions. How much
soever, then, idolaters may show themselves to be wholly devoted to God,
they yet will take care that nothing be lost.

<span id="xv.xv-p7"></span>The Prophet then seems now to reprove this
vice; I yet allow that the Israelites are blamed for thinking that God
is pacified by sacrifices which were of themselves of no value, as we
have had before a similar declaration. But I join both views together —
that they offered to God vain sacrifices without piety, and then, that
they offered flesh for burnt-offerings, and thus fed themselves and
cared not for the worship of God. *The sacrifices* then *of my
burnt-offerings they offer;* but what do they offer? *Flesh* Nor does he
seem to have mentioned in vain the word flesh. Some say that all
sacrifices are here called flesh by way of contempt; but there seems
rather to me to be a contrast made between burnt sacrifices and flesh;
because the people of Israel wished to take care of themselves and to
have a rich repast, when the Lord required a burnt-offering to be
presented to him: and he afterwards adds, *and they eat* By the word
eating, he confirms what I have already said, that is, that he here
reproves in the Israelites the vice of being intent only on cramming
themselves, and of only putting forth the name of God as a vain
pretence, while they were only anxious to feed themselves.

<span id="xv.xv-p8"></span>It is the same with the Papists of our day,
when they celebrate their festivals; they indulge themselves, and think
that the more they drink and eat, the more God is bound to them. This is
their zeal; they eat flesh, and yet think that they offer sacrifices to
God. They offer, then, their stomach to God, when it is thus well
filled. Such are the oblations of the Papists. So also the Prophet now
says, “They eat the flesh which they ought to have burned.”

<span id="xv.xv-p9"></span>*The Lord,* he says, *will not accept them*
Here again he briefly shows, that while hypocrites thus make pretences,
they are self-deceived, and will at last find out how vainly they have
lied to God and men: “God will not accept them.” He here repudiates, in
the name of God, their sacrifices; for whatever they might promise to
themselves, it was enough that they devised for themselves these modes
of worship; for God had never commanded a word respecting them.

<span id="xv.xv-p10"></span>It then follows, *Now will he remember their
iniquity, and visit their sins* The Prophet denounces a future
punishment, lest hypocrites should flatter themselves, when God’s fury
is not immediately kindled against them, for it is usual with them to
abuse the patience of God. Hence Hosea now forewarns them, and says,
“Though God may connive for a time, there is yet no reason for the
Israelites to think that they shall be free from punishment: God will at
length,” he says, “remember their iniquity.” He uses a common form of
speaking, which everywhere occurs in Scripture: God is said to remember
when he really, and as with a stretched-out hand, shows himself to be an
avenger. “The Lord now spares you; but he will, in a short time, show
how much he abominates these your impure sacrifices: *He will remember,*
then, *your iniquity* Visitation follows this remembering, as the effect
the cause.

<span id="xv.xv-p11"></span>*They shall flee,* he says, *to Egypt* The
Prophet, I doubt not, intimates here, that vain would be all the escapes
which the Israelites would seek; and though God might allow them to flee
to Egypt, yet it would be, he says, without any advantage: “Go, flee to
Egypt, but your flight will be useless.” The Prophet expressed this
distinctly, that the people might know that they had to do with God,
against whom they could make no defense, and that they might no longer
deceive themselves by foolish imaginations. And though the people were
blinded by so great an obstinacy, that this admonition had no effect;
yet they were thus rendered the more inexcusable. It now follows —

<span id="xv.xvi"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#014.md)<span id="xv.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p2"></span>**14.** For Israel hath forgotten his Maker,
and buildeth temples; and Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I
will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the palaces
thereof.

<span id="xv.xvi-p3"></span>**14.** Et oblitus est Israel factoris sui,
et aedificavit altaris: Juda autem multiplicavit urbes munitas: ego vero
ignem emittam (et emittam ignem, *ad verbum*) in urbes ejus, et comedet
(qui comedet, *aut*, vorabit) palatia ejus.

<span id="xv.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xv.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xv.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.xvi-p6"></span>Here the Prophet concludes his foregoing
observations. It is indeed probable that he preached them at various
times; but, as I have already said, the heads of the sermons which the
Prophet delivered are collected in this book, so that we may know what
his teaching was. He then discoursed daily on idolatry, on
superstitions, and on the other corruptions which then prevailed among
the people; he often repeated the same threatenings, but afterwards
collected into certain chapters the things which he had spoken. The
conclusion, then, of his former teaching was this, that *Israel had
forgotten his Maker,* whilst for himself he had been *building temples*
He says, that he forgot his Maker by building temples because he
followed not the directions of the law. We hence see that God will have
himself to be known by his word. Israel might have objected and said,
that no such thing was intended, when he built temples in Dan and
Bethel, but that he wished by these to retain the remembrance of God.
But the Prophet here shows that God is not truly known, and that men do
not really remember him, except when they worship him according to what
the law prescribes, except when they submit themselves wholly to his
word, and undertake nothing,and attempt nothing, but what he has
commanded. What then the superstitious say is remembrance, the Prophet
here plainly testifies is forgetfullness. The case is the same at this
day, when we blame the Papists for their idols; their excuse is this,
that what they set forth is in pictures and statues the image of God,
and that images, as they say, are the books of the illiterate. But what
does the Prophet answer here? That *Israel forgot his Maker* There was
an altar in Bethel, and there Israel was wont to offer sacrifices, and
they called this the worship of God; but the Prophet shows that each
worship was accursed before God, and that it had no other effect than
wholly to obliterate the holy name of God from the minds of men, so that
the whole of religion perished.

<span id="xv.xvi-p7"></span>Remarkable then is this passage; for the
Prophet says, that *the people forgot God their Maker, when they built
temples for themselves* But what was in the temples so vicious, as to
take away the remembrance of God from the world? Even because God would
have but one temple and altar. If a reason was asked, a reason might
indeed have been given; but the people ought to have acquiesced in the
command of God. Though God may not show why he commands this or that, it
is enough that we ought to obey his word. Now, then, it appears, that
when Israel built for himself various temples, he departed from God, and
for this reason, because he followed not the rule of the law, and kept
not himself within the limits of the divine command. Hence it was to
forget God. We now apprehend the object of the Prophet.

<span id="xv.xvi-p8"></span>Though then they were wont to glory in their
temples, and there to display their pomp and splendor, and proudly to
delight in their superstitions, yet the Prophet says, that they had
forgotten their Creator, and for this reason only, because they had not
continued in his law. He says, that they had forgotten God *their
Maker;* by the word *Maker,* the Prophet alludes not to God as the
framer of the world and the creator of men, but he applies it to the
condition of the people. For, as we well know, the favor of God had been
peculiar towards that people; he had not only made them, as a part of
the human race, but also formed them a people to himself. Since then God
had thus intended them to be devoted to him, the Prophet here increases
and enhances their sin, when he says, that they obeyed not his word, but
followed their own devices and depraved imaginations.

<span id="xv.xvii"></span>

<span id="xv.xvii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xv.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we have
already so often provoked thy wrath against us, and thou hast in thy
paternal indulgence borne with us, or at least chastised us so gently as
to spare us, — O grant, that we may not become hardened in our
wickedness, but seasonably repent, and that we may not be drawn away
after the inventions of our flesh, nor seek ways to flee away from thee,
but come straight forward to thy presence, and make a humble, sincere,
and honest confession of our sins, that thou mayest receive us into
favor, and that being reconciled to us, thou mayest bestow on us a
larger measure of thy blessings, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="xv.xviii"></span>

<span id="xv.xviii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-third

<span id="xv.xviii-p2"></span>It remains for us to consider the second
part of the last verse of the eighth chapter, in which the Prophet
blames the tribe of Judah for *multiplying fenced cities.* This was not
in itself condemnable before God; but the Prophet saw that the
confidence of the people was transferred to these cities as it usually
happens. Rare indeed is the example, when any people are well fortified,
that they become not implicated in this charge of misplaced confidence.
But as this vice in the tribe of Judah was well known, the Prophet does
not here complain without reason, that they reposed their hope on their
fortified cities, and thus deprived God of his just praise. And then he
denounces a punishment. *I will send fire upon his cities, and it shall
devour his palaces* The meaning is, that when men turn away their minds
from God, and rely on perishable things, a fatal destruction will at
last follow; for the Lord will frustrate the hope of those who thus
deprive him of his honor. This then is the meaning. Now follows the
ninth chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc26014.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="xv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span> “The cornet at thy mouth, be *it* like the
eagle over the house of Jehovah.” — *Horsley*. It is in a note added, —
“Let the sound of the cornet in thy mouth be shrill and terrible, as the
ominous scream of the eagle hovering over the roof of the temple.” But
the literal rendering of the words with admit more naturally another
sense. I translate it thus: —

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>“To thy mouth the trumpet,  
Like the eagle over the house of Jehovah.”

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>That is, seize the trumpet as quickly as the
eagle flies. He thereby denotes that judgment was to come without delay;
or the distich may be thus rendered, —

<span id="xv.i-p7"></span>“To thy mouth the trumpet, like an eagle,  
Against the house of Jehovah.”

<span id="xv.i-p8"></span>That is, “Apply the trumpet quickly, imitate
the quickness of the eagle, and use it to proclaim war against the house
of Jehovah.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc26014.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="xv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xv.iv-p4"></span> The construction of this versed is
anomalous, there being a mixture of numbers, not uncommon in this book.
The original is the following: —

<span id="xv.iv-p5"></span><span id="xv.iv-p5.1"></span>לי יזעקו אלהי
ידענוך ישראל

<span id="xv.iv-p6"></span>The literal rendering is this: —

<span id="xv.iv-p7"></span>“To me they will cry, My God, we have known
thee, Israel.”

<span id="xv.iv-p8"></span>If we take the future as expressive of a
continued act, as it is often to be taken, and consider “my God” as the
expression of each one includes in “they,” or accommodate it to “They,”
and say “our God,” and if we regard “Israel” to be in apposition with
“we,” as some critics think and very justly, then we have the following
appropriate rendering: —

<span id="xv.iv-p9"></span>“To me they cry, Our God; we, Israel, have
known thee.”

<span id="xv.iv-p10"></span> — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 9](cc26015.md)
