[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc26015)  [Next](cc26017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 26: Hosea*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>Chapter 10

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001.md)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Israel *is* an empty vine, he
bringeth forth fruit unto himself: according to the multitude of his
fruit he hath increased the altars; according to the goodness of his
land they have made goodly images.

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Vites spoliata Israel, fructum ponet
sibi: secundum multitudinem fructus sui multiplicavit altaria (in
altaribus multiplicavit;) secundum bonitatem (*hoc est,* proventum
fertilem) terrae suae benefecerunt in statuis (*alii*, bonas fecerunt
statuas; *sed prior versio mihi magis probatur.*)

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span><span id="xvii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span>Interpreters explain this verse in various
ways. Those who think <span id="xvii.i-p6.1"></span>בוקק, *bukok,* here
applied to the vine, means “empty,” are mistaken; for the Prophet means
rather, that Israel was like a vine, which is robbed after the
ingathering is come: for the word <span id="xvii.i-p6.2"></span>בקק,
*bekok,* means properly to pillage, or to plunder. But the Prophet
compares the gathering of grapes to robbing; and this view best suits
the place. He says, then, that *Israel is like a robbed vine;* for it
was stripped of its fruit; and then he adds, *He will make fruit for
himself* The verb <span id="xvii.i-p6.3"></span>שוה, *shue,* means to
equal; and many render it thus, — He will equalize fruit to himself, or,
“fruit has been squalled to him.” But this rendering brings out no clear
sense. I rather follow those who render it, “to lay up.” This verb means
also sometimes “to lie;” at least some thus render the clause, “Fruit
will lie to him:” and though, in the sense of lying, it has a different
final letter, <span id="xvii.i-p6.4"></span>שוה, *shue*, it is yet said
to be derived from this root, so that there is a change of <span
id="xvii.i-p6.5"></span> א“*alef*” into <span id="xvii.i-p6.6"></span>
ה“*he*”, as grammarians think: and yet it does not seem probable that
<span id="xvii.i-p6.7"></span>שוא, *shua* means to lie. But they elicit
this sense, “Israel is a plundered vine; therefore fruit will lie to
him;” that is, it will bring no produce, for that will happen to it
which is wont to be, when robbers have laid waste fields and vineyards.
But as I have said already, some more correctly render it, “to lay up;”
*He will lay up fruit for himself* Some, however, read the sentence as a
question, — “Will Israel lay up fruit for himself?” Then the sense is,
that Israel was so plundered, that no restitution could be hoped for.
But these interpreters do not seem to understand the mind of the
Prophet.

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>I collect a different meaning from the
words, and that is, that Israel would lay up fruit for himself after the
robbing, and sacred history confirms this view: for this people, we
know, had been in various ways chastised; so, however, that they
gathered new strength. For the Lord intended only to admonish them
gently, that they might be healed; but nothing, as it has before
appeared, was effected by God’s moderation. The case, however, was so,
that Israel produced new fruit, as a vine, after having been robbed one
year, brings forth a new vintage; for one ingathering does not kill the
vine. Thus also Israel did lay up fruit for himself; that is, after the
Lord had collected there his vintage, he again favoured the people with
his blessing, and, as it were, restored them anew; as vines in the
spring throw out their branches, and then produce fruit.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md)

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>But what did happen? *According to the
abundance of his fruit*, he says, *he multiplied his altars* Here God
complains, that Israel, after having been once gathered, went on in his
own wickedness. Chastisements ought at least to have availed so much as
to induce Israel to retake himself to the pure worship of God. But God
not only reproves the people here for having been always obstinate but
also for having, as it were designedly increased their vices. For it was
like a horrible conspiracy against God for the people, as soon as they
acquired new strength, to multiply altars to themselves, when yet the
Lord had already shown, by clear evidences, that fictitious modes. of
worship did not please him; nay, that they were to him the greatest
abominations. We now apprehend the meaning of the Prophet. Then *Israel,
a robbed vine, multiplied altars for himself;* that is, Israel has
indeed been gathered but the Lord restored to him wealth and abundance
of provisions, and whatever appertains to a safe and happy condition;
has Israel become better through correction? Has he repented after the
Lord has so mercifully withdrawn his hand? By no means, he says; but he
has multiplied altars for himself, he has become worse than he was wont
to be; and *according to the goodness of his land, he has been doing
good in statues*

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>Now this is a very useful doctrine; for we
see how the Lord forbears in inflicting punishments — he does not
execute them with the utmost rigour; for as soon as he lays on a few
stripes, he withholds his hand. But how do they act who are thus
moderately chastised? As soon as they can recruit their spirits, they
are carried away by a more headstrong inclination, and grow insolent
against God. We see this evil prevalent in the world even in our day, as
it has been in all ages. We need not wonder, then, that the Prophet here
expostulates with the people of Israel: but it is, at the same time,
right for us to apply the doctrine for our own instruction. Though,
then, the Lord should spare us, and, after having begun to chastise us,
should soon show indulgence, and restore us as it were anew, let us
beware lest a forgetfulness of our former sins should creep over us; but
let his chastisements exert over us an influence, even after God has put
a limit and an end to them. For the import of what the Prophet teaches
is this, that men are not to forget the wrath of God, though he may not
always, or continually, lay on stripes, but to consider that the Lord
deals thus gently that they may have more time to repents and that a
truce is granted them that they may more quietly reflect on their sins.

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span>But he says, *According to the goodness of
their land, they have been doing good in statues* I have before stated,
that some take this as meaning, that they made good statues, and
consider “good” to be elegant. But I repeat the preposition <span
id="xvii.i-p15.1"></span> ל“*lamed*” before altars. When the Prophet
said that Israel multiplied altars to himself, the literal reading is,
that he multiplied in altars, or as to altars; that is, he did much, or
very liberally spent money on altars. So also here, it is proper to
repeat, that they did good as to statues. But a concession is made in
the verb <span id="xvii.i-p15.2"></span>הימיבו, *eithibu;*  <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) ; for it is certain that they grievously
sinned; they would not have provoked the wrath of God had they not dealt
wickedly in altars and statues. But the Prophet speaks ironically of the
perverted worship of God, as when we say at this day, that the Papists
are mad in their good intentions: when I call intentions good, I concede
to them a character which does not rightly belong to them. It is
therefore according to their sense that the Prophet speaks here; but he
says, ironically, that they did good in statues; that is, that they
seemed to themselves to be the most holy worshipers of God; for they
made a show of great zeal. It was, as they say, insane devotion. But
there appeared here something more than blind hardness, inasmuch as they
had so soon forgotten the Lord’s displeasure, of which they had been
reminded by evident tokens. We now then perceive the object of the
Prophet, and what is the application of his doctrine. Let us go on —

<span id="xvii.ii"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#002.md)<span id="xvii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Their heart is divided; now shall
they be found faulty: he shall break down their altars, he shall spoil
their images.

<span id="xvii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Divisum est (*vel*, se divisit) cor
eorum: nunc convicti erunt (*alii*, peribunt; *nam* <span
id="xvii.ii-p3.1"></span>אשם *utrunque significat; refertur tam ad
culpam quam ad poenam: sed mihi probatur eorum sententia qui vertunt,*
Nunc convicti erunt, *hoc* *est*, Nunc erunt scelerati; *quemadmodum
etiam simile examplum jam vidimus capite* 5, *nisi fallor:* Nunc *ergo*
convicti erunt:) ipse evertet altaria eorum, destruet statuas ipsorum.

<span id="xvii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.ii-p5"></span><span id="xvii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ii-p6"></span>He says first that *their heart was
divided,* that is, from God; for this, we know, is principally required,
that people should faithfully cleave to their God. “And now Israel, what
does thy God require of thee, but to cleave to him with the whole
heart?” Since God then binds us to himself by a holy union, it is the
summit of all wickedness, when our heart is divided from him, as it is
when an unchaste and perfidious wife alienates her affection from her
husband. For as long as the husband keeps the heart of his wife, as it
were, tied to himself, conjugal fidelity and chastity continue; but when
her heart is divided from her husband, it is all over, and she abandons
herself to lewdness. So also the Prophet says here that the heart of the
people was divided from God; for they did not devote themselves to God
with a pure and sincere affection, as they ought to have done. “This
people then have withdrawn their heart from me.”

<span id="xvii.ii-p7"></span>But he says, *Now they shall be guilty;*
that is I will now show what they deserve, so that they shall not
hereafter, as they are wont to do, sport with their cavils; for the verb
<span id="xvii.ii-p7.1"></span>אשם, *ahsem,* is not to be referred to
the deeds but rather, as, they say, to its manifestation. Then he says
that they shall be guilty, for they shall be convicted: as, to be
justified means to be absolved, so also to be guilty means to be
condemned. The meaning is, that as this people could not perceive the
Lord’s wrath as long as their condition was easy to be borne, he would
inflict such dreadful punishment as would convince them, so that they
might no longer deceive and flatter themselves. They shall then be now
condemned. How? For the Lord *will overturn their altars.* This may be
referred to the minister of vengeance; but as no name is expressed, I
prefer to understand God as being meant. *God* then *shall overturn
their altars* and *destroy,* or *reduce to nothing, their statues*

<span id="xvii.ii-p8"></span>This was added, because ungodly men, we
know, trust in their own devices, and can never be brought to serious
fear, except when they understand that they have been deceived by the
crafts of Satan, while they gave themselves up to superstitions and
idolatry. Hence the Prophet declares that their altars shall be
overturned, and their statues reduced to nothing, that hypocrites might
lay aside the confidence by which they had hitherto grown proud against
God. But a confirmation of this view follows —

<span id="xvii.iii"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#003.md)<span id="xvii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p2"></span>**3.** For now they shall say, We have no
king, because we feared not the Lord; what then should a king do to us?

<span id="xvii.iii-p3"></span>**3.** Quia nunc dicent, Non rex nobis,
quia non timuimus Jehovam, et rex quid faciet nobis?

<span id="xvii.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iii-p5"></span><span id="xvii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iii-p6"></span>He explains more at large what he had
briefly referred to, when he said, that the condemnation, which would
discover their wickedness, was now near at hand. He now adds, that even
they themselves would, of their own accord, say, that they were
deservedly punished in being deprived of a king; nay, that a king would
avail them nothing, because they had not feared Jehovah. There is always
to be understood a contrast between the perverse boasting of the people
and the feeling of God’s wrath, of which the Prophet now speaks. For as
long as God spared the Israelites, they abused his forbearance and his
kindness. They did not then think that there was any thing to be
reprehended in their life; nay, we know how petulantly they contended
with the Prophets: as soon as a severe word came out of the mouth of any
Prophet, great contentions arose. “What! dost thou treat thus the people
of God, and the elect race of Abraham?” Since, then, they so obstinately
spurned every instruction, the Prophet says here, “The time shall come,
when they shall say that they have no king, because they did not fear
the Lord.” The meaning is, that as they did not profit by the word of
the Lord, another kind of teaching was soon to be adopted; for the Lord
would really show his wrath, and even force them to confess against
their will what they now excused: for this confession of sin would have
never been expressed, had not the Lord dealt severely with them. They
shall therefore say, — when? even when they shall be taken to another
school; for the Lord will not henceforth remonstrate with them in words,
but will so strike them with his hand, that they will understand that
they have to do with him.

<span id="xvii.iii-p7"></span>But it must be observed, that the Prophet
speaks not here of the repentance of the people, nor relates their
words, but rather mentions the thing itself. Hypocrites either clamour
against God when he visits their sins, or feignedly own that they are
worthy of such punishments, and all the while the same perverseness
remains within. But when the Prophet introduces them as speaking, he
does not mean that they will say what he relates; but, as I have said
already, he rather speaks of the thing itself. Hence *They will say,*
that is, the event itself will declare, that they are deprived of a
king, because they feared not Jehovah; yea, that though a king ruled
over them, he would be useless. Though, then, the Israelites had never
ceased to clamour against God, nor given over openly to vomit forth
their blasphemies against him, yet this, which the Prophet says, would
have been still true. How so? Because it was sufficient that they were
in reality convicted, though God had not extorted from them this
confession; yea, they were themselves made to feel that they were justly
smitten by the hand of God, however they might obstinately deny this
before men.

<span id="xvii.iii-p8"></span>The Prophet shows here also, that profane
men, while any hope on earth is set before them, proudly despise the
hand of God, and grow torpid in their own security, as in their own
dregs. While Israel saw their king in the midst of them, they thought
themselves safe from every harm, and boldly despised all threatening.
This, then, is what the Prophet meant. Still further, when the Lord
takes away every thing that dazzles the eyes of profane and wicked men,
they then begin to own how foolishly they had flattered themselves, and
how much they had been deceived by Satan. This is what is meant by
Hosea, when he says, that the Israelites shall be constrained to know
that they had no king, because they feared not God: but this repentance
would be too late, for it would be without advantage. It now follows —

<span id="xvii.iv"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p1"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004.md)<span id="xvii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p2"></span>**4.** They have spoken words, swearing
falsely in making a covenant: thus judgement springeth up as hemlock in
the furrows of the field.

<span id="xvii.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Loquuti sunt verba, jurando
mendaciter, incidendo foedus: germinabit tanquam absynthium super sulcos
agri judicium.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md)

<span id="xvii.iv-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvii.iv-p8"></span><span id="xvii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p9"></span>*They have spoken words, they have uttered
words*. Some give this explanation, that they daringly followed their
own counsels, as the despisers of God are wont to settle and determine
what comes to their minds according to their own will; for they deign
not to inquire of God what is right. Thus they take the meaning to be;
but I view it to be different, that is, that they spoke words, or very
freely testified, that they would be the best and the most faithful
worshipers of God. Then it follows, *By swearing falsely*. Some refer
this to covenants. I will explain the words one by one; for I shall
hereafter speak of the real meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xvii.iv-p10"></span>Then he says, that *they swore falsely*,
that is, according to some because there was in them much levity and
changeableness. And, indeed, I confess it to be true, that they procured
for themselves grievous punishments by their perjuries; but the Prophet
rather means those who swore falsely to the Lord. It then follows, *By
cutting a covenant, by making a covenant*. Here again the Prophet no
doubt reproves them for renewing their covenant with God perfidiously;
for it was a mere dissimulation. But it follows, *Judgement will
germinate as wormwood* Some render the word <span
id="xvii.iv-p10.2"></span>כראש, *carash* as gall; but the similitude is
not suitable, since the Prophet speaks here of fields; for he adds, *In
the furrows of the field*; that is, judgement will germinate in the
furrows as wormwood or some other bitter plant.

<span id="xvii.iv-p11"></span>I have thus briefly explained how some
understand this verse, namely, that Israel was daring and haughty in
their counsels, boldly determining whatever pleased them, as if it were
not in the power of God to change what men resolve to do, — and then,
that they implicated themselves in many compacts, that without any faith
they violated them with this and that nation, and that at last they had
nothing but bitterness. This is their exposition: but I rather think
that the cause of God is here pleaded by the Prophet; that is, that the
Israelites, as often as they promised some repentance, and gave some
sign of it, only dissembled and lied to God. Hence he says *They have
spoken words*, but they were only words; for they were never from a
heart touched with any feeling as to God’s wrath, so as to abhor
themselves for their vices. They therefore uttered words only.

<span id="xvii.iv-p12"></span>He afterwards expresses the same
deceitfulness in other words: *They have sworn falsely*, he says, *and
made a covenant*; which means, that though they seemed to wish to return
to God, it was yet a fallacious pretence; yea, a perjury. When they
wished to prove themselves to be especially faithful, they then sinned
more grievously by renewing their covenant.

<span id="xvii.iv-p13"></span>*Judgement shall therefore germinate as
wormwood in the furrows of the field*. Judgement is here to be taken as
rectitude, as though the Prophet had said, “When they exhibit some
appearance of religion, and give a colour to their impieties, it seems
indeed to be judgement, there seems to be some justice; but it will be
at last wormwood, and will germinate in the furrows of the field.”

<span id="xvii.iv-p14"></span>Interpreters seem not to me to have
understood the design of the Prophet. For why does he say, “in the
furrows of the field,” rather than in the field? Even for this reason,
because there is some preparation made, when the field is ploughed, for
the good seed to grow. When therefore, noxious herbs grow on the furrows
of the land, it is less to be endured than when they grow in dry and
desert places; for this is what is wont naturally to happen. But when
wormwood grows up instead of wheat in the furrows, that is, on lands
well cultivated, it is a thing more strange and less to be endured. We
now then apprehend what the Prophet meant. They indeed seemed at times
to be touched with some feeling of piety, and promised much, and were
very liberal in good words; they even swore, and seemed prepared to
renew their covenant with God, — but what was all this? It was the same
as if a husband man had prepared his field, and noxious herbs had grown
up where he had bestowed much labour and toil. Such was their rectitude,
— a disguised form or shadow of religion; it was nothing else, but like
wormwood growing in well-cultivated land.

<span id="xvii.v"></span>

<span id="xvii.v-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xvii.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou dost train
us up with so much diligence and assiduous care, and regard us as dear
and precious like an hereditary vine, — O grant, that we may not bring
forth wild grapes, and that our fruit may not be bitter and unpleasant
to thee, but that we may strive so to form our whole life in obedience
to thy law, that all our actions and thoughts may be pleasant and sweet
fruits to thee. And as there is ever some sin mixed up with our works,
even when we desire to serve thee sincerely and from the heart, grant
that all stains in our works may be so cleansed and washed away by the
sacrifice of thy Son, that they may be to thee sacrifices of sweet
odour, through the same, even Christ Jesus, who has so reconciled us to
thee, as to obtain pardon even for our works. Amen.

<span id="xvii.v-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.vi"></span>

<span id="xvii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-seventh

<span id="xvii.vii"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005.md)<span id="xvii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p2"></span>**5.** The inhabitants of Samaria shall
fear because of the calves of Bethaven: for the people thereof shall
mourn over it, and the priests thereof *that* rejoiced on it, for the
glory thereof, because it is departed from it.

<span id="xvii.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Propter vitulas  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) (juvencas.md) Bethaven pavebunt (*ad
verbum)* incola Samaria (*sed mutatio est numeri,* pavebunt *igitur:
alii vertunt,* exulabunt incolae Samariae, *sed male*:) quia lugebit
super eum populus suus et sacerdotes ejus, qui super eum exultant
(*vel*, propter eum exultabunt) super gloria ejus, quia transivit ab eo
(*vel*, aversa est ab eo.)

<span id="xvii.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xvii.vii-p6"></span><span id="xvii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p7"></span>I shall first briefly touch on what I have
mentioned in reading over the text; that is, that some interpreters
expound this verse of the exile of the people. The word <span
id="xvii.vii-p7.1"></span>גור, *gur,* signifies to be banished: and it
means also to fear; but the context, as we shall see, will not allow it
to be taken here in the sense of being banished. Some render the other
word <span id="xvii.vii-p7.2"></span>שכן, *shecan,* to dwell, but they
are mistaken. The Prophet simply means that the inhabitants of Samaria
were now glorying in their calves, (for the calves we know, were in Dan
and Bethel,) but that in a short time the Lord would strike them with
terror, and the cause we shall see hereafter.

<span id="xvii.vii-p8"></span>I now come to show the real meaning of the
prophet *The inhabitants of Samaria,* he says *shall fear, because of
the calves of Bethaven*. The Prophet derides the folly of the people of
Israel in worshipping calves, and in thinking that the whole hope of
safety was included in them. How so? “They are constrained” he says, “to
weep for the exile of their calf; so far is it from being able to bring
them any aid, that the citizens of Samaria in vain deplore its
captivity.” By way of contempt, he calls the calves, heifers. He might
have used the masculine gender; but the whole of the verse glances at
the madness of the people of Israel, because they were so grossly
delirious in their superstitions, and yet were wholly insensible. Then
*the inhabitants of Samaria shall fear* for the calves of Bethaven,
because idolaters, when they see some danger to their idols, tremble,
and would gladly bring aid; and this very fear betrays their stupidity
and madness. For why do not the gods help themselves, instead of
expecting help from mortals? We now understand the design of the
Prophet.

<span id="xvii.vii-p9"></span>But he says, *They will mourn over it* The
number is here changed. He had said, “because of the heifers;” and now
he expresses the kind by putting down a relative of the masculine gender
<span id="xvii.vii-p9.1"></span>ו, *vau*  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) . He therefore returns to “calves,” and
afterwards uses the singular number; for there was one only at Bethaven,
the other was at Dan. But we have already shown why the Prophet called
them heifers.

<span id="xvii.vii-p11"></span>*Its people,* he says, *shall mourn for
it, yea, even the priests also*. Some think that <span
id="xvii.vii-p11.1"></span>כמרים, *camerim*, priests were called by this
terms because they put on black vestments in celebrating their rites;
for the word “*kemer*” means black; but this is a vain conjecture: and
the Rabbis, as it often appears, are very bold in their figments; for
they regard not what is true, but only make conjectures, and wish that
whatever comes to their minds to be counted as oracular; nor do they
regard history, but advance without reason what pleases them. Another
explanation of the word may be adduced, and one in my judgement more
probable; for the word signifies also to ring again or to resound; and
the priests, we know, made, in performing their services, great noises
and howling; as Elijah says

<span id="xvii.vii-p12"></span>‘Cry aloud, for your Baal is perhaps
asleep,’  
(<span id="xvii.vii-p12.2"></span>[1Ki
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027.md)<span
id="xvii.vii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.vii-p13"></span>If their conjecture is allowable, I would
rather say that they were called by this word on account of the noise
they made. But I leave the thing undecided. It was, however, a name
commonly in use, as it appears from other places. For by this name <span
id="xvii.vii-p13.1"></span>כמרים, *camerim* were those new priests
called, whom Josiah took away, as it is related in <span
id="xvii.vii-p13.2"></span>[2Ki
23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#000.md)<span id="xvii.vii-p13.2"></span>.
But whether they had this name from their noises, or the black colour of
their vestments, it is still certain that they were the priests of false
gods.

<span id="xvii.vii-p14"></span>The Prophet now says, that the priests
also shall mourn, for the verb <span id="xvii.vii-p14.1"></span>אבל,
*abel,* is to be repeated. He afterwards adds, <span
id="xvii.vii-p14.2"></span>יגילו על-כבודו, *igilu ol-cabudu*; the
relative, who, is wanting — who exult, but it is to be understood after
<span id="xvii.vii-p14.3"></span>כמרים, who exult for it. But why should
they mourn? They shall mourn for its glory, because it had departed:
they shall now begin to mourn, because the glory of the calf had passed
away from it. Here the Prophet teaches that the glorying, by which
hypocrites deceive themselves, will not be permanent; for the Lord will
surely lead them, as we shall see, to sudden and unexpected shame. He
then says that there would be mourning for the calves among the citizens
of Samaria. They indeed thought that the kingdom was well fortified, for
they had erected temples in their borders, to be, as it were, their
fortresses. They hence imagined themselves to be safe from every
incursion of enemies. The Prophet says, “Nay, they shall mourn for their
calf.” How so? Truly its own people shall mourn for it. He goes farther,
and calls all its worshipers, the people of the calf: and we know that
the whole kingdom of Israel was implicated in that superstition. Yea, he
says, even the priests, who exult for it, shall mourn. Why? Because its
glory shall depart from it. It now follows —

<span id="xvii.viii"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#006.md)<span id="xvii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p2"></span>**6.** It shall be also carried unto
Assyria *for* a present to king Jareb: Ephraim shall receive shame, and
Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.

<span id="xvii.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Etiam ipse in Assyriam feretur
munus regi Jareb: puderem Ephraim accipiet, et pudefiet Israel a
consilio suo.

<span id="xvii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.viii-p5"></span><span id="xvii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.viii-p6"></span>Here the Prophet expresses more clearly
the cause of mourning to the priests and to the whole people, *The
calf,* he says, *“shall be carried into Assyria,* and carried as *a
present to king Jareb*”. It is probable, that when extreme danger came,
the king of Israel was constrained either to cast the calf into a new
form, or to break it in pieces, to redeem peace from the Assyrian king.
As then the whole kingdom was reduced to great want, we may infer from
this place that the calf or calves, were carried into Assyria for
pacifying the king. Since then the Israelites saw that they were
stripped of their protection, (for they were now without any hope of
safety, as there was no God among them,) the Prophet mentioned above
their grief: but he now shows that exile was nigh at hand, not only to
the Israelites, but also to the calves which they worshipped and by
whose aid they thought themselves to be secure and safe in their
country.

<span id="xvii.viii-p7"></span>There is a particular emphasis in the
particle <span id="xvii.viii-p7.1"></span>גם, *gam*, as though the
Prophet said, “Not only the Israelites shall migrate, but the very calf
shall also be carried into Assyria.” Of the word “Jareb,” we have spoken
in the commentary on <span id="xvii.viii-p7.3"></span>[Hosea
5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#000.md)<span id="xvii.viii-p7.3"></span>, it
seems to have been the proper name of a man. Some conjecture it to be a
city in Assyria, though not noticed by writers. Others think it to be
the name of a neighbouring king to the Assyrian, but without reason, and
they are refuted by this very passage; for the Prophet doubtless points
out here the Assyrian king. He yet calls him Jareb; it may be that he
was as yet a private man, or he may have so called him by way of
reproach. This is however uncertain. Jerome renders the word, “avenger.”
But it is sufficiently evident that it was a proper name, not of a city
or place, but, as it has been said, of a man. And I am disposed to
think, that he calls him king Jareb by way of contempt, for this
contempt prevailed among the Israelites as long as they thought
themselves strong enough to resist. But the Lord afterwards checked this
pride: hence the Prophet says now in a cutting manner, “The calf shall
be carried into Assyria to pacify king Jareb.”

<span id="xvii.viii-p8"></span>He afterwards adds, *Ephraim shall
receive shame,* or *reproach*; *Israel shall be made ashamed of his
counsel.* He says the same thing in different ways and not without
reason; for it was difficult at first to persuade the Israelites that
what they thought to have been wisely contrived would turn out to their
shame. The king Jeroboam the first, when he erected temples did indeed
think it the best device to prevent the people, were they to repent,
from submitting themselves again to the posterity of David. Hence he
thought that the ten tribes were wholly torn away, when he set up that
peculiar worship, which had nothing in common with that of the tribe of
Judah. And doubtless had the ten tribes worshipped the true God at
Jerusalem, this union might have been the means of again reuniting them
into one body under one head. Hence the king Jeroboam thought that he
had provided well for his kingdom, to render it permanent, by cutting
off all communication between the two people: and there was none in
Israel who did not approve of this counsel; for they took delight in
their wealth, in the number of their men, and in other advantages. Since
then the kingdom of Judah was much inferior, the Israelites were vastly
pleased with themselves. This is the reason why the Prophet says,
*Ephraim shall receive shame; Israel shall be made ashamed of his
counsel* But this, as I have said, could not appear credible at first.
For men promise to themselves the success they wish in their own
craftiness: and hence it comes also, that they dare to attempt any thing
they please without the aid of God. This is the reason why the Prophet
repeats the same sentence, “Ephraim,” he says, “shall receive shame;
Israel shall be made ashamed,” — for what? for their counsel. They think
that their own counsel will be most useful to them; yea, they place
their safety in their own craftiness. But the Lord will overrule for
their shame whatever they have devised. It follows —

<span id="xvii.ix"></span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xvii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#007.md)<span id="xvii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** *As for* Samaria, her king is cut
off as the foam upon the water.

<span id="xvii.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Succisus est Samariae rex suus,
sicuti spuma in superficie aquarum (*alii* <span
id="xvii.ix-p3.1"></span>קצק *volunt* corsdticem: *sed nomen spumae
multo aptius est.*  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) .md)

<span id="xvii.ix-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvii.ix-p8"></span><span id="xvii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p9"></span>The Prophet proceeds with the same subject,
nor ought it to be deemed a useless prolixity. It would have indeed been
sufficient by one word to threaten the Israelites, had they been pliable
and obedient; but as they were stupid in their perverseness, it was
necessary to stun their ears with continual threatening, that they might
be at least less excusable before God. Hence the Prophet says now, that
*the king of Samaria shall be cut off like the foam:* and he thus speaks
of the king, because the Israelites thought their king, next to their
idols, to be to them an invincible fortress. For thus ungodly men, as it
has been mentioned before, always imagine their stronghold to be in the
world and earthly things. Hence, the Lord denounces a just punishment,
by saying that he would cut off the king; for the impious confidence, of
which I have spoken, could not be otherwise corrected. Therefore “the
king of Samaria shall be cut off” — in what manner? “Like a foam”. It is
a most apt comparison; for the Prophet shows that the condition of the
kingdom, which they imagined to be firm and perpetual, had nothing in it
but an empty appearance, like the foam, which has nothing substantial.
And further, he seems to me to point out another thing, that is, that
the kingdom, though it showed itself to be above other kingdoms, was yet
but an excrement. The foam floats above the waters of the sea, and by
its height seems eminent; but what is the foam but the excrement of the
water? for whatever is decayed in the waters passes into foam. So Israel
thought, that as they were endued with power, and in every way excelled
the tribe of Judah, they could ride, as it were, over their heads. The
Prophet, on the contrary, says that they were foam, and also their king.
“Your king,” he says, “though the king of Judah cannot be compared with
him, is yet a foam. By his height he seems indeed wonderful, and hence
has arisen your pride, for you are now become hardened against God; but
the Lord will cut him off like a foam.” The Prophet then not only
compares the king of Israel to a bubble or to foaming waters; but he
says, that with respect to the king of Judah, he is an excrement. We now
then understand the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xvii.x"></span>

<span id="xvii.x-p1"></span><span id="xvii.x-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008.md)<span id="xvii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.x-p2"></span>**8.** The high places also of Aven, the sin
of Israel, shall be destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up
on their altars; and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to
the hills, Fall on us.

<span id="xvii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et perierunt (*vel,* peribunt excelsa
Aven, scelus Israel: spina et carduus ascendet super altaria eorum: et
dicent montibus, Operite nos; et collibus, Cadite super nos.

<span id="xvii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.x-p5"></span><span id="xvii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.x-p6"></span>We see how much the Prophet dwells on one
thing: but, as I have already said, there was need of a strong hammer to
beat this iron; for the hearts of the people were iron, or even steel.
This hardness could not then be broken except with violence. This is the
reason why the Prophet goes on with his threatening and places before
their eyes in so many forms the vengeance of God; of which it would have
been enough for him briefly to remind them, had they not been so
perverse.

<span id="xvii.x-p7"></span>And first he says, *The high places of Aven
have perished,* or *shall perish*. He now calls Bethel Aven, as he
called it before Bethaven. We have stated the reason for changing the
name. Jeroboam might indeed have disguised the worship, which he had
profanely introduced by this pretext, that God had appeared in that
place to holy Jacob, and we know its name was given to it by God: but in
the meantime, as the people had made a wrong use of the Patriarch’s
example, the place was called Bethaven. Bethaven, we know, is the house
of iniquity; as though the Prophet had said, “God dwells not in this
place, as superstitious men imagine; but it has been corrupted by
ungodly worshipers.” He therefore says, “The high places of Aven;” that
is, of impiety. But it may be expedient to repeat here what we have
before said, namely, that when men degenerate from the pure teaching of
God, they in vain cover their profanations with empty names, as we see
the Papists doing at this day; for they adorn that profanation, the
Mass, with the title of Sacrament, as if it was something allied to it.
They wish even their own Mass to be regarded as the Holy Supper, as if
it were in their power to abolish what has been prescribed by the Son of
God, and to substitute in its place their own inventions. Hence, how
much soever the Papists may dignify their profanations with honourable
names they effect nothing. How so? Because God loudly proclaims
respecting Bethel that it is Bethaven; and the reason is well known,
because Jeroboam erected temples, and appointed new sacrifices, without
God’s command. Whenever, then, men depart from the word of the Lord, it
will avail them nothing to disguise their own dreams; for the Lord
approves of nothing but what he himself commands. Hence the high places
of Aven have perished, or “shall perish.”

<span id="xvii.x-p8"></span>He adds *The sin of Israel* This sentence,
placed in apposition, belongs to the former. What is meant is, The sin
of Israel shall perish. But, as it was said yesterday, the Israelites
thought that they performed a service acceptable to God; and hence it
was that they were so sedulously attentive to their holy rites; but God,
on the contrary, pronounced them to be sin. How so? Because it is
profanation and idolatry in men to leave off following God’s command,
and to give way to their own fancies and inventions. We must then
understand, that it is not in the power of men to form any modes of
worship they please; nor is it in their power to decide on this or that
worship, whether it be lawful or spurious; but nothing remains for us
but to attend to what the Lord says. When, therefore, the Lord
pronounces that to be profane which pleases us, we ought to acquiesce in
his judgement; for it does not become us to dispute with him, and it
would be vain to do so.

<span id="xvii.x-p9"></span>*The thorn and the thistle,* he says, *shall
come up on their altars* It may be asked, Ought the Prophet simply, by
these tokens, to have reproved the superstition of the people, seeing
that the same thing happened to the temple a short time after, though
not built by the counsel of men, but by that of God? Since, then, the
grass grew where the temple was, was not that worship, which we know was
founded by God, exposed to ridicule? It is only the same that can be
said of the calves. We grant that the calves were carried into Assyria,
as a price from the wretched Israelites to pacify the king, who was
angry with them. Was not the ark of the covenant taken also into
captivity by enemies? Did not king Nebuchadnezzar take away the vessels
of the temple? And was not pious Hezekiah constrained to strip the doors
of the temple of their ornaments? Then this seems not to have been fitly
spoken by the Prophet. The answer to all this may be readily given: The
Israelites promised to themselves what they saw, and found afterwards to
be vain as is the case with hypocrites, who securely despise all
judgements and all punishments. How so? Because they thought their own
perverted worship to be sufficient for their safety; though they were in
their whole life abominable yet as some form of religion was observed by
them, they thought that God was bound to be with them: such and so
supine was the security of that people. Very different was the case with
the tribe of Judah. For God, by his Prophets, proclaimed aloud, “Trust
not in words of falsehood; for ye boast continually, The temple of the
Lord, The temple of the Lord, (<span id="xvii.x-p9.1"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="xvii.x-p9.1"></span>,.md)
but I no longer dwell in that temple:” and Ezekiel saw the glory of the
Lord departing elsewhere, (<span id="xvii.x-p9.2"></span>[Eze
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004)<span id="xvii.x-p9.2"></span>..md)
What is said here could not then apply to the temple, nor to the true
and lawful altar, nor to the true worshipers of God; but the Prophet
justly reproaches the Israelites for expecting safety from their own
altars, while yet they were provoking God’s wrath against themselves by
such inventions. We ought, then to remember this difference between the
tribe of Judah and the ten tribes.

<span id="xvii.x-p10"></span>But he adds, — *They shall say to the
mountains, Cover us: and to the hills, Fall on us.* By this form of
speaking, the Prophet intended to express the dreadful vengeance of God;
as if he had said, that the destruction, which was at hand, would be so
grievous that it would be better to perish a hundred times than to
remain in that state alive. For when men say to hills, Fall on us, and
to mountains, Cover us, they doubtless desire a death too dreadful to be
spoken of; but it is the same as if the Prophet had said, that life and
light, and the sight of the sun and the common air, would become a
horror to them, for they would perceive the hand of God to be against
them. And further, it is a sign of extreme despair, when men willingly
seek the abyss, where they may sink to avoid the presence of God and
present destruction. And hence Christ has also transferred this passage
to set forth the last judgement, of which he speaks, — ‘They shall say
to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us;’  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) that is, what was once said by the
Prophet shall then be again fulfilled; that the wicked will prefer a
hundred deaths to one life; for both light and the vital air will be
hated and detested by them; because they will perceive themselves to be
oppressed by the dreadful hand of God. It follows —

<span id="xvii.xi"></span>

<span id="xvii.xi-p1"></span><span id="xvii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#009.md)<span id="xvii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** O Israel, thou hast sinned from the
days of Gibeah: there they stood: the battle in Gibeah against the
children of iniquity did not overtake them.

<span id="xvii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** A diebus Gabaa peccasti Israel:
illic steterunt; non apprehendit eos in Gibea proelium super filios
iniquitatis.

<span id="xvii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xi-p5"></span><span id="xvii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xi-p6"></span>He here reproaches Israel for having been
long inured in their sins, and not for being lately corrupted. This is
the substance. He had said in the last chapter that they were deep in
their sins, as in the days of Gibeah: we then explained why the Prophet
adduced the example of Gibeah, and that was, because the Gibeonites had
fallen away from all fear of God, as if not a word about the law had
ever been heard among them. We indeed know that they abandoned
themselves to filthy and monstrous lusts, like the inhabitants of Sodom
and Gomorra. Seeing, then, that so great obscenity prevailed openly and
with impunity in Gibeah, rightly did the Prophet say that the Israelites
were then lost and past hope, as the case was at that time. But now he
regards another thing, even this, — that from that time they had not
ceased to accumulate evils on evils, and thus to spin, as it were, a
continuous rope of iniquity, as it is said in another place, — *From the
days* then *of Gibeah hast thou, Israeli sinned*

<span id="xvii.xi-p7"></span>But this seems an unjust charge; for we
know that the whole people united together against the tribe of
Benjamin. Since, then, the Israelites revenged that wickedness which was
committed in the city of Gibeah, why does the Prophet bring against them
the crime of which they had been the avengers? But we know that it often
happens, that they who execute the vengeance of God are in no respect
better; and we had a remarkable example of this at the beginning in
Jehu; for he had been God’s minister in punishing superstitions; yet God
calls him a robber, and compares the vengeance he executed to robbery;
‘I will avenge,’ he says, ‘on the head of Jehu the blood of the house of
Ahab, which he has shed.’ And yet we know that he was armed with the
sword of God. This is indeed true; but he acted not with a sincere and
upright heart, for he afterwards followed the same example. So now the
Prophet says, that the Israelites had sinned even from that time; as
though he said, “The Lord by the hand of your fathers took vengeance on
the Gibeonites and on the whole tribe of Benjamin: but they were wholly
like them. This corruption has from that time overwhelmed, like a
deluge, the whole land of Israel. There is then no reason for you to
boast that you have been better, inasmuch as it afterwards fully
appeared what you were, for you imitated the Gibeonites.” We now then
understand the design of the Prophet, and how justly he brings this
charge against the Israelites, that they had sinned from the days of
Gibeah. They indeed thought that crime was confined to a small corner of
the land; but the Prophet says that the whole land was covered with it,
and that they all exposed themselves to God’s judgement, and deserved
the same punishment with the Gibeonites and their brethren, the whole
tribe of Benjamin. ‘Thou, Israel, hast then sinned from the days of
Gibeah:’ the Israelites said, that the Benjamites alone sinned; but that
sin, he says was common.

<span id="xvii.xi-p8"></span>*There they stood* This clause is variously
explained. Some think that the people are reproved for wishing to
retreat after having twice fought without success. We hence see that
their minds were soft and cowardly, since they so soon succumbed to
their trial. They therefore think that this want of confidence is
pointed out by the Prophet; ‘There they stood,’ he says, that is,
retreated from the battle; for as they did not succeed as they wished,
they thought that they had been deceived. Hence it is concluded, that
they did not ascribe his just honour to God, and were on this account
reprehensible. But others say, that God had then testified by a clear
proof that the Israelites were equal in guilt to the Gibeonites; for how
came it, they say, that when they engaged in battle, they were compelled
twice to retreat? All Israel were armed against one tribe; how then was
it that they did not immediately overcome? But the Benjamites, we know,
were not at last conquered without a great loss. It is then certain that
God plainly showed that the Israelites were unworthy of so honourable an
office; for the Israelites wished to execute God’s judgement, when they
were themselves equally wicked. The Lord then openly reminded them, that
it was not for them to turn their zeal against others, when they were no
less guilty themselves. It seems to others that their obstinacy is here
pointed out: ‘There they stood;’ that is, from that time they have been
perverse in their wickedness, and ‘the battle against the children of
iniquity did not lay hold on them.’ This third exposition is what I
mostly approve; that is, that the Israelites, when they became ungodly
and wicked, though they professed great zeal and ardour against the
tribe of Benjamin, did not yet cease from that time to conduct
themselves perversely against God, so that they at last arrived at the
highest pitch of impiety.

<span id="xvii.xi-p9"></span>But what follows, *The battle in Gibea
against the children of iniquity did not lay hold on them,* may also be
variously explained. Some say, that the Israelites ought not to have
defended themselves with this shield, that God had so severely punished
the Gibeonites and their kindred. “The Lord spared you once, but what
then? He has deferred his vengeance for a long time; but will he on that
account deal more mildly with you now? Nay, a heavier vengeance awaits
you; for from that time he has not forced repentance out of you.” But
others read the sentence as a question, “Has the battle in Gibeah
against the children of iniquity laid hold on you?” But the simple sense
of the words seems to me to be this, that the battle had not laid hold
on the Israelites, because they had not been touched by that example.
The judgements of God, we know, are set forth before our eyes, that each
of us may apply them for our own benefit. The Prophet now reproves the
neglect of the Israelites in this matter, because they disregarded the
event as a thing of no moment. Hence the battle did not lay hold on
them; that is, they did not perceive that they were warned at the
expense of others to repent, and to live afterwards a holier and purer
life in subjection to God. And this view is confirmed by the last
clause, “against the children of iniquity;” for why is this expressly
added by the Prophet, except that the Lord testified that they should
not be unpunished, who were like the Gibeonites, with whom he dealt so
rigidly and severely. Since, then, the Israelites had not been touched,
their stupidity was hence proved. And for the same reason Paul says,
that the wrath of God shall come on the children of disobedience or of
unbelief, (<span id="xvii.xi-p9.1"></span>[Eph
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)<span id="xvii.xi-p9.1"></span>:.md)
for when God takes vengeance on one people or on one man, he doubtless
shows himself in that particular judgement to be the judge of the world.
This seems to me to be the genuine meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="xvii.xi-p10"></span>We ought further to bear in mind, that
when men go on in their wickedness, whatever sins their fathers have
done are justly imputed to them. When we return to the right way, the
Lord instantly buries all our sins, and reconciles us to himself on this
condition, that he will pardon whatever fault there may be in us: though
we may, through our whole life, have provoked his wrath against us, he
will yet as I have said, instantly bury the whole. But if we repent not,
the Lord will remember, not only our own sins, but also those of our
fathers, as it is evident from what is here said by the Prophet.

<span id="xvii.xii"></span>

<span id="xvii.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xvii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
once appeared in the person of thy only-begotten Son, and hast rendered
in him thy glory visible to us, and as thou dost daily set forth to us
the same Christ in the glass of thy gospel, — O grant, that we, fixing
our eyes on him, may not go astray, nor be led here and there after
wicked inventions, the fallacies of Satan, and the allurements of this
world: but may we continue firm in the obedience of faith and persevere
in it through the whole course of our life, until we be at length fully
transformed into the image of thy eternal glory, which now in part
shines in us, through the same Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="xvii.xii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xvii.xiii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-eighth

<span id="xvii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xvii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xvii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#010.md)<span id="xvii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xiv-p2"></span>**10.** *It is* in my desire that I should
chastise them; and the people shall be gathered against them, when they
shall bind themselves in their two furrows.  <span
id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md)

<span id="xvii.xiv-p5"></span>**10.** In voto meo est, et castigabo eos,
et congregabuntur contra eos populi, ubi colligati fuerint (*vel*, se
colligaverint) in duobus sulcis suis (*alii vertunt,* in duobus
iniquitatibus suis, *quasi nomen esset ab* <span
id="xvii.xiv-p5.1"></span>עון )

<span id="xvii.xiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xiv-p7"></span><span id="xvii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xiv-p8"></span>When God says that he desires to chastise
the people, he intimates that this was his purpose, as when one greatly
wishes for anything; and it may be an allowable change in the sentence,
if the copulative was omitted, and it be rendered thus, — *It is in my
desire to chastise them* But to depart from the words seems not to me
necessary; I therefore take them apart as they stand, in this sense, —
that God would follow his desire in chastising the people. The sentence
seems indeed to be repugnant to many others, in which God declares his
sorrow, when constrained to deal severely with his people, but the two
statements are not discordant. Passions, we know, belong not to God; but
in condescension to men’s capacities, he puts on this or that character.
When he seems unwilling to indict punishment, he shows with how much
love he regards his own people, or with what kind and tender affection
he loves them. But yet, as he has to do with perverse and irreclaimable
men, he says that he will take pleasure in their destruction; and for
this reason also, it is said that God will take revenge. We now then
understand the meaning of the Prophet: he intimates, that the purpose
which God had formed of destroying the people of Israel could not now be
revoked; for this punishment was to him his highest delight.

<span id="xvii.xiv-p9"></span>He further says, *I will chastise them,
and assembled shall peoples be against them* By these words God shows
that all people are in his hand, that he can arm them whenever he
pleases; and this truth is everywhere taught in the Scriptures. God then
so holds all people under his command, that by a hiss or a nod he can,
whenever it pleases him, stir them up to war. Hence, as heedless Israel
laughed at God’s judgement, he now shows how effectual will be his
revenge, for he will assemble all people for their destruction.

<span id="xvii.xiv-p10"></span>And for the same purpose he adds, *When
they shall have bound themselves in two furrows* By this clause the
Prophet warns the Israelites, that nothing would avail them, though they
fortified themselves against every danger, and though they gathered
strength on every side; for all their efforts would not prevent God from
executing his vengeance. When therefore they shall be bound in their two
furrows, I will not on that account give over to assemble the people who
shall dissipate all their fortresses. We now apprehend the design of the
Prophet. He no doubt mentions two furrows, with reference to ploughing;
for we shall see that the Prophet dwells on this metaphor. However much
then the Israelites might join together and gather strength, it would
yet be easy for God to gather people to destroy them.

<span id="xvii.xiv-p11"></span>Some refer this sentence to the whole
body of the people; for they think that the compact between the kingdom
of Judah and Israel is here pointed out: but this is a mere conjecture,
for history gives it no countenance. Others have found out another
comment, that the Lord would punish them all together, since Judah had
joined the people of Israel in worshipping the calves: so they think
that the common superstition was the bond of alliance between the two
kingdoms. There are others who think that the Prophet alludes to the two
calves, one of which, as it is well known, was worshipped in Dan, and
the other at Bethel. But all these interpretations are too refined and
strained. The Prophet, I doubt not, does here simply mention the two
furrows, because the people, (as godless men are wont to do,) relying on
their own power, boldly and proudly despised all threatening.
“Howsoever,” he says, “they may join themselves together in *two
furrows,* they shall yet effect nothing by their pride to prevent me
from executing my vengeance.” Let us proceed —

<span id="xvii.xv"></span>

<span id="xvii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xvii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011.md)<span id="xvii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xv-p2"></span>**11.** And Ephraim *is as* an heifer *that
is* taught, *and* loveth to tread out *the corn*; but I passed over upon
her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride; Judah shall plow, *and*
Jacob shall break his clods.

<span id="xvii.xv-p3"></span>**11.** Ephraim juvenca est edocta ad
diligendum trituram;  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) et ego
transivi super pulchritudine colli ejus; equitare faciam Ephraim, arabit
Judah, occabit sibi Jacob.

<span id="xvii.xv-p7"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xv-p8"></span><span id="xvii.xv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xv-p9"></span>Some read the two words, “taught,” and
“loveth,” separately, <span id="xvii.xv-p9.1"></span>מלמדה, *melamde,*
and <span id="xvii.xv-p9.2"></span>אהבתי, *aebti*; for they think that
at the beginning of the verse a reproach is conveyed, as though the
Prophet had said, that Ephraim was wholly unteachable: though God had
from childhood brought him up under his discipline, he yet now showed so
great stubbornness, that he even ceased not to rebel against God, and
went on obstinately in his own wickedness. “Ephraim then is like a
trained heifer.” But this meaning seems too far fetched: I therefore
connect the whole together in one context, and follow what has been more
approved, *Ephraim is a heifer trained to love,* or, *that she may love,
threshing;* that is, Ephraim has been accustomed to love threshing.

<span id="xvii.xv-p10"></span>There is here an implied comparison
between ploughing and threshing. There is more labour and toil, we know,
in ploughing than in threshing; for the oxen are coupled together, and
then they are compelled to obey, and in vain do they draw here and
there, when they are joined together. But when oxen thresh, they are
loose, and the labour is less toilsome and heavy. The Prophet then means
this, — that Ephraim pretended some obedience, and yet would not take
the yoke, so as to be really and in everything submissive to God. Other
nations did not understand what it was to obey God; but there was some
appearance of religion in Israel; they indeed professed to worship the
God of Israel, they had temples among them; but the Lord derides this
hypocrisy, and says, — *Ephraim is like a heifer,* which will not submit
her neck to the yoke, but will only, for recreation’s sake, pass through
the threshing-floor and tread the corn, as hypocrites are wont to do;
for they do not wholly repudiate every truth, but in part receive it;
yet, when the Lord presses on them too much, they then fiercely resist,
and show that they wish to do according to their own will. Almost the
whole world exhibit, indeed, some appearance of obedience, I know not
what; but they wish to make a compact with God, that he should not
require more then what their pleasure may allow. When one is a slave to
many vices, he desires a liberty for these to be allowed him; in other
things, he will yield some obedience. We now understand the meaning of
the Prophet, and see what he had in view. He then derides the
hypocritical service which the Israelites rendered to God; for they were
at the same time unwilling to bear the yoke, and were untameable. To the
threshing they were not unwilling to come; for when God commanded
anything that was easy, they either willingly performed it, or at least
discharged their duty somehow in that particular; but they would not
accustom themselves to plough.

<span id="xvii.xv-p11"></span>Since it was so, *I have passed over,* he
says, *upon her beautiful neck* God shows why he treated Ephraim with
severity; for he was made to submit, because he was so obstinate. ‘I
have passed over upon the goodness of her neck;’ that is, “When I saw
that she had a fat neck, and that she refused the yoke, I tried, by
afflictions, whether such stubbornness could be subdued.” Some refer
this to the teaching of the law, and say, that God had passed over upon
the beautiful neck of Israel, because he had delivered his law in common
to all the posterity of Abraham. But this is foreign to the context. I
therefore doubt not but that the mind of the Prophet was this, — that
God here declares, that it was not without reason that he had been so
severe in endeavouring to tame Israel, for he saw that he could not be
otherwise brought to obedience. “Since, then, Ephraim only loved the
treading, I wished to correct this delusion, and ought not to have
spared him. If he had been a wearied ox, or an old one broken down and
emaciated, and of no strength, some consideration for him ought to have
been had: but as Israel had a thick and fat neck, as he was strong
enough to bear the yoke, and as he yet loved his own pleasures and
refused the yoke, it was needful that he should be tamed by afflictions.
*I have* therefore *passed over upon the goodness,* or *the beauty*, *of
the neck* of Ephraim.”

<span id="xvii.xv-p12"></span>But as God effected nothing in mildly
chastising Israel, he now subjoins, — *I will make him to ride* Some
render it, “I will ride:” but as the verb is in Hiphel, (the causative
mood,) it is necessary to explain it thus, that God will make Israel to
ride. But what does this mean? They who render it, “I will ride,” saw
that they departed from what grammar requires; but necessity forced them
to this strained interpretation. Others will have <span
id="xvii.xv-p12.1"></span>על, *ol*, on, to be understood, “I will make
to ride on Ephraim,” and they put in another word, “I will make the
nations to ride on Ephraim.” But the sentence will accord best with the
context, if we make no change in the words of the Prophet. Nay, they who
adduce the comments I have mentioned, destroy the elegance of the
expression and pervert the meaning. Thus, then, does God speak, — “Since
Ephraim loves treading, and the moderate punishments by which I meant to
subdue him avail nothing, I will hereafter deal with him in another way:
*I will make him,”* he says, *“to ride:”* that is, “I will take him
away, as it were, through the clouds.” The Prophet alludes to the
lasciviousness and intemperance of Israel; for lust had so carried away
that people, that they could not walk straight, or with a steady step,
but staggered here and there; as also Jeremiah says, that they were
untameable bullocks, (<span id="xvii.xv-p12.2"></span>[Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md)<span
id="xvii.xv-p12.2"></span>.) What does God declare? ‘I will make them to
ride;’ that is, I will deal with this people according to their
disposition. There is a similar passage in Job;  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) where the holy man complains that he was
forcibly snatched away, that God made him to ride on the clouds. ‘God,’
he says, ‘made me to ride,’ (he uses there the same word.) What does it
mean? Even that the Lord had forcibly carried him here and there. So
also the Prophet says here, — “Israel is delicate, and, at the same
time, I see so much voluptuousness in his nature, that he cannot take
the yoke; nothing then remains for him but to ride on the clouds. But
what sort of riding will this be? Such as that, when the people shall be
carried away into exile; since they cannot rest quietly in the land of
Canaan, since they cannot enjoy the blessings of God, they shall ride,
that is, they shall quickly be taken away into a far country.” We now
then see how God dealt with Israel, when he saw what his disposition
required; for he could not be constrained to obedience in his own land;
it was then necessary to remove him elsewhere, as it was done.

<span id="xvii.xv-p14"></span>He afterwards subjoins, *Judah shall
plough, Jacob shall harrow for himself;* that is, the remaining portion
of the people shall remain in their afflictions. These punishments were
indeed grievous, when considered in themselves; but it was far easier
and more tolerable for Judah to plough and to harrow among his people,
than if he had to ride. Judah then suffered grievous losses, and the
Lord chastised him also with afflictions; but this punishment, as I have
said, was much less than the other. It was the same as when an ox, drawn
out of the stall, is led into the field, and is forced to endure his
daily labour; his toil is indeed heavy and grievous; but the ox at least
lives after his work, and refreshes himself by his rest during the
night. He also undergoes some toil by harrowing, and grows weary; but he
returns to the stall; and then his master is not so cruel, but that he
grants his ox some indulgence. We hence see the purport of this
comparison, that *Judah shall plough,* and that *Jacob,* that is, the
remaining part of the people, *shall harrow;* which means, that the rest
of the people shall break the clods, — for to harrow among the Latins is
to break the clods — but that the Lord will make Ephraim to ride. This,
I doubt not, is the genuine sense of the passage; but I leave to others
their own free judgement. It now follows —

<span id="xvii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xvii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012.md)<span id="xvii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvi-p2"></span>**12.** Sow to yourselves in
righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your fallow ground: for *it is*
time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you.

<span id="xvii.xvi-p3"></span>**12.** Seminate vobis ad justitiam,
colligite (metite) ab mensuram (*vel* pro mensura) clementiam (*vel*,
bonitatem;) arate vobis aratinem (*alii vertunt,* Novate vobis novale,
*sicuti Jeremiae* 4*: caeterum quia idem est sensus, ego relinquo hoc
liberum:)* et tempus inquirendi Jehovam, donec veniat, et pluere faciat
justitiam vobis (*quanquam megis recepta versio est,* Doceat vos
justitiam.)

<span id="xvii.xvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xvi-p5"></span><span id="xvii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvi-p6"></span>He exhorts here the Israelites to
repentance; though it seems not a simple and bare exhortation, but
rather a protestation; as though the Lord had said, that he had hitherto
laboured in vain as to the people of Israel, because they had ever
continued obstinate. For it immediately follows —

<span id="xvii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#013.md)<span id="xvii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** Ye have plowed wickedness, ye
have reaped iniquity; ye have eaten the fruit of lies: because thou
didst trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Arastis impietatem, iniquitatem
messuistes; comedistis fructum mendacii: quia confisus es in via tua, in
multitudine fortium tuorum.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="xvii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvii-p6"></span>The reason is here found, why I thought
that the Prophet did not simply exhort the people, but rather charged
them with obduracy for not growing better, though often admonished. He
then relates how much God had previously done to restore the people to a
sound mind; for it had been his constant teaching, *Sow for yourselves
righteousness, reap, in proportion, kindness,* or *according to the
proportion of kindness*; *plough a ploughing for yourselves; it is the
time to seek the Lord* Though then the people heard these words daily,
and had their ears almost stunned by them, they did not yet change for
the better, nor made themselves pliable; nay, as it were with a fixed
purpose, they ploughed, he says, ungodliness, they reaped iniquity; they
therefore did eat the fruit of falsehood, for they sustained just
punishments, or satiated themselves with falsehood and treachery. We now
apprehend the meaning of the Prophet: I will come to particulars.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p7"></span>*Sow for yourselves righteousness* He
shows that the salvation of this people had not been neglected by God;
for he had tried whether they were healable. The remedy was, that the
people were to know that God would be pacified towards them, if they
devoted themselves to righteousness. The Lord offered his favour:
“Return only to me; for as soon as the seed of righteousness shall be
sown by you, the harvest shall be prepared, a reward shall be laid up
for you; ye shall then reap fruit according to your kindness.”

<span id="xvii.xvii-p8"></span>But if any one asks, whether it be in the
power of men to sow righteousness, the answer is ready, and that is that
the Prophet explains not here how far the ability of men extends, but
requires what they ought to do. For whence is it that so many of God’s
curses often overwhelm us, except that we sow seed similar to the
produce? that is, God repays us what we have deserved. This then is what
the Prophet shows, when he says, “Sow for yourselves righteousness:” he
shows that it was their fault, if the Lord did not cherish them kindly
and bountifully, and in a paternal manner; it was because their impiety
suffered him not.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p9"></span>And the Prophet only speaks of the duties
of the second table, as also the Prophets do, when they exhort men to
repentance: they often begin with the second table of the law, because
the perverseness of men with regard to this is more palpable, and they
can thereby be more easily convicted.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p10"></span>But what he afterwards subjoins, <span
id="xvii.xvii-p10.1"></span>נירו ניר, *niru nir,* *plough the
ploughing,* is not, I confess, in its proper place; but there is in this
nothing inconsistent: for after having exhorted them to plough, he now
adds, that they were like uncultivated and desert fields, so that it was
not right to sow the seed until they had been prepared. The Prophet then
ought, according to the order of nature, to have begun with ploughing;
but he simply said what he wished to convey, that the Israelites
received not the fruit they desired, because they had only sown
unrighteousness. If they now wished to be dealt with more kindly, he
shows the remedy, which is to sow righteousness. If it was so, that they
were already filled with wickedness, he shows that they were like a
field overgrown with briers and thorns. When therefore a field has long
remained uncultivated, thorns and thistles and other noxious herbs grow
there, and a double ploughing will be necessary, and this double labour
is called Novation;  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) and Jeremiah
speaks of the same thing, when he shows that the people had grown
hardened in their wickedness, and that they could not bear any fruit
until the thorns were torn up by the roots, and until they had been well
cleansed from the vices in which they had become fixed; and hence he
says, —

<span id="xvii.xvii-p12"></span>‘Plough again your fallow-ground,’
(<span id="xvii.xvii-p12.1"></span>[Jer
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003.md)<span
id="xvii.xvii-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.xvii-p13"></span>*And it is the time for seeking Jehovah,
until he come* Here the Prophet offers a hope of pardon to the people,
to encourage them to repent: for we know that when men are called back
to God, they are torpid and even faint in their minds, until they are
assured that God will be propitious to them; and this is what we have
treated of more fully in another place. The Prophet now handles the same
truth, that *it is the time for seeking the Lord.* He indeed uses the
word <span id="xvii.xvii-p13.1"></span>עת, *ot*, which means a
seasonable time. *It is* then *the time for seeking the Lord;* as though
he said, “The way of salvation is not yet closed against you; for the
Lord invites you to himself, and he is of his own self inclined to
mercy.” This is one thing. We are, however, at the same time, taught
that there ought to be no delay; for such tardiness will cost them dear,
if they despise so kind an invitation of God, and go on in their own
obstinacy. *It is then the time for seeking Jehovah;* as Isaiah also
says

<span id="xvii.xvii-p14"></span>‘Seek the Lord while he may be found,  
call on him while he is nigh:  
Behold, now is the time of good-pleasure;  
behold, now is the day of salvation,’  
(<span id="xvii.xvii-p14.5"></span>[Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006.md)<span
id="xvii.xvii-p14.5"></span>.)  <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md)

<span id="xvii.xvii-p16"></span>So also in this place, the Prophet
testifies that God will be easily entreated, if Israel returned to the
right way; but that, if they continued obstinately in their sins, this
time would not be perpetual; for the door would be shut, and the people
would cry in vain, after having neglected this seasonable invitation,
and abused the patience of God.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p17"></span>*It is* then *the time,* he says, *for
seeking the Lord, until he come* This last clause is a confirmation of
the former; for the Prophet here expressly declares that it would not be
useless labour for Israel to begin to seek God — ‘He will come to you.’
He at the same time warns them not to be too hasty in their
expectations; for though God may receive us into favour, he does not yet
immediately deliver us from all punishments or evils. We must, then,
patiently wait until the fruit of reconciliation appears. We hence see
that both points are here wisely handled by the Prophet; for he would
have Israel to hasten with deep concern, and not to delay long the time
of repentance, and also to remain quiet, if God did not immediately show
himself propitious, and show tokens of his favour; the Prophet wished,
in this case, the people to be patient.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p18"></span>*And rain righteousness upon you.* The
word <span id="xvii.xvii-p18.1"></span>ירה, *ire,* means indeed “to
teach,” and also “to throw;” but as the word <span
id="xvii.xvii-p18.2"></span>מורה, *mure*, derived from this verbs as it
is well known, means the rain, I could not explain it here otherwise
than “he will rain righteousness upon you.” What, indeed, could the
teaching of righteousness mean? For the Prophet alludes to the harvest;
and the people might say, “Are we sure of provision, if we seek God?”
“Certainly,” he says; “he will come — he will come to you, and will rain
righteousness, or the fruit of righteousness, upon you.” In short, the
Prophet here shows, that whenever God is sought sincerely and from the
heart by sinners, he comes forth to meet them, and shows himself kind
and merciful. But as he had spoken of ploughing and sowing, the fruit or
the harvest was now to be mentioned; that he might therefore hold forth
a promise that they who had sown righteousness would not lose their
expense and toil, he says, the Lord will rain upon you the fruit of
righteousness.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p19"></span>Now follows the other verse, which, as I
have said, completes the passage, *Ye have ploughed ungodliness,
iniquity have ye reaped: ye have eaten the fruit of falsehood* The
Prophet shows that the people had in vain been daily admonished, and so
kindly and sweetly allured by the Lord; for they had not only slighted
wholesome warnings, but had, in their perverse wickedness, abandoned
themselves to a contrary course: *ye have ploughed,* he says, *impiety;*
God has exhorted you to sow righteousness, — what have ye sown? Impiety;
and then ye have reaped iniquity. Some think that the punishments which
the people had to bear are pointed out here; as though the Prophet had
said, “God has returned to you such a produce as was suitable to your
sowing; ye are therefore satiated with falsehood — that is, with your
own false confidence.” But he seems rather to pursue the same strain of
thought, and to say, that they had ploughed impiety — that is, that they
had been from the beginning ungodly; and then, that they had reaped
iniquity — that is, that they had continued their wickedness to the very
harvest, and laid up their fruit as it were in a storehouse, that they
might satiate themselves with treachery. The Prophet, I think, speaks in
this sense; but let there be a free choice. I only show what seems to me
most suitable.

<span id="xvii.xvii-p20"></span>For it follows then, *For thou hast
trusted in thine own way, in the multitude of thy valiant ones* Here the
Prophet points out the chief spring-head of all sins; for the
Israelites, trusting in their own counsels, gave no ear to the word of
God: and then, being fortified by their own strength, they dreaded not
his judgements, nor fled to his pledged protection to defend them. This
pride is not then named here by the Prophet without reason as the chief
source of all sins. For when one distrusts his own wisdom, or is afraid,
being conscious of his weakness, he can be easily subdued; but when
pride possesses man’s minds so that he thinks himself wise, nothing will
then prevail with him, neither counsel nor instruction. It is the same
when any one greatly extols his own strength, and is inflated with
pride, he cannot be made tractable, were he admonished a hundred times.
The Prophet then defines here the falsehood, the impiety, and the
iniquity of which he had been speaking. For though the people sinned in
various ways, the fountain and root was in this lie or falsehood, that
they were wont to set up their own strength in opposition to God, and
thought themselves so endued with wisdom, that they had no need of
teachers. Since, then, the people were so blinded with their own pride,
the Prophet shows here that it was this lie with which they had satiated
themselves. It follows —

<span id="xvii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xvii.xviii-p1"></span><span id="xvii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Hosea
10:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014.md)<span
id="xvii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** Therefore shall a tumult arise
among thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman
spoiled Betharbel in the day of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces
upon *her* children.

<span id="xvii.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Et (*vel,* ideo, *copula enim
illativam particulam valet,* ideo) surget tumultus in populis tuis; et
unaquaeque munitionum tuarum vastabitur, secundum vastationem Salman
Beth-arbel: in die proelii mater super filios allidetur.

<span id="xvii.xviii-p4"></span>**15.** So shall Bethel do unto you
because of your great wickedness: in a morning shall the king of Israel
utterly be cut off.

<span id="xvii.xviii-p5"></span>**15.** Secundum (*hoc modo*) faciet
vobis Bethel a facie malitiae, malitiae vestrae: in aurora pereundo
peribit rex Israel.

<span id="xvii.xviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xviii-p7"></span><span id="xvii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xviii-p8"></span>The Prophet here denounces punishment,
having before exposed to view the sins of the people, and sufficiently
proved them guilty, who by subterfuges avoided judgement. He now adds,
that God would be a just avenger. *A tumult* then *shall arise among thy
people* Thou hast hitherto satiated thyself with falsehood; for hope in
thine own courage has inebriated thee, and also a false notion of
wisdom; but the Lord will suddenly stir up tumults among thy people;
that is, a tumult shall in one moment arise on every side. He intimates
that its progress would not be slow, but that the tumult would be each
as would confound things from one corner of the land to the other. *A
tumult* then, or *perdition, shall arise among thy people;* for the word
<span id="xvii.xviii-p8.1"></span>שאון, *shaun, “*on” means perdition or
destruction; but I prefer “tumult,” as the verb, <span
id="xvii.xviii-p8.2"></span> קאם“*kam*” seems to require. “Every one of
thy fortresses,” he says, “shall be demolished.” He shows that whatever
strength the people had would be weak and wholly useless, when the Lord
had begun to raise a tumult; for this tumult would reduce to ruin all
their fortified cities.

<span id="xvii.xviii-p9"></span>He then adds an instance, which some
refer to Shalmanezar. He only mentions Shaman; and Shalmanezar is indeed
a compound name; but it is not known whether the Prophet had put down
here his name in its simple form, Shaman: and then he mentions
Betharbel, a city, referred to in some parts of Scripture, which was,
with respect to Judea, beyond Jordan. If we receive this opinion, it
seems that the Prophet wished to revive the memory of a recent
slaughter, “Ye know what lately happened to you when Shalmanezar marched
with so much cruelty through your country, when he laid waste your
villages and towns and cities, and ye especially know how fierce the
battle was in Betharbel, when a carnage was made, when mothers were
violently thrown on their children, when the enemy spared neither sex
nor age, which in the worst wars is a most cruel thing.” Such, then, may
have been the meaning of the Prophet. But others think that he relates a
history, which is nowhere else to be told. However this may be, it
appears that the Prophet spake of some slaughter which was in his day
well known. Then the report of it was common enough, whether it was a
slaughter made by Shalmanezar, or any other, of which there is no
express mention found. We now see the meaning of the Prophet; but we
cannot finish to-day.

<span id="xvii.xix"></span>

<span id="xvii.xix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="xvii.xix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we remain yet
in our own wickedness, though often warned and sweetly invited by thee,
and as thou prevailest not with us by thy daily instruction, — O grant,
that we may, in a spirit of meekness, at length turn to thy service, and
fight against the hardness and obstinacy of our flesh, till we render
ourselves submissive to thee, and not wait until thou puttest forth thy
hand against us, or at least so profit under thy chastisements, as not
to constrain thee to execute extreme vengeance against us, but to repent
without delay; and that we may indeed, without hypocrisy, plough under
thy yoke, and so enjoy thy special blessings, that thou mayest show
thyself to us not only as our Lord, but also as our Father, full of
mercy and kindness, through Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="xvii.xix-p3"></span> 

<span id="xvii.xx"></span>

<span id="xvii.xx-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-ninth

<span id="xvii.xx-p2"></span><span id="xvii.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xx-p3"></span>We explained yesterday <span
id="xvii.xx-p3.1"></span>[Ho
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014.md)<span id="xvii.xx-p3.1"></span>,
in which the Prophet denounced the vengeance of God on his people, such
as they had experienced either when the country was laid waste by the
army of Shalmanezar, or when some other slaughter was made. From the
words, we certainly learn that a battle had been fought in Arbel, which
was a town, as we have said, beyond Jordan. But the Prophet shows also
how much had been the atrocity of that battle, and how grievous and
dreadful would be that slaughter which he now threatens to the people,
by saying that even the mother had been violently thrown upon her
children. And the Prophet also shows that God’s vengeance would be just,
because the Israelites had provoked God by their superstitions.

<span id="xvii.xx-p4"></span>He then points out in the last verse the
cause why the Lord would deal so severely with his people; and his
manner of speaking ought to be observed. *So,* he says, *shall Bethel do
unto you* He might have said, ‘So will God do unto you;’ but he more
distinctly shows that the evil, or the cause of the evil, was in
themselves; *Bethel,* he says, *shall do this unto you.* It is certain
that the war did not arise from Bethel; but as they had corrupted the
worship of God by worshipping the calf, the Prophet says, that the
Assyrian was not, properly speaking, the author of this slaughter, but
that it was to be imputed to that corruption which had arisen in Bethel.
*Bethel* then *shall do this unto you*

<span id="xvii.xx-p5"></span>But he adds, *Because of wickedness* — *of
your wickedness* Some give this explanation, “Because of the wickedness
of wickedness,” by which is expressed something extreme, as the genitive
case is often used by the Hebrews in the place of the superlative
degree; but it may be viewed as a simple repetition, “This shall be for
wickedness — your wickedness, and it shall be so, that ye may not be
able to transfer the blame to any other cause; for ye are yourselves the
authors of all the evils.”

<span id="xvii.xx-p6"></span>He says, in the last place, *In a morning
shall the king of Israel be utterly cut off,* or, *by perishing shall
perish*. The Prophet means by these words, that the Lord would so punish
the people of Israel, that it would appear plain enough, that it was not
done by man or by chance; for the Lord would suddenly overturn that
kingdom which had been so well fortified, which flourished so much in
wealth and power. *Cut off* then *in a morning,* or in one morning,
*shall be the king of Israel.* Some read, “as the morning,” instead of,
“in a morning,” <span id="xvii.xx-p6.1"></span>כשחר, *cashicher*, <span
id="xvii.xx-p6.2"></span>בשחר, *beshicher*. ‘The king of Israel shall
perish like the dawn;’ for the dawn, we know, immediately disappears
when the sun rises: the sun brings with it the full day, and then the
dawn immediately passes away. But the other is the more correct reading,
as it has also been more commonly received, that is, “In a morning, or
in one morning, shall the king of Israel perish;” as we say in French,
<span id="xvii.xx-p6.3"></span>*Cela n’est que pour un desiuner* For
that proud people thought that no adversity could happen to them for
many years, as they had a blind confidence in their own strength. The
Prophet derides this madness, and says, that the slaughter would be
sudden, that the king would in a moment be destroyed, though he thought
himself well supplied with soldiers and all other defences. Now follows
—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc26016.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span> Much difference exists among critics as to
the meaning of the two first clauses of this verse. The two words which
create the difficulty are <span id="xvii.i-p8.1"></span>בוקק and <span
id="xvii.i-p8.2"></span>שוה. The first word in the three other places,
<span id="xvii.i-p8.3"></span>[Isa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001.md)<span id="xvii.i-p8.3"></span>,
<span id="xvii.i-p8.4"></span>[Jer
51:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#002.md)<span id="xvii.i-p8.4"></span>,
and <span id="xvii.i-p8.5"></span>[Na
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002.md)<span id="xvii.i-p8.5"></span>,
where it alone occurs, means, “to empty thoroughly,” or “to make wholly
empty:” and when applied to the vine, as here, it seems to signify vine
that fully empties itself of its juices, so as to bear fruit abundantly.
This view is favored by the Septuagint, <span
id="xvii.i-p8.6"></span>ευκληματουσα, well-branching, luxuriant, and by
*Symmachus*, <span id="xvii.i-p8.7"></span>υλομανουσα, wildly luxuriant,
and is adopted by *Bishop* *Horsley*, who renders it, “yielding.” The
other word, <span id="xvii.i-p8.8"></span>שוה, means “to equal,” or “to
be equal,” and in no case, properly, “to lay up,” as Calvin takes it.
Then the literal rendering of these words, <span
id="xvii.i-p8.9"></span>פרי ישוה לו, is, “the fruit is equal to it;”
i.e. the fruit is suitable to the vine, or, “it makes fruit equal to
itself:” and with this meaning correspond the words in the Septuagint,
<span id="xvii.i-p8.10"></span>ὁ καρπος ευθηνῶν αυτης, — “its fruit is
exuberant.” The following appears to be the literal rendering of the
verse: —

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>*“A vine, emptying itself,* is *Israel,  
It makes fruit equal to itself:  
According to the abundance of his fruit,  
He has abounded toward altars;  
According to the goodness of his land,  
He has made statues good.”*

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>Or, if we would coin a word to correspond
with the original, the two last lines may be thus translated: —

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>“According to the goodness of his land,  
He has goodnized statues.”

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc26016.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span> The final <span id="xvii.i-p16.1"></span>ו
is left out in one copy, and the omission is countenanced by the
Septuagint. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc26016.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="xvii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.iv-p4"></span> There is here a departure from the usual
arrangement: the text is interwoven with the exposition, and not given
apart. But to preserve uniformity, the text is here given by itself,
collected from the comment. The verse may be thus literally rendered: —

<span id="xvii.iv-p5"></span>*‘They have spoken words, oaths of
falsehood,  
*In *making of a covenant:  
And judgment hath sprung up like the wormwood  
in the furrows of the field.’*

<span id="xvii.iv-p6"></span>Though the doctrine of Calvin is correct,
yet his exposition of the last two lines seems too refined. Judgment
often means the administration of justice. Instead of being right and
for the general good, as it ought to have been, it was like some noxious
weed growing naturally and abundantly in the furrows of the field. As
the word is literally ‘head,’ it seems to designate a weed or a herb
most natural to the soil, the *chief* herb, which commonly grows
abundantly. So that judgment, or administration of justice, was not like
the good seed sown in a prepared ground, but like the noxious weed,
natural to the soil, when first turned up by the plough. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc26016.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="xvii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p4"></span> The word rendered “calves” is in the form
of a feminine plural: but it is evidently a noun in the singular number,
for all the pronouns in the verse, referring to it, are in the singular
number. It is a peculiar form, expressive of something huge or great: as
<span id="xvii.vii-p4.1"></span>בהמות, a great beast in <span
id="xvii.vii-p4.2"></span>[Ps
73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022.md)<span id="xvii.vii-p4.2"></span>;
and <span id="xvii.vii-p4.3"></span>חכמות, chief wisdom, in <span
id="xvii.vii-p4.4"></span>[Pr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001.md)<span
id="xvii.vii-p4.4"></span>. And so Bishop *Horsley* renders it “great
calf.” The Septuagint has “calf.” — <span id="xvii.vii-p4.5"></span>τω
μοσχω. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc26016.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="xvii.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.vii-p10"></span> This relative is either masculine or
neuter: the Hebrews have only two genders, the masculine and feminine;
and the neuter is expressed by the former. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc26016.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="xvii.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p4"></span>

<span id="xvii.ix-p5"></span> Samaria is destroyed,  
Her king is like foam on the waters.

<span id="xvii.ix-p6"></span>This is evidently the correct rendering,
and this construction is what Bishop *Horsley* adopts. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc26016.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="xvii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.x-p11"></span> <span id="xvii.x-p11.1"></span>[Lu
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#030.md)<span id="xvii.x-p11.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc26016.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="xvii.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xiv-p3"></span> The word here rendered “furrows” is not
so found any where else. The Masoretic points have alone fixed to it
this meaning. The Hebrew text has <span id="xvii.xiv-p3.1"></span>עינתם,
their spring or fountain; and Keri, the marginal reading, and twelve
MSS, have <span id="xvii.xiv-p3.2"></span>עונותם, their sins or
iniquities. The latter reading is countenanced by the Septuagint, the
Syriac, and the Vulgate. Then the right translation would be, “when they
are bound to their two iniquities;” that is, the two alliances with
Assyria and Egypt, or the two calves, one in Dan, the other at Bethel.

<span id="xvii.xiv-p4"></span>*“When they are chastised for their two
iniquities.”* — *Newcome.*

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc26016.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="xvii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.xv-p4"></span> This is certainly a more literal rendering
than our version, though it be not wholly so. The two first lines, word
for word, may be thus translated, —

<span id="xvii.xv-p5"></span>*“And Ephraim* is *a trained heifer.  
Loving to tread the corn.”*

<span id="xvii.xv-p6"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc26016.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="xvii.xv-p12.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.xv-p13"></span> <span id="xvii.xv-p13.1"></span>[Job
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022.md)<span id="xvii.xv-p13.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc26016.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="xvii.xvii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvii-p11"></span> <span
id="xvii.xvii-p11.1"></span>Novatio, which means the second ploughing —
the ploughing of the fallow-ground — of the ground once before ploughed,
the <span id="xvii.xvii-p11.2"></span>novale. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc26016.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="xvii.xvii-p14.6"></span>

<span id="xvii.xvii-p15"></span> <span id="xvii.xvii-p15.1"></span>[Isa.
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md), [Isa.
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006.md), [2 Cor.
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002.md)<span id="xvii.xvii-p15.1"></span>.
— *fj.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc26017.md)
