[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som09.md) 
[Next](som11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### Lesson Two: Introduction

Mental Science, which is the Science of Mind and Spirit, makes a
tremendous claim when it states that it can free the individual from the
bondage of sickness, poverty and unhappiness; but it makes this
statement without hesitation and without qualification; it does not
retract from that claim and it never will. It does, however, carefully
set forth the conditions under which it operates and the laws governing
Life, warning man that, unless he understands these conditions and obeys
these laws, he will not receive full benefit from the Science of Mind.

**THE WORLD HAS LEARNED ALL IT CAN THROUGH SUFFERING**

The world is beginning to realize that it has learned all it can through
suffering and pain. Perhaps they were good in their place, but surely
there can be no power in the Universe which wishes man to be sick, to
suffer pain, to be unhappy and end up in the grave. Surely God could not
ordain that man should ultimately be other than a perfect expression of
Life.

We should have no intellectual difficulty in realizing that even God
Himself could not make an automatic individuality, and this explains why
man must suffer on the road to self-discovery. He must suffer, not
because pain is a necessity, but because he must have experience in
order to become individualized.

**WHAT INDIVIDUALITY REALLY MEANS**

Perhaps it would be a good idea to elaborate on this and explain just
what individuality really means. Individuality means self-choice,
volition, conscious mind, personified Spirit, complete freedom and a
POWER TO BACK UP THAT FREEDOM.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

We cannot imagine a mechanical or unspontaneous individuality. To be
real and free, individuality must be created IN THE IMAGE OF PERFECTION
AND LET ALONE TO MAKE THE GREAT DISCOVERY FOR ITSELF.

The answer to the question, "Why did not God make us free and compel
that freedom?" is apparent when we realize that even God could not do
this. A freedom under compulsion would produce a freedom that would
ultimately amount to the very worst kind of bondage. There is no such
thing as compulsory freedom; even God Himself could not ordain this; for
He could do nothing that would violate His own nature. No; man must be
created with the possibility of limitless freedom and then be let alone
to discover the fact for himself. On the road to that discovery he must
be subject to the Law of all Life, and if in ignorance he violates that
Law, he must thereby suffer. This is not, however, because God imposes
the suffering or desires it, but simply because it is the necessity of
the case.

**THE MEANING OF FREEDOM**

Freedom of will means the ability to do, say and think as one wishes; to
express life as one personally desires. To be able only to think and
dream of freedom would not be liberty. To imagine, without the power to
manifest that imagination, would be to remain in a sort of dream world
which would never come to complete self-realization. This is not the
world in which man lives at all, for man's world is one of
self-expression, even though that expression appears at times to destroy
him.

**SIN AND PUNISHMENT. RIGHTEOUSNESS AND REWARD**

We do not wish to enter into theological discussions in this course of
instruction, but we do wish to make the thought clear to those who care
to study it. There is no sin but a mistake and no punishment but an
inevitable consequence. Wrong doing must be punished, for the Law of
cause and effect must

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

be eternally operative. Right doing must be rewarded for the same
reason.

We do not say that man cannot sin; what we say is, that he does sin or
make mistakes and that he is thereby automatically punished, AS LONG AS
HE CONTINUES TO MAKE MISTAKES. This does not mean that there is an evil
power in the Universe; but it does mean that there is an immutable Law
of cause and effect running through everything. Sin is its own
punishment and righteousness ITS OWN REWARD.

The age-long discussion of the problem of evil will never be answered
until we realize that it is not a thing of itself but is simply A MISUSE
OF THE LAW OF FREEDOM. The problem of evil will be met only to the
degree that we *cease doing evil and do good*, for evil will disappear
when we no longer indulge in it. When the whole world sees the right and
does it; then, and not until then, will the problem of evil be solved
for the entire race.

**THE INCARNATION OF SPIRIT**

To return to individuality; it is that which distinguishes man from the
mere brute creation; it is the greater Incarnation of God in the human;
the Indwelling Spirit of the Most High.

Man is created and left to discover himself, and on the road to this
self-discovery he experiences the creations of his own imaginations
which ultimately show him the Truth and lead to real freedom.

There is an interesting myth in regard to the creating of man which may
serve to point out this fact. It is said that when the gods decided to
make man, and make him a Divine Being, they held a long discussion as to
where would be the best place to hide his Divinity. Some of the gods
suggested that it be hidden in the earth, but others argued that some
day man would penetrate the earth and so discover himself; it was then
suggested that it be hidden in the depths of the sea, but this idea was
rejected, for man would go under the sea and there discover his true
nature; it was next suggested that his real nature should be deposited
somewhere in the air, but this also was rejected, for he would surely
fly through the air and

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

find himself. After a long discussion it was finally agreed that the
best place to hide man's Divinity would be IN THE INNERMOST NATURE OF
MAN HIMSELF--this being the last place he would look to find it!

This discovery would not be made until he had had all the experience
necessary to complete a well-rounded life. "The Word is very nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it." <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md)

Of course, this is a fable, but how clearly it sets forth the reality of
the case! The word is really in our own mouths, and every time we say "I
AM" we are repeating it; for "I AM" is the secret of nature and the
emblem of Eternity.

The story of "The Prodigal Son" is the story of man's return to "His
Father's House." How truly the poet puts it when he says that "Trailing
clouds of Glory do we come from Heaven which is our home." This is the
mystical meaning of that marvelous poem of Robert Browning's, called
"Saul." Saul had lost his sense of real life and lay in a stupor in his
tent when David came to sing to him, to awaken him to the realization of
his true nature. At first David sings of the wonders of Creation and of
the delights of life; he tells Saul of his power and glory as a human
being; and, as the song expands, he touches the secret spring of Saul's
being--"He is Saul ye remember in glory, ere error had bent the broad
brow from the daily communion." Then, he plainly tells Saul of the
Christ. This revelation finally awakens Saul to "His old motions and
attitudes kingly." The healing has taken place and the realization of
the Truth has freed Saul from the thraldom of false belief.

**DIFFERENT VIEWPOINTS**

Some take the viewpoint that man was cast forth to discover himself; and
others contend that man decided to do this for himself. It makes no
difference what the case may be; man is certainly on the pathway to
self-discovery, and everything in his experience points to the truth of
this fact. We know that the forces of nature wait on man's discovery of
them and

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

obey his will as soon as he understands how to make use of her laws. We
certainly have freedom enough when we understand how to use that
freedom. The Pilgrim Fathers might have had steam cars if they had
understood the nature of steam. It was not pushed into man's experience
by any autocratic power, but served him only after he had discovered how
to use it. We might say the same of any and all of the laws that we now
understand and utilize.

**THE LESSON OF NATURE'S LAWS**

If we find this to be true of the laws of the mechanical world, why
should we not also find it true of those Mental and Spiritual Laws which
transcend the mechanical world? No doubt, we shall find latent powers
and capacities of which we have never dreamed; powers and abilities
waiting to be understood and used. "Behold I stand at the door and
knock." It certainly will pay man to spend much time and thought in the
study of his own nature; for he will discover things about himself that
will cause him to "Arise and shine." <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md) Man is to-day, more than ever before,
awakening to the real facts of the case, and from now on his evolution
will become very rapid. Nothing is impossible; all things are possible
to the Great Whole, and man is a part of that Whole.

**THE RELATION OF MAN TO THE UNIVERSE OF SPIRIT**

As the evidence of design in the Universe proves a Designer, so the
evidence of self-choice shows a Power that Knows Itself. The Spirit is
Self-Knowing; God knows that God Is. But a Universal Self-Knowingness
really means a Universal Personalness; and so we see how God can be
Personal to every living soul who believes in Spirit. We could
truthfully say--so it seems to me at least--that there is One Infinite
Person, in whom we all "live, and move and have our Being"; <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) for we all live in the One.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

**MAN'S EXPERIENCE**

Let us assume that man is on the road to self-discovery. What is he to
discover?--That he is really free, but that, in order to be free, he
must first go through experiences which will teach him how to use his
freedom properly; and, after the lesson is learned, he will be free
indeed. Everything seems as if this were true. We have traced man's
progress carefully through his journey on this planet from the time when
the first face "Was turned from the clod," to now, and what have we
discovered? That all nature waits upon man's self-discovery and is ever
ready to serve him and do his bidding. Laws and forces undreamed of by
our ancestors are now being employed; powers and forces which to
prehistoric man would have seemed as gods, are to-day called nature's
forces, and we consciously make use of them. Man has gradually merged
with nature and her laws, and to-day stands forth as a new being so far
as the mechanical world is concerned. It seems as if he had conquered
nature and compelled her to serve him.

**NATURE WAITS ON MAN**

Nowhere on this path has he found nature opposed to him. She has
silently waited for his recognition and as silently done his bidding.
She will never contradict herself nor operate contrary to her inherent
laws; but she will serve whoever comes to understand and use them along
the lines of her way of working. Man never created any of these laws but
simply uses them, and he can do this only as he first obeys them.
"Nature obeys us as we first obey it" is an old saying and a true one.
We learn the fundamental principle of a law, obey its mode of operation
and then have conscious use of it. It would be absurd to say that nature
punished us because we did not make proper use of her laws. She simply
will not work harmoniously for us until we harmonize with her; she will
obey us only after we have obeyed her. This is, of course, true of any
and all law. If we obey, it serves; if we disobey, it seems to punish
us.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

**MENTAL AND SPIRITUAL LAWS**

It is the same with those great Mental and Spiritual Laws of our Being.
We must come to discover and utilize the inner forces of Mind and
Spirit, for they are the highest powers.

Man will be delivered from sin, sickness and trouble in exact proportion
to his discovery of himself and his relationship to the Whole.

Law is law wherever we find it, and we shall discover that the Laws of
Mind and Spirit must be understood if they are to be consciously used
for definite purposes. THE SPIRIT KNOWS AND THE LAW OBEYS.

Hidden away in the inner nature of the real man is the Law of his life,
and some day he will discover it and consciously make use of it. He will
heal himself, make himself happy and prosperous, and will live in an
entirely different world; for he will have discovered that LIFE IS FROM
WITHIN AND NOT FROM WITHOUT.

**GOD AND MAN**

Man is made out of and from Life; and, as effect must partake of the
nature of its cause, so man must partake of the Divine Nature from which
he springs.

**MAN REËNACTS THE NATURE OF GOD**

If we realize that God is "Triune" and that man is made in the Image and
Likeness of God, we shall see that the whole scheme of Life and the
whole nature of the Divine Being is reënacted through man. This, of
course, does not mean that man is God; it means that, in his small world
of individual expression, his nature is identical with God's. This is
what Jesus meant when he said, "As the Father hath Life within Himself
so hath He given to the Son to have Life within himself." <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md)

A single drop of water is not the whole ocean, but it does resemble the
ocean and does contain within itself the same

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

qualities and attributes. We might say that man is in God and that God
works through man. "I and The Father are One," <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) "The Kingdom of God is within you"; <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) and we might add, "God's in His Heaven,
all's right with the world."

**THE TWO WAYS TO REASON**

There are but two processes of reasoning known to the human mind:
inductive and deductive; and from these two ways of reasoning all our
knowledge of life has come. Inductive reasoning is the systematic
process of reasoning from a part to the whole. Deductive reasoning is
the process of accepting certain conclusions as truths and drawing other
conclusions from them; it is reasoning from the whole to a part. For
instance, in inductive reasoning we would say that everything happens
just as if there were what we call electricity and that it is everywhere
present. Deductive reasoning says that since electricity is everywhere
present, it is always where we are and can always be generated from any
center.

Using these two methods of reasoning to deduce the nature of God, we may
start with the assumption that God IS, drawing all our conclusions from
this premise; or we may carefully study the nature of man and the
Universe and so draw the conclusion that a God must exist. Whichever
method we use will lead to the same conclusion; namely, that there is a
Divine Being and that man is made in His Image and must reënact and
portray the same attributes as the Life from which he came.

**NOTHING HAPPENS BY CHANCE**

Nothing in the Universe happens by chance. All is in accordance with
Law, and the Law of God is as Omnipresent as is the Spirit of God. This
Law is a Law of Mind, but back of the Law is the Word. "All things were
made by Him and without Him was not anything made that was made." <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md)

Back of our lives is the Law of our Being; and through that Law runs the
word which we speak; for "What things soever

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He (the Son) seeth
the Father do, these also doeth the Son likewise." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md)

**MANY ARE WAKING UP TO THE FACTS**

Thousands of people to-day are beginning to realize this and put it into
operation, and the results attained would fill more books than one man
could read in a lifetime. Thousands to-day are using the silent power of
Mind to heal their bodies and bring prosperity into their affairs; and
the Law is always working in accordance with the belief of those seeking
to use It. As the Universe is run by an Infinite Mind, so man's life is
controlled by his thinking; ignorance of this keeps him in bondage;
knowledge will free him.

One by one, people will investigate the Truth and put It into operation,
and the time will come when disease and poverty will be swept from the
face of the earth, for they were never intended to be. They are simply
the by-products of ignorance, and enlightenment alone will erase them.

**THE TIME HAS COME TO KNOW THE TRUTH**

The hour of freedom has struck, the bell of Liberty is ringing, and "Let
him that is athirst come." <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) Let us,
then, plunge more deeply into our own natures and into the nature of the
Universe and see if we shall not find treasures undreamed of,
possibilities never imagined and opportunities which the fond
thought--yearning for freedom--has often, in our vision of the greater
Life, given us.

"Prove me now, herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you
the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not
be room enough to receive it." <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md)

**A WONDERFUL EXPERIMENT**

It would be a wonderful experiment for any one to make to begin to live
as if this promise were true; to talk, think and act as though there
were a Limitless Power attending him on his

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

journey through life; as though his every act were directed and guided
into expressions of peace, health, happiness and harmony. It is surely
worth while, and understanding will make the way so clear before us that
we shall some day come to see the logic of it; and then, indeed, shall
we really begin to live. Our lives, fortunes and happiness are in our
own hands to mold as we will--provided we first obey the Law and learn
how to make conscious use of It. "With all thy getting get
understanding" <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)--an old adage--but
to-day as true as ever.

It has been the teaching of all times that man reproduces the Divine
Nature; and if he does, we shall expect to find in his nature the same
qualities that we suppose must be in the Nature of Life Itself.

**WHAT PSYCHOLOGY TEACHES ABOUT MAN'S NATURE**

A study of the psychological nature of man verifies the belief in "The
Trinity" running through all Life. Man is self-conscious; of this we are
sure, for he can say "I AM." This fact alone proves his claim to
immortality and greatness. In psychology we learn that man is threefold
in his nature; that is, he has a self-conscious mind, a subconscious
mind and a body. In metaphysics we learn that the three are but
different attributes of the same life. Man's self-conscious mind is the
power with which he knows; it is, therefore, one with the Spirit of God;
it is, indeed, His only guarantee of conscious being.

**THE SELF-KNOWING MIND**

It is from this self-knowing mind that man is able to realize his
relationship with the Whole; for without it he would be unhuman and most
certainly not Divine; but since he has it, he must be Divine.

It is the self-knowing mind alone that constitutes reality, personality
and individuality. It is the "Image of God," the essence of Sonship, and
the "Personification of the Infinite."

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

**MAN'S UNITY WITH THE WHOLE**

We recognize, then, in man's self-knowing mind his Unity with the Whole.
For while a drop of water is not the ocean, yet it does contain within
itself all the attributes of the limitless deep.

Man's self-knowing mind is the instrument which perceives reality, and
cognizes or realizes Truth. All illumination, inspiration, and
realization must come through the self-knowing mind in order to manifest
in man. Vision, intuition and revelation proclaim themselves through
man's self-knowing mind; and the Saints and Sages, the Saviours and
Christs, the Prophets and Seers, the Wise and Learned, have all
consciously perceived and proclaimed this fact. Every evidence of human
experience, all acts of kindness and mercy, have interpreted themselves
through man's self-knowing mind. All that we know, say or think, feel or
believe, hope or long for, fear or doubt, is some action of the
self-knowing mind. Subjective memories we have, and inner, unexpressed
emotions we feel; but to the self-knowing mind alone does realization
come. Without this capacity to consciously know, man would not exist as
an expressed being; and, so far as we are concerned, would not exist at
all. The self-knowing mind of man proclaims itself in every thought,
deed or act, and is truly the only guarantee of his individuality.

**MAN A CENTER OF GOD-CONSCIOUSNESS**

With this vast array of facts at our disposal it would be foolish to
suppose that man's self-knowing mind is any other than his perception of
Reality. *It is his Unity with the Whole, or God, on the conscious side
of life, and is an absolute guarantee that he is a Center of
God-Consciousness in the Vast Whole.*

**UNITY WITH LAW**

We will say, then, that in Spirit man is One with God. But what of the
great Law of the Universe? If we are really One

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

with the Whole we must be One with the Law of the Whole, as well as One
with the Spirit. Again psychology has determined the fact to be more
than a fancy. The characteristics of the subconscious mind of man
determine his Subjective Unity with the Universe of Life, Law and
Action.

**THE SUBJECTIVE OBEYS THE OBJECTIVE**

In the Subjective Mind of man we find a law obeying his word, the
servant of his Spirit. Suggestion has proved that the subconscious mind
acts upon our thought without question or doubt. It is the mental law of
our Being and the creative factor within us. It is unnecessary, at this
point, to go into all the details of the Subjective Mind and its mode of
action; it is enough to say that within us is a mental law, working out
the will and purposes of our conscious thoughts. This can be no other
than OUR INDIVIDUAL USE OF THAT GREATER SUBJECTIVE MIND WHICH IS THE
SEAT OF ALL LAW AND ACTION, AND IS "THE SERVANT OF THE ETERNAL SPIRIT
THROUGH ALL THE AGES."

Marvelous as the concept may be, it is none the less true that man has
at his disposal, in what he calls his subjective mind, a power which
seems to be Limitless. This is because he is One with the Whole, on the
subjective side of life.

Man's thought, falling into his subjective mind, merges with the
Universal Subjective Mind and becomes the law of his life, through THE
ONE GREAT LAW OF ALL LIFE.

There are not two subjective minds. *There is but one subjective mind;
and what we call our subjective mind is really only THE USE THAT WE ARE
MAKING OF THE ONE LAW.*

Each individual maintains his identity in Law through his personal use
of It; and each is drawing *from* Life what HE THINKS *INTO* IT.

TO LEARN HOW TO THINK IS TO LEARN HOW TO LIVE, for our thoughts go into
a Medium that is Infinite in Its ability to do and to be.

MAN, BY THINKING, CAN BRING INTO HIS EXPERIENCE

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> WHATSOEVER HE
DESIRES, IF HE THINKS CORRECTLY AND BECOMES A LIVING EMBODIMENT OF HIS
THOUGHTS. *This is not done by holding thoughts but by KNOWING THE
TRUTH.*

**THE BODY**

But what about man's body? Is that, too, one with the Body of the
Universe? Let us briefly analyze matter and see what it really is. We
are told that matter is not a solid, stationary thing; but is a
constantly flowing, formless substance which is forever coming and
going. Matter is as indestructible as God, as eternal as Timeless Being;
nothing can be either added to or taken from it. The very bodies we now
have were not with us a short time ago. As Sir Oliver Lodge says, we
discard many of them on the path through this life, for the material
from which our bodies are composed is in a constant state of flow.
Vistas of thought open up along the line of mental healing when we
realize this fact; later we will thoroughly discuss and work out a
definite technique for the purpose of healing.

Matter is not what we thought it to be; it is simply a flowing stuff
taking the form that Mind gives it. How about the matter from which
other things than the body are made? It is all the same--ONE SUBSTANCE
IN THE UNIVERSE TAKES DIFFERENT FORMS AND SHAPES AND BECOMES DIFFERENT
THINGS.

**LAST STAGES OF MATTER**

The last analysis of matter resolves it into a universal ether and
leaves nothing more than a stuff which may be operated upon.

Matter, in the last analysis, is composed of particles so fine that they
are simply supposed to be. In other words, it disappears entirely, and
the place where it once was is again "without form and void." <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md) Matter, as we know it, is only an
aggregation of these particles arranged in such order as to

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

produce definite forms, which are determined by something *WHICH IS NOT
MATERIAL.*

There is no difference between the particles which any one form takes
and the particles which all forms take; the difference is not in the
minute particles but in their arrangement.

**THE UNITY OF ALL BODY**

Our bodies are One with the Whole Body of the Universe. Seeds, plants,
cabbages and kings are made of the same substance; minerals, solids and
liquids are made from *THE PRIMORDIAL SUBSTANCE WHICH IS FOREVER FLOWING
INTO FORM AND FOREVER FLOWING OUT AGAIN INTO THE VOID.*

**THE FORMLESS AND THE FORMED**

Nothing could form a formless stuff, which has no mind of its own,
except Intelligence operating upon it. Again we come back to the Word as
the starting point of all Creation--God's Word in the Great World, man's
word in the small world.

*ONE SPIRIT, ONE MIND, AND ONE SUBSTANCE; ONE LAW BUT MANY THOUGHTS; ONE
POWER, BUT MANY WAYS OF USING IT; ONE GOD IN WHOM WE ALL LIVE, AND ONE
LAW WHICH ALL OPERATE; ONE, ONE, ONE. NO GREATER UNITY COULD BE GIVEN
THAN THAT WHICH IS ALREADY VOUCHSAFED TO MANKIND.*

But why is man so limited? Why is he still poor, sick, afraid and
unhappy? Because he does not know the Truth--that is the only "Why." But
why was he not so made that he would *have* to know the Truth? The
answer is that even God could not make a real man, that is, a real
Personified Expression of Himself, without *creating him in freedom and
leaving him TO DISCOVER HIMSELF*. This is the meaning of the story of
the Prodigal Son and the whole meaning of it.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

**INDIVIDUALITY MEANS SELF-CHOICE**

Individuality means real individualized being and real personified
self-choice. We could not imagine an individuality without self-choice;
but what would be the use of self-choice unless the ability to choose
were backed with the power to externalize that choice? It would remain
simply an idle dream, never coming into real self-expression. A little
thought will make it clear that, if man is created to express freedom,
he must be left to discover himself. Of course, during the process he
will have much experience, but in the end he will come out a real being.

The day of man's discovery of himself marked the first day of the record
of human history on this planet; and from the day when he first made
this discovery he has constantly risen and continuously progressed. All
the forces of nature attend him on his way, but he must first discover
them in order to make use of them.

**THE GREATEST DISCOVERY EVER MADE**

The greatest discovery that man ever made was, that his thought has
creative power; that is, that it uses creative power. His thought, of
itself, would have no power unless it were operative through a creative
medium. We do not have to compel Law to operate; all that we have to do
is to use It. The Law of Mind is just like any and all other laws of
Being. It simply Is.

**A COMPLETE UNITY**

We have now discovered a Unity with the Whole on all three sides of life
or from all three modes of expression. We are One with all matter in the
physical world, One with the Creative Law of the Universe in the Mental
World, and One with the Spirit of God in the Conscious World.

What more could we ask or hope for? How would it be possible for more to
be given? We could ask for no more, and no greater freedom could be
given. From now on we will expand, grow and express, only to the degree
that we consciously coöperate with the Whole.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[85:22](som10.htm#fr_21.md) Deut. 30:14

<span id="fn_22"></span>[86:23](som10.htm#fr_22.md) Isa. 60:1.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[86:24](som10.htm#fr_23.md) Acts 17:28.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[88:25](som10.htm#fr_24.md) John 5:26.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[89:26](som10.htm#fr_25.md) John 10:30.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[89:27](som10.htm#fr_26.md) Luke 17:21.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[89:28](som10.htm#fr_27.md) John 1:3.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[90:29](som10.htm#fr_28.md) John 5:19.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[90:30](som10.htm#fr_29.md) Rev. 22:17.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[90:31](som10.htm#fr_30.md) Mal. 3:10.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[91:32](som10.htm#fr_31.md) Prov. 4:7.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[94:33](som10.htm#fr_32.md) Gen. 1:2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Metaphysical Meaning of Words Used in Individual Chart No.
II-B](som11.md)
