[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som21) 
[Next](som23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

### Lesson Five: The Perfect Whole

[Chart No. V](#img_chart05) represents the Triune Unity. The other
charts were divided into Spirit, Soul and Body, symbolizing the
Conscious part of Existence; the Law through which It operates; and the
result of the operation. But those lines were entirely arbitrary. No
such lines could exist, for the threefold Universe, with all of Its
attributes, interspheres Itself. We find the Spirit, or Conscious Mind,
the Soul or Subconscious Mind, and the Body, which is the manifestation
of the union of Spirit and Soul, simultaneously present at every point.
This chart represents the Indivisible Whole, within which are all of Its
parts; the Absolute, within which is the relative; the Uncreated, within
which is all Creation.

Creation is the giving of form to the Substance of Spirit. Spirit, being
All and Only, there is nothing for It to change into but Itself;
therefore, It is the Changeless, within which must take place all change
or manifestation of Itself. Change is simply motion within Life.

The Infinite, of Itself, is Formless, but within It are contained all of
the forms which are the expressions or the outlines of Its experiences.

Spirit is the Limitless, within which is all space; Spirit is Timeless,
within which is all time. "Time is the sequence of events in a Unitary
Whole." Creation and experience are eternally going on, but a particular
experience is measured by time and has a beginning and an end.

The big circle represents the Universal, within which is the individual;
the One Person within Whom are all people. There is really but One
Person in the Universe; but within this One Person all people live, "for
in Him we live, and move, and have our being." <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85) It is the Source and center of all Life,
Power, Action, Truth, Love, Mind, Spirit, the Ever and the All. It is,
of course, God.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

<span id="img_chart05"></span>

[![Lesson Five: Metaphysical Chart No. V.](tn/chart05.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/chart05.jpg)  
Lesson Five: Metaphysical Chart No. V.  

This is the Mystic's chart and shows how the Universal becomes the
Particularization of Itself through man. Man comes to a point in the
Universal, or God, and is the Idea of God as man. The Father is
represented as the Whole just back of, or above, or within, man. This is
the Indwelling God to Whom we pray and with Whom we talk. The mystic has
the ability to consciously talk to God and to consciously receive a
direct answer from the Spirit. In this chart it is shown that the
Absolute contains the relative, within Itself, but is not limited by the
relative. We must remember that the relative does not limit, but
expresses, the Absolute. All change takes place within the Changeless.
All form subsists within the Formless. All conditions obtain within that
which is Limitless; and Creation is eternally going on within that which
is Uncreated. All are activities of the One Mind and Spirit of God. All
people come to a point of individuality within that which is universal.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

**INDIVIDUALITY**

The point within the big circle represents the personality and
individuality of man, indicating that he is a center in the Divine Mind
or God.

Man is the Personification of the Infinite Life; and so we place, just
above this point and on the inside of it, "The Son"; and just above this
(with no line to divide them) are written the words, "Our Father which
art in Heaven," <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) taken from the
Lord's Prayer. There is no difference between God, the Absolute, which
is Our Father in Heaven, and the Son, so far as actual Being is
concerned. The Son is simply a point where God recognizes Himself as
Personality or Individualized Being. It is within that we find the Unity
of God and man; there is no separation.

Man, having his existence in the Unitary Whole, which is Indivisible, is
compelled to accept the fact that his life is God or Spirit; but to say
that man is God, which is equivalent to saying that any part equals the
whole, is to contradict logic and reason, and limit the Limitless Idea.
It is enough to say that we are at one with the Whole. It is both within
and without. In perhaps a more liberal sense we could say man is in God;
immersed in God; saturated with God. God permeates all life, and in man
we find that this Infinite Mind or Intelligence comes to a point of
Individualized Self-Consciousness.

Theoretically, we believe that the personality which we possess is on
the pathway of self-discovery; for everything bears witness to this
belief; as fast as we discover any truth, it is there to use. We never
create Truth--we discover and use It. We believe, then, that as man
continuously unfolds his personality, he will find latent capacities of
which he has never dreamed.

**FURTHER EVOLUTION**

Since his whole life is the unfoldment of intelligence, according to
law, man can only evolve as he recognizes greater possibilities--there
could be no other way. The arbitrary process of

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

evolution ceased when man became an individual; and any further
evolution will be through self-recognition; but back of him is the whole
of Life surging to express Itself. This is what is known as the Divine
Urge. It is that Instinctive, Omniscient "I am" in man, always pushing
him on and up; but It can only express for him as It flows through him.
That person has the greatest power who the most completely recognizes
himself to be one with this Infinite Mind. That is why Jesus said: "I
speak not of myself" (it is not this individualized point); "but the
Father that dwelleth in Me" (that is, God, our Father, Which is in
Heaven); "He doeth the works." <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)

The evolution of man, which is the unfoldment of Spirit through his
personality, will be more complete when his objective and subjective
faculties are more perfectly balanced; that is, when he has conscious
control of the spiritual forces which surge for expression. The
psychological nature has to change somewhat, and the subjective
tendencies that hinder the Whole from coming to a point of conscious
contact must be neutralized. This would produce illumination or the
consciousness of his Unity with the Whole.

In treatment, we work until we penetrate the false thought within and
break through to Reality. There is no limitation, either in Infinite
Intelligence or in Infinite Law. The whole limitation which we
experience is not, of itself, a reality or an entity, but is simply one
of the forms within the formless which we are outlining.

**THE TRUTH IS KNOWN**

Our conscious intelligence is as much of Life as we understand. We have
stopped looking for the Spirit, because we have found It; It is what you
are and It is what I am; we could not be anything else if we tried. The
thing that we look with is the thing that we have been looking for. That
is why it is written: "I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are
children of the most High." <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) We have
stopped looking for the Law. We have found It. In the Universe we call
It the Universal Subjectivity or Soul; in our own experience we call

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It the subjective
state of our thought, which is our individual use of Universal Law. We
have found the Law and demonstrated It. We find that both the Law and
the Spirit are Limitless. What is it that we need for a greater freedom?
Nothing but a greater realization of what we already know.

We should never hesitate to say that we know the Truth, because we do;
for the realization of the Unity of God and man *is* the Truth. We
simply need a greater realization of this. How are we to get it? Only by
penetrating deeper and yet deeper into our own Divine Nature; pushing
farther and farther back into the Infinite. Where are we to do that?
There is no place except within that we can do it. Who is to do it for
us? No one. No one can. People can heal us; they can set the Law in
motion for us and help us to become prosperous;--that is good and
helpful; but the evolution of the individual, the unfoldment of
personality, the enlightenment of the Soul, the illumination of Spirit,
can come only to the degree that the individual himself purposes to let
Life operate through him. "Let this Mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus." <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) This is the Mind of
God,--the only Mind,--the Supreme Intelligence of the Universe.

**THE ANSWER IS IN MAN**

The answer to every question is within man, because man is within Spirit
and Spirit is an Indivisible Whole. The solution to every problem is
within man; the healing of all disease is within man; the forgiveness of
all sin is within man; the raising of the dead is within man; Heaven is
within man. That is why Jesus prayed to this indwelling "I am" and said:
"Our Father Which art in Heaven." <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90)
He also said: "The Kingdom of God is within you." <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)

Each of us, then, represents the Whole. How should we feel toward the
Whole? In the old order, we thought of the Whole as a sort of mandatory
power, an autocratic government, an arbitrary God, sending some to
Heaven and some to hell; and "all for His glory." Now we are much more
enlightened and we realize that there can be no such a Divine Being. We

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

have meditated upon the vastness of the Universe of Law, and we have
said: "God is Law; there is a Divine Principle Which is God." In the new
order, we are liable to fall into as great an error as the old thought
fell into, unless we go much deeper than thinking of God simply as
Principle. God is more than Law or Principle. God is the Infinite
Spirit, the Limitless, Conscious Life of the Universe; the One Infinite
Person within Whom all people live. The Law is simply a Force.

**GOD--INFINITE PERSONALITY**

God or Spirit is Supreme, Infinite, Limitless Personality. And we should
think of the Divine Being as such--as completely responsive to
everything we do. There should come to us a sense of communion, a
spontaneous sense of Irresistible Union. If we had that, we would
demonstrate instantaneously.

An evolved soul is always a worshiper of God. He worships God in
everything; for God *is* in everything. God not only is *in everything,
but He is more than everything He is in.* "Ye are the light of the
world"; <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)--that is, God in us. All
that we are is God; yet God is more than all we are.

The nearer consciousness gets to the Truth, the more Cosmic sweep it
has, the more power it has. Angels wait upon individuals who perceive
Cosmic Purposes and Powers, because the Whole is crowding forth into
expression. Let a man recognize a Cosmic Purpose, which is the
expression of Life, Truth and Love; let his thought vibrate to the
higher and grander realization of life, and see how--automatically--he
becomes more powerful.

The process of healing and demonstration is, at first, mechanical and
scientific; then the fire of Spirit is added to make it real. One is
technique--the other is the pulsating life and glow. We need the
recognition of love, coupled with a scientific understanding of what we
are doing. Thoughts are things, and diseases are the direct result of
specific thoughts somewhere in consciousness. Poverty is the direct
result of a subjective state of thought which binds.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

**UNITY**

All Manifestation of Life is from and invisible to a visible plane; and
it is a silent, effortless process of spiritual realization. We must
unify, in our own mentalities, with Pure Spirit. To each of us,
individually, God, or Spirit, is the Supreme Personality of the
Universe; the Supreme Personality of that which we, ourselves, are. It
is only as the relationship of the individual to this Deity becomes
enlarged that he has a consciousness of power.

There should always be a recognition in treatment of the Absolute Unity
of God and man; the Oneness, Inseparability, Indivisibility,
Changelessness; God as the Big Circle, and man as the little circle. Man
is in God and God is in man; just as a drop of water is in the ocean,
while the ocean is in the drop of water. This is the recognition Jesus
had when He said: "I and my Father are One." <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) There is a Perfect Union; and to the
degree that we are conscious of this Union we incorporate this
consciousness in our word, and our word has just as much power as we put
in it, no more and no less.

Within this Infinite Mind each individual exists, not as a separated,
but as a separate, entity. We are a point in Universal Consciousness,
which is God, and God is our Life, Spirit, Mind and Intelligence. We are
not separated from Life, neither is It separated from us; but we are
separate entities in It, Individualized Centers of God's Consciousness.

We came from Life and are in Life, so we are One with Life; and we know
that Instinctive Life within, which has brought us to the point of
self-recognition, still knows in us the reason for all things, the
purpose underlying all things; and we know that there is nothing in us
of fear, doubt or confusion which can hinder the flow of Reality to the
point of our recognition. We are guided, daily, by Divine Intelligence
into paths of peace wherein the soul recognizes its Source and meets It
in joyful Union, in complete At-one-ment.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

**HOLD TO THE GOOD**

Such is the power of clear thought that it penetrates things; it removes
obstructions, the reason being that there is nothing but consciousness,
nothing but Mind. The only instrument of Mind is idea. See with perfect
clearness and never become discouraged nor overcome by a sense of
limitation. Know this:--that the Truth with which you are dealing is
absolute. All of God, all of Truth, all there is, is at the point of
man's recognition; and every time you give a treatment, and all the way
through it, keep bringing this back to your remembrance.

Never struggle; say, "There is nothing to struggle over; everything is
mine by Divine Right; Infinite Intelligence is my Intelligence; Divine
Love is my Love; Limitless Freedom is my Freedom; Perfect Joy is my
Gladness; Limitless Life is my Energy."

Let us BLIND OURSELVES TO NEGATION, as far as we are mentally able to.
LET US NOT TALK, THINK, OR READ ABOUT ANYTHING DESTRUCTIVE, whether it
be war, pestilence, famine, poverty, sickness, or limitation of any
kind. Looking at this from a practical standpoint, there is all to win
and nothing to lose. The rapid progress we would make if we should do
this would be wonderful.

We are always dealing with First Cause. Nothing else can equal the
satisfaction that comes to one when he perceives himself, from the
silence of his own soul and the activity of his own thought, actually
bringing about a condition without the aid of visible instrumentalities.
There is nothing else as satisfying as to heal some disease purely by
the power of thought; this shows that we are dealing with First Cause.

We must definitely neutralize confusion and doubt. We should take time,
daily, to conceive of ourselves as being tranquil, poised,
powerful,--always in control of every situation; as being always the
highest concept of the Divine which we can imagine. We should never
hesitate to think of ourselves in this way. The Ancients used to teach
their pupils to say to themselves--"Wonderful, wonderful, wonderful
me!"--until they lost sight of themselves as Mary Smith or John Jones,
and perceived themselves as Divine Realities. Then, when they came

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

back to the objectivity of Mary Smith and John Jones, they brought with
them that subtle power which distinguishes Spiritual Growth,--the
Atmosphere of Reality.

**THE INFINITE IS PERSONAL TO ALL**

Undoubtedly the power of Jesus lay in His recognition of the Infinite
Person as a Responsive, Conscious, Living Reality; while, on the other
hand, He recognized the Law as an arbitrary force, which was compelled
to obey His will. He combined the personal and the impersonal attributes
of Life into a perfect whole. The Infinite is Personal to every soul who
believes in the Infinite. It is a mistake to so abstract the Principle
that we forget the Living Presence; it is the combination of the two
that makes work effective.

**THE CHRIST**

Who is man? He is the Christ. Who is the Christ? The Son, begotten of
the only Father;--not the only begotten Son of God. Christ means the
Universal Idea of Sonship, of which each is a Member. That is why we are
spoken of as Members of that One Body; and why we are told to have that
Mind in us "which was also in Christ Jesus." <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) Each partakes of the Christ Nature to the
degree that the Christ is revealed through him, and to that degree he
becomes the Christ. We should turn to that Living Presence within, Which
is the Father in Heaven, recognize It as the One and Only Power in the
Universe, unify with It, declare our word to be the presence, power and
activity of that One, and speak the word as if we believed it; because
the Law is the servant of the Spirit.

If we could stand aside and let the One Perfect Life flow through us, we
could not help healing people. This is the highest form of healing.

We have gone through all of our abstract processes of reasoning and have
found out what the Law is and how It works; now we can forget all about
It, and know that there is nothing

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

but the Word; the Law will be working automatically. We must forget
everything else, and let our word be spoken with a deep inner
realization of love, beauty, peace, poise, power, and of the great
Presence of Life at the point of our own consciousness.

**REALIZATION**

We do not dare to throw ourselves with abandonment into a seeming void;
but if we did, we would find our feet planted firmly on a rock, for
there is a place in the mentality, in the heights of its greatest
realizations, where it throws itself with complete abandonment into the
very center of the Universe. There is a point in the supreme moment of
realization where the individual merges with the Universe, but not to
the loss of his individuality; where a sense of the Oneness of all Life
so enters his being that there is no sense of otherness; it is here that
the mentality performs seeming miracles, because there is nothing to
hinder the Whole from coming through. We can do this only by providing
the great mental equivalents of Life, by dwelling and meditating upon
the immensity of Life; and yet as vast, as immense, as limitless as It
is, the whole of It is brought to the point of our own consciousness.

We comprehend the Infinite only to the degree that It expresses Itself
through us, becoming to us that which we believe It to be. And so we
daily practice in our meditations the realizations of Life:--"Infinite,
indwelling Spirit within me, Almighty God within me, Perfect Peace
within me, Complete Satisfaction within me, Real Substance within me;
that which is the Truth within me." "I am the Truth," Jesus said. He
said: "I am the way; I am the Life; no man cometh unto the Father but by
Me." <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) How true it is! We cannot come
unto the Father Which art in Heaven except through our own nature.

Right here, through our own nature, is the gateway and the path that
gradually leads to illumination, to realization, to inspiration, to the
intuitive perception of everything.

The highest faculty in man is intuition, and it comes to a

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

point sometimes where, with no process of reasoning at all, he realizes
the Truth intuitively. So we should daily meditate, particularly if we
are practicing right along.

**MEDITATION**

Any practitioner should take a certain time every day to meditate within
himself, to realize that the words which he speaks are the words of
Truth. Being the words of Truth, they cannot fail to be fulfilled; they
are a law unto themselves within the Great Law. They know themselves to
be what they are. They are immutable, irresistible, unassailable; they
are eternal and complete, having intelligence, knowledge and
understanding within themselves.

Every treatment must be a complete thing within itself. It is an
unqualified statement of Being and pays no attention to appearances. If
it did, it would not be efficacious. It rises above all appearance and
may contradict every experience the human race has ever had; but it is
real just the same. *The treatment begins and ends within the mentality
of the one giving it; and the demonstration takes place within the
mentality of the one giving it; and, to the degree that it does take
place there, it is a good treatment and will be a good demonstration.*

If you have a patient who says: "I am sick," and you are able to
neutralize your belief of that man as being sick, or any man as being
sick, and can see him perfect, he will come to you and say: "I am
healed." *The practitioner must know within himself.* He never thinks of
projecting his thought, sending it out or holding it. He simply takes
the whole condition and brings it into the great realization of Life.

Declare:--"Perfect Life within me, God within me, Spirit within me, Good
within me, Almightiness within me, Loving Intelligence within me, Peace,
Poise, Power, Happiness and Joy within me, Life, Truth and Love within
me, Omniscient Instinctive I am within me, Almighty God within me." It
is not enough to say that God is. The concept must be brought home to
the mentality of the individual and unified with it, in order to have it
expressed through him.

If we need financial healing, we should say: "Infinite Substance

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

within me, Infinite Activity within me, flowing through me into
everything I do, say or think, quickening into action all those things
that my mentality touches; Infinite Activity within me, unerring, never
mistaking, always doing the right thing at the right time, always
knowing what to do, knowing how to do it and doing it; Infinite
Executive Power within me, the Great Executive, the great I am, the
All-Knowing and All-Seeing, the All-Wise within me; Infinite Substance
within me, forever expressing Itself through me; Infinite Supply flowing
through me and flowing to me;--irresistible supply, unassailable supply,
limitless." As you say this, stop and think of the things you
want--seeing them as realities--much as one would look at pictures on
the wall.

Repeat:--"Infinite Substance within me, Infinite Supply flowing through
me and to me, Infinite Activity around me and within me, Infinite
Intelligence within me, directing me, guarding me, governing me,
controlling me; the One and Only within me and through me, that is,
Almighty God within me. There is no other, or beside which there is none
other. Infinite love within me, seeing all, knowing all, loving all, One
in and through all." Carry this concept out until you see that you live
in everybody and everybody lives in you. Then continue: "Infinite One,
comprehending, seeing, knowing, understanding, living in and including
the All, within me." Realize what this means. "I am One with all people.
There are no enemies. There is only the One, in all and through all."

If we would spend half the time making such affirmations that we spend
complaining, finding fault, fussing, being sad and sorry for ourselves,
we would soon be healed. "Infinite Wisdom within me"; stop and think
what this means,--the Intelligence that operates through everything,
visible and invisible. "Infinite Wisdom within me; Infinite Intelligence
within me; Infinite Power within me";--feel what this means: The Power
that holds the planets in place; a power to which the united force of
the human race is as nothing. "Infinite Intelligence and Infinite Power
within me, the great Executor; Infinite Energy and Wisdom within
me,--the All-Knowing, the Unerring Mind of the Universe;--Infinite Peace
within me, Infinite Peace, undisturbed and unalterable; Infinite Life,
Infinite

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Peace within me";
that means there is no disturbance, no commotion, no trouble. There is
only Infinite Peace; the power that stilled the waves and told the winds
to be calm is the Power with which we deal. "Infinite Peace within me,
Infinite Joy within me, the Joy that causes the leaves of the trees to
clap their hands." It is the Joy that sings in the brook, the music of
the spheres, the Joy of the sense of completion. "Infinite Joy within
me, not somewhere else, but within me"; It is the Good which is urging
Itself forth through every act which we call human or humane. We see it
in the hand that gives and in every human act. That is the "Infinite
Good that is within me,"--Infinite everything, whatever the need may be.
Meditate upon the abstract essence of the thing; then bring it to a
concrete point within your own mentality and see what it means as it
manifests, declaring that it is.

This great teaching plainly shows the way to liberty and freedom. It is
a pathway continuously unfolding from a Limitless Source to a Limitless
Source. "Arise, shine, for thy light is come." <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) "I am that I am." <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97)

 

Note: Read and study "Cosmic Consciousness," Bucke; "Twelve Lessons in
Mysticism," Hopkins; "The Impersonal Life" and "Creative Process in the
Individual," T. Troward; "Bible Mystery and Meaning," T. Troward;
"Sayings of Jesus," Red Letter Testament.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[216:86](som22.htm#fr_85) Acts. 17:28.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[218:87](som22.htm#fr_86) Luke 11:2.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[219:88](som22.htm#fr_87) John 14:10.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[219:89](som22.htm#fr_88) Ps. 82:6.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[220:90](som22.htm#fr_89) Phil. 2:5.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[220:91](som22.htm#fr_90) Luke 11:2.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[220:92](som22.htm#fr_91) Luke 17:21.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[221:93](som22.htm#fr_92) Matt. 5:14.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[222:94](som22.htm#fr_93) John 10:30.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[224:95](som22.htm#fr_94) Phil 2:5.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[225:96](som22.htm#fr_95) John 14:6.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[228:97](som22.htm#fr_96) Isa. 60:1.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[228:98](som22.htm#fr_97) Exodus 3:14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](som23)
