[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som38.md) 
[Next](som40.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE MIRROR OF THE SUBJECTIVE

It has truly been said that Mind is a mirror. If we could realize how
completely this law works, no doubt we would greatly alter our manner of
thinking. It is impossible to create even the slightest thought without
causing some reflex action in Mind; and the deeper the emotion the
deeper will be the penetration of thought and the more complete will be
the reaction.

Thought is the most subtle of all the forces which we know anything
about, and but few understand what a tremendous power it has, either for
good or for ill. To learn how to control one's thought means knowing how
to control one's body and destiny.

Subjective mind can reason only deductively; consequently, it is
compelled, by reason of its nature, to accept whatever thought gains
entrance to it. So the mirror of Mind is, in reality, the working of the
law of cause and effect through the mentality. The subjective mind,
being the seat of memory, must contain all the thoughts which have ever
gone into it, whether these thoughts have been conscious or not. But
when a person is told that he has thoughts which he never consciously
created it is a little hard to understand. He must realize, however,
that constant contact with life opens the door to many impressions which
were never consciously created. This fact, together with the realization
that whatever falls into the subjective mind must be acted upon, answers
the question.

Of course, we do not imagine that certain things are going to happen to
us; but we do think certain kinds of thoughts which, brought to their
logical conclusions, would produce definite effects. Remember that the
subjective mind reasons deductively only; and all this becomes quite
evident.

The subjective side of thought, being the creative agency

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

within, must at once set to work to produce anything which is given it,
no matter what the emotion may be. How wonderful! But this shows how
very careful one should be in choosing the kind and type of emotion to
be made into form; for something must happen to all the thoughts which
submerge.

The subjective mind never argues nor contradicts what is put into it;
the thought is at once accepted and acted upon. If one says that he is
sick, it at once begins to create a sick condition; for, like a mirror,
it reflects; and being creative, what it reflects it tends to create and
to cast forth as a condition.

Like any other natural force, subjective mind was not created by man and
he cannot change its mode of operation; but, while he may not change a
natural force, he may change his manner of approach to it. Man cannot
change his own inherent nature; but he can, and should, learn to make
the best use of all his forces. Subjective mind will never change its
own nature, but will always reflect to the thinker what he thinks into
it. Man did not make this law nor can he change it; but, like any other
law, once understood, it becomes an obedient servant.

The use of this law is entirely mental and is within the grasp of every
one; it is so simple that all can understand; it is the law of mind in
action, and this law is set in motion by correct thinking and knowing.

But how few know why they think or what they think! How few control even
the slightest emotion or allow the emotions to express in a constructive
manner! No doubt the time will come when a complete control of the
subjective will be gained and man will then be much less limited.

But the race is made up of individuals, and the place to begin is right
at home. We, who have affirmed these great laws of mind to be realities
in the human experience, must so prove them in our expressions of life
that the rest, looking on, may read the sign and follow the signal. It
is possible to do this, and the reward is great.

At first the road may be hard and beset with many difficulties; there
may be failures and discouragements; but the

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

end is certain. We fall, only to rise again into a greater realization
of life and action; and, like the pilgrim of old, to renew the journey.
We shall need a backbone instead of a wishbone here as in all other
places. It is not in wishing but in knowing and in doing that we shall
find the reward of true merit. It behooves each one to make the effort
to consciously control the processes of his thought.

This does not mean sitting around in some dark corner with the hand at
the brow, impersonating Socrates or Plato; it means out in the world, in
the midst of affairs, at home and abroad, wherever our work takes us. We
need not leave the world; for we may engage in all of its activities
without being controlled by them; we may be in the world of affairs as
masters and not as slaves.

Surely this hope, held before the waiting thought, will so stimulate our
endeavors that we shall go forth into life and the great game of living
with a new song upon our lips and a new joy within, springing forth into
the dawn of a new day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Personality](som40.md)
