[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../nth/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](som34.md) 
[Next](som36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0874779219/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Science of Mind, by Ernest Shurtleff Holmes \[1926\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HOW TO VISUALIZE

Visualizing means mentally seeing the things that you wish to have or to
do. When you mentally see the things you desire, and see them very
clearly, you are presenting Universal Mind with images of thought; and,
like the creative soil of the ground, It at once tends to project them
into form. If the thought image is clear it provides a good mold; if it
is imperfect the mold is a poor one. This does not mean that

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

one must set his mind or hold thought; it simply means that he must
think clearly. There is no power in holding thoughts; indeed, the real
secret of successful mental work is to loose thought and let Mind
operate upon it.

The first thing to do is to decide what you wish to image into Mind.
After having become composed in thought, begin to see the complete
outcome of your desires, in mental pictures. Suppose that you wish to
demonstrate a home; you should know just what kind of home you wish. Of
course, if you simply thought of house you would get something, but the
more definite the picture the better the results will be. In order to
make the picture complete, decide just what kind of a home you wish to
live in; then, in the silence of your thought, mentally look at this
house; go from room to room, stopping here and there to look at some
piece of furniture or at some picture on the wall. Make the whole thing
real, as far as possible; enter the house, sit down and feel that you
are actually living there, saying, "I am now living in this house." You
have set a word in motion through the Law which will bring a realization
of your desire, unless you, yourself, neutralize the picture by doubting
it. Do this every day until the house appears. Use the same process in
visualizing anything.

In order that you may fully understand just what I mean, I will
illustrate by drawing a mental picture which I will ask you to follow as
you read these lines. Imagine that you are with me; we will suppose that
I am a man about six feet tall, with light hair and complexion. We are
sitting on the front porch of a house that is painted green; it is a
two-story house and sits quite far back from the road; there are tall
trees standing in front of the house through which the sun is shining.
We can see the little shadows as they play upon the porch through the
open spaces between the trees. The breeze is gently blowing and the
leaves are waving back and forth. I am talking to you, saying, "Let us
take a walk together." We immediately rise from our seats, which are
made of wicker, and walk down three stone steps to a gravel walk,
leading to the street. As we go out through a stone gate we are suddenly
met by a dog which is running along the street; he is a large, yellow
dog, and is running rapidly. We watch him as he runs, barking,

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

down the street, till he turns a corner,--and our picture is at an end.
Now, if you have carefully imaged each step in the above picture, you
will understand what visualizing means.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sequence of the Creative Order](som36.md)
