[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07024)  [Next](cc07026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxvi"></span>

<span id="xxvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 23

<span id="xxvi.i"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
23:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001)<span id="xxvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass a long time after
that the LORD had given rest unto Israel from all their enemies round
about, that Joshua waxed old *and* stricken in age.

<span id="xxvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fuit autem post dies multos postquam
requiem dedit Jehova Israeli ab omnibus inimicis eorum in circuitu,
Josue senuit, et venit in dies:

<span id="xxvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And Joshua called for all Israel,
*and* for their elders, and for their heads, and for their judges, and
for their officers, and said unto them, I am old *and* stricken in age:

<span id="xxvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tunc vocavit Josue omnem Israel,
seniores ejus, et capita ejus, et judices ejus, et praefectos ejus,
dixitque ad eos, Ego senui, et veni in dies:

<span id="xxvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And you have seen all that the LORD
your God has done unto all these nations because of you; for the LORD
your God *is* he that has fought for you.

<span id="xxvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Vosque vidistis omnia quae fecerit
Jehova Deus vester omnibus gentibus istis in conspectu  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) vestro, quod Jehova Deus vester
pugnaverit pro vobis.

<span id="xxvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Behold, I have divided unto you by
lot these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes,
from Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even unto the
great sea westward.

<span id="xxvi.i-p10"></span>**4.** Videte, sorte distribui vobis gentes
istas residuas in haereditatem per tribus vestras, a Jordane, atque
omnes gentes quas disperdidi usque ad mare magnum ab occasu solis.

<span id="xxvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** And the LORD your God, he shall
expel them from before you, and drive them from out of your sight; and
you shall possess their land, as the LORD your God has promised unto
you.

<span id="xxvi.i-p12"></span>**5.** Jehova autem Deus vester ipse
propulsabiteas a facie vestra, et expellet eas a conspectu vestro, et
jure haereditario possidebitis  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187)
terram earum, quemadmodum loquutus est Jehova Deus vester vobis.

<span id="xxvi.i-p14"></span>**6.** Be you therefore very courageous to
keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that
you turn not aside therefrom *to* the right hand or *to* the left;

<span id="xxvi.i-p15"></span>**6.** Robrate igitur vos valde, ut
custodiatis, et faciatis quicquid scriptum est in libro Legis Mosis, ut
non recedatis ab eo neque ad dextram, neque ad sinistram.

<span id="xxvi.i-p16"></span>**7.** That you come not among these
nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention of the name
of their gods, nor cause to swear *by them*, neither serve them, nor bow
yourselves unto them:

<span id="xxvi.i-p17"></span>**7.** Neque commisceamini gentibus istis
quae remanent vobiscum et nomen deorum earum ne commemoretis, nec
adjuretis, neque serviatis eis, neque incurvetis vos eis.

<span id="xxvi.i-p18"></span>**8.** But cleave unto the LORD your God,
as you have done unto this day.

<span id="xxvi.i-p19"></span>**8.** Sed Jehovae Deo vestro adhaereatis,
sicut fecistis usque ad diem hanc.

<span id="xxvi.i-p20"></span>**9.** For the LORD has driven out from
before you great nations and strong: but *as for* you, no man has been
able to stand before you unto this day.

<span id="xxvi.i-p21"></span>**9.** Propterea expulit a facie vestra
gentes magnas et fortes, nec stetit quisquam in conspectu vestro usque
ad diem hanc.

<span id="xxvi.i-p22"></span>**10.** One man of you shall chase a
thousand: for the LORD your God, he *it is* that fights for you, as he
has promised you.

<span id="xxvi.i-p23"></span>**10.** Vir unus ex vobis persequutus est
mille, quia Jehova Deus vester est qui pugnat pro vobis sicut loquutus
fuerat vobis.

<span id="xxvi.i-p24"></span>**11.** Take good heed therefore unto
yourselves, that you love the LORD your God.

<span id="xxvi.i-p25"></span>**11.** Custodite valde super animabus
vestris ut diligatis Jehovam Deum vestrum.

<span id="xxvi.i-p26"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.i-p27"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p28"></span>Here we have a narrative of the solemn
protestation which Joshua used towards the time of his death, that he
might leave the pure worship of God surviving him. But although the
peace and quiet which the Israelites obtained among the nations of
Canaan is described as an excellent blessing from God, it is necessary
to keep in mind what I formerly taught, that it was owing to their
cowardice that they dwelt among their enemies, whom it would not have
been difficult to rout and destroy. But thanks are justly rendered to
God for his goodness in pardoning their ingratitude.

<span id="xxvi.i-p29"></span>The pious solicitude of Joshua is here also
set forth, for the imitation of all who are in authority. For as the
father of a family will not be considered sufficiently provident if he
thinks of his children only till the end of his own life, and does not
extend his care farther, studying as much as in him lies to do them good
even when he is dead; so good magistrates and rulers ought carefully to
provide that the well arranged condition of affairs as they leave them,
be confirmed and prolonged to a distant period. For this reason Peter
writes, (<span id="xxvi.i-p29.1"></span>[2Pe
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#015)<span id="xxvi.i-p29.1"></span>)
 <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) that he will endeavor after he
has departed out of the world to keep the Church in remembrance of his
admonitions, and able to derive benefit from them.

<span id="xxvi.i-p31"></span>From its being said that he invited all
Israel, and its being immediately after added that he invited their
elders, and heads, and judges, and prefects, I understand the meaning to
be that all were indeed permitted to come, but that the summons was
addressed specially to the heads and prefects. And thus the last clause
appears to me to be explanatory of the former. And, indeed, it is not at
all credible that the whole people were invited; for no such meeting
could possibly take place. The sense, therefore, in which the people
were invited was simply this, that the elders, judges, and others were
commanded to come, and might bring as many persons as were disposed to
come along with them.

<span id="xxvi.i-p32"></span>The speech of Joshua, as quoted, is double;
but it appears to me that the historian first, as is often done, gives a
brief summary of the whole speech, and then follows it out more in
detail, introducing the particulars which he had omitted.  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) In the one which is first given,
Joshua briefly animates the people, and exhorts them to sure confidence
in the continued and unwearying grace of God. For, seeing they had
experienced that God is true in all things, they could have no doubt for
the future, that they might safely hope for the same success in
vanquishing and destroying the enemy. The partition also by which he had
distributed the remainder of the land, he set before them as an earnest
or pledge of their undoubted fruition, because it was not at random but
by the order of God he had marked out the seat, and fixed the boundaries
of each tribe.

<span id="xxvi.i-p34"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p35"></span>**6.** *Be you therefore very courageous,*
etc He now shows them the mode of conquering, — not to indulge gross
security, as too often happens, as a substitute for genuine confidence.
He affirms that God will be propitious to them, and promises that
whatever they attempt will turn out prosperously, provided they are
steadfast in obeying the Law. However confidently hypocrites may contemn
and deride God, they would wish, however, to have him astricted to them;
nay, they often, with no small pomposity, boast of his promises. But
true faith, while it reclines upon God, keeps those who possess it in
his fear. In short, those who would find God must seek him sincerely,
and if we desire to be regarded by him, we must beware of turning our
backs upon him. The expression, Be you very courageous, as has elsewhere
been said, denotes serious study, because in the great weakness of our
nature no man will set about the thorough observance of the Law, if he
does not exert himself above his strength. Attention ought also to be
paid to the definition of true obedience which is here repeated from
Moses, (<span id="xxvi.i-p35.1"></span>[De
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#032)<span id="xxvi.i-p35.1"></span>)
and said to consist in not turning either to the right hand or the left.

<span id="xxvi.i-p36"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p37"></span>**7.** *That you come not among these
nations,* etc He distinctly admonishes them that it will be impossible
rightly to discharge their duty if they be not carefully on their guard
against all sources of corruption. This it was very necessary to enforce
upon them. For they were surrounded on all sides by the snares of Satan,
and we know how great their proneness to superstition was, or rather how
headlong their eagerness for it. First, then, he warns them that
intimate intercourse with the nations may involve them in fellowship in
crime; for the term *mingling* used in this passage is equivalent to
what is termed by St. Paul, *being yoked.* (<span
id="xxvi.i-p37.1"></span>[2Co
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="xxvi.i-p37.1"></span>)
In short, he first removes the incitements or allurements to idolatry,
and then declares his detestation of idolatry itself. It is to be
observed, however, that he does not expressly mention either bending of
the knee, or sacrifices, or other rites, but designates all perverse
modes of worship by the terms *naming* them and *swearing* by them.
Whence we infer that God is defrauded of his honor when ever any
particle, however small, of all the things which he claims for himself
is transferred to idols. He accordingly concludes that they are to
adhere to God alone; in other words, they are to be bound to him out and
out.

<span id="xxvi.i-p38"></span><span id="xxvi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p39"></span>**9.** *For the Lord has driven out from
before you,* etc He intimates that so long as they do not themselves
change, there will certainly be no change on the part of God. Therefore
he asserts that, provided they conciliate the favor of God, they shall
have an uninterrupted course of victory. At length he again exhorts
them, as they value their life and safety, to be careful in maintaining
love to God. From this source all true obedience springs; for if we do
not cling to him with free and ardent affection, we shall study in vain
to frame our lives in accordance with the external form of the Law.

<span id="xxvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
23:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012)<span
id="xxvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p2"></span>**12.** Else if you do in any wise go back,
and cleave unto the remnant of these nations, *even* these that remain
among you, and shall make marriages with them, and go in unto them, and
they to you:

<span id="xxvi.ii-p3"></span>**12.** Quia si avertendo aversi fueritis,
et adhaeseritis residuis gentibus istis, residuis, inquam, istis quae
sunt vobiscum: et affinitatem contraxeritis cum eis, et misceatis vos
cum eis, et ipsae vobiscum:

<span id="xxvi.ii-p4"></span>**13.** Know for a certainty that the LORD
your God will no more drive out *any of* these nations from before you;
but they shall be snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides,
and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from off this good land which
the LORD your God has given you.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p5"></span>**13.** Jam nunc scitote quod posthac
Jehova Deus vester non expellet omnes gentes istas a facie vestra: sed
potius erunt vobis in laqueum, et offendiculum, et flagellum in
lateribus vestris, et in spinas in oculis vestris, donec pereatis e
terra optima ista quam dedit vobis Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p6"></span>**14.** And, behold, this day I *am* going
the way of all the earth: and you know in all your hearts and in all
your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things which
the LORD your God spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto you,
*and* not one thing has failed thereof.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p7"></span>**14.** En autem ego ingredior hodie viam
universae terrae: cognoscite ergo toto corde vestro, et tota anima
vestra quod non cecidit verbum unum ex omnibus verbis optimis quae
loquutus est Jehova Deus vester super vos: omnia evenerunt vobis, non
cecidit ex eis verbum unum.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p8"></span>**15.** Therefore it shall come to pass,
*that* as all good things are come upon you, which the LORD your God
promised you; so shall the LORD bring upon you all evil things, until he
have destroyed you from off this good land which the LORD your God has
given you.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p9"></span>**15.** Sicut ergo evenit vobis omne verbum
bonum quod loquutus est Jehova Deus vester ad vos, sic adducet Jehova
super vos omne verbum malum, donec disperdat vos e terra optima ista,
quam dedit vobis Jehova Deus vester.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p10"></span>**16.** When you have transgressed the
covenant of the LORD your God, which he commanded you, and have gone and
served other gods, and bowed yourselves to them; then shall the anger of
the LORD be kindled against you, and you shall perish quickly from off
the good land which he has given unto you.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p11"></span>**16.** Quum transgressi fueritis pactum
Jehovae Dei vestri quod praecepit vobis, et abieritis, et servieritis
diis alienis, incurvaveritisque vos eis, irascetur furor Jehovae contra
vos, et peribitis cito e terra optima quam dedit vobis.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="xxvi.ii-p13"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p14"></span>**12.** *Else if you do in any wise go
back,* etc According to the usual method observed in the Law, he adds
threatening, in order that if they are not sufficiently allured by the
divine goodness, they may be aroused by fear to the performance of their
duty. It is, indeed, disgraceful for men, when God graciously
condescends to invite them, not at once to run forward and meet the
invitation by prompt and alert obedience; but such is the lethargy of
the flesh, that it always requires to be stimulated by threats. Joshua,
therefore, adopts the usual method of the Law, while he reminds the
Israelites of the terrors of the Lord, provided they do not of their own
accord embrace his offered favor. Moreover, it is not once only that, he
sets before them the denunciation that the nations of Canaan will be
scourges to their sides and thorns in their eyes if they become familiar
with them. *First,* inasmuch as God had consecrated the land to himself,
he wished it to be purged of all impurities; and *secondly,* inasmuch as
he saw how prone the people were to be corrupted by bad example, he
wished also to provide a remedy for this evil. Then, while on the one
hand the people counted it as nothing that the land should be
contaminated by impious superstitions, and that idols should be
worshipped in it instead of the true God, and on the other hand, eagerly
contracted contagion from their vices, it was only a just punishment of
this gross contempt that they should experience molestation and
hostility from those whom they had improperly  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) spared.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p16"></span>That the threatening which both Moses and
Joshua thus denounced were openly accomplished, is but too plain from
the Book of Judges. And yet this promulgation of the divine vengeance
was not altogether useless; for after Joshua was dead, they became
courageous enough to engage in war. Their ardor, however, proved
evanescent,  <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) and they shortly
after were initiated in nefarious Gentile rites. Hence, we perceive in
the human mind an intemperate longing for perverse worship, a longing
which no curbs are able to restrain.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p18"></span>It is now proper to consider how far this
doctrine is applicable to us. It is true a special command was given to
the ancient people to destroy the nations of Canaan, and keep aloof from
all profane defilement’s. To us, in the present day, no certain region
marks out our precise boundaries; nor are we armed with the sword to
slay all the ungodly; we have only to beware of allowing ourselves to
become involved in fellowship with wickedness, by not keeping at a
sufficient distance from it. For it is almost impossible, if we mingle
with it, spontaneously to avoid receiving some spot or blemish. But this
point having been elsewhere expounded, I now merely advert to it in
passing.

<span id="xxvi.ii-p19"></span><span id="xxvi.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p20"></span>**14.** *And, behold, this day I am
going,* etc As it has been appointed unto all men once to die, (<span
id="xxvi.ii-p20.1"></span>[Heb
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#027)<span id="xxvi.ii-p20.1"></span>)
Joshua says that in regard to himself the common end of all is at hand,
inasmuch as he, too, was born mortal. These expressions are evidently
adapted to console the people, and prevent them from feeling immoderate
grief at the bereavement when he should be taken from them. For there
cannot be a doubt that his loss filled the people with the deepest
regret, when they saw themselves reduced, as it were, to a mutilated
trunk, by being deprived of their head. He therefore admonishes them,
that since the race of life is ended by having reached the goal, they
were not to ask that his condition should be different from that of the
whole human race. Meanwhile he does not intimate that the form of dying
is the same in all, because the believers of heavenly doctrine are
distinguished from unbelievers by an incorruptible seed, not allowing
them in like manner to perish, but only adverts to that which is common,
namely, departure from the world after the course of life is ended. The
substance of his whole address amounts to this, that as God had proved
himself true by his favors and the fulfillment of his promises, so his
threatening would not be empty or vain, and he would certainly avenge
the profanation of his worship by their final destruction.  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc07025.htm#fr_186) <span
id="xxvi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p8"></span> The original literally is “from before
you,” and is more exactly rendered by Calvin’s Latin “<span
id="xxvi.i-p8.1"></span>In conspectu vestro,” and by the English version
“because of you.” This English rendering is the more remarkable, as in
the 5th verse, <span id="xxvi.i-p8.2"></span>[Jos
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#005)<span id="xxvi.i-p8.2"></span>,
the very same Hebrew word is literally rendered “From before you.”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc07025.htm#fr_187) <span
id="xxvi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p13"></span> Simply “You shall inherit,” seems to be
better than the English version, “You shall possess,” which is too weak,
or than Calvin’s Latin, “<span id="xxvi.i-p13.1"></span>Jure
haereditario possidebitis,” which is too strong. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc07025.htm#fr_188) <span
id="xxvi.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p30"></span> The original text had the reference to
<span id="xxvi.i-p30.1"></span>[2 Peter
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#025)<span id="xxvi.i-p30.1"></span>,
an obvious typesetting error. —*fj.*

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc07025.htm#fr_189) <span
id="xxvi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.i-p33"></span> According to this view, the details given
in <span id="xxvi.i-p33.2"></span>[Joshua
23](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#000)<span id="xxvi.i-p33.2"></span> and
<span id="xxvi.i-p33.3"></span>[Joshua
24](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#000)<span id="xxvi.i-p33.3"></span>
refer only to one meeting. It may be so, but certainly the impression
produced by a simple perusal of the chapters is, that they refer to two
distinct meetings, between which some interval of time must have
elapsed. It is only by means of labored criticism, accompanied with a
degree of straining, that some expositors have arrived at a different
conclusion. But why should it be deemed necessary to employ criticism
for such a purpose? There is surely no antecedent improbability that
Joshua, after all the turmoil’s of war were over, should have more than
once come forth from his retirement, and called the heads of the people,
or even the whole body of them together to receive his counsels, when he
felt that the time of his departure was at hand. Observe, moreover, that
each meeting is ushered in by its own appropriate preamble, and has its
own special business. In the one, Joshua speaks in his own name, and
delivers his own message; in the other, all the tribes are regularly
assembled, and are said to have “presented themselves before God,”
because, although Joshua was still to be the speaker, he was no longer
to speak in his own name, but with the authority of a divine messenger,
and in the very terms which had been put into his mouth. Accordingly,
the very first words he utters are, “Thus said the Lord God of Israel.”
The message thus formally and solemnly announced in <span
id="xxvi.i-p33.4"></span>[Jos
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#002)<span id="xxvi.i-p33.4"></span>,
is continued verbatim and without interruption to the end of <span
id="xxvi.i-p33.5"></span>[Jos
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#013)<span id="xxvi.i-p33.5"></span>.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc07025.htm#fr_190) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p15"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxvi.ii-p15.1"></span>Male.” French, “<span
id="xxvi.ii-p15.2"></span>A tort et contre leur devoir;” “Wrongfully and
contrary to their duty.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc07025.htm#fr_191) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p17"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxvi.ii-p17.1"></span>Verum evanidus fuit fervor ille.” French,
“<span id="xxvi.ii-p17.2"></span>Mais c’a este un feu de paille comme on
dit: car leur ardeur n’a gueres dure;” “But it was a fire of straw, as
it is called; for their ardor was not durable.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc07025.htm#fr_192) <span
id="xxvi.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="xxvi.ii-p21"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxvi.ii-p21.1"></span>Ultimo eorum interitu.” French, “<span
id="xxvi.ii-p21.2"></span>En les destruisant a toute rigeur;” “By
destroying them in all rigor,” (without mercy.) — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](cc07026)
