[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc07004)  [Next](cc07006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi"></span>

<span id="vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#001.md)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And Joshua rose early in the morning;
and they removed from Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the
children of Israel, and lodged there before they passed over.

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Surrexit autem Josue summo mane, et
profecti sunt e Sittim, venerantque usque ad Jordanem ipse et omnes
filii Israel, pernoctaveruntque illic antequam transirent.

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And it came to pass after three days,
that the officers went through the host;

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et fuit a fine trium dierum, ut
praefecti transirent per medium castrorum.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And they commanded the people, saying,
When you see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the
priests the Levites bearing it, then you shall remove from your place,
and go after it.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Praeciperentque populo, dicendo, Quum
videritis arcam foederis Jehovae Dei vestri, et sacerdotes Levitas
portantes eam, proficiscemini e loco vestro, ibitisque post illam.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** Yet there shall be a space between you
and it, about two thousand cubits by measure: come not near unto it,
that you may know the way by which you must go: for you have not passed
*this* way heretofore.

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Veruntamen interstitium erit inter vos
et ipsam fere duorum milium cubitorum in mensura: ne appropinquetis ei,
ut cognoscatis viam per quam ambulaturi estis. Non enim transiistis per
viam illam heri vel nudius tertius.

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And Joshua said unto the people,
Sanctify yourselves: for to morrow the LORD will do wonders among you.

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Dixerat autem Josue ad populum,
sanctificate (*praeparate*) vos. Cras enim faciet Jehova in medio vestri
mirabilia.

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Joshua spoke unto the priests,
saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the
people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the
people.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Loquutus autem est Josue ad
sacerdotes, dicendo, Tollite arcam foederis, et transite ante populum.
Tulerunt itaque arcam foederis, et ambularunt ante populum.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the LORD said unto Joshua, This
day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they
may know that, as I was with Moses, *so* I will be with thee.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Dixerat autem Jehova ad Josuam, Hodie
incipiam magnificare te in oculis totius Israel, ut, sciant, quomodo fui
cum Mose, sic me fore tecum.

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And thou shall command the priests
that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When you are come to the
brink of the water of Jordan, you shall stand still in Jordan.

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Tu ergo praecipies sacerdotibus
portantibus arcam foederis, dicendo, Quum ingressi fueritis usque ad
extremum aquae Jordanis, in Jordane stabitis.

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And Joshua said unto the children of
Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of the LORD your God.

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Dixitque Josue ad filios Israel
Accedite huc, et audiate verba Jehovae Dei vestri.

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Joshua said, Hereby you shall
know that the living God *is* among you, and *that* he will without fail
drive out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the
Hivites, and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and
the Jebusites.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Dixit item Josue, In hoc cognoscetis
quod Deus vivens est in medio vestri, et quod expellendo expellet a
facie vestra Chananaeum, Hitthaeum, et Hivaeum, et Pherisaeum, et
Gergesaeum, et Amorrhaeum, et Jebusaeum.

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>**11.** Behold, the ark of the covenant of
the Lord of all the earth passes over before you into Jordan.

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ecce arca foederis Dominatoris
universae terrae transibit ante vos per Jordanem.

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span>**12.** Now therefore take you twelve men out
of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man.

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Nunc ergo tollite vobis duodecim
viros e tribubus Israel, singulos per singulas tribus.

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span>**13.** And it shall come to pass, as soon as
the soles of the feet of the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the
Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of Jordan, *that* the
waters of Jordan shall be cut off *from* the waters that come down from
above; and they shall stand upon an heap.

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Quum autem quieverint plantae pedum
sacerdotum portantium arcam Jehovae Dominatoris universae terrae in
aquis Jordanis, aquae Jordanis intercidentur, et aquae superne (*vel*
desuper, *vel* desursum) fluentes, consistent in acervo uno.

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span> 

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span><span id="vi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span>**1.** *And Joshua rose early,* etc We must
remember, as I formerly explained, that Joshua did not move his camp
till the day after the spies had returned, but that after hearing their
report, he gave orders by the prefects that they should collect their
vessels, as three days after they were to cross the Jordan.  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md) His rising in the morning, therefore,
does not refer simply to their return, but rather to the issuing of his
proclamation. When the three days were completed, the prefects were
again sent through the camp to acquaint the people with the mode of
passage. Although these things are mentioned separately, it is easy to
take up the thread of the narrative. But before it was publicly
intimated, by what means he was to open a way for the people, the
multitude spread out on the bank of the river were exposed to some
degree of confusion.

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span>It is true, there were fords by which the
Jordan could be passed. But the waters were then swollen, and had
overflowed, so that they might easily prevent even men altogether
without baggage from passing. There was therefore no hope, that women
and children, with the animals, and the rest of the baggage, could be
transported to the further bank. That, in such apparently desperate
circumstances, they calmly wait the issue, though doubtful, and to them
incomprehensible, is an example of faithful obedience, proving how
unlike they were to their fathers, who, on the slightest occasions, gave
way to turbulence, and inveighed against the Lord and against Moses.
This change was not produced without the special agency of the Holy
Spirit.

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span><span id="vi.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span>**2.** *And it came to pass after three
days,* etc That is, three days after their departure had been intimated.
For they did not halt at the bank longer than one night. But as the
period of three days had previously been fixed for crossing, and they
had no hope of being able to accomplish it, Joshua now exhorts them to
pay no more regard to obstacles and difficulties, and to attend to the
power of God. For although the form of the miracle is not yet explained,
yet when the ark of the covenant is brought forward like a banner to
guide the way, it was natural to infer that the Lord was preparing
something unusual. And while they are kept in suspense, their faith is
again proved by a serious trial; for it was an example of rare virtue to
give implicit obedience to the command, and thus follow the ark, while
they were obviously uninformed as to the result. This, indeed, is the
special characteristic of faith, not to inquire curiously what the Lord
is to do, nor to dispute subtlety as to how that which he declares can
possibly be done, but to cast all our anxious cares upon his providence,
and knowing that his power, on which we may rest, is boundless, to raise
our thoughts above the world, and embrace by faith that which we cannot
comprehend by reason.

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span><span id="vi.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span>**4.** *Yet there shall be a space, etc* As
the younger Levites, whose province it was to carry the ark, (<span
id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>[Nu 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>) were strictly forbidden to touch it, or even to
look at it, when uncovered, it is not wonderful that the common people
were not allowed to approach within a considerable distance of it. The
dignity of the ark, therefore, is declared, when the people are ordered
to attest their veneration by leaving a long interval between themselves
and it. And we know what happened to Uzzah, (<span
id="vi.i-p37.2"></span>[2Sa 6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#000.md)<span
id="vi.i-p37.2"></span>) when seeing it shaken by restive oxen, he with
inconsiderate zeal put forth his hand to support it. For although God
invites us familiarly to himself, yet faithful trust so far from
begetting security and boldness, is, on the contrary, always coupled
with fear. In this way the ark of the covenant was, indeed, a strong and
pleasant pledge of the divine favor, but, at the same time, had an awful
majesty, well fitted to subdue carnal pride. This humility and modesty,
moreover, had the effect of exercising their faith by preventing them
from confining the grace of God within too narrow limits, and reminding
them, that though they were far distant from the ark, the divine power
was ever near.

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span>In the end of the verse it is shown how
necessary it was for them to be divinely guided by an unknown way; that
anxiety and fear might keep them under the protection of the ark.

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span><span id="vi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span>**5.** *And Joshua said,* etc Some unwonted
manifestation of divine power in bringing assistance behooved to be held
forth, lest the backwardness arising from hesitancy might produce delay;
and yet, in order that the Israelites might depend on the mere counsel
of God, Joshua does not yet plainly point out the special nature of the
miracle, unless, indeed, we choose to read what follows shortly after,
as forming part of one context. Herein lies the true test of faith, to
lean so on the counsel of God, as not to keep inquiring too anxiously
concerning the mode of action or the event. As the word <span
id="vi.i-p40.1"></span>קדש means sometimes to *prepare,* and sometimes
to *sanctify,* and either meaning is not inappropriate, I thought it
best to leave a free choice. For faith prepares us to perceive the
operation of God; and in those times, when God manifested himself to men
more nearly, they consecrated themselves by a solemn rite; thus we see
how Moses, on the promulgation of the Law, sanctified the people as God
had commanded. The view taken by some expositors, that the people were
thus commanded to purge themselves from defilement’s, merely in order
that nothing might impede the passage of the Jordan, seems to be too
confined.

<span id="vi.i-p41"></span><span id="vi.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p42"></span>**6.** *And Joshua spoke unto the priests,*
etc It is probable that the priests were informed why God wished the ark
to precede, that they might be more ready to execute the command, for
the whole people are immediately after made acquainted with the intended
division of the waters. As the prefects had formerly published in the
camp, that the people were to follow the ark of the covenant, the
priests could not possibly be ignorant as to the office which they were
to perform. For it had been distinctly declared that they were to be
leaders or standard-bearers. But when all were in readiness, Joshua
publicly unfolded the divine message which he had received. For it would
have been incongruous to make the divine favor more clearly manifest to
the common people than to them. It is added, however, immediately after,
that the people were made acquainted with the miracle.

<span id="vi.i-p43"></span>I conclude, therefore, that after the priests
had for some time been kept in suspense, along with the multitude, the
Lord, on ascertaining the obedience of all, publicly declared what he
was to do. First, then, it is related that the priests were enjoined by
Joshua to bear the ark before the people; and secondly, lest any one
might think that he was making the attempt at random, or at his own
hand, mention is at the same time made of the promise with which he had
been furnished as a means of ensuring his command. But although it is
not then distinctly said that the course of the Jordan would be
interrupted, yet, from the language which Joshua used to the people, we
may infer that the Lord spoke more in detail, and explained more
distinctly what he had determined to do. For Joshua did not mention
anything which he had not previously learned from the mouth of God
himself. Nay, before he makes any mention of the matter at all, he tells
them to hear the words of the Lord, and thus premises that he has the
authority of God for what he is about to say.

<span id="vi.i-p44"></span><span id="vi.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p45"></span>**10.** *Hereby you shall know,* etc He makes
the power of the miracle extend further than to the entrance of the
land, and deservedly; for merely to open up a passage into a hostile
territory, from which there was afterwards no retreat, would have been
nothing else than exposure to death. For either entangled among straits,
and in an unknown region, they would easily have been destroyed, or they
would have perished, worn out by hunger and the absolute want of all
things. Joshua therefore declares before hand, that when God would
restore the river to its course, it would just be as if he were
stretching forth his hand to rout all the inhabitants of the land; and
that the manifestation of his power given in the passage of the Jordan,
would be a sure presage of the victory which they would obtain over all
the nations.

<span id="vi.i-p46"></span>He says, Hence shall you know that the Lord
is present with you; to what end? Not only to plant your feet in the
land of Canaan, but also to give you full possession of it. For surely
when mention is made of the overthrow of the nations, an ultimate, free,
and peaceful possession is implied. Therefore, as the Lord by dividing
the river clearly showed that his power resided with the Israelites, so
the people must on their part have conceived hopes of perpetual
assistance, as much as if they had already seen their enemies worsted
and lying prostrate before them.

<span id="vi.i-p47"></span>For God does not abandon the work of his
hands midway, leaving it maimed and unfinished. (<span
id="vi.i-p47.1"></span>[Ps 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.i-p47.1"></span>) When he leads his people unto the promised
inheritance, he makes a dry passage for them by cutting off the course
of the Jordan. How perverse then would it have been for the Israelites
to stop short at that momentary act, instead of feeling confident in all
time to come, until quiet possession of the land were actually obtained!
Let us learn then from this example, prudently to combine the different
acts of divine goodness relating to our final salvation, so that a happy
commencement may cherish and keep alive in our minds the hope of an
equally happy termination.

<span id="vi.i-p48"></span>When Joshua says that the people will know
the presence of God from the miracle, he indirectly upbraids them with
their distrust, as the mere promise of God ought to have sufficed for a
full assurance, and our faith, unless founded solely on this promise,
must be continually wavering. But although faith ought properly to
recline on the truth of God alone, it does not follow that experimental
knowledge may not act as a secondary support to its weakness, and give
subsidiary aid to its confirmation. For that which God promises to us in
word he seals by act, and as often as he exhibits to us manifestations
of his grace and might, he intends them to be so many confirmations of
what he has spoken, and so many helps tending to suppress all our
doubts.

<span id="vi.i-p49"></span><span id="vi.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p50"></span>**11.** *Behold the ark of the covenant,* etc
First he says that the ark of God will go before; and secondly, he
explains for what purpose, namely, that Jordan may retire from its
place, trembling, so to speak, at the presence of the Lord, as is said
in the Psalms. (<span id="vi.i-p50.1"></span>[Ps
114](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#000)<span id="vi.i-p50.1"></span>..md) The
narrative introduced concerning the twelve men is parenthetical, as it
only briefly alludes to what it will afterwards deliver more fully and
clearly. At present let us merely understand, that while the ark went
before, God displayed his power in guiding the people. And in this way
there was a confirmation of the sanctity of the worship appointed by the
Law, when the Israelites perceived that it was no empty symbol of his
presence that God had deposited with them. For Jordan was compelled to
yield obedience to God just as if it had beheld his majesty.

<span id="vi.i-p51"></span>Let us however remember, that the only reason
which induced the Lord to display his grace in the ark was because he
had placed the tables of his covenant within it. Moreover, as the thing
could not be easily credited, Joshua directs the mind of the people to
the contemplation of the divine power, which surmounts all difficulties.
The title of Ruler of the whole earth here applied to God is not
insignificant, but extols his power above all the elements of nature, in
order that the Israelites, considering how seas and rivers are subject
to his dominion, might have no doubt that the waters, though naturally
liquid, would become stable in obedience to his word.

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
3:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**14.** And it came to pass, when the people
removed from their tents, to pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing
the ark of the covenant before the people;

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>**14.** Et fuit, quum proficiscentur populus
ad transeundum Jordanem, sacerdotes qui portabant arcam foederis erant
ante populum.

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span>**15.** And as they that bare the ark were
come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were
dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overflows all his banks all
the time of harvest,)

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>**15.** Postquam autem venerunt qui portabant
arcam usque ad Jordanem, et pedes sacerdotum potantium arcam intincti
fuerunt in extremo aquarum (Jordanes autem erat plenus ultra omnes suas
ripas toto tempore messis,)

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>**16.** That the waters which came down from
above stood *and* rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that
*is* beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the
plain, *even* the salt sea, failed, *and* were cut off: and the people
passed over right against Jericho.

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>**16.** Constiterunt aquae quae descendebant
desuper, et assurexerunt in acervum unum procul valde, ab Adam urbe quae
est ad latus Sarthan, et quae descendebant ad mare solitudinis mare
salis, consumptae sunt, interciderunt: populus autem transierunt e
regione Jericho.

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>**17.** And the priests that bare the ark of
the covenant of the LORD stood firm on dry ground in the midst of
Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the
people were passed clean over Jordan.

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>**17.** Stabant autem sacerdotes portantes
arcam foederis Jehovae in sicco in medio Jordanis expediti, (*vel*
praeparati,) totus vero Israel transibant per siccum donec finem
facerent universa gens transeundi Jordanis.

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span><span id="vi.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>**15.** *And as they that bare the ark,* etc
The valor of the priests in proceeding boldly beyond the bed into the
water itself, was deserving of no mean praise, since they might have
been afraid of being instantly drowned. For what could they expect on
putting in their feet, but immediately to find a deep pool in which they
would be engulfed? In not being afraid on reaching the stream, and in
continuing to move firmly forward to the appointed place, they gave a
specimen of rare alacrity, founded on confidence.

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>To the general danger was added the special
one, that the Jordan had then overflowed its banks, as it is wont to do
at the commencement of every summer. As the plain was covered, it was
impossible to observe the line of the banks or the ford, and the slime
spread far and wide, increased their fear and anxiety.  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md) God was pleased that his people, and
especially the priests, should contend with these obstacles, in order
that the victory of their faith and constancy might be more illustrious.
At the same time, the difficulty thus presented tended to magnify the
glory of the miracle when the waters, which had overflowed their banks,
retired at the divine command, and were gathered together into a solid
heap. First, Joshua explains the nature of the miracle for the purpose
of removing doubt, and preventing profane men from denying the divine
interposition by a subtle searching for other causes. It is not, indeed,
impossible that the flowing of the water might have been restrained for
a short time, and that some portion of the channel might thus have
appeared dry, or that the course might have changed and taken some other
direction. But it was certainly neither a natural nor fortuitous event,
when the waters stood gathered up into a heap. It is therefore said that
the waters which previously flowed from the higher ground, seeking in
their descent a continuous outlet, stood still.

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>There cannot be a doubt that this wonderful
sight must have been received with feelings of fear, leading the
Israelites more distinctly to acknowledge that they were saved in the
midst of death. For what was that collected heap but a grave in which
the whole multitude would have been buried, had the waters resumed their
naturally liquid state?  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) Had they
walked upon the waters their faith might have served them as a kind of
bridge. But now, while mountains of water hung over their heads, it is
just as if they had found an open and level path beneath them. The
locality is marked out as situated between two cities,  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md) that the remembrance of it might never be
lost; and, in like manner, God ordered stones to be set up as a
perpetual memorial, that this distinguished mercy might be celebrated by
posterity in all ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc07005.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="vi.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span> This seems to be the proper place to insert
a short account of the Jordan, and more especially of that part of it in
the neighborhood of which the Israelites were now encamped. This becomes
necessary, because Calvin had altogether omitted it, partly, as some
expressions in his Commentary would seem to indicate, from having
unfortunately attached little comparative importance to geographical
details, and partly, as he very modestly expresses it, from not having
been very well acquainted with them. Indeed, at the period when he
wrote, the geography of the Holy Land was very imperfectly known, but we
have not the same excuse, as numerous well-qualified travelers have
since traversed it in all directions, and published careful descriptions
both of its general features and of almost all the localities possessed
of much historical interest. In a single note, only a few leading points
can be adverted to, but it seems not impossible in this way, to give a
distinct idea of the nature of the passage which the Israelites were now
preparing to make, and of the wonderful interposition by which they were
enabled to accomplish it.

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span>The Jordan, then, by far the most important
river of Palestine, is formed, near its northern frontiers, by several
streams which descend from the mountains of Lebanon, and after flowing
nearly due south, for a direct distance of about 175 miles, discharges
its waters into the north side of the Dead Sea. In the upper part of its
course, before it reaches the late of Tiberius, more familiarly known by
its usual scriptural name of the Sea of Galilee, it has much of the
character of an impetuous torrent, and is hemmed closely in on both
sides by loftly mountains, but on issuing from the south side of the
lake, it begins to flow in a valley, the most remarkable circumstance
connected with which, is its great depth beneath the level of the ocean.
Even the Sea of Galilee is 84 feet, and the Dead Sea, where the Jordan
falls into it is 1337 feet beneath this level. The intervening space
between the two seas, forms what is properly called the valley of the
Jordan, and consists of a plain, about six miles across in its northern,
but much wider in its southern half, where it spreads out, on its east
or left bank, into the plains of Moab, and on its west or right bank,
into the plains of Jericho. This valley, throughout its whole length, is
terminated on either side by a mountain chain, which in many parts rises
so rapidly as soon to attain a height exceeding 2500. Within the valley
thus terminated, a minor valley is enclosed. It is about three quarters
of a mile in breadth, and consists, for the most part, of a low flat,
bounded by sandy slopes, and covered by trees or brushwood. Nearly in
the center of this flat the river, almost concealed beneath its
overhanging banks, pursues its course, with few large windings, but with
such a multiplicity of minute tortuosities, that though the direct
distance is not more than sixty-five, the indirect distance or total
length of the stream is estimated at not less than two hundred miles.
The river, in its ordinary state, within its banks, has a width of from
twenty to thirty yards, and a depth, varying from nine to fifteen feet.
The banks are there from twelve to fourteen feet high, and immediately
beyond them, the flat bears evident marks of being frequently inundated.
These inundation’s take place in spring, and are caused by the melted
snow brought down, partly by the three principal tributaries of the
Jordan, the Jarmuch, or Shurat-el-Mandour, the Jabbok, or Zerka, and the
Arnon, or Wady Modjet, which all join it from the east, but chiefly by
the main stream, which is then copiously supplied from the snowy heights
of Lebanon. This rising of the waters, of course, begins as soon as the
thawing influence of the returning heat begins to be felt, but does not
attain its maximum till the impression has been fully made, or, in the
first weeks of April. Such was the state of the stream as the Israelites
now safely assumed to have been from seven to Twelve miles north of the
Dead Sea, and not far from the Bethabarah, where our Savior, after
condescending to receive baptism at the hands of his forerunner, went up
from the banks, while the heavens opened, and the Spirit of God
descended like a dove, and lighted upon him. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc07005.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span> These remarks are made on the assumption
that the waters had risen so as not only to reach the highest edge of
the banks, and make the usual channel what may be called brim-full, but
had spread themselves to some distance over the plain. It may have been
so, but there is no distinct statement to this effect, and the
concluding clause of the fifteenth verse does not literally bear the
meaning which Calvin and our English translators have assigned to it.
His rendering is, “<span id="vi.ii-p14.1"></span>Jordanes autem erat
plenus ultra omnes suas ripas;” literally, “Now Jordan was full beyond
all his banks.” The original only says that “Jordan fills up to
(completely fills) all his banks.” The Septuagint, in like manner, says,
“<span id="vi.ii-p14.2"></span>Ο δὲ Ιορδάνης ἐπηροῦτο καθ ὅλην την
κρηπίδα αὐτοῦ;” “Now the Jordan was filled as to all his embankment.”
The same meaning is very exactly given by Luther, whose version is
“<span id="vi.ii-p14.3"></span>Der Jordan aber war voll an allen feinen
ufern;” “Now Jordan was full on all his banks.” The difference between
the renderings is slight, but it is of importance not to overlook it,
because even such slight differences have sometimes furnished the
infidel with plausible grounds for assailing the credit of the sacred
narrative. In the present instance it has been insinuated that the
historian has exaggerated the extent of the inundation in order to
heighten the importance of the miracle. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc07005.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span> French, “<span id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>Si
les eaux, selon lour nature, cussent alors recommence a eouler;” “Had
the waters then according to their nature begun again to flow.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc07005.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="vi.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span> This is not very explicit, and may have
been left vague on purpose because the original itself, as it now
stands, is obscure, and both translators and commentators, instead of
throwing any light upon it, have rather increased the darkness. For
Adam, the Vulgate substitutes Edom, and the Septuagint, the district of
Kirjath-jearim (<span id="vi.ii-p17.1"></span>μέρους Καριαθιαρίμ) Two
towns near each other, and bearing the respective names of Adam and
Zarethan, are mentioned in Scripture as situated in the tribe of
Manasseh, the one on the right and the other the left bank of the
Jordan. Their distance above the place at which the Israelites are
presumed to have crossed is about forty miles; and the most natural
meaning of the passage seems to be, that when the waters stood, as it
were, congealed in a heap, they remained so long in that state, as to
cause a kind of reflux tide, which was perceptible as far back as Adam
on the one hand, and Zareptan on the other. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc07006.md)
