[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc07007)  [Next](cc07009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
6:1-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#001.md)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now Jericho was straitly shut up
because of the children of Israel: none went out, and none came in.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Jericho autem erat clausa, et
claudebatur propter filios Israel, nec poterat quisquam egredi, vel
ingredi.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2.** And the LORD said unto Joshua, See, I
have given into thine hand Jericho, and the king thereof, *and* the
mighty men of valor.

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Dixitque Jehova ad Josuam, Ecce tradidi
in manum tuam Jericho, et regem ejus, et virtute praestantes.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**3.** And you shall compass the city, all
*you* men of war, *and* go round about the city once. Thus shall thou do
six days.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Circuibitis itaque urbem, omnes viri
bellatores, circundando eam semel: sic facies sex diebus.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>**4.** And seven priests shall bear before the
ark seven trumpets of rams’ horns: and the seventh day you shall compass
the city seven times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets.

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Porro septem sacerdotes ferent septem
cornua arientina ante arcam: Die autem septima circuibitis urbem septem
vicibus, et sacerdotes ipsi clangent tubis.

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**5.** And it shall come to pass, that when
they make a long *blast* with the ram’s horn, *and* when you hear the
sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout; and
the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend
up every man straight before him.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quum vero protraxerint sonitum cornu
arietino: ubi primum audieritis vocem tubae, vociferabitur universus
populus vociferatione magna, et concidet murus urbis sub se: populus
vero ascendet quisque e regione sua.

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>**6.** And Joshua the son of Nun called the
priests, and said unto them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let
seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the
LORD.

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Vocavit ergo Josue filius Nun
sacerdotes, et dixit eis, Tollite arcam foederis, et septem sacerdotes
accipient septem tubas arietinas coram arca Jehovae.

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>**7.** And he said unto the people, Pass on,
and compass the city, and let him that is armed pass on before the ark
of the LORD.

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Dixit quoque ad populum, Transite, et
circuite urbem, et armatus quisque praecedat arcam Jehovae.

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>**8.** And it came to pass, when Joshua had
spoken unto the people, that the seven priests bearing the seven
trumpets of rams’ horns passed on before the LORD, and blew with the
trumpets: and the ark of the covenant of the LORD followed them.

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et fuit postquam loquutus est Josue ad
populum, tulerunt septem sacerdotes septem tubas arietinas, et
transeuntes ante arcam Jehovae clanxerunt tubis. Arca autem foederis
Jehovae sequebatur ipsos.

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the armed men went before the
priests that blew with the trumpets, and the rearward came after the
ark, *the priests* going on, and blowing with the trumpets.

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et armatus quisque praecedebat
sacerdotes clangentes tubis, Et qui cogebat agmen sequebatur arcam eundo
et clangendo tubis.

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Joshua had commanded the people,
saying, You shall not shout, nor make any noise with your voice, neither
shall *any* word proceed out of your mouth, until the day I bid you
shout; then shall you shout.

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Populo autem praeceperat Josue,
dicendo, Non vociferabimini, nec facietis audire vocem vestram, neque
egredietur ex ore vestro verbum, usque ad diem quo dixero vobis,
vociferamini: tunc vociferabimini.

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span>**11.** So the ark of the LORD compassed the
city, going about *it* once: and they came into the camp, and lodged in
the camp.

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Circuivit itaque arca Jehovae urbem,
circundando semel, et reversi sunt in castra: manseruntque illic.

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span>**12.** And Joshua rose early in the morning,
and the priests took up the ark of the LORD.

<span id="ix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Rursum surrexit Josue mane,
tuleruntque sacerdotes arcam Jehovae.

<span id="ix.i-p26"></span>**13.** And seven priests bearing seven
trumpets of rams’ horns before the ark of the LORD went on continually,
and blew with the trumpets: and the armed men went before them; but the
rearward came after the ark of the LORD, *the priests* going on, and
blowing with the trumpets.

<span id="ix.i-p27"></span>**13.** Septem autem sacerdotes ferentes
septem tubas arietinas praecedebant arcam Jehovae, eundo: et clangebant
tubis. Armatus vero praecedebat eos, et qui cogebat agmen sequebatur
arcam Jehovae, eundo, et clangendo tubis.

<span id="ix.i-p28"></span>**14.** And the second day they compassed the
city once, and returned into the camp: so they did six days.

<span id="ix.i-p29"></span>**14.** Circuiverunt ergo urbem dic secundo
vice alia, reversique sunt ad castra: sic fecerunt sex diebus.

<span id="ix.i-p30"></span>**15.** And it came to pass on the seventh
day, that they rose early about the dawning of the day, and compassed
the city after the same manner seven times: only on that day they
compassed the city seven times.

<span id="ix.i-p31"></span>**15.** Ubi autem advenit septimus dies,
surrexerunt simul ac ascendit aurora, et circuiverunt urbem secundum
eundem morem septem vicibus: tantum die illa circuiverunt urbem septem
vicibus.

<span id="ix.i-p32"></span>**16.** And it came to pass at the seventh
time, when the priests blew with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the
people, Shout; for the LORD has given you the city.

<span id="ix.i-p33"></span>**16.** Septima autem vice quum clangerent
sacerdotes tubis, dixit Josue ad populum, vociferamini, tradidit Jehova
vobis urbem.

<span id="ix.i-p34"></span>**17.** And the city shall be accursed,
*even* it, and all that *are* therein, to the LORD: only Rahab the
harlot shall live, she and all that *are* with her in the house, because
she hid the messengers that we sent.

<span id="ix.i-p35"></span>**17.** Erit autem urbs anathema, ipsa et
quaecunque in ea sunt, Jehovae: tantum Rahab meritrix vivet, ipsa et
quicunque fuerint cum ea domi, quia abscondidit nuncios quos misimus.

<span id="ix.i-p36"></span>**18.** And you, in any wise keep
*yourselves* from the accursed thing, lest you make *yourselves*
accursed, when you take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of
Israel a curse, and trouble it.

<span id="ix.i-p37"></span>**18.** Veruntamen vos cavete ab anathemate,
ne forte contingatis aliquid de anathemate, tollatisque de anathemate,
et ponatis castra Israel anathema, et turbetis ea.

<span id="ix.i-p38"></span>**19.** But all the silver, and gold, and
vessels of brass and iron, *are* consecrated unto the LORD: they shall
come into the treasury of the LORD.

<span id="ix.i-p39"></span>**19.** Omne autem argentum, et aurum, et
vasa aerea et ferrea, sanctitas erunt Jehovae: thesaurum Jehovae
ingredientur.

<span id="ix.i-p40"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p41"></span><span id="ix.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p42"></span>**1.** *Now Jericho was straitly shut up,*
etc Jericho is said to be shut up, because the gates were not opened: as
in time of war cities are guarded with more than usual care. It is
added, by way of emphasis, that they were sealed, or locked up,  <span
id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) as if it were said that the inhabitants
were attentive in watching, so as not to be taken by surprise. Hence, as
it could not be taken by stratagem, the only hope of taking it was by
open force. This tends to display the goodness of God to the children of
Israel, who would have been worn out by a long and difficult siege, had
not a substitute been early provided from heaven. Meanwhile there was a
danger, lest being forced into a corner, they might be consumed by want
and famine, as there was no means of obtaining food and provender in a
hostile region. The Lord, therefore, that they might not sit down
despondently before one city, assisted them by an extraordinary miracle,
and opened up an entrance to them by throwing down the walls, that they
might thereafter have the greater confidence in attacking other cities.

<span id="ix.i-p44"></span>We now see the connection between the two
first verses, in the one of which it is said, that Jericho was shut up,
and the children of Israel thus prevented from approaching it, while in
the other God promises that he will take it for them. He makes this
promise with the view of preventing them from tormenting themselves with
anxious thoughts. In one word, God, by this easy victory at the outset,
provides against their giving way to despondency in future. We, at the
same time, perceive the stupidity of the inhabitants, who place their
walls and gates as obstacles to the divine omnipotence; as if it were
more difficult to break up or dissolve a few bars and beams than to dry
up the Jordan.

<span id="ix.i-p45"></span><span id="ix.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p46"></span>**3.** *And you shall compass the city,* etc
The promise was, indeed, fit and sufficient of itself to give hope of
victory, but the method of acting was so strange, as almost to destroy
its credibility. God orders them to make one circuit round the city
daily until the seventh day, on which they are told to go round it seven
times, sounding trumpets, and shouting. The whole looked like nothing
else than child’s play, and yet was no improper test, for trying their
faith, as it proved their acquiescence in the divine message, even when
they saw in the act itself nothing but mere disappointment. With the
same intention, the Lord often, for a time, conceals his own might under
weakness, and seems to sport with mere trifles, that his weakness may at
length appear stronger than all might, and his folly superior to all
wisdom.

<span id="ix.i-p47"></span>While the Israelites thus abandon their own
reason, and depend implicitly on his words, they gain much more by
trifling than they could have done by making a forcible assault, and
shaking the walls by numbers of the most powerful engines. Only it
behooved them to play the fool for short time, and not display too much
acuteness in making anxious and subtle inquiries concerning the event:
for that would have been, in a manner, to obstruct the course of the
divine omnipotence. Meanwhile, though the circulatory movement round the
walls might have excited derision, it was afterwards known, by its
prosperous result, that God commands nothing in vain.

<span id="ix.i-p48"></span>There was another subject of care and doubt,
which might have crept into their minds. Should the inhabitants of the
city suddenly sally forth, the army would, without difficulty, be put to
the rout, while, in long straggling lines, it was proceeding round the
city, without any regular arrangement that might have enabled it to
repel a hostile assault. But here, also, whatever anxiety they might
have felt, they behooved to cast it upon God; for sacred is the security
which reclines on his providence. There was an additional trial of their
faith, in the repetition of the circuit of the city during seven days.
For what could seem less congruous than to fatigue themselves with six
unavailing circuits? Then, of what use was their silence,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) unless to betray their timidity, and
tempt the enemy to come out and attack besiegers who seemed not to have
spirit enough to meet them? But as profane men often, by rash
intermeddling fervor, throw everything into confusion, the only part
which God here assigns to his people, is to remain calm and silent, that
thus they may the better accustom themselves simply to execute his
commands.

<span id="ix.i-p50"></span>Here, too, it is worthy of remark, that the
instruments, given to the priests to blow with, are not the silver
trumpets deposited in the sanctuary, but merely rams’ horns. The sound
of the sacred trumpets would certainly have inspired more confidence,
but a better proof of obedience was given, when they were contented with
the vulgar symbol. Moreover, their movements were so arranged, that the
greater number, by which is understood the armed, went before the ark,
while those who usually accompanied the baggage followed. It was their
part to take care that the rear did not fall into confusion. As the term
*congregating,* applied to them, was obscure, I have rendered it by the
corresponding term usually employed by the Latins.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) Some think that the tribe of Dan was thus
employed, but this is uncertain, as they were not then arranged in the
manner usual on other expeditions.

<span id="ix.i-p52"></span><span id="ix.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p53"></span>**15.** *And it came to pass on the seventh
day,* etc Here, also, God seemed, by leading the people so often round
the city, not only to keep the matter in suspense, but purposely to
sport with the miseries of the people, who were fatiguing themselves to
no purpose. For why does he not order them suddenly to attack the city?
Why does he keep them in their former silence, even to weariness, and
not open their mouths to shout? But the happy fruit of this endurance
teaches us, that there is nothing better than to leave the decisive
moments and opportunities of acting at his disposal, and not, by our
haste, anticipate his providence, in which, if we acquiesce not, we
obstruct the course of his agency. Therefore, while the priests were
sounding, God ordered a corresponding shout to be raised by the people,
that in this way he might prove that he is not pleased with any
impetuosity which men manifest at their own hands, but above all things
requires a regulated zeal, of which the only rule is not to move either
tongue, or feet, or hands, till he order. Here, the rams’ horns
undoubtedly represented his authority.

<span id="ix.i-p54"></span><span id="ix.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p55"></span>**17.** *And the city shall be accursed,* etc
Although God had determined not only to enrich his people with spoil and
plunder, but also to settle them in cities which they had not built, yet
there was a peculiarity in the case of the first city; for it was right
that it should be consecrated as a kind of first fruits. Accordingly, he
claims the buildings, as well as all the moveable property, as his own,
and prohibits the application of any part of it to private uses. It may
have been an irksome and grievous task for the people voluntarily to
pull down houses in which they might have commodiously dwelt, and to
destroy articles which might have been important for use. But as they
had not been required to fight, it behooved them to refrain, without
grudging, from touching the prey, and willingly yield up the rewards of
the victory to God, as it was solely by his nod that the walls of the
city had fallen, and the courage of the citizens had fallen along with
them. God was contented with this pledge of gratitude, provided the
people thereby quickly learned that everything they called their own was
the gift of his free liberality. For with equal right all the other
cities might have been doomed to destruction, had not God granted them
to his people for habitations.

<span id="ix.i-p56"></span>As to the Hebrew word <span
id="ix.i-p56.1"></span>חרס, I will now only briefly repeat from other
passages. When it refers to sacred oblations, it becomes, in respect of
men, equivalent to *abolitions,* since things devoted in this manner are
renounced by them as completely as if they were annihilated. The
equivalent Greek term is ἀνάθημα*,* or ἀνάθεμα*,* meaning *set apart,*
or as it is properly expressed in French, *interdicted.* Hence the
exhortation to beware of what was under anathema, inasmuch as that which
had been set apart for God alone had perished, in so far as men were
concerned. It is used in a different sense in the following verse, where
caution is given not to place the camp of Israel in anathema. Here its
simple meaning is, excision, perdition, or death. Moreover, God destined
vessels made of metals for the use of the sanctuary; all other things he
ordered to be consumed by fire, or destroyed in other manners.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
6:20-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#020.md)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**20.** So the people shouted when *the
priests* blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when the people
heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great
shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the
city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span>**20.** Itaque vociferatus est populus
postquam clanxerunt tubis. Quum enim audisset populus vocem tubarum,
vociferatus est vociferatione maxima, et cecidit murus subtus, tum
ascendit populus in urbem quisque e regione sua, et ceperunt eam.

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span>**21.** And they utterly destroyed all that
*was* in the city, both man and woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep,
and ass, with the edge of the sword.

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span>**21.** Et perdiderunt omnia quae erant in
urbe, a vobis usque ad mulierem, a puero usque ad senem, ad bovem, et
ovem, et asinum, acie gladii.

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span>**22.** But Joshua had said unto the two men
that had spied out the country, Go into the harlot’s house, and bring
out thence the woman, and all that she has, as you swear unto her.

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>**22.** Duobus autem viris qui exploraverant
terram dixit Josue, Ingredimini domum mulieris meretricis, et inde
educite eam, et quaecunque habet, quemadmodum jurastis ei.

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>**23.** And the young men that were spies
went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her
brethren, and all that she had; and they brought out all her kindred,
and left them without the camp of Israel.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span>**23.** Ingressi itaque exploratores
eduxerunt Rahab, et patrem ejus, et matrem ejus, et fratres ejus, et
quaecunque habebat, et totam cognationem ejus eduxerunt, ac locarunt
extra castra Israel.

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>**24.** And they burnt the city with fire,
and all that *was* therein: only the silver, and the gold, and the
vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of
the LORD.

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span>**24.** Urbem vero succenderunt igni, et
quaecunque erant in ea: tantummodo aurum et argentum, vasa aerea et
ferrea posuerunt in thesauro domus Jehovae.

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>**25.** And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot
alive, and her father’s household, and all that she had; and she dwells
in Israel *even* unto this day; because she hid the messengers, which
Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.

<span id="ix.ii-p13"></span>**25.** Itaque Rahab meretricem, et domum
patris ejus, et quaecunque habebat vivere fecit Josue: habitavitque in
medio Israel usque ad hunc diem, quia absconderat nuntios quos miserat
Josue ad explorandum Jericho.

<span id="ix.ii-p14"></span>**26.** And Joshua adjured *them* at that
time, saying, Cursed *be* the man before the LORD, that riseth up and
builds this city Jericho: he shall lay the foundation thereof in his
firstborn, and in his youngest *son* shall he set up the gates of it.

<span id="ix.ii-p15"></span>**26.** Adjuravit autem Josue tempore illo,
dicendo, Maledictus vir coram Jehova qui surget ut edificet urbem istam
Jericho. In primogenito suo fundabit eam et in minore suo statuet portas
ejus.

<span id="ix.ii-p16"></span>**27.** So the LORD was with Joshua; and his
fame was *noised* throughout all the country.

<span id="ix.ii-p17"></span>**27.** Fuit autem Jehova cum Josue, et fama
ejus fuit in tota terra.

<span id="ix.ii-p18"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p19"></span><span id="ix.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p20"></span>**20.** *So the people shouted,* etc Here
the people are praised for obedience, and the faithfulness of God is, at
the same time, celebrated. They testified their fidelity by shouting,
because they were persuaded, that what God had commanded would not be in
vain, and he, in not allowing them to lose their labor, vindicated the
truth of what he had said. Another virtue of not inferior value was
displayed by the people, in despising unlawful gain, and cheerfully
suffering the loss of all the plunder. For there cannot be a doubt, that
in the minds of many the thought must have risen, For what end does God
please to destroy all the wealth? Why does he envy us that which he has
given into our hand? Why does he not rather gladden us by furnishing us
with the materials of thanksgiving? Dismissing these considerations,
which might have interfered with their duty, it was a proof of rare and
excellent self-denial, voluntarily to cast away the spoils which were in
their hands, and the wealth of a whole city.

<span id="ix.ii-p21"></span>The indiscriminate and promiscuous
slaughter, making no distinction of age or sex, but including alike
women and children, the aged and decrepit, might seem an inhuman
massacre, had it not been executed by the command of God. But as he, in
whose hands are life and death, had justly doomed those nations to
destruction, this puts an end to all discussion. We may add, that they
had been borne with for four hundred years, until their iniquity was
complete. Who will now presume to complain of excessive rigor, after God
had so long delayed to execute judgment? If any one object that
children, at least, were still free from fault, it is easy to answer,
that they perished justly, as the race was accursed and reprobated. Here
then it ought always to be remembered, that it would have been barbarous
and atrocious cruelty had the Israelites gratified their own lust and
rage, in slaughtering mothers and their children, but that they are
justly praised for their active piety and holy zeal, in executing the
command of God, who was pleased in this way to purge the land of Canaan
of the foul and loathsome defilement’s by which it had long been
polluted.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md)

<span id="ix.ii-p23"></span><span id="ix.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p24"></span>**22.** *But Joshua had said unto the two
men,* etc The good faith of Joshua in keeping promises, and his general
integrity, are apparent in the anxious care here taken. But as the whole
city had been placed under anathema, a question might be raised as to
this exception of one family. No mortal man was at liberty to make any
change on the decision of God. Still as it was only by the suggestion of
the Spirit that Rahab had bargained for her impunity, I conclude that
Joshua, in preserving her, did only what was considerate and prudent.

<span id="ix.ii-p25"></span>We may add, that the messengers were not yet
under any contrary obligation, as the complete destruction of the city
had not been declared. It is true, they had heard in general, that all
those nations were to be destroyed, but they were still at liberty to
make a compact with a single woman, who had voluntarily abandoned her
countrymen. But we shall afterwards meet with a far easier solution,
namely, that while the Israelites, by the divine command, exhorted all
whom they attacked, to surrender, by holding out the hope of pardon, the
blinded nations obstinately refused the peace thus offered, because God
had decreed to destroy all of them. But while all, in general, were
hardened to their destruction, it follows that Rahab was exempted by
special privilege, and might escape in safety, while the others
perished. Joshua, therefore, judged wisely, that a woman who had
voluntarily gone over to the Church, was rescued thus early, not without
the special grace of God. The case of the father and the whole family
is, indeed, different, but seeing they all spontaneously abjure their
former state, they confirm the stipulation which Rahab had made for
their safety, by the promptitude of their obedience.

<span id="ix.ii-p26"></span>Moreover, let us learn from the example of
Joshua, that we do not sufficiently attest our probity, by refraining
from violating our promise intentionally and of set purpose, unless we
also diligently exert ourselves to secure its performance. He not only
allows Rahab to be delivered by her guests, but is careful to guard
against her sustaining any injury in the first tumult; and to make the
messengers more diligent in performing their office, he reminds them
that they had promised with the intervention of an oath.

<span id="ix.ii-p27"></span><span id="ix.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p28"></span>**23.** *And the young men that were spies
went in,* etc God, doubtless, wished those to be safe, whose minds he
thus inclined to embrace deliverance. Had it been otherwise, they would
have rejected it not less proudly, and with no less scorn than the two
sons-in-law of Lot. But a still better provision is made for them, when,
by being placed without the camp, they receive a strict injunction to
abandon their former course of life.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) For had they been immediately admitted
and allowed to mix indiscriminately with the people, the thought of
their impurity might never, perhaps, have occurred to them, and they
might thus have continued to indulge in it. Now when they are placed
apart, that they may not, by their infection, taint the flock, they are
impressed with a feeling of shame, which may urge them to serious
conversion.

<span id="ix.ii-p30"></span>It cannot be meant that they were thus set
apart for safety, lest any one in the crowd might have risen up
violently against them: for they would have been received by all with
the greatest favor and gladness, whereas they might have been attacked
in a solitary place more easily, and even with impunity. Their impurity,
therefore, was brought visibly before them, that they might not while
polluted come rashly forward into the holy meeting, but rather might be
accustomed by this rudimentary training to change their mode of life.
For it is added shortly after, that they dwelt in the midst of the
people; in other words, having been purged from their defilement’s, they
began to be regarded in the very same light as if they had originally
belonged to the race of Abraham. In short, the meaning is, that after
they had made a confession of their previous impurity, they were
admitted indiscriminately along with others. By this admission, Rahab
gained one of the noblest fruits of her faith.

<span id="ix.ii-p31"></span><span id="ix.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p32"></span>**26.** *And Joshua adjured them,* etc This
adjuration, then, was not merely to have effect for one day, but to warn
posterity through all ages that that city had been taken only by divine
power. He wished, therefore, that the ruins and devastation should exist
for ever as a kind of trophy; because the rebuilding of it would have
been equivalent to an erasure effacing the miracle. In order, therefore,
that the desolate appearance of the place might keep the remembrance of
the divine power and favor alive among posterity, Joshua pronounces a
heavy curse upon any one who should again build the ruined city. From
this passage we gather that the natural torpidity of men requires the
aid of stimulants to prevent them from burying the divine favors in
oblivion; and hence this spectacle, wherein the divine agency was made
conspicuous to the people, was a kind of indirect censure of their
ingratitude.

<span id="ix.ii-p33"></span>The substance of the imprecation is, that if
any one ever attempt to rebuild Jericho he may be made sensible by the
unpropitious and mournful result that he had done a cursed and
abominable work. For to lay the foundations in his first-born, were just
as if he were to cast forth his son to perish, crushed and buried
beneath the mass of stones; and to set up the gates in his younger son,
is the same thing as to plan an edifice which could not be erected
without causing the death of a son. Thus he who should dare to make the
insane attempt is condemned in his own offspring. Nor did Joshua utter
this curse at his own suggestion; he was only the herald of celestial
vengeance.

<span id="ix.ii-p34"></span>This makes it the more monstrous that among
the people of God a man should have been found, whom that fearful curse,
couched in formal terms, could not restrain from sacrilegious temerity.
In the time of Ahab (<span id="ix.ii-p34.1"></span>[1Ki
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034)<span id="ix.ii-p34.1"></span>.md)
arose Hiel, a citizen of Bethel, who dared, as it were avowedly, to
challenge God in this matter; but the Sacred History at the same time
testifies, that the denunciation which God had pronounced by the mouth
of Joshua did not fail of its effect; for Hiel founded the new Jericho
in Abiram his first-born, and set up its gates in his younger son Segub,
and thus learned in the destruction of his offspring what it is to
attempt anything against the will and in opposition to the command of
God.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc07008.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="ix.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p43"></span> The Septuagint has <span
id="ix.i-p43.1"></span>συγκεκλεισμένη καὶ ὠχυρωμένη, “completely closed
and made sure, by being barred or barricaded.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc07008.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="ix.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p49"></span> French, “<span id="ix.i-p49.1"></span>De ne
dire mot, ne faire aucun bruit;” “Not to speak a word, not to make a
noise.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc07008.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="ix.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p51"></span> French, “<span id="ix.i-p51.1"></span>Mais
je l’ay traduit par un terme plus accoustume a la langue Francoise;”
“But here I have translated it by a term more commonly used in the
French language.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc07008.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p22"></span> In confirmation of the views thus admirably
expressed, it is not out of place to add those of the profoundest and
most philosophical English theologians on the same subject. Bishop
Butler, in his Analogy, Part 2, chapter 3, after saying that “it is that
province of reason to judge of the morality of Scripture; *i.e.*, not
whether it contains things different from what we should have expected
from a wise, just, and good Being — but whether it contains things
plainly contradictory to wisdom, justice, or goodness; to what the light
of nature teaches us of God,” continues thus: “I know nothing of this
sort objected against Scripture, excepting such objections as are formed
upon suppositions which would equally conclude, that the constitution of
nature is contradictory to wisdom, justice, or goodness: which most
certainly it is not. Indeed there are some particular precepts in
Scripture, given to particular persons, requiring actions, which would
be immoral or vicious, were it not for such precepts. But it is easy to
see, that all these are of such a kind, as that the precept changes the
whole nature of the case and of the action: and both constitutes and
shows that not to be unjust or immoral, which, prior to the precept,
must have appeared, and really have been so: which well may be, since
none of these precepts are contrary to immutable morality. If it were
commanded to cultivate the principles, and act from the spirit of
treachery, ingratitude, cruelty; the command would not alter the nature
of the case, or of the action, in any of these instances. But it is
quite otherwise in precepts, which require only the doing an external
action: for instance, taking away the property or life of any. For men
have no right to either life or property, but what arises solely from
the grant of God. When this grant is revoked, they cease to have any
right at all in either: and when this revocation is made known, as
surely it is possible it may be, it must cease to be unjust to deprive
them of either. And though a course of external acts, which, without
command, would be immoral, must make an immoral habit, yet a few
detached commands have no such natural tendency. I thought proper to say
thus much of the few Scripture precepts which require, not vicious
actions, but actions which would have been vicious had it not been for
such precepts: because they are sometimes weakly urged as immoral, and
great weight is laid upon objections drawn from them. But to me there
seems no difficulty at all in these precepts, but what arises from their
being offences; *i.e.*, from their being liable to be perverted, as,
indeed, they are, by wicked designing men, to serve the most horrid
purposes, and, perhaps, to mislead the weak and enthusiastic.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc07008.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p29"></span> French, “<span id="ix.ii-p29.1"></span>Car
combien qu’il y ait en cela de la severite, toutes fois c’est un bon
moyen par lequel ils sont appelez a renoncer a leur vie precedente;”
“For though there is severity in this, it is, however a good method of
calling upon them to renounce their previous life.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc07008.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="ix.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p35"></span> This rebuilding by Hiel on the very site of
the ancient city, took place, according to the ordinary chronology, 520
years after Joshua pronounced the curse. It would seem, however, that
another Jericho had been built at a much earlier period, not actually on
the former site which, while the memory of the curse remained, was
probably avoided, but at no great distance from it. Of this fact, the
mention made of Jericho in <span id="ix.ii-p35.1"></span>[Jos
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021.md)<span id="ix.ii-p35.1"></span>,
as one of the cities of Benjamin, is not decisive, because it may have
been intended to indicate merely a locality, and not an actually
existing city, nor is it absolutely certain that the “city of palm
trees” which Eglor captured, (<span id="ix.ii-p35.2"></span>[Jud
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#013)<span id="ix.ii-p35.2"></span>.md)
was a rebuilt Jericho, though by that name Jericho was generally known.
Its existence, however, at least a century before Hiel, is clearly
established by the directions given to David’s ambassadors, after their
insulting treatment by the king of Ammon, “to tarry at Jericho.” (<span
id="ix.ii-p35.3"></span>[2Sa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#005.md)<span
id="ix.ii-p35.3"></span>) It may be worth while briefly to glance at the
subsequent history of Hiel’s sacrilegious city. As if the penalty of
rebuilding had been fully paid by the exemplary punishment inflicted on
the founder, the curse appears to have been withdrawn, and in the course
of about twenty years we learn that it had not only been selected as a
school of the prophets, (<span id="ix.ii-p35.4"></span>[2Ki
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#005)<span id="ix.ii-p35.4"></span>,.md)
but received a very important addition to its other attractions as a
residence by the miraculous cure of its waters by Elisha. (<span
id="ix.ii-p35.5"></span>[2Ki
2:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#018.md)<span
id="ix.ii-p35.5"></span>.) Its inhabitants, on the return from the
Babylonish captivity, are mentioned as having assisted in rebuilding the
walls of Jerusalem. (<span id="ix.ii-p35.6"></span>[Ne
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002)<span id="ix.ii-p35.6"></span>.md) At
a later period Jericho was fortified by the Syrian general Bacchides, or
rather received from him additions to its previously existing
fortifications, (<span id="ix.ii-p35.7"></span>[1Ma
9:50](../../../bib/apo/ma1009.htm#050)<span id="ix.ii-p35.7"></span>.md)
but does not seem to have acquired very much importance till the time of
Herod the Great, who, after capturing and sacking it, rebuilt it in a
much more magnificent form, and erected in it a splendid palace, where
he often resided and ultimately died. It also became a favorite
residence of his son but by the display of his miraculous agency. It
appears in the latter period of the Roman empire to have ranked as one
of the chief cities of Palestine. The general devastation of the country
on the dissolution of that empire effected its final ruin, and its site
is now only doubtfully represented by a miserable village called Riha,
containing from 200 to 300 souls. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7](cc07009.md)
