[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07010)  [Next](cc07012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And it came to pass, when all the
kings which *were* on this side Jordan, in the hills, and in the
valleys, and in all the coasts of the great sea over against Lebanon,
the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite,
and the Jebusite, heard *thereof,*

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quum autem audissent omnes reges qui
erant trans Jordanem in monte, et in planitie, et in toto tractu marls
magni e regione Libani, Hitthaeus, Amorrhaeus, Chananaeus, Pherisaeus,
Hivaeus, et Jebusaeus,

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** That they gathered themselves
together, to fight with Joshua and with Israel, with one accord.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Congregaverunt se pariter ad pugnandum
cum Josue et Israel uno consensu.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And when the inhabitants of Gibeon
heard what Joshua had done unto Jericho and to Ai,

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Habitatores vero Gibeon au-dientes
quod fecerat Josue urbi Jericho et Hai,

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4.** They did work wilily, and went and
made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their
asses, and wine-bottles, old, and rent, and bound up;

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Egerunt etiam ipsi callide. Nam
abierunt et finxerunt se legatos esse, et tulerunt saccos vetustos, in
suis asinis, et utres vini vestustos, et ruptos ac colligatos,

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And old shoes and clouted upon their
feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread of their provision
was dry *and* mouldy.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et calceamenta vetusta, et resarta in
pedibus suis, et vestes re. tustas super se, et torus panis viatici
eorum aridus ac mucidus.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And they went to Joshua unto the camp
at Gilgal, and said unto him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from
a far country; now therefore make yea league with us.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Perrexerunt ergo ad Josuam in castra
in Gilgal, dixeruntque ei et viris Israel, E terra longinqua venimus,
itaque nunc percutite nobiscum foedus.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the men of Israel said unto the
Hivites, Peradventure you dwell among us; and how shall we make a league
with you?

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Tune responderunt viri Israel ad
Hivaeum, Forte in medio mei tu habitas, et quomodo percutiam tocum
foedus?

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And they said unto Joshua, We *are*
thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who *are* you? and from whence
come you?

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**8.** At illi dixerunt ad Josuam, Servi tui
sumus. Quibus ait Josua, Quinam estis, et unde venistis?

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And they said unto him, From a very
far country thy servants are come because of the name of the Lord thy
God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Responderunt ei, E terra longinqua
valde venerunt servi tui in nomine Jehovae Dei tui. Audivimus enim famam
ejus, et quaecunque fecit in AEgypto,

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And all that he did to the two kings
of the Amorites, that *were* beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon,
and to Og king of Bashan, which *was* at Ashtaroth.

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Quaecunque item fecit duobus regibus
Amorrhaei, qui erant trans Jordanem, Sihon regi Hesebon, et Og regi
Basan in Astaroth.

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**11.** Wherefore our elders, and all the
inhabitants of our country, spoke to us, saying, Take victuals with you
for the journey, and go to meet them, and say unto them, We *are* your
servants: therefore now make yea league with us.

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Dixeruntque nobis seniores nostri,
et emnes habitatores terrae nostrae, Tollite in manu vestra escam pro
itinere, et ite in occursum eorum, ac dicite illis, Servi vestri sumus,
et nunc percutite nobiscum foedus.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**12.** This our bread we took hot *for* our
provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go unto you; but
now, behold, it is dry, and it is mouldy:

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Iste est panis noster, calidum pro
viatico paravimus e domibus nostris quo die egressi sumus ut veniremus
ad vos, nunc autem aruit, et siccus est.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>**13.** And these bottles of wine which we
filled were new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and
our shoes are become old by reason of the very long journey.

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Et isti sunt utres vini, quos
impleverimus novos, et ecce rupti sunt. Et ista vestimenta nostra, et
calceamenta nostra vetustate attrita sunt ob longum iter.

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And the men took of their victuals,
and asked not *counsel* at the mouth of the Lord.

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Sumpserunt ergo viri de viatico
eorum, et os Jehovae non interrogaverunt.

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Joshua made peace with them, and
made a league with them, to let them live: and the princes of the
congregation swear unto them.

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et fecit cum eis Josue pa-cem, et
percussit cum eis foedus quod sineret cos vivere, juraveruntque eis
principes congregationis.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span><span id="xii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>**1.** *And it came to pass when all the
kings,* etc. As the arrival of the people was well known to these kings
from the very first, it is certain that their minds were intoxicated
from above with security or lethargy, so that they did not forthwith
league together to oppose them. It implied excessive stupor not to
provide for themselves till they were violently roused to exertion by
the overthrow of two cities.  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) For
as the war was common, it was a kind of voluntary surrender to send no
aid to their neighbors, nay, to have no army ready, which might make a
powerful impression for their defense. But in this way God spared the
weakness of his people, to whom the combined forces of so many nations
would have caused no small fear.

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>It is certain, then, that by the sloth and
torpor of their enemies, the Israelites were rendered more expeditious.
For an interval was, in the meanwhile, given them to compose themselves,
and thus those whom the mere name of enemies might have alarmed, prepare
leisurely to encounter them.  <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) In
the same way, although the reprobate are desirous, by every possible
device, to destroy the Church, God, to take away their power of hurting
her, scatters and confounds their counsels, nay, destroys their spirit.
 <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) On the other hand, these nations
display their frantic audacity. Instead of being overcome by manifest
miracle, they continue to rage like wild beasts against the unassailable
power of God. A report of the taking of Jericho had reached them. Had it
been overthrown by the counsel, or the acting, or the prowess, or the
engines of men? Nay, the walls had fallen of their own accord. With what
confidence then can they league to take up arms against heaven?

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span><span id="xii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span>**3.** *And when the inhabitants of Gibeon
heard, etc.* The inhabitants of Gibeon alone rejecting the proposal to
make war have recourse to fraud, and endeavor to obtain peace by
pretending to live at a great distance. To make such an attempt, was
very odious to their neighbors, because it was, in a manner, to make a
schism among them, to open a door to the Israelites, and weaken the
strength of their allies. And though blame is justly due to the foolish
credulity of Joshua and the rulers, who were under no obligation to
bargain rashly in regard to a matter not properly investigated, *yet*
the Lord, who is wont to bring light out of darkness, turned it to the
advantage of his people; for it procured them an interval of relaxation,
while they halted in a tranquil district.

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span>The Gibeonites, indeed, judged rightly and
prudently, when they resolved to bear anything sooner than provoke God
more against them, by a vain resistance. But the employment of fraud and
illicit arts, to *circumvent* those whose favor and protection they
desired to enjoy, was no less absurd and ridiculous than at variance
with reason and equity. For what could be the stability of a league
which was founded in nothing but gross fraud? They pretend that they are
foreigners who had come from a far distant country. Joshua, therefore,
is bargaining with mere masks, and contracts no obligation except in
accordance with their words. Hence the craft by which they insinuated
themselves ought not to have availed them. Still, as a great degree of
integrity yet existed among men, they deemed it enough to obtain an oath
even extorted by fraud, feeling fully persuaded, that the people of
Israel would not violate it.

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span>The expression, that they too acted
cunningly, is erroneously supposed by some to contain an allusion to the
stratagem which Joshua had employed in deceiving the citizens of Ai no
less inaccurately do others make it refer to the time of Jacob, whose
sons, Simeon and Levi,  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) had
treacherously destroyed the Sichemites. (<span
id="xii.i-p43.2"></span>[Ge 34](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#000)<span
id="xii.i-p43.2"></span>) The antithesis is merely between the hostile
preparations of the kings and the secret wiles with which the Gibeonites
accosted Joshua. Accordingly, after it is stated, that some had leagued
with the intention of trying the result of open war, the trick of the
Gibeonites is subjoined, and hence the meaning is, that Joshua had to do
not only with professed enemies, who had gathered themselves together to
battle, but with the crafty dissimulation of one nation.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span>It is asked, however, why the Gibeonites
labored so anxiously in a matter which was not at all necessary? For we
shall see elsewhere that the Israelites were ordered to offer peace to
all, that *they* might thereafter have a just and legitimate cause for
declaring war. But as it was everywhere rumored, that they were seeking
a permanent settlement in the land of Canaan, (which they could not
obtain except by expelling the inhabitants,) the Gibeonites conclude
that there is no means of binding them to mercy except by imposing upon
them in some way or other; as they would never have spontaneously and
knowingly allowed the land which they had invaded to be occupied by
others. Nay, as it was known that they had been commanded to destroy
all, they had no alternative left but to have recourse to fraud, as all
hope of obtaining safety was otherwise taken away. And for this reason
they shortly after ask pardon for a fraud wrung from them by necessity.

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span>Here, however, a question arises; as the
Israelites object that they are not at liberty to make any paction with
the nations of Canaan, but are bound to exterminate them utterly. There
is certainly a discrepancy between the two things — to exhort to
submission, and at the same time refuse to admit suppliants and
volunteers. But although God required that the laws of war should be
observed according to use and wont, and that, therefore, peace should be
offered on condition of submitting, he merely wished to try the minds of
those nations, that they might bring destruction upon themselves by
their own obstinacy. At the same time, it was intimated to the
Israelitish people, that they must destroy them; and hence the
conclusion necessarily followed, that those who dwelt in the land of
Canaan could not be tolerated, and that it was unlawful to make a
covenant with them.

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span>We shall afterwards find both things
distinctly expressed, viz., that all persisted in carrying on war,
because it had been the divine intention that their hearts should be
hardened, and that they should perish. It was, therefore, a legitimate
inference that those who were doomed to death could not be preserved. If
any one object that the Gibeonites, who voluntarily applied for peace,
were therefore exceptions, I answer, that the Israelites were not at
present considering that formal custom which produced no result, but are
merely attending to the promise and the command of God. Hence it is,
that they allow no hope to remain, because they had been simply and
precisely commanded to purge the land by putting *every* individual to
death, and to succeed to the place of those they had slain.

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span><span id="xii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span>**6.** *And they went to Joshua,* etc. I
have said that in strict law, a covenant of this description was null
and void. For when they obtain their prayer, what is stipulated but just
that they should be kept safe, provided they come from a distant and
remote region of the globe? And the oftener they reiterate the same
falsehood, the more do they annul a compact elicited by fraud, since its
true meaning only amounts to this, that the Israelites will offer no
molestation to a foreign people, living at a remote distance. This is
shown to be more especially the meaning, from the fact, that the
Israelites expressly exclude all the inhabitants of the land of Canaan.
They could not, therefore, gain anything by the fraud. Nor are they more
assisted by making a fallacious pretext of the name of God, and thus
throwing a kind of mist over the mind of Joshua. They pretend that they
had come in the name of God; as if they were professing to give glory to
God, even the God of Israel; inasmuch as there is a tacit rejection of
the superstitions to which they had been accustomed. For if it is true,
that they had come, moved by the faith of the miracles which had been
performed in Egypt, they concede supreme power to the God of Israel,
though to them a God unknown.

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span><span id="xii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span>**14.** *And the men took of their victuals,
etc.* Some commentators here have recourse to the insipid fictions that
they ate the bread, to ascertain from the taste whether it were stale
from age, or that they confirmed the covenant by a feast. The words
rather, in my opinion, are an indirect censure of their excessive
credulity in having, on slight grounds acquiesced in a fabulous
narrative, and in having attended merely to the bread, without
considering that the fiction was devoid of color. And, certainly, had
not their senses been blunted, many things would have instantly occurred
to refute the Gibeonites.  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) But as
it sometimes happens, that the most piercing *eyes* are dazzled by an
empty spectacle, they are more severely condemned for not having
ascertained the pleasure of God. The remedy was at hand, had they
attempted nothing without consulting the oracle. It was a matter
deserving of careful inquiry, and it was therefore a sign of gross
*carelessness,* when a priest was ready to seek an answer from God, by
means of Urim and Thummim, to decide rashly in an obscure case, as if
they had no means of obtaining advice. Their rashness was the less
excusable, from being combined with such supine neglect of the grace of
God.

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
9:16-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#016)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**16.** And it came to pass, at the end of
three days after they had made a league with them, that they heard that
they *were* their neighbors, and *that* they dwelt among them.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**16.** Post tres autem dies a foedere cum
illis inito audierunt, quod pro-pinqui essent ipsis, et in medio
ipso-rum habitarent.

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span>**17.** And the children of Israel
journeyed, and came unto their cities on the third day. Now their cities
*were* Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kirjathjearim.

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**17.** Profectique sunt filii Israel, et
venerunt ad urbes ipsorum die tertio. Urbes autem eorum erant Gibeon,
Chephirat, Beeroth, Ciriatjearlm.

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>**18.** And the children of Israel smote
them not, because the princes of the congregation had sworn unto them by
the Lord God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the
princes.

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span>**18.** Et non percusserunt eos filii
Israel, eo quod jurassent eis princi-pes congregationis per Jehovam Deum
Israel: et murmuravit tota congregatio contra principes.

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span>**19.** But all the princes said unto all
the congregation, We have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel: now
therefore we may not touch them.

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span>**19.** Tunc dixerunt omnes principes ad
totam congregationem, Nos juravimus eis per Jehovam Deum Israel, ideo
mine non possumus attingere eos.

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span>**20.** This we will do to them; we will
even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we
swear unto them.

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>**20.** Hoc faciemus eis, servabimus eos
vivos, ne sit contra nos ira propter jusjurandum quod juravimus eis.

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>**21.** And the princes said unto them, Let
them live; but let them be hewers of wood, and drawers of water, unto
all the congregation; as the princes had promised them.

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span>**21.** Dixerunt itaque illis principes,
Vivant, et caedant ligna, et fodiant aquam toti congregationi,
quemadmodum loquuti sunt eis cuncti principes.

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span>**22.** And Joshua called for them, and he
spoke unto them, saying, Wherefore have you beguiled us, saying, We
*are* very far from you; when you dwell among us?

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>**22.** Vocavit itaque cos Josue, et
loquutus est ad eos, dicendo: Ut quid decepistis nos, dicendo, Remoti
sumus a vobis valde, cum in medio nostri habitefts?

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span>**23.** Now therefore you *are* cursed; and
there shall none of you be freed from being bond-men, and hewers of
wood, and drawers of water, for the house of my God.

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>**23.** Nunc ergo maledicti estis, nec
delebuntur ex vobis servi, et caedentes ligna, et fodientes aquam pro
domo Dei met.

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span>**24.** And they answered Joshua, and said,
Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that the Lord thy God
commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all
the inhabitants of the land from before you, therefore we were sore
afraid of our lives because of you, and have done this thing.

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>**24.** Qui responderunt ad Josuam, atque
dixerunt, Cum renunciando renunciatum fuit servis tuis quomodo
praeceperat Jehova Deus tuus Most servo suo ut daret vobis terram, et
disperderet omnes habitatores terrae a facie vestra, timuimus valde
animabus nostris a facie vestra, et fecimus istud.

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span>**25.** And now, behold, we *are* in thine
hand: as it seems good and right unto thee to do unto us, do.

<span id="xii.ii-p21"></span>**25.** Et nunc ecce sumus in manu tua,
sicut placet, et sicut rectum est in oculis tuis, ut facias nobis,
facies.

<span id="xii.ii-p22"></span>**26.** And so did he unto them, and
delivered them out of the hand of the children of Israel, that they slew
them not.

<span id="xii.ii-p23"></span>**26.** Et fecit eis ita, liberavitque eos
de manu filiorum Israel, nec interfecerunt eos.

<span id="xii.ii-p24"></span>**27.** And Joshua made them that day
hewers of wood, and drawers of water, for the congregation, and for the
altar of the Lord, even unto this day, in the place which he should
choose.

<span id="xii.ii-p25"></span>**27.** Constituitque eos Josue eo die
caesores lignorum, et haustores aquaq congregationi, et altari Jehovae
usque in huuc diem in loco quem elegerit.

<span id="xii.ii-p26"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p27"></span><span id="xii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p28"></span>**16.** *And it came to pass,* etc. The
chastisement of their levity by the discovery of the fraud, three days
after, must, by the swiftness of the punishment, have made them more
sensible of the shame and disgrace. For it was thus known, that through
sloth and lethargy, they had very stupidly fallen into error from not
having taken the trouble to inquire into a matter almost placed before
their eyes. Their marching quietly through that region, entering cities
without trouble, and finding free means of sustenance, was owing to the
paternal indulgence of *God,* who not only pardons their fault, but
causes that which might justly have been injurious to turn out to their
good. Here it is related that the children of Israel did not act in a
hostile manner in that region, because the Gibeonites had received a
promise of safety confirmed by an oath.

<span id="xii.ii-p29"></span>Now two questions arise — *first,* Whether
the children of Israel, who had no intention whatever to pledge their
faith to impostors, had contracted any obligation? and, *secondly,*
Whether it was not in the option of the people to rescind a promise
which their leaders had foolishly and erroneously made? In regard to the
general position, the obligation of an oath ought to be held in the
greatest sacredness, so that we may not, under the pretext of error,
resile from pactions, even from those in which we have been deceived,
since the sacred name of God is more precious than the wealth of a whole
world.  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) Hence though a man may have
sworn with little consideration, no loss or expense will free him from
performance. I have no doubt, that in this sense David says, (<span
id="xii.ii-p30.5"></span>[Ps 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004)<span
id="xii.ii-p30.5"></span>,) that the true worshippers of God, if they
have sworn to their hurt, change not, because they will bear loss sooner
than expose the name of God to contempt, by retracting their promises.

<span id="xii.ii-p31"></span>I conclude, therefore, that if a private
interest only is to be affected, everything which we may have promised
by oath must be performed. And it is apparent from the words, that the
Israelites were afraid lest they should expose the name of their God to
disgrace among the nations of Canaan. For I think there is an emphasis
in the expression — because they had sworn by the God of Israel. But a
special reason left the Israelites at liberty to recede from the
deceitful compact; for they had not only given up their own right, but
improperly departed from the command of God, with which it was not
lawful to interfere in the smallest iota. It was not in their power
either to spare the vanquished or enact laws of surrender, whereas they
now transact as if the business had been committed to them. We see,
accordingly, that they twice profaned the name of God, while, under
pretence of the oath, they persevered in defending what they had
foolishly promised.

<span id="xii.ii-p32"></span>In the deference which the common people
pay to their leaders, by abstaining from all violence to the Gibeonites,
we behold the integrity of the age. Elsewhere it would have readily
occurred to elude the promise by asserting that a whole people were not
bound by the agreement of a few individuals, as the Romans did, in
repudiating the Caudine peace, to which only the consuls, legates, and
tribunes had sworn without the orders of the senate and people. The more
praise, therefore, is due to that rude simplicity in which the religious
obligation prevailed more than the too subtle arguments which the
greater part of men in the present day approve and applaud. The people
are indeed indignant that their leaders had taken more upon them than
they were entitled to do, but their moderation does not allow them to
proceed beyond murmur and noise.  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)

<span id="xii.ii-p34"></span><span id="xii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p35"></span>**20.** *This we will do to them,* etc.
Although, according to agreement, they give the Gibeonites their lives,
*they* ratify the whole covenant only in part. For while the Gibeonites
were entitled to be made perfectly secure, they are deprived of liberty,
which is dearer than life. From this we infer that Joshua and the others
had, as in a case of doubt and perplexity, devised a kind of middle
course, so as not to make the oath altogether void. The principal object
of this device was to appease the multitude: at the same time, while
they were indignant at having been imposed upon by the Gibeonites, they
punished the fraud, and did not allow impunity to increase their
derision. It was a harsh condition, in this arrangement, that the
Gibeonites were not only doomed to servile labors but withdrawn from
their homes, to lead a vagrant and wandering life. The *office* of
scullions imposed on them was no less mean than laborious, but the
worst, of all was to hew wood and draw water, wherever God should be
pleased to station the ark.

<span id="xii.ii-p36"></span><span id="xii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p37"></span>**22.** *And Joshua called for them, etc.*
As he was to deliver a sad and severe sentence, he premises that the
resolution involves no injustice, because nothing would be more
unbecoming than to allow tricks and wiles to be profitable to those who
employ them. He therefore first expostulates with them for having warded
off danger by falsehood, and then immediately pronounces them cursed. By
this I understand that he throws the blame of their servitude upon
themselves, because they bear nothing worse than they have deserved by
their guile or perfidy; as if he had said that the ground of the
condemnation which he pronounces is in themselves. It is hard, indeed,
that no end is assigned to the labors to which they are doomed, for this
is implied in the words, Slaves shall never cease from among you: but he
declares that no injustice is done them, as they were cursed of their
own accord, or by their own fault. They, indeed, extenuate the offense,
by alleging the necessity which compelled them, and yet they decline not
the punishment, which they acknowledge to be justly inflicted. It may
indeed be, that overcome with fear, they refused nothing, nay, calmly
and flatteringly  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) acquiesced in the
terms imposed on them. For what could they gain by disputing? I have no
doubt, however, that as they were conscious of having done wrong, and
had no means of completely exculpating themselves, they considered
themselves very humanely dealt with, so long as their lives were saved,
 <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc07011.htm#fr_79) <span
id="xii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span> French, “<span id="xii.i-p35.1"></span>Car
c’estoit une stupidite par trop grande de ne se point tenir sur ses
gardes, jusqu’a tant quils fussent resveillez comme par force de leur
paresse oyans la ruine et le sac de deux villes;” “For it implied
excessive stupidity not to stand upon their guard, until they were
awakened, as if by force, from their indolence, on hearing of the run
and sacking of two towns.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc07011.htm#fr_80) <span
id="xii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span> To encounter them.” Latin, “<span
id="xii.i-p37.1"></span>Ad eos excipiendos.” French, “To give them a
good reception, and repulse them bravely.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc07011.htm#fr_81) <span
id="xii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span> French, “<span
id="xii.i-p38.1"></span>Dissippe et renverse leur conseils, entreprises,
et machinations: et mesme il leur oste le sens et l’entendement;”
“Dissipates and overturns their counsels, enterprises, and machinations;
and even deprives them of sense and understanding.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc07011.htm#fr_82) <span
id="xii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span> French, “<span
id="xii.i-p43.1"></span>Duquel les trois enfans, assavoir, Ruben, Levi
et Simeon;” “Whose three sons, Reuben, Levi, and Simeon.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc07011.htm#fr_83) <span
id="xii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span> Nothing could be more gross than the
imposition thus practiced. The capital of the Gibeonites was not above
fourteen miles west from Jericho, and scarcely half that distance
south-west from Ai, where the Israelites had recently gained so signal a
victory, and it is therefore not improbable that the Israelites, while
pursuing the fugitives, had actually been within the territory which
their leaders now ignorantly believe to be so very distant, as to be
altogether beyond the limits of the promised land. The compliments paid
to their prowess so flattered their pride, and the alliance of a
powerful though distant nation held out the hope of so many advantages
in the further prosecution of their conquests, that they fell at once
into the snare, as if they had almost been willing to be deceived. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc07011.htm#fr_84) <span
id="xii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p30"></span> Calvin was well qualified, by his legal
education, to discuss the important question here raised, and it is
impossible to dispute the soundness of his general positions in regard
to it, both here and in the previous section of the Commentary on this
chapter. There is, however, an appearance of inconsistency in some of
the statements. In the section beginning with the third verse, he says
in Latin, “<span id="xii.ii-p30.1"></span>Cum larvis ergo paciscitur
Josue, nec quidquam obligationis contrahit, nisi secundum eorum verba;”
or as it is in French, “<span id="xii.ii-p30.2"></span>Josue donques
traitte alliance avec des masques ou phantosmes et n’est nullement
oblige, sinon suivant leurs paroles;” “Joshua, then, makes an alliance
with masks or phantoms, and is in no way bound, except according to
their words.” Again, in the section beginning with verse the sixth, he
says, “<span id="xii.ii-p30.3"></span>Dixi summo jure evanidum et
irritum fuisse ejusmodi foedus,” or as it is in French, “<span
id="xii.ii-p30.4"></span>J’ay dit qu’a la rigueur de droit une telle
alliance estoit nulle et cassee;” “I have said, that in strict law such
an alliance was null and void.” And he gives the reason in the form of a
question, when he asks, “What do they (the Gibeonites) gain when their
request is granted, but just that they are to be kept safe, provided
they have come from a distant country?” But if the Gibeonites did not
gain, or, in other words, were not entitled to demand anything, it is
perfectly obvious that the Israelites could not be bound to grant
anything. They were the two parties to a mutual contract, in which the
claims of the one party were exactly the counterpart or measure of the
obligations of the other. It might have been expected, therefore, that
after Calvin had decided that the Gibeonites had no claim, he would, of
course, have decided that the Israelites had incurred no obligation.
Here, however, when considering this latter point, he seems to change
his ground, by distinctly asserting, that we may not resile even from
pactions in which we have been deceived. The inconsistency, however, is
only apparent. He does not say that we are bound by such pactions, as if
they were valid in themselves, but he adverts to circumstances which may
lay us under a formal obligation to act as if we were bound by them. In
other words, he removes the case from a court of law into the court of
conscience, and thus brings it under the class of cases to which St.
Paul referred, when he drew a distinction between things lawful and
things expedient. Joshua and the elders had sworn rashly, but having by
so doing put the honor of the God of Israel, so to speak, in pledge,
they were bound, at whatever cost, to redeem it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc07011.htm#fr_85) <span
id="xii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p33"></span> French, “<span
id="xii.ii-p33.1"></span>Quand il ne passe point outre le murmure, et
qu’il se contente de cela;” “When they do not proceed beyond murmuring,
and rest contented with it.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc07011.htm#fr_86) <span
id="xii.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p38"></span> Latin, “<span id="xii.ii-p38.1"></span>Nec
sine assentatione;” “Nor without flattery.” French, “<span
id="xii.ii-p38.2"></span>et sans flatterie;” “And without flattery.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc07011.htm#fr_87) <span
id="xii.ii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p39"></span> Among the many pernicious consequences
resulting form this arrangement, was the formation of a degraded caste
in the heart of the Israelitish commonwealth, and the consequent
introduction of domestic slavery, in one of its worst forms. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](cc07012)
