[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc07000)  [Next](cc07002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

<span id="ii-p2"></span>The Commentary On Joshua was the last literary
labor of its venerable Author. When he engaged in it, his constitution,
which had never been strong, was completely worn out by excessive
exertion, and almost every line of it must have been dictated to his
amanuensis during momentary intervals of relief from severe bodily pain.
On this point we possess authentic documents which leave no room for
doubt.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>In a letter dated 30th November 1563, not quite
six months before his death, after alluding to the difficulty he felt in
continuing his studies, while both mind and body were exhausted by
sickness, he states that he had undertaken a Commentary on Joshua, in
compliance with the wishes of his friends, but had not then been able to
advance beyond the third Chapter, though he had endeavored to be as
brief as possible.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>Little more than two months after this letter
was written, on 6th February 1564, he made his appearance in the pulpit
for the last time; and on 10th March following, the complication of
diseases which too plainly indicated that his earthly career was about
to close, had become so alarming as to cause an entry in the Register of
Geneva in the following terms: — “<span id="ii-p4.1"></span>Arrete que
chacun prie Dieu pour la sante de M. Calvin, qui est indispose depuis
longtemps, et meme en danger de mort:” — “Decreed that every one pray to
God for the health of Mr. Calvin, who has been indisposed for a long
time, and even in danger of death.”

<span id="ii-p5"></span>Such are the circumstances in which this
Commentary was composed, and it is impossible, in reflecting on them,
not to admire the indomitable energy which Calvin displayed in
proceeding with his task, and in meeting the remonstrance’s of those who
would have withdrawn him from it, with the heroic exclamation, “Would
you that the Lord, when He comes, should find me idle!”

<span id="ii-p6"></span>A Work written at such a time, and in such a
spirit, might justly claim exemption from criticism; but it has no need
of indulgence, and can well afford to be judged by its own intrinsic
merits. Viewed merely as an intellectual effort, it displays all the
excellencies which characterize the other Commentaries of its
distinguished Author: viewed in a higher and better light, it is his
dying bequest to the Church — a solemn ratification of the whole System
of Doctrine which he had so long, so earnestly, and so successfully
promulgated.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>As an appropriate conclusion both to the present
Volume and the others which have preceded it, a valuable Tract, first
published in this country in 1845, has been appended. It contains a
Preface by the Rev. William Pringle, its original editor, an Essay from
the German of Professor Theoluck, and a series of Extracts from Writers
often differing widely from each other, but all concurring in a united
testimony to the greatness of Calvin’s talents, or the excellence of his
character. In the present reprint, the chief change consists in the
insertion of Additional Testimonies.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>The list of Calvin’s Writings, which completes
the present Volume, is in accordance with that furnished by his greatest
Biographer, Henri of Berlin, and will enable the reader to comprehend at
a single glance the amazing extent of his literary labors.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>H.B.  
December 30, 1854.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](cc07002.md)
