[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc07022)  [Next](cc07024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 21

<span id="xxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
21:1-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001.md)<span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then came near the heads of the
fathers of the Levites unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son
of Nun, and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children
of Israel;

<span id="xxiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Accesserunt autem principes patrum
Levitarum ad Eleazar sacerdotem, et ad Josue filium Nun, et ad principes
patrum tribuum filiorum Israel.

<span id="xxiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And they spoke unto them at Shiloh in
the land of Canaan, saying, The LORD commanded by the hand of Moses to
give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for our cattle.

<span id="xxiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Loquutique sunt ad eos in Silo in
terra Chanaan, dicendo, Jehova praecepit per manum Mosis ut daretis
nobis urbes ad habitandum, et suburbana earum pro animalibus nostris.

<span id="xxiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** And the children of Israel gave unto
the Levites out of their inheritance, at the commandment of the LORD,
these cities and their suburbs.

<span id="xxiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Dederunt ergo filii Israel Levitis de
haereditate sua, secundum sermonem Jehovae, urbes istas et suburbana
earum.

<span id="xxiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And the lot came out for the families
of the Kohathites: and the children of Aaron the priest, *which were* of
the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe
of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.

<span id="xxiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Egressa est autem sors per familias
Caethitarum: fueruntque filiis Aaron sacerdotis de Levitis, de tribu
Juda, et de tribu Simeon, et de tribu Benjamin per sortem, urbes
tredecim.

<span id="xxiv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the rest of the children of
Kohath *had* by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out
of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.

<span id="xxiv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Filiis autem Ceath reliquis, de
familiis tribus Ephraim, et de tribu Dan, et de dimidia tribu Manasse,
per sortem, urbes decem.

<span id="xxiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** And the children of Gershon *had* by
lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe
of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of
Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.

<span id="xxiv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Filiis vero Gerson de familiis
tribus Issachar, et de tribu Aser, et de tribu Nephthali, et de dimidia
tribu Manasse in Basan per sortem, urbes tredecim.

<span id="xxiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** The children of Merari by their
families *had* out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad,
and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.

<span id="xxiv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Filiis Merari per familias suas, de
tribu Ruben, et de tribu Gad, et de tribu Zabulon, urbes duodecim.

<span id="xxiv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the children of Israel gave by
lot unto the Levites these cities with their suburbs, as the LORD
commanded by the hand of Moses.

<span id="xxiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Dederunt, inquam, filii Israel
Levitis urbes has, et suburbana earum, sicut praeceperat Jehova per
manum Mosis, per sortem.

<span id="xxiv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And they gave out of the tribe of
the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon,
these cities which are *here* mentioned by name,

<span id="xxiv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Dederunt ergo de tribu filiorum
Juda, et de tribu filiorum Simeon, urbes istas quas vocavit nomine.

<span id="xxiv.i-p20"></span>**10.** Which the children of Aaron,
*being* of the families of the Kohathites, *who were* of the children of
Levi, had: for theirs was the first lot.

<span id="xxiv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Fueruntque filiis Aaron de familiis
Ceath, de filiis Levi: illis enim fuit sors prima.

<span id="xxiv.i-p22"></span>**11.** And they gave them the city of Arba
the father of Anak, which *city is* Hebron, in the hill *country* of
Judah, with the suburbs thereof round about it.

<span id="xxiv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Dederuntque eis Ciriath-arba patris
Anac (ipsa est Hebron) in monte Juda, et suburbana ejus per circuitum
ejus.

<span id="xxiv.i-p24"></span>**12.** But the fields of the city, and the
villages thereof, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his
possession.

<span id="xxiv.i-p25"></span>**12.** Agrum vero ejus urbis et villas
ejus dederunt Caleb filio Jephune in possessionem ejus.

<span id="xxiv.i-p26"></span>**13.** Thus they gave to the children of
Aaron the priest Hebron with her suburbs, *to be* a city of refuge for
the slayer; and Libnah with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.i-p27"></span>**13.** Filiis, inquam, Aaron sacerdotis
dederunt urbem refugii homicidae, Hebron, et suburbana ejus, et Libna et
suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.i-p28"></span>**14.** And Jattir with her suburbs, and
Eshtemoa with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et Jathir et suburbana ejus, et
Esthemoa et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.i-p30"></span>**15.** And Holon with her suburbs, and
Debir with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.i-p31"></span>**15.** Holon et suburbana ejus, et Debir
et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.i-p32"></span>**16.** And Ain with her suburbs, and
Juttah with her suburbs, *and* Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities
out of those two tribes.

<span id="xxiv.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et Ain et suburbana ejus, et Jutta
et suburbana ejus: et Bethsemes et suburbana ejus: urbes novem de duabus
tribubus istis.

<span id="xxiv.i-p34"></span>**17.** And out of the tribe of Benjamin,
Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.i-p35"></span>**17.** De tribu vero Benjamin, Gibeon et
suburbana ejus, et Geba et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.i-p36"></span>**18.** Anathoth with her suburbs, and
Almon with her suburbs; four cities.

<span id="xxiv.i-p37"></span>**18.** Anathoth et suburbana ejus, Almon
et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.i-p38"></span>**19.** All the cities of the children of
Aaron, the priests, *were* thirteen cities with their suburbs.

<span id="xxiv.i-p39"></span>**19.** Omnes urbes filiorum Aaron
sacerdotum, tredecim urbes et suburbana earum.

<span id="xxiv.i-p40"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.i-p41"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p42"></span>**1.** *Then came near the heads,* etc Here
we have at a later period a narrative of what ought to have preceded.
For no cities of refuge were appointed before they had been assigned to
the Levites. To this may be added what was formerly said, that Joshua
and Eleazar had made an end of dividing the land. Now, the land was not
truly divided till the habitation of the Levites was fixed. We must
understand, therefore, that when the lot was cast in the name of the ten
tribes, a reservation was made of cities in the land of Canaan for the
habitation of the Levites. Beyond the Jordan their portion had already
been assigned to them. But as the Levites come forward and request a
ratification of the divine grant, it is probable that they were
neglected till they pleaded their own cause. For so it is apt to happen,
every one being so attentive in looking after his own affairs that even
brethren are forgotten. It was certainly disgraceful to the people that
they required to be pulled by the ear, and put in mind of what the Lord
had clearly ordered respecting the Levites. But had they not demanded a
domicile for themselves, there was a risk of their being left to lie in
the open air; although, at the same time, we are permitted to infer that
the people erred more from carelessness and forgetfulness than from any
intention to deceive, as they make no delay as soon as they are
admonished; nay, they are praised for their obedience in that they did
what was just and right according to the word of the Lord.

<span id="xxiv.i-p43"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p44"></span>**4.** *And the lot came out for the
families,* etc Here is first described the number of cities of which we
shall have to speak by and bye. Secondly, it is distinctly said that the
lot fell out to the children of Aaron in the tribe of Judah. This did
not happen fortuitously, because God in his admirable counsel placed
them in that locality where he had determined to choose a temple for
himself. Thirdly, the narrative proceeds to give the exact names of the
cities, of which the first mentioned is Hebron, of which Caleb, with
great equanimity, allowed himself to be deprived. Should any one object
that the first city of all that ought to have been given them was
Jerusalem, where they were to have their future station, it is easy to
answer, that moderate sized cities were delivered to them as their
condition required. Moreover, Jerusalem was not then subjugated, as it
continued under the power of the Jebusites. In short, it would have been
absurd to assign a royal seat to priests. And their religion and faith
was the better proved by this, that they migrated of their own accord
from their native soil to devote their attention to sacred things. For
no priest performed the office without becoming a stranger. Their
weakness, however, was so far indulged by giving them a grant of
neighboring cities, that they might not have the fatigue of a long
journey in going to perform their function. Moreover, the giving of
thirteen cities for a habitation to one family, and that not very
numerous, confirms what I have elsewhere said, that the other tribes
possessed very many cities,  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174.md) of
which no mention is made; in a short time this will be more certainly
confirmed.

<span id="xxiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
21:20-45](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#020.md)<span
id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p2"></span>**20.** And the families of the children of
Kohath, the Levites which remained of the children of Kohath, even they
had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p3"></span>**20.** Familiis vero filiarum Cahath
Levitarum, qui residui erant de filiis Cahath (fuerunt autem urbes
sortis eorum de tribu Ephraim.)

<span id="xxiv.ii-p4"></span>**21.** For they gave them Shechem with her
suburbs in mount Ephraim, *to be* a city of refuge for the slayer; and
Gezer with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.ii-p5"></span>**21.** Dederunt, inquam, illis urbem
refugii homicidae Sechem, et suburbana ejus in monte Ephraim: et Geser
et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p6"></span>**22.** And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and
Bethhoron with her suburbs; four cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p7"></span>**22.** Et Cibsaim et suburbana ejus: et
Beth-horon et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p8"></span>**23.** And out of the tribe of Dan,
Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.ii-p9"></span>**23.** De tribu vero Dan, Elthece et
suburbana ejus: et Gibbethon et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p10"></span>**24.** Aijalon with her suburbs,
Gathrimmon with her suburbs; four cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p11"></span>**24.** Et Ajalon et suburbana ejus, et
Gath-rimmon et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p12"></span>**25.** And out of the half tribe of
Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs, and Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two
cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p13"></span>**25.** De dimidia vero tribu Manasse
Thaanach, et suburbana ejus: Gathrimmon et suburbana ejus: urbes duae.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p14"></span>**26.** All the cities *were* ten with
their suburbs for the families of the children of Kohath that remained.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p15"></span>**26.** Omnes urbes decem, et suburbana
earum, familiis filiorum Cahath residuis.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p16"></span>**27.** And unto the children of Gershon,
of the families of the Levites, out of the *other* half tribe of
Manasseh *they gave* Golan in Bashan with her suburbs, *to be* a city of
refuge for the slayer; and Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p17"></span>**27.** Porro filiis Gerson de familiis
Levitarum, de dimidia tribu Manasse urbem refugii homicidae, Golan in
Basan, et suburbana ejus, Beesthera et suburbana ejus: urbes duae.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p18"></span>**28.** And out of the tribe of Issachar,
Kishon with her suburbs, Dabareh with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.ii-p19"></span>**28.** De tribu Issachar, Cision et
suburbana ejus: Dabrath et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p20"></span>**29.** Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim
with her suburbs; four cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p21"></span>**29.** Iarmuth et suburbana ejus:
Engannim et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p22"></span>**30.** And out of the tribe of Asher,
Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.ii-p23"></span>**30.** De tribu autem Aser, Misal et
suburbana ejus: Abdon et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p24"></span>**31.** Helkath with her suburbs, and
Rehob with her suburbs; four cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p25"></span>**31.** Helcath et suburbana ejus, et
Rehob et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p26"></span>**32.** And out of the tribe of Naphtali,
Kedesh in Galilee with her suburbs, *to be* a city of refuge for the
slayer; and Hammothdor with her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs;
three cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p27"></span>**32.** De tribu vero Nephthaliurbem
refugii homicidae, Cedes in Galil et suburbana ejus: et Hamoth-dor et
suburbana ejus: et Carthan et suburbana ejus: urbes tres.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p28"></span>**33.** All the cities of the Gershonites
according to their families *were* thirteen cities with their suburbs.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p29"></span>**33.** Omnes urbes Gersonitarum per
familias suas, tredecim urbes, et suburbana earum.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p30"></span>**34.** And unto the families of the
children of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of
Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and Kartah with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.ii-p31"></span>**34.** Familiis autem filiorum Merari
Levitarum residuorum, de tribu Zabulon: Jocneam et suburbana ejus:
Cartha et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p32"></span>**35.** Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal
with her suburbs; four cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p33"></span>**35.** Dimnah et suburbana ejus, Nahalal
et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p34"></span>**36.** And out of the tribe of Reuben,
Bezer with her suburbs, and Jahazah with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.ii-p35"></span>**36.** De tribu vero Ruben, Beser et
suburbana ejus: et Jehasa et suburbana ejus.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p36"></span>**37.** Kedemoth with her suburbs, and
Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p37"></span>**37.** Cedemoth et suburbana ejus:
Mephaath et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p38"></span>**38.** And out of the tribe of Gad,
Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs, *to be* a city of refuge for the
slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,

<span id="xxiv.ii-p39"></span>**38.** Et de tribu Gad, urbem refugii
homicidae, Ramoth in Gileath et suburbana ejus: et Mahanaim et suburbana
ejus.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p40"></span>**39.** Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer
with her suburbs; four cities in all.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p41"></span>**39.** Hesbon et suburbana ejus: Jaazer
et suburbana ejus: urbes quatuor.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p42"></span>**40.** So all the cities for the children
of Merari by their families, which were remaining of the families of the
Levites, were *by* their lot twelve cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p43"></span>**40.** Omnes urbes filiorum Merari per
familias suas qui residui erant de familiis Levitarum, ut fuit sors
eorum, urbes duodecim.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p44"></span>**41.** All the cities of the Levites
within the possession of the children of Israel *were* forty and eight
cities with their suburbs.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p45"></span>**41.** Omnes urbes Levitarum, in medio
possessionis filiorum Israel, urbes quadraginta octo et suburbana earum.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p46"></span>**42.** These cities were every one with
their suburbs round about them: thus *were* all these cities.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p47"></span>**42.** Fuerunt urbes istae singulae, et
suburbana earum per circuitum ipsarum: sic omnibus urbibus istis.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p48"></span>**43.** And the LORD gave unto Israel all
the land which he swear to give unto their fathers; and they possessed
it, and dwelt therein.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p49"></span>**43.** Dedit itaque Jehova Israeli
universam terram de qua juraverat se daturum eam patribus eorum: et
possederunt eam, habitaveruntque in ea.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p50"></span>**44.** And the LORD gave them rest round
about, according to all that he swear unto their fathers: and there
stood not a man of all their enemies before them; the LORD delivered all
their enemies into their hand.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p51"></span>**44.** Requiem quoque dederit eis Jehova
in circuitu prosus ut juraverat Jehova patribus eorum: neque fuit
quisquam qui resisteret illis ex omnibus inimicis eorum: omnes inimicos
eorum tradidit Jehova in manum eorum.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p52"></span>**45.** There failed not ought of any good
thing which the LORD had spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to
pass.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p53"></span>**45.** Non cecidit ullum verbum ex omni
bono quod loquutus fuerat Jehova ad domum Israel, omnia evenerunt.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p54"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ii-p55"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p56"></span>**20.** *And the families of the children
of Kohath,* etc Why it was necessary that the Levites should be
dispersed among the different tribes, the reader may see in my
Commentaries on the Books of Moses. This dispersion had, indeed, been
imposed on their progenitor as a punishment for the cruelty and perfidy
of which he had been guilty toward the children of Shechem, but the
disgrace of it had been converted into the highest honor by their
appointment as a kind of guardians in every district to retain the
people in the pure worship of God. It is true, they were everywhere
strangers; but still it was with the very high dignity of acting as
stewards for God, and preventing their countrymen from revolting from
piety. This is the reason for stating so carefully how many cities they
obtained from each tribe; they were everywhere to keep watch, and
preserve the purity of sacred rites unimpaired.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p57"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p58"></span>**41.** *All the cities of the Levites,*
etc This passage more especially shows what I have already more than
once adverted to, that the boundaries of the other tribes were not so
confined as not to comprehend a far larger number of cities than is
actually mentioned. It is perfectly well known that Levi was the least
numerous of all the tribes. With what equity, then, could it have been
allowed to expand itself over four times the space allowed to the tribe
of Zebulun, which, though more populous, is mentioned as only possessing
twelve cities. Only sixteen are enumerated as belonging to the tribe of
Issachar, nineteen to the tribe of Naphtali, and twenty-two to the tribe
of Asher. It would surely have been an unequal division to give the
greater number of cities for habitation to the smaller population. Hence
we infer, that not only the villages which are here set down as
accessories of the cities were fit for habitation, but that other cities
also, of which no mention is made, were included. In short, the extent
of the lot of Levi makes it perfectly obvious how large and ample the
territories of the other tribes must have been.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p59"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p60"></span>**43.** *And the Lord gave unto Israel,*
etc Should any one raise a question as to this rest, the answer is easy.
The nations of Canaan were so completely overcome with fear, that they
thought they could not better consult their interest than by servility
flattering the Israelites, and purchasing peace from them on any terms.
 <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175.md) Plainly, therefore, the country
was subdued and rendered peaceful for habitation, since no one gave any
annoyance, or dared to entertain any hostile intentions, since there
were no threats, no snares, no violence, no conspiracies.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p62"></span>A second point, however, raises some
doubt,  <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176.md) namely, how the children
of Israel can be said to have been settled in the possession of the land
promised to them, and to have become masters of it, in such a sense that
in regard to the enjoyment of it, not one syllable of the promises of
God had failed. For we have already seen that many of the enemy were
intermingled with them. The divine intention was, that not one of the
enemy should be permitted to remain; on the other hand, the Israelites
do not drive out many, but admit them as neighbors, as if the
inheritance had been common to them; they even make pactions with them.
How then can these two things be reconciled, that God, as he had
promised, gave possession of the land to the people, and yet they were
excluded from some portion by the power or obstinate resistance of the
enemy?

<span id="xxiv.ii-p64"></span>In order to remove this appearance of
contradiction, it is necessary to distinguish between the certain,
clear, and steadfast faithfulness of God in keeping his promises, and
between the effeminacy and sluggishness of the people, in consequence of
which the benefit of the divine goodness in a manner slipped through
their hands. Whatever war the people undertook, in whatever direction
they moved their standards, victory was prepared; nor was there any
other delay or obstacle to their exterminating all their enemies than
their own voluntary torpor. Wherefore, although they did not rout them
all so as to make their possession clear, yet the truth of God came
visibly forth, and was realized, inasmuch as they might have obtained
what was remaining without any difficulty, had they been pleased to
avail themselves of the victories offered to them. The whole comes to
this, that it was owing entirely to their own cowardice that they did
not enjoy the divine goodness in all its fullness and integrity. This
will be still clearer from the following chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc07023.htm#fr_174.md) <span
id="xxiv.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p45"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxiv.i-p45.1"></span>Plurimis urbibus.” French, “<span
id="xxiv.i-p45.2"></span>Plusieurs villes:” “Several cities.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc07023.htm#fr_175.md) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p61"></span> French, “<span
id="xxiv.ii-p61.1"></span>Ils penserent qu’il n’y avoit rien meilleur
pour eux ni plus expedient, que de racheter la paix avec les enfans
d’Israel, en faisans les chiens couchans (comme l’on dit) devant eux, et
leur gratifiant en toutes choses;” “They thought there was nothing
better for them, nor more expedient, than to purchase peace with the
children of Israel by acting (so to speak) like fawning dogs before
them, and gratifying them in all things.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc07023.htm#fr_176.md) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p63"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxiv.ii-p63.1"></span>Verum de secundo ambigitur.” French, “<span
id="xxiv.ii-p63.2"></span>Mais il y a plus grande difficulte sur le
second point;” “But there is greater difficulty as to the second point.”
— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22](cc07024.md)
