[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07014)  [Next](cc07016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvi"></span>

<span id="xvi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xvi.i"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p1"></span><span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
13:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001)<span id="xvi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now Joshua was old *and* stricken in
years; and the LORD said unto him, Thou art old *and* stricken in years,
and there remaineth yet very much land to be possessed.

<span id="xvi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quum autem senuisset Josue, et
venisset in dies, dixit ei Jehova, Tu senuisti, venisti in dies, et
multa terra admodum superest ad possidendum.

<span id="xvi.i-p4"></span>**2.** This *is* the land that yet remaineth:
all the borders of the Philistines, and all Geshuri,

<span id="xvi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Haec est terra quae residua est, omnes
limites Philisthinorum, et omnis Gessuri.

<span id="xvi.i-p6"></span>**3.** From Sihor, which *is* before Egypt,
even unto the borders of Ekron northward, *which* is counted to the
Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the
Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the
Avites:

<span id="xvi.i-p7"></span>**3.** A Nilo qui est e regione AEgypti usque
ad terminum Ecron, qui est ab aquilone, quae Chananeae reputatur,
quinque principatus Philisthinorum, Azathaeus, Asdodaeus, Ascalonaeus,
Gitthaeus et Ekronaeus et Auaei.

<span id="xvi.i-p8"></span>**4.** From the south, all the land of the
Canaanites, and Mearah that *is* beside the Sidonians, unto Aphek, to
the borders of the Amorites:

<span id="xvi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ab austro universa terra Chananaei et
Meara, quae est Sidoniorum usque ad Paera, usque ad terminum Aemorrhaei.

<span id="xvi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the land of the Giblites, and all
Lebanon, toward the sunrising, from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the
entering into Hamath.

<span id="xvi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et terra Gibli, et totus Libanus ad
ortum solis a Baal-gad sub monte Hermon, donec pervenias Hemath.

<span id="xvi.i-p12"></span>**6.** All the inhabitants of the hill
country from Lebanon unto Misrephothmaim, *and* all the Sidonians, them
will I drive out from before the children of Israel: only divide thou it
by lot unto the Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee.

<span id="xvi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Omnes habitotores montis a Libano
usque ad fervores aquarum: omnes Sidonios ego expellam a facie filiorum
Israel: tantum jacias sortem, ut sit in haereditatem Israel, sicut
praecepi tibi.

<span id="xvi.i-p14"></span>**7.** Now therefore divide this land for an
inheritance unto the nine tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh;

<span id="xvi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Nunc ergo divide terram istam in
haereditatem novem tribubus, et dimidiae tribui Manasse.

<span id="xvi.i-p16"></span>**8.** With whom the Reubenites and the
Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave them, beyond
Jordan eastward, *even* as Moses the servant of the LORD gave them;

<span id="xvi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Praeter eam Rubenitae, et Gaditae
acceperunt partes suas, quas dedit iis Moses trans Jordanem ad orientem,
sicut dedit eis Moses servus Jehovae.

<span id="xvi.i-p18"></span>**9.** From Aroer, that *is* upon the bank
of the river Arnon, and the city that *is* in the midst of the river,
and all the plain of Medeba unto Dibon;

<span id="xvi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Ab Aroer quae est juxta ripam
fluminis Arnon, et urbem ipsam quae est in medio vallis, et totam
planitiem Medeba usque ad Dibon.

<span id="xvi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And all the cities of Sihon king of
the Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children
of Ammon;

<span id="xvi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et omnes urbes Sihon regis
Aemorrhaei, qui regnabat in Hesbon, usque ad terminum filiorum Ammon.

<span id="xvi.i-p22"></span>**11.** And Gilead, and the border of the
Geshurites and Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto
Salcah;

<span id="xvi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et Gilead et terminum Gessuri, et
Maachati, et totum montem Hermon, et universum Basan usque ad Salchah.

<span id="xvi.i-p24"></span>**12.** All the kingdom of Og in Bashan,
which reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei, who remained of the remnant of
the giants: for these did Moses smite, and cast them out.

<span id="xvi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Universum regnum Og in Basan, qui
regnabat in Astaroth, et in Edrei: hic supererat ex residuo Rephaim,
quos percussit Moses et expulit.

<span id="xvi.i-p26"></span>**13.** Nevertheless the children of Israel
expelled not the Geshurites, nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites
and the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day.

<span id="xvi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Non expulerunt autem filii Israel
Gessuri et Maachati: propterea habitavit Gessur et Maachat in medio
Israel usque ad hunc diem.

<span id="xvi.i-p28"></span>**14.** Only unto the tribe of Levi he gave
none inheritance; the sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel made by fire
*are* their inheritance, as he said unto them.

<span id="xvi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tantum tribui Levi non dedit
haereditatem, sacrificia Jehovae Dei Israel sunt hereditas ejus,
quemadmodum loquutus est de ea.

<span id="xvi.i-p30"></span> 

<span id="xvi.i-p31"></span><span id="xvi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p32"></span>**1.** *Now Joshua was old,* etc  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) Since we have seen above that the land
was pacified by the subjugation of thirty-one kings, it is probable that
some cessation now took place for the purpose of resting from their
fatigues, lest the people should be worn out by continual service. Nor
could that justly be blamed, provided they rested only for a time and
continued always intent on the goal set before them. But lest that
intermission which was given for the purpose of recruiting new vigor
might prove an occasion of sloth, the Lord employs a new stimulus to
urge them to proceed. For he orders the whole inheritance to be divided
into tribes, and the whole line of the Mediterranean coast which was
possessed by the enemy to be put into the lot. A division of this kind
might indeed seem absurd and ludicrous, nay, a complete mockery, seeing
they were dealing among themselves with the property of others just as
if it had been their own. But the Lord so appointed for the best of
reasons. *First,* they might have cast away the hope of the promise and
been contented with their present state. Nay, although after the lot was
cast they had security in full for all that God had promised, they by
their own cowardice, as far as in them lay, destroyed the credit of his
words. Nor was it owing to any merit of theirs that his veracity did not
lie curtailed and mutilated. The allocation by lot must therefore have
been to them an earnest of certain possession so as to keep them always
in readiness for it. *Secondly,* Those who happened to have their
portion assigned in an enemy’s country, inasmuch as they were living in
the meanwhile as strangers on precarious hospitality beyond their own
inheritance, must have acted like a kind of task-masters spurring on the
others. And it surely implied excessive stupor to neglect and abandon
what had been divinely assigned to them.

<span id="xvi.i-p34"></span>We now see to what intent the whole land
behooved to be divided by lot, and the seat of each tribe allocated. It
was also necessary that this should be done while Joshua was alive,
because after his death the Israelites would have been less inclined to
obedience, for none of his successors possessed authority sufficient for
the execution of so difficult a task. Moreover, as God had already by
the mouth of Moses commanded it to be done, had he not performed the
business thus committed to him, the whole work might have gone to wreck
when the lawful minister was removed. Although the exact time is not
stated, still it is probable that as there was no hope that while Joshua
continued alive the people would again take up arms with the view of
giving a wider extent to their boundaries, he then only attempted to
divide the land, as if he were proclaiming and promising, by a solemn
attestation, that the distribution would certainly be carried into
effect, because the truth of God could not fail in consequence of the
death of any man.

<span id="xvi.i-p35"></span><span id="xvi.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p36"></span>**2.** *This is the land,* etc The ancient
boundaries long ago fixed by God, are recalled to remembrance, in order
that Joshua. and the people may feel fully persuaded that the covenant
made with Abraham would be fulfilled in every part. Wherefore they are
enjoined to make it their study to acquire the parts still remaining to
be possessed. The inference will be appropriate if we make a practical
application of this perseverance to that which is required of us, viz.,
to forget the things which are behind, and reach forth unto those that
are before, and press toward the mark for the prize of our high calling.
(<span id="xvi.i-p36.1"></span>[Php
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p36.1"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) For it would be of no use to
run in the race without endeavoring to reach the goal.

<span id="xvi.i-p38"></span>The boundary commenced with a river
separating Egypt toward the sea from the Holy Land, and most probably
the river Nile, as we interpret it according to the received opinion, or
a small stream which flowed past the town of Rhinocornea, believed by
many to be Raphia or Raphane.  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128)
It is indeed beyond dispute that the inheritance of the people
commencing in that quarter was contiguous to Egypt. But although I have
followed the opinion of the majority of expositors, that the boundaries
were not extended further than to the less cultivated and in a manner
desert land, lest greater proximity might have been injurious by leading
to too close familiarity with the Egyptians, I by no means repudiate a
different opinion.

<span id="xvi.i-p40"></span>The third verse raises a question. After it
is said that the territories towards the sea-coast were five, a sixth is
added, namely, that of the Avites. Some think that it is not counted
among the five because it was an insignificant province. But I would
have my readers to consider whether there may not be an indirect
antithesis between a free people, their own masters, and five
territories ruled by sovereigns. Hence the Avites being in different
circumstances are mentioned separately, the plural number being used for
the sake of distinction. In the enumeration of the sovereignties they
are not arranged in the order of their dignity or opulence, but the
first place is given to Aza because of its nearness to Egypt, and the
same remark applies to Ashdod and the others.

<span id="xvi.i-p41"></span>The Septuagint translators, according to
their usual custom, employ the Greek γ *(gamma) to* express the Hebrew
<span id="xvi.i-p41.1"></span>ע *(ain),* and thus give the name of Gaza
to that which in Hebrew is Aza, in the same way as they convert Amorrha
into Gomorrha.  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) This
sufficiently exposes the mistake of those who suppose that its name is
Persian, and derived from its resources  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) in consequence of Cambyses, when about
to carry on war in Greece, having made it the depot of his treasures.
But as in the Acts, (<span id="xvi.i-p43.2"></span>[Ac
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026)<span id="xvi.i-p43.2"></span>,)
Luke speaks of “Gaza which is desert,” it appears that a city of the
same name was erected near it, but on a different site. Ashdod is the
same as that which the Greeks called Azotus. The whole of this tract,
which is either on the sea-coast or verging towards it, extends as far
as Sidon. And there are some who think that the Phoenicians were once
masters both of Gaza and Azotus. How far Lebanon extends is sufficiently
known.  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) For it sometimes
comprehends Mount Hermon; and on account of its length part of it is
surnamed Antilibanus.  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) The
reader will find the subject of Mount Hermon considered in <span
id="xvi.i-p45.1"></span>[De 4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#000)<span
id="xvi.i-p45.1"></span>. Towards the east is Hamath, which is also
Antioch of Syria.

<span id="xvi.i-p46"></span><span id="xvi.i-p46.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p47"></span>**6.** *All the inhabitants of the hill
country,* etc Joshua is again admonished, though the Israelites do not
yet possess those regions, not to defer the partition, but trust to the
promise of God, because it would detract injuriously from his honor if
there were any doubt as to the event. It is accordingly said: Only do
what is thy duty in the distribution of the land; nor let that which the
enemy still hold securely be exempted from the lot; for it will be my
care to fulfil what I have promised. Hence let us learn in undertaking
any business, so to depend on the lips of God as that no doubt can delay
us. It is not ours, indeed, to fabricate vain hopes for ourselves; but
when our confidence is founded on the Lord, let us only obey his
commands, and there is no reason to fear that the event will disappoint
us.

<span id="xvi.i-p48"></span>He afterwards assigns the land of Canaan to
nine tribes and a half tribe, because the portion of the Reubenites,
Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh had already been assigned beyond the
Jordan. Though there is a seeming tautology in the words, Which Moses
gave them, as Moses gave them, there is nothing superfluous, because in
the second clause the donation is confirmed; as if God were ordering
that which was done to be ratified, or saying, in other words, As Moses
gave them that land, so let them remain tranquil in the possession of
it.  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) For this reason also he is
distinguished by the title of servant of God, as if it were said, Let no
one interfere with that decree which a faithful minister has pronounced
on the authority of God. It was certainly necessary to provide by
anticipation against the disputes which otherwise must have daily
arisen.

<span id="xvi.i-p50"></span><span id="xvi.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p51"></span>**14.** *Only unto the tribe of Levi,* etc
This exception was also necessary, lest the Levites might allege that
they were unjustly disinherited, and thus excite great commotions in
regard to their right. He therefore reminds them that Moses was the
author of this distinction, and, at the same time, shows that they have
no reason to complain of having been in any way defrauded, because an
excellent compensation was given them. For although the sacrifices were
not equally divided among the Levites, their subsistence was
sufficiently provided for by all the first-fruits and the tithes.
Moreover, as God allures them by hire to undertake the charge of sacred
things, so he exhorts the people in their turn to be faithful in paying
the sacred oblations by declaring that their sacrifices are the
maintenance of the Levites.  <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134)

<span id="xvi.ii"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
13:15-33](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#015)<span id="xvi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p2"></span>**15.** And Moses gave unto the tribe of the
children of Reuben *inheritance* according to their families.

<span id="xvi.ii-p3"></span>**15.** Dedit ergo Moses tribui filiorum
Ruben per familias suas:

<span id="xvi.ii-p4"></span>**16.** And their coast was from Aroer, that
*is* on the bank of the river Arnon, and the city that *is* in the midst
of the river, and all the plain by Medeba;

<span id="xvi.ii-p5"></span>**16.** Fuitque illis terminus ab Aroer,
quae est juxta ripam torrentis Arnon, et urbs quae est in medio vallis,
et universa planities quae est juxta Medeba.

<span id="xvi.ii-p6"></span>**17.** Heshbon, and all her cities that
*are* in the plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon,

<span id="xvi.ii-p7"></span>**17.** Hesbon et omnes urbes ejus, quae
erant in planitie: Dibon et Bamoth-baal, et Beth-baalmeon.

<span id="xvi.ii-p8"></span>**18.** And Jahazah, and Kedemoth, and
Mephaath,

<span id="xvi.ii-p9"></span>**18.** Et Jahassah, et Cedemoth, et
Mephaath.

<span id="xvi.ii-p10"></span>**19.** And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and
Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley,

<span id="xvi.ii-p11"></span>**19.** Et Ciriathaim, et Sibmah, et
Sereth-sahar in monte vallis.

<span id="xvi.ii-p12"></span>**20.** And Bethpeor, and Ashdothpisgah,
and Bethjeshimoth,

<span id="xvi.ii-p13"></span>**20.** Et Beth-peor, et Asdoth-Pisgah, et
Beth-jesimoth.

<span id="xvi.ii-p14"></span>**21.** And all the cities of the plain,
and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which reigned in
Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem,
and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, *which were* dukes of Sihon, dwelling in the
country.

<span id="xvi.ii-p15"></span>**21.** Et omnes urbes planitiei, et
universum regnum Sihon regis Aemorrhaei, qui regnabat in Hesbon, quem
percussit Moses: et principes Midian, Evi, et Rekem, et Sur, et Hur, et
Reba duces Sihon habitatores terrae.

<span id="xvi.ii-p16"></span>**22.** Balaam also the son of Beor, the
soothsayer, did the children of Israel slay with the sword among them
that were slain by them.

<span id="xvi.ii-p17"></span>**22.** Et Bileam filium Beor divinatorem
occiderunt filii Israel gladio cum interfectis eorum.

<span id="xvi.ii-p18"></span>**23.** And the border of the children of
Reuben was Jordan, and the border *thereof*. This *was* the inheritance
of the children of Reuben after their families, the cities and the
villages thereof.

<span id="xvi.ii-p19"></span>**23.** Fuit autem terminus filiorum Ruben,
Jordanes et terminus. Haec est haereditas filiorum Ruben per familias
suas, urbes et villae earum.

<span id="xvi.ii-p20"></span>**24.** And Moses gave *inheritance* unto
the tribe of Gad, *even* unto the children of Gad according to their
families.

<span id="xvi.ii-p21"></span>**24.** Deditque Moses tribui Gad, filiis
Gad per familias suas.

<span id="xvi.ii-p22"></span>**25.** And their coast was Jazer, and all
the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the children of Ammon, unto
Aroer that *is* before Rabbah;

<span id="xvi.ii-p23"></span>**25.** Et fuit eis terminus Jazer, et
omnes urbes Gilead, et dimidium terrae filiorum Ammon usque ad Aroer,
quae est coram Rabbah.

<span id="xvi.ii-p24"></span>**26.** And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh,
and Betonim; and from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir;

<span id="xvi.ii-p25"></span>**26.** Et ab Hesbon usque ad Ramath ipsuis
Mispe, et Bethonim: et a Mahanaim usque ad terminum ipsius Debir.

<span id="xvi.ii-p26"></span>**27.** And in the valley, Betharam, and
Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon
king of Heshbon, Jordan and *his* border, *even* unto the edge of the
sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward.

<span id="xvi.ii-p27"></span>**27.** Et in valle Beth-haram, et
Beth-nimrah, et Succoth, et Saphon: residuum regni Sihon, regis Hesbon,
Jordanem, et confinium, usque ad extremum maris Chinnereth, trans
Jordanem ad orientem.

<span id="xvi.ii-p28"></span>**28.** This *is* the inheritance of the
children of Gad after their families, the cities, and their villages.

<span id="xvi.ii-p29"></span>**28.** Haec est haereditas filiorum Gad
per familias suas, urbes et villae earum.

<span id="xvi.ii-p30"></span>**29.** And Moses gave *inheritance* unto
the half tribe of Manasseh: and *this* was *the possession* of the half
tribe of the children of Manasseh by their families.

<span id="xvi.ii-p31"></span>**29.** Dedit praeterea Moses dimidiae
tribui Manasse: fuitque dimidiae tribui filiorum Manasse per familias
suas:

<span id="xvi.ii-p32"></span>**30.** And their coast was from Mahanaim,
all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of
Jair, which *are* in Bashan, threescore cities:

<span id="xvi.ii-p33"></span>**30.** Fuit, inquam, terminus eorum a
Mahanaim omnis Basan totius regni Og regis Basan, et omnes Havoth-Jair,
quae sunt in Basan, sexaginta urbes.

<span id="xvi.ii-p34"></span>**31.** And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and
Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, *were pertaining* unto the
children of Machir the son of Manasseh, *even* to the one half of the
children of Machir by their families.

<span id="xvi.ii-p35"></span>**31.** Et dimidium Gilead, et Astaroth, et
Edrei, urbes regni Og in Basan, filiorum Machir, filii Manasse, dimidiae
parti filiorum Machir, per familias suas.

<span id="xvi.ii-p36"></span>**32.** These *are the countries* which
Moses did distribute for inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other
side Jordan, by Jericho, eastward.

<span id="xvi.ii-p37"></span>**32.** Istae sunt hereditates quas
tradidit Moses in campestribus Moab a transitu Jordanis ipsi Jericho ad
orientem.

<span id="xvi.ii-p38"></span>**33.** But unto the tribe of Levi Moses
gave not *any* inheritance: the LORD God of Israel *was* their
inheritance, as he said unto them.

<span id="xvi.ii-p39"></span>**33.** Tribui autem Levi non dedit Moses
haereditatem: Jehova Deus Israel ipse est haereditas eorum, quemadmodum
dixit illis.

<span id="xvi.ii-p40"></span> 

<span id="xvi.ii-p41"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p42"></span>**15.** *And Moses gave unto the tribe,*
etc What he seemed to have said with sufficient clearness he now follows
more fully in detail, not only that the reading might incite the people
to gratitude, seeing the divine goodness recorded in public documents,
and, as it were, constantly before their eyes, but also that each might
enjoy his inheritance without molestation and quarrel. For we know how
ingenious human cupidity is in devising pretexts for litigation, so that
no one can possess his right in safety unless a plain and perspicuous
definition of his right make it impossible to call it in question. That
country had been given without casting lots. It was therefore open to
others to object that the just proportion had not been kept, and that
the inequality behooved to be corrected. Therefore, that no unseasonable
dispute might ever disturb the public peace, the boundaries are
everywhere fixed by the authority of God, and disputes of every kind are
removed by setting up landmarks. God does not by one single expression
merely adjudge the whole kingdom of Sihon to the tribe of Reuben, but he
traces their extreme limit from Aroer to the banks of the Arnon, and
thus, making an entire circuit, contracts or widens their territory so
as not to leave the possession of a single acre ambiguous. Moreover, how
useful this exact delineation was may be learned from profane history,
where we everywhere meet, not only with invidious but pernicious
disputes among neighbors as to their boundaries.

<span id="xvi.ii-p43"></span>We may add that the care which the Lord
condescended to take in providing for his people, and in cherishing
mutual peace among them, demonstrates his truly paternal love, since he
omitted nothing that might conduce to their tranquillity. And, indeed,
had not provision been thus early made, they might have been consumed by
intestine quarrels.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)

<span id="xvi.ii-p45"></span>I again beg my readers to excuse me if I do
not labor anxiously in describing the situation of towns, and am not
even curious in regard to names. Nay, I will readily allow those names
which it was thought proper to leave as proper nouns in Hebrew to be
used appellatively, and so far altered as to give them a Latin form.
 <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)

<span id="xvi.ii-p47"></span>It is worthy of notice, that when the land
of the Midianites is referred to, the princes who ruled over it are
called Satraps of Sihon, to let us know that they shared in the same
overthrow, because they had involved themselves in an unjust war, and
belonged to the government of Sihon, an avowed enemy. And to make it
still more clear that they perished justly, it is told that among the
slain was Balaam, by whose tongue they had attempted to wound the
Israelites more grievously than by a thousand swords;  <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) just as if it had been said that in
that slaughter they found the hostile banner, by which they had declared
themselves at open war with the Israelites. When it is said that the
Jordan was a boundary, and a boundary, it will be proper, in order to
prevent useless repetition, to interpret that Jordan was a boundary to
them according to its limits.  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138)

<span id="xvi.ii-p50"></span><span id="xvi.ii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p51"></span>**24.** *And Moses gave inheritance unto
the tribe of Gad,* etc The observation made above applies also to the
tribe of Gad, namely, that their legitimate boundaries were carefully
defined in order to prevent disputes as to their possession. Meanwhile
God is extolled for his liberality in having expelled nations of great
celebrity, and substituted them in their stead. This is expressed more
clearly in regard to the half tribe of Manasseh, when sixty cities are
enumerated as included in their inheritance. Hence, too, it is manifest
that Moses was not munificent through mistake, because it was well known
to God how many cities he was giving them out of his boundless
liberality. In a short clause the tribe of Levi is again excluded, that
the Levites might not be able at some future period to pretend that the
grant which the Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of Manasseh had
obtained without the casting of lots, belonged in common to them also;
for they are expressly forbidden to share with their brethren. This made
it easy for them to interpret shrewdly for their advantage, that they
were entitled to share with others. Here, however, it is not the
sacrifices, as a little before, but God Himself that is said to be their
inheritance; if they are not satisfied with it, they only convict
themselves of excessive pride and insufferable fastidiousness.  <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc07015.htm#fr_126) <span
id="xvi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p33"></span> The words, “old and stricken in years,” do
not contain a tautology, but accurately express the period of life
according to a division which was long familiar to the Jews, and may
have been not unknown to them even at this early period. According to
this division, old age consisted of three stages, — the *first*
extending from the sixtieth to the seventieth year, constituting the
commencement of old age properly so called; the *second* extending from
the seventieth to the eightieth year, and constituting what was called
*hoary,* or *hoary-headed* age; and the *third* extending from the
eightieth year to the end of life, and constituting what was called
*advanced* age, and caused the person who had reached it to be described
as one stricken in years. At this closing stage Joshua had now arrived.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc07015.htm#fr_127) <span
id="xvi.i-p36.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p37"></span> The original text had the reference to
<span id="xvi.i-p37.1"></span>[Php
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#014)<span id="xvi.i-p37.1"></span>, an
obvious typesetting error. —*fj.*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc07015.htm#fr_128) <span
id="xvi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p39"></span> The opinion generally entertained in
Calvin’s time, that the river here meant was the Nile, or at least one
of its branches, was founded partly on the meaning of the word *sihor*,
which is literally *black*, and was explained by expositors as
equivalent to *turbid*, a term strictly applicable to the Nile; and
partly from a passage in Jeremiah, (<span id="xvi.i-p39.1"></span>[Jer
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018)<span id="xvi.i-p39.1"></span>) in
which the Prophet asks, “What has thou to do in the way of Egypt to
drink the waters of Sihor?” — Sihor being here undoubtedly used as a
proper name for the Nile. The second opinion mentioned by Calvin is now
almost universally admitted to be the only one tenable. Even the
description here given of Sihor, (<span id="xvi.i-p39.2"></span>[Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)<span id="xvi.i-p39.2"></span>,)
as “before Egypt,” is totally inapplicable to the Nile which, instead of
being before Egypt, or on its frontiers, flows nearly through its
center. The river meant and expressly referred to both by Moses (<span
id="xvi.i-p39.3"></span>[Nu 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#005)<span
id="xvi.i-p39.3"></span>) and by Joshua (<span
id="xvi.i-p39.4"></span>[Jos 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#004)<span
id="xvi.i-p39.4"></span>) under the name of the river of Egypt, is now
called the Wady El-Arisch, from the town of that name situated near its
mouth, and not far from the site of the ancient Rhinocolura, or perhaps
more properly Rhinocorura. Calvin spells Rhinocornea, which if it had
not been repeated by the French, might seem to be a misprint. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc07015.htm#fr_129) <span
id="xvi.i-p41.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p42"></span> It is here assumed that the only genuine
sound represented by the Hebrew letter *Ain* is that of *a*. Is this the
fact? Gesenius, on the contrary, while repudiating the modern Jewish
pronunciation of it by the nasal *gn* or *ng* as decidedly false, says
that its hardest sound is that of a *g* referring to Gaza and Gomorrha,
the two words referred to by Calvin in illustration of the contrary. See
Gesenius’s Hebrew Grammar. (Bagster, 1852.)

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc07015.htm#fr_130) <span
id="xvi.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p43"></span> The French adds, “<span
id="xvi.i-p43.1"></span>Et qu’il signifie Richesses;” “And that it means
Riches.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc07015.htm#fr_131) <span
id="xvi.i-p43.3"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p44"></span> French, “<span
id="xvi.i-p44.1"></span>Quant au Liban, c’est une chose assez notoire
quelle longeur d’etendue il a;” “As to Lebanon it is sufficiently well
known what length of extent it has.”

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc07015.htm#fr_132) <span
id="xvi.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p45"></span> This is certainly incorrect. Antilibanus
received its name, not from its length, but from its being a mountain
chain opposite and parallel to Libanus or Lebanon proper, from which it
is separated by the beautiful valley known to the Greeks and Romans by
the names of Coele-Syria, or rather Koile (Hollow) Syria, and watered by
the Leontes. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc07015.htm#fr_133) <span
id="xvi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p49"></span> The Septuagint avoids the appearance of
tautology, both by abridging the verse and adopting a different
punctuation, rendering it thus: “To Reuben and Gad the Lord gave (*an
inheritance*) on the other side of the Jordan; towards the sun-rising
did Moses the servant of the Lord give it to them.” This, however, is
not the only alteration made by the Septuagint version. For immediately
before the verse now quoted, it interpolates another in the following
terms, “From the Jordan unto the Great Sea on the west shall thou give
it: the Great Sea will be the boundary of the two tribes and of the half
tribe of Manasse.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc07015.htm#fr_134) <span
id="xvi.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.i-p52"></span> To the end of this verse the Septuagint
adds the following clause: “<span id="xvi.i-p52.1"></span>καὶ οὖτος ὁ
καταμερισμὸς ὅν κατεμέρισε Μωνσὢς τοῖς υἱοῖς Ισραὴλ ἐν Αραβὼθ Μωὰβ ἐν τῷ
πέραν τοῦ Ιορδάνου κατὰ Ιεριχὼ;” “And this is the division which Moses
divided to the children of Israel in Araboth-Moab beyond Jordan opposite
to Jericho.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc07015.htm#fr_135) <span
id="xvi.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p44"></span> French, “<span id="xvi.ii-p44.1"></span>Et
de faict, s’il n’euste pourveu a cela de bonne heure, ils se fussent
mangez et consumez les uns les autres en debatant entre eux;” “And in
fact, had not this been provided for in good time, they would have eaten
and consumed one another while debating among themselves.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc07015.htm#fr_136) <span
id="xvi.ii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p46"></span> French, “<span
id="xvi.ii-p46.1"></span>Qui plus est, je suis content qu’on traduise en
d’autres langues certains noms, qu’il m’a semble bon de laisser ici en
la langue Hebraique comme noms propres;” “Moreover, I am content that
certain words which I have thought good to leave here in the Hebrew
tongue as proper names be translated into other languages.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc07015.htm#fr_137) <span
id="xvi.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p48"></span> The curious contradictions in the behavior
of this remarkable man whose fate is here recorded, and analogous
exemplification’s of them in ordinary life, are admirably delineated by
Bishop Butler in a sermon on the subject. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc07015.htm#fr_138) <span
id="xvi.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p49"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xvi.ii-p49.1"></span>Terminum illis fuisse Jordanem secundum suos
fines.” French, “<span id="xvi.ii-p49.2"></span>Que le Jordain estoit
leur borne selon ses limites;” “That the Jordan was their boundary
according to its limits.” The repetition is omitted by the Septuagint. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc07015.htm#fr_139) <span
id="xvi.ii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xvi.ii-p52"></span> The thirty-third verse is entirely omitted
by the Septuagint. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 14](cc07016)
