[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc07021)  [Next](cc07023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 20

<span id="xxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#001.md)<span id="xxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** The LORD also spoke unto Joshua,
saying,

<span id="xxiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Loquutus est autem Jehova ad Josue,
dicendo,

<span id="xxiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Speak to the children of Israel,
saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge, whereof I spoke unto you
by the hand of Moses:

<span id="xxiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Alloquere filios Israel, his verbis,
Date urbes refugii, de quibus loquutus sum ad vos per manum Mosis:

<span id="xxiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** That the slayer that kills *any*
person unawares *and* unwittingly may flee thither: and they shall be
your refuge from the avenger of blood.

<span id="xxiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ut fugiat illuc homicida qui
percusserit animam per errorem, absque scientia: eruntque vobis in
refugium a propinquo sanguinis.

<span id="xxiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** And when he that doth flee unto one
of those cities shall stand at the entering of the gate of the city, and
shall declare his cause in the ears of the elders of that city, they
shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place, that he
may dwell among them.

<span id="xxiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et fugiet ad unam ex civitatibus
istis, stabitque ad ostium portae urbis, ac loquetur in auribus seniorum
urbis ipsius verba sua, et recolligent eum in urbem ad se, dabuntque ei
locum, ac habitabit apud eos.

<span id="xxiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And if the avenger of blood pursue
after him, then they shall not deliver the slayer up into his hand;
because he smote his neighbor unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime.

<span id="xxiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quum autem persequutus fuerit eum
propinquus sanguinis, non tradent homicidam in manum ejus: quia absque
scientia percussit proximum suum, neque odio habuerat eum ab heri et
nudiustertius.

<span id="xxiii.i-p12"></span>6. And he shall dwell in that city, until
he stand before the congregation for judgment, *and* until the death of
the high priest that shall be in those days: then shall the slayer
return, and come unto his own city, and unto his own house, unto the
city from whence he fled.

<span id="xxiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et habitabit in ea civitate donec
stet ante coetum ad judicium, aut donec moriatur sacerdos magnus qui
erit in diebus illis: tunc enim revertetur homicida venietque ad urbem
suam, et ad domum suam, ad urbem unde fugerat.

<span id="xxiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And they appointed Kedesh in
Galilee in mount Naphtali, and Shechem in mount Ephraim, and
Kirjatharba, which *is* Hebron, in the mountain of Judah.

<span id="xxiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et addixerunt Cedes in Galil in
monte Nephtali, et Sechem in monte Ephraim, et Cirjath-arba (ipsa est
Hebron) in monte Jehudae.

<span id="xxiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And on the other side Jordan by
Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain
out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of
Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="xxiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** De trans Jordane autem Jericho, ad
orientem dederunt Beser in deserto in planitie, de tribu Ruben: et
Ramoth in Gilead, de tribu Gadi: et Golan in Basan, de tribu Manasse.

<span id="xxiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** These were the cities appointed for
all the children of Israel, and for the stranger that sojourns among
them, that whosoever kills *any* person at unawares might flee thither,
and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before
the congregation.

<span id="xxiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Istae fuerunt urbes conventionis
omnibus filiis Israel, et peregrino qui peregrinatur in medio eorum: ut
fugeret illuc quicunque interfecisset aliquem per errorem, et non
moreretur manu propinqui sanguinis, donec stetisset coram coetu.

<span id="xxiii.i-p20"></span> 

<span id="xxiii.i-p21"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p22"></span>**1.** *The Lord also spoke unto Joshua,*
etc In the fact of its not having occurred to their own minds, to
designate the cities of refuge, till they were again reminded of it,
their sluggishness appears to be indirectly censured. The divine command
to that effect had been given beyond the Jordan. When the reason for it
remained always equally valid, why do they wait? Why do they not give
full effect to that which they had rightly begun? We may add, how
important it was that there should be places of refuge for the innocent,
in order that the land might not be polluted with blood. For if that
remedy had not been provided, the kindred of those who had been killed
would have doubled the evil, by proceeding without discrimination to
avenge their death. It certainly did not become the people to be idle in
guarding the land from stain and taint.  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171.md) Hence we perceive how tardy men are,
not only to perform their duty, but to provide for their own safety,
unless the Lord frequently urge them, and prick them forward by the
stimulus of exhortation. But that they sinned only from thoughtlessness,
is apparent from this, that they are forthwith ready to obey, neither
procrastinating nor creating obstacles or delays to a necessary matter,
by disputing the propriety of it.

<span id="xxiii.i-p24"></span>The nature of the asylum afforded by the
cities of refuge has been already explained. It gave no impunity to
voluntary murder, but if any one, by mistake, had slain a man, with whom
he was not at enmity, he found a safe refuge by fleeing to one of these
cities destined for that purpose. Thus God assisted the unfortunate, and
prevented their suffering the punishment of an atrocious deed, when they
had not been guilty of it. Meanwhile respect was so far paid to the
feelings of the brethren and kindred of the deceased, that their sorrow
was not increased by the constant presence of the persons who had caused
their bereavement. Lastly, the people were accustomed to detest murder,
since homicide, even when not culpable, was followed by exile from
country and home, till the death of the high priest. For that temporary
exile clearly showed how precious human blood is in the sight of God.
Thus the law was just, equitable, and useful, as well in a public as in
a private point of view.  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172.md) But it
is to be briefly observed, that everything is not here mentioned in
order. For one who had accidentally killed a man might have remained in
safety, by sisting himself before the court to plead his cause, and
obtaining an acquittal, after due and thorough investigation, as we
explained more fully in the books of Moses, when treating of this
matter.

<span id="xxiii.i-p26"></span><span id="xxiii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p27"></span>**7.** *And they appointed Kedesh,* etc
The Hebrew word Kedesh here used, signifies also to fit and consecrate.
Accordingly, I interpret, that cities were selected according as common
use required.  <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173.md) Hence it is
inferred that matters were well arranged so as to make private yield to
public interest. Moreover, we shall see in the next chapter, that
Ciriath-Arbah, which was afterwards called Hebron, was transferred to
the Levites, though it had formerly been the property of Caleb. Hence
appeared the rare, nay, the incomparable moderation of this aged saint,
who readily gave up to others both the city and suburbs, which he had
justly claimed as his right, the moment the lot showed that this was
pleasing to God. It was necessary to advert briefly to this change,
because the Lord was pleased that asylums should be found only in the
Levitical cities, that their innocence might be defended with greater
fidelity and authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc07022.htm#fr_171.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p23"></span> Calvin is somewhat singular in holding
that the message communicated to Joshua was an indirect censure of the
Israelites, for not having previously of their own accord appointed
cities of refuge. Other expositors think that till now the proper time
of appointing them had not arrived, as it could not well precede, but
rather behooved to be subsequent to the allocation of cities to the
Levites, inasmuch as the nature of the case required that every city of
refuge should be Levitical. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc07022.htm#fr_172.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p25"></span> It may be observed in passing, how
strikingly the humanity and wisdom conspicuous in the appointment of the
Mosaic cities of refuge contrast with the manifold abuses and
abominations to which the numerous asylums and sanctuaries of Popish
countries have led. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc07022.htm#fr_173.md) <span
id="xxiii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxiii.i-p28"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxiii.i-p28.1"></span>Prout communis usus ferebat.” French, “<span
id="xxiii.i-p28.2"></span>Selon que le profit et l’utilite commune le
requeroit;” “According as the common profit and utility required.” —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 21](cc07023.md)
