[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07018)  [Next](cc07020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>CHAPTER 17

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
17:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** There was also a lot for the tribe of
Manasseh; for he *was* the firstborn of Joseph; *to wit*, for Machir the
firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead: because he was a man of
war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fuit quoque sors tribui Manasse (ipse
enim fuit primogenitus Joseph) ipsi Machir primogenito Manasse patri
Gilead (ipse enim fuit vir bellicosus), fuit inquam, ei Gilead et Basan.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span>**2.** There was also *a lot* for the rest of
the children of Manasseh by their families; for the children of Abiezer,
and for the children of Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for
the children of Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the
children of Shemida: these *were* the male children of Manasseh the son
of Joseph by their families.

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span>**2.** Fuit item filiis Manasse reliquis per
familias suas, filiis Abiezer, et filiis Abiezer, et filiis Helec, et
filiis Hepher, et filiis Semida. Isti sunt filii Manasse, filii Joseph
mares per familias suas.

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**3.** But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the
son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but
daughters: and these *are* the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah,
Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span>**3.** Porro Selphead filio Hephner, filii
Gilead, filii Machir, filii Manasse non fuerunt filii sed filiae: quarum
ista sunt nomina, Mahala, et Noa, Hogla, Melcha, et Thirza.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span>**4.** And they came near before Eleazar the
priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the princes,
saying, The LORD commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our
brethren. Therefore according to the commandment of the LORD he gave
them an inheritance among the brethren of their father.

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**4.** Hae accesserunt in conspectum Eleazar
sacerdotis, et in conspectum Josue filii Nun, atque in conspectum
principum, dicendo, Jehova praecepit Mosi ut daret nobis haereditatem in
medio fratrum nostrorum. Itaque dedit eis juxta sermonem Jehovae,
haereditatem in medio fratrum patris earum.

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span>**5.** And there fell ten portions to
Manasseh, beside the land of Gilead and Bashan, which *were* on the
other side Jordan;

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et ceciderunt haereditates Manasse
decem, praeter terram Gilead et Basan, quae erant trans Jordanem.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span>**6.** Because the daughters of Manasseh had
an inheritance among his sons: and the rest of Manasseh’s sons had the
land of Gilead.

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**6.** Filiae enim Manasse sortitae sunt
hereditatem in medio filiorum ejus: terra autem Gilead fuit filiis
Manasse reliquis.

<span id="xx.i-p14"></span>**7.** And the coast of Manasseh was from
Asher to Michmethah, that *lieth* before Shechem; and the border went
along on the right hand unto the inhabitants of Entappuah.

<span id="xx.i-p15"></span>**7.** Fuit autem terminus Manasse ab Aser ad
Michmethah, quae est coram Sechem, et pergit terminus ad dextram ad
habitatores Enthappua.

<span id="xx.i-p16"></span>**8.** *Now* Manasseh had the land of
Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh *belonged* to the
children of Ephraim;

<span id="xx.i-p17"></span>**8.** Ipsius Manasse fuit terra Thappua: ab
Thappua quae erat ad terminum Manasse, est filiorum Ephraim.

<span id="xx.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the coast descended unto the river
Kanah, southward of the river: these cities of Ephraim *are* among the
cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh also *was* on the north side
of the river, and the outgoings of it were at the sea:

<span id="xx.i-p19"></span>**9.** Descenditque terminus ad torrentem
arundinis ad meridiem ipsius torrentis: civitates istae tribus Ephraim
sunt in medio civitatum Manasse: at terminus Manasse est ab aquilone
ipsius torrentis, suntque exitus ejus ad mare.

<span id="xx.i-p20"></span>**10.** Southward *it was* Ephraim’s, and
northward *it was* Manasseh’s, and the sea is his border; and they met
together in Asher on the north, and in Issachar on the east.

<span id="xx.i-p21"></span>**10.** Ad meridiem est ipsius Ephraim, et ad
aquilonem ipsius Manasse, estque terminus ejus, et in Aser occurrunt
inter se ab aquillone, et in Issachar ab oriente.

<span id="xx.i-p22"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p23"></span><span id="xx.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p24"></span>The historian returns to the tribe of
Manasseh with the view of confirming what we formerly saw with regard to
the daughters of Selophead. For though it was a novelty for females to
succeed indiscriminately with males, yet as five of them had survived
their father, they proved it to be equitable that they should be
admitted to a portion, lest while he was innocent he should lie under
the reproach of having died childless. God had replied to Moses by his
oracle, that in regard to succession they should be counted as one head.
They now demand that the decision thus given by the mouth of the Lord
shall be carried into effect. As to the name of first-born, still given
to Manasseh, it must be understood so as not to be at variance with the
prophecy of Jacob; or rather his primogeniture is here in a manner
buried, and his dignity restricted to the past. Here, however, it is to
be observed, that men are so tenacious and so much devoted to their own
interests, that it seldom occurs to them to give others their due. The
daughters of Selophead had obtained a portion by a heavenly decree; nor
had any one dared to utter a word against it; and yet if they had
remained silent no regard would have been paid to them. Therefore, lest
the delay should prove injurious to them, they apply to Joshua and
Eleazar, and insist that they shall not be deprived of their legitimate
succession. No delay is interposed by Joshua to prevent their
immediately obtaining what is just, nor is there any murmuring on the
part of the people. Hence we infer, that all were disposed to act
equitably; but every one is occupied with his own interest, and too apt
carelessly to overlook that of others.

<span id="xx.i-p25"></span><span id="xx.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p26"></span>**5.** *And there fell ten portions to
Manasseh,* etc The children of Manasseh are in this passage classed
under seven stems. Machir, the first-born, is placed apart; the other
six follow. Here the question arises, How was the inheritance divided
into ten parts? Some expositors cunningly disguise the difficulty;
 <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) others, because they are unable
to solve it, indulge in the merest trifling. It is certainly very absurd
that four portions should be given to five daughters; and it is not a
whit more congruous that their share should be doubled because their
father was the first-born. It is beyond all controversy, that Gilead,
son of Machir, and great-grandfather of the females of whom we are now
speaking, chose his settlement in mount Gilead and Bashan. Therefore,
seeing he had already obtained an inheritance by privilege without lot,
he ought not to have obtained one by lot in the land of Canaan, unless
perhaps he settled only a part of his family beyond the Jordan. For
Hepher was one of his sons, but not the only one; and likewise the
offspring of five other brothers might be distinguished into several
heads according to the number of which the allocation by lot might be
made. For it is not known in what degree families whose portion fell in
the land of Canaan were taken. And all we read here is, that ten lots
were east among the sons of Manasseh in addition to the country which
they had formerly acquired for themselves beyond the Jordan. It is thus
vain to dispute concerning the number, which cannot be ascertained with
certainty from the present narrative, because the first thing necessary
to be known is the exact number of families to whom the division was
common. Nay, it is not impossible that the daughters of Selophead
obtained their patrimony there. They are said, indeed, to have dwelt
among the brethren of their father; but the place is not given. Be this
as it may, I have no doubt that mutual equity was observed, and that
after provision was made for others, the land which had been submitted
to lot was distributed among ten families whose names are here omitted.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
17:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**11.** And Manasseh had in Issachar and in
Asher Bethshean and her towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the
inhabitants of Dor and her towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her
towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants
of Megiddo and her towns, *even* three countries.

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span>**11.** Fuitque ipsi Manasse in Issachar, et
in Aser, Beth-sean, et oppida ejus: et Ibleam, et oppida ejus: et
habitatores Dor, et oppida ejus: et habitatores Endor, et oppida ejus:
et habitatores Thaanach, et oppida ejus: et habitatores Magiddo, et
oppida ejus, tres regiones.

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span>**12.** Yet the children of Manasseh could
not drive out *the inhabitants of* those cities; but the Canaanites
would dwell in that land.

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**12.** Et non potuerunt filii Manasse
expellere habitatores urbium istarum, sed coepit Chananaeus habitare in
terra ipsa.

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span>**13.** Yet it came to pass, when the
children of Israel were waxen strong, that they put the Canaanites to
tribute; but did not utterly drive them out.

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span>**13.** Quum autem roborati essent filii
Israel, posuerunt Chananaeum tributarium, nec expellendo expulerunt eum.

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>**14.** ¶ And the children of Joseph spoke
unto Joshua, saying, Why has thou given me *but* one lot and one portion
to inherit, seeing I *am* a great people, forasmuch as the LORD has
blessed me hitherto?

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span>**14.** Loquui sunt autem filii Joseph ad
Josue, dicendo, Cur dedisti mihi in haereditatem sortem unam, et
haereditatem unam, quum ego sim populus multus, ita quod hucusque
benedixerit mihi Jehova?

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span>**15.** And Joshua answered them, If thou
*be* a great people, *then* get thee up to the wood *country*, and cut
down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the giants,
if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.

<span id="xx.ii-p11"></span>**15.** Dixitque ad eos Josue, Si populus
multus es, ascende in sylvam, et succide tibi illic in terra Perizaei,
et Rephaim, si angustus est tibi mons Ephraim.

<span id="xx.ii-p12"></span>**16.** And the children of Joseph said, The
hill is not enough for us: and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land
of the valley have chariots of iron, *both they* who *are* of Bethshean
and her towns, and *they* who *are* of the valley of Jezreel.

<span id="xx.ii-p13"></span>**16.** Cui responderunt filii Joseph, Non
sufficiet nobis mons ille: et currus ferrei sunt in omni Chananaeo qui
habitat in terra vallis, et ei qui habitat in Beth-sean et oppidis ejus,
et ei qui habitat in valle Jezrael.

<span id="xx.ii-p14"></span>**17.** And Joshua spoke unto the house of
Joseph, *even* to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, Thou *art* a great
people, and has great power: thou shall not have one lot *only*:

<span id="xx.ii-p15"></span>**17.** Dixitque Josue ad domum Joseph,
nempe ad Ephraim et Manasse, dicendo, Populus multus es, et fortitudo
magna est tibi: non erit tibi sors unica.

<span id="xx.ii-p16"></span>**18.** But the mountain shall be thine; for
it *is* a wood, and thou shall cut it down: and the outgoings of it
shall be thine: for thou shall drive out the Canaanites, though they
have iron chariots, *and* though they *be* strong.

<span id="xx.ii-p17"></span>**18.** Mons enim erit tibi, quia sylva est:
succides ergo eam, et erunt tibi exitus ejus: quia expelles Chananaeum,
quanquam currus ferrei sint ei, quanquam fortis sit.

<span id="xx.ii-p18"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p19"></span><span id="xx.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p20"></span>**11.** *And Manasseh had in Issachar,* etc
How they were so mingled as to possess some cities in the lot of Asher
and Issachar, while the tribe of Ephraim dwelt between their limits, it
is not easy to divine, unless, perhaps, it was perceived that a more
commodious habitation would not be liable to many complaints,  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) or, perhaps, after the whole country
had become more certainly known, some change was made on principles of
equity in the former partition. This, therefore, seems to have been a
new acquisition after it was discovered that the children of Manasseh
might occupy a wider extent without loss to others. Nor was the
habitation given to them a subjugated one, which they might immediately
enjoy, but it was an inheritance treasured up in hope, and founded more
upon heavenly promise than on actual possession. And yet their not
gaining possession of those cities is attributed to their fault, because
the lot assigning it to them was an indubitable pledge of victory. The
reason, therefore, why they could not expel the inhabitants was, because
they were not fully persuaded in their minds that God is true, and
stifled his agency by their own sluggishness. But another crime still
less pardonable was committed when, having it in their power easily to
destroy all, they not only were slothful in executing the command of
God, but, induced by filthy lucre,  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) they preserved those alive whom God
had doomed to destruction. For persons, on whom we impose tribute, we in
a manner take under our faith and protection. God had appointed them the
ministers of his vengeance, and he supplies them with strength to
execute it: they not only delay, but deprive themselves of the liberty
of acting rightly. It is not strange, therefore, that God severely
punished this perverse heartlessness, by making those nations whom they
had pardoned in the face of a clear prohibition, to become like thorns
to pierce their eyes and pricks to gall their sides.

<span id="xx.ii-p23"></span>Here, again, a question arises, How were
cities granted to them in the tribe of Asher and Issachar, when the
portions of both were as yet unknown? Here, therefore, that which had
not yet taken place is related by way of anticipation. Be this as it
may, we gather that from ignorance of the localities, single portions
were not divided so exactly as not to make it necessary afterwards to
correct what had been more or less decided.  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) And we must hold in general, with
regard both to the tribe of Ephraim and the others, that many of the
cities which they gained were of no account because of the devastation.
I doubt not that many ruins here lie buried. On the other hand, we must
conclude that in fertile spots, or spots possessed of other advantages,
where petty villages only existed, their famous cities were founded. It
is certain that Sichem was of sufficient importance to hold both a name
and rank, and yet there is no mention of it here. The same is the case
with Samaria, which, as is well known, belonged to the same tribe of
Ephraim when it was the metropolis of the kingdom of Israel. It is
plain, therefore, that each tribe possessed several cities, which are
here passed over in silence.

<span id="xx.ii-p25"></span><span id="xx.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p26"></span>**14.** *And the children of Joseph spoke
unto Joshua,* etc Although they clothe their complaint with some color
of excuse, yet they dishonestly disguise the fact, that more was
comprehended in one lot than was proper for one tribe. I know not,
however, whether or not the lot was cast indefinitely for the sons of
Joseph: it certainly does not seem congruous that it should be so.
Joshua and the other dividers were not unaware that Ephraim and Manasseh
formed two heads, or two stems: and it has repeatedly been said before
that the land was divided into ten tribes, which number was not
accurate, unless the tribe of Manasseh was considered distinct from that
of Ephraim. It is certain, therefore, that they had not fallen into such
a gross blunder as to throw the two names into one lot. Now, to conceal
two tribes under the name of Joseph, in order to defraud them of half
their right, would have been intolerable injustice. We may add, that the
domain of each was distinctly explained and described by its proper
boundaries.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="xx.ii-p28"></span>We are therefore led to conclude, that when
the lots were cast for the two tribes, the admirable counsel of God
arranged that the brothers, who had a common father, should be
contiguous and neighbors to each other. It is unworthy in them,
therefore, to complain and plead that only one inheritance had been
given to them, because Joshua had neither such heartlessness nor so much
malice as to defraud them of a clear right either through
thoughtlessness or envy.  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) But
herein lay the falsehood of their complaint concerning narrow
boundaries, that they counted all that was yet to be acquired by warlike
prowess as nothing; as if the lot had assigned portions to the other
tribes only in subjugated territory. Joshua, accordingly, in a single
sentence, refutes and disposes of their plea, and retorts upon them a
charge by which they were trying to throw obloquy upon him. If your
resources and your numbers are so great, why, he asks, do you not make
an inroad on the enemy, whose country has been given to you? Nor will
the event disappoint you, if, trusting to the promise of God, you boldly
proceed to the inheritance which he has bestowed upon you. We see how,
although proper provision had been made for them, they were so blinded
by sloth as to complain that they were straitened for room, because they
were unwilling to move their finger to seek the full possession of their
inheritance. Wherefore, this passage teaches us, that if at any time we
think less is performed for us than is due, we ought carefully to shake
off all delays, and not rashly throw upon others the blame which is
inherent in ourselves.

<span id="xx.ii-p34"></span><span id="xx.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p35"></span>**16.** *And the children of Joseph said,*
etc It is too apparent that they were thinking only of themselves,
because they quibble as much as they can, in order to avoid following
the suggestion of Joshua, than which, however, nothing was more
reasonable. They object, that the mountain is rugged and little better
than a desert, and therefore, though it were added to them, they would
derive very little benefit from it. In regard to the plain, which was
cultivated and fertile, they object that they are shut out and debarred
from it because of the formidable array of the enemy. Accordingly, they
make mention of their iron chariots, as if they had not already learned
by experience that the Lord was able, without any difficulty, to trample
down both horses and chariots. Joshua, however, by a simple and
right-hearted answer, administers due castigation, as well to their
avarice as their effeminacy and torpor. If the forest, as it now stands,
is not sufficiently productive, cut down the trees and convert it into
good fields; provided you are not sparing of your labor, you will have
no reason to be dissatisfied with your habitation. Iron chariots,
moreover, cannot prevent the Lord from performing what he has promised
to you. The inheritance is yours; do only your part by entering with due
confidence on the possession of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc07019.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xx.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p27"></span> Latin, “<span id="xx.i-p27.1"></span>Quidam
astute hunc scrupulum dissimulant.” French, “<span
id="xx.i-p27.2"></span>Aucuns y vent a la finesse ne faisans nulle
mention de ceste difficulte;” “Some have recourse to finesse, making no
mention of this difficulty.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc07019.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xx.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p21"></span> Latin, “<span id="xx.ii-p21.1"></span>Nisi
quia forte perspectum est; nec habitatio commodior obnoxia esset multis
querimoniis.” French, “<span id="xx.ii-p21.2"></span>Sinon possible
qu’on voulust avoir esgard que s’ils eussent este plus a leur aise, cela
eust engendre des complaintes;” “Unless it be possible that they were
pleased to take it into consideration that if they had been more at
their ease, that might have engendered complaints.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc07019.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xx.ii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p22"></span> Latin, “<span id="xx.ii-p22.1"></span>Turpi
lucro adduti.” French, “<span id="xx.ii-p22.2"></span>Sous couleur de
quelque gain vilain et infame;” “Under color of some vile and infamous
gain.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc07019.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xx.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p24"></span> In the French this section of the
commentary stops here, and all that follows in the Latin is omitted. It
only amounts, however, to a transposition, as the omitted paragraph is
inserted under the section of <span id="xx.ii-p24.1"></span>[Jos
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014)<span id="xx.ii-p24.1"></span>,
at the place indicated by a note. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc07019.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xx.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p27"></span> The omitted paragraph of the section of
<span id="xx.ii-p27.1"></span>[Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011)<span id="xx.ii-p27.1"></span> is
inserted here. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc07019.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xx.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p29"></span> It is impossible, of course, to make any
suppositions at variance with the honor and integrity of Joshua, and it
must therefore be held that in whatever manner the lot was taken for the
children of Joseph, the strictest equity was observed. Is it necessary,
however, to adopt one of the two alternatives, — either that separate
lots were taken for Ephraim and Manasseh, or that Joshua deceived them?
Though they counted as two tribes, they had only one patriarch for their
ancestor, and it may therefore have been most expedient that, as they
were brethren, their settlements should be adjacent to each other. This
might, perhaps, have been obtained by taking separate lots, for we have
already seen, on several occasions, how the lot, though apparently
fortuitous, was providentially controlled, so as to give results at once
confirmatory of ancient predictions, and conducive to the public good;
and we may therefore presume that even if separate lots had been taken,
the result might be still have been to place the two kindred tribes in
juxtaposition. But this was only problematical, and the only way of
placing the matter beyond doubt was to make one lot serve for both. And
there was no necessary injustice in this, since, as has been repeatedly
observed, the lot only fixed the locality, without determining its
precise limits, and thus left it open to enlarge or curtail them
according to the extent of the population. If injustice had been done to
the children of Joseph, it would not have been merely because they had
been placed in one lot, but because this lot, though really intended for
two tribes, had been left as small as if it had been intended only for
one. The unreasonableness and dishonesty of the complaint, therefore,
lay, according to this view, in their insisting on the fact that only
one lot had been taken, and at the same time keeping out of view the
other equally important fact, that in fixing its boundaries due
allowance had been made for their numbers, and distinct settlements of
sufficient magnitude given to each. That only one lot had been taken is
strongly confirmed by the whole tenor of the narrative: *First,* When
the children distinctly put the question to Joshua, “Why has thou given
me but one lot and one portion to inherit?” he does not silence them at
once by answering that the assertion which they thus broadly made in the
form of a question was not true. On the contrary, the indirectness of
his answer seems to imply that the truth of the assertion could not be
denied. *Secondly,* The narrative in <span
id="xx.ii-p29.1"></span>[Joshua
16](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#000)<span id="xx.ii-p29.1"></span>, in
describing the allocations of Ephraim and Manasseh, speak of them as
forming only one lot. Thus, it is said, (<span
id="xx.ii-p29.2"></span>[Jos 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001)<span
id="xx.ii-p29.2"></span>,)

<span id="xx.ii-p30"></span>“The lot of the children of Joseph fell from
Jordan by Jericho,  
unto the water of Jericho on the east;”

<span id="xx.ii-p31"></span>and (<span id="xx.ii-p31.1"></span>[Jos
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#004)<span id="xx.ii-p31.1"></span>.)

<span id="xx.ii-p32"></span>“So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and
Ephraim,  
took their inheritance.”

<span id="xx.ii-p33"></span>— *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 18](cc07020)
