[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07011)  [Next](cc07013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
10:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now it came to pass, when Adonizedek
king of Jerusalem had heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly
destroyed it; as he had done to Jericho and her king, so he had done to
Ai and her king; and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with
Israel, and were among them;

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Quum audisset Adoni-zedec rex
Jerusalem quod cepisset Josue Hai, et eam perdidisset (quemadmodum
feceret Jericho, et regi ejus, quod sic fecisset Hai et regi ejus) et
quod pacem fecissent habitatores Gibeon cum Israel, et essent inter
ipsos:

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** That they feared greatly, because
Gibeon *was* a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it
*was* greater than Ai, and all the men thereof *were* mighty.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tunc timuerunt valde, quod civitas
magna esset Gibeon tanquam una e civitatibus regiis, quia major erat
quam Hai, omnesque viri ejus fortes.

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Wherefore Adonizedek king of
Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of Hebron, and unto Piram king of
Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon,
saying,

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Propterea misit Adoni-zedec rex
Jerusalem ad Hoham regem Hebron et ad Piram regem Jarmuth, et ad Japhiam
regem Lachis, et ad Debir regem Eglon, dicendo,

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Come up unto me, and help me, that we
may smite Gibeon: for it has made peace with Joshua and with the
children of Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ascendite ad me et suppetias ferte
mihi, ut percutiamus Gibeon qui pacem fecit cum Josue et filiis Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Therefore the five kings of the
Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of
Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves
together, and went up, they and all their hosts, and encamped before
Gibeon, and made war against it.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Congregati sunt itaque, et
ascenderunt quinque reges Amorrhaei, rex Jerusalem, rex Hebron, rex
Jarmuth, rex Lachis, rex Eglon, ipsi et omnes exercitus eorum, et
castrametati sunt juxta Gibeon, pugnaveruntque adversus eam.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And the men of Gibeon sent unto
Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy hand from thy
servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us: for all the
kings of the Amorites that dwell in the mountains are gathered together
against us.

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Miserunt ergo viri Gibeon ad Josuam
ad castra in Gilgal, dicendo, Ne contrahas manus tuas a servis tuis:
ascende ad nos cito, et serva nos, atque auxiliare nobis: congregati
enim sunt contra nos omnes reges Amorrhaei habitantes in monte.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he,
and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valor.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Ascendit itaque Josue de Gilgal,
ipse, et universus populus bellator cum eo, omnes potentes viribus.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear
them not: for I have delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a
man of them stand before thee.

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Dixit autem Jehova ad Josue, Ne
timeas ab eis: in manum enim tuam tradidi eos, nec consistet quisquam ex
eis in conspectu tuo.

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Joshua therefore came unto them
suddenly, *and* went up from Gilgal all night.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et venit ad eos Josue repente: tota
enim nocte ascendit de Gilgal.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And the LORD discomfited them
before Israel, and slew them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and
chased them along the way that goeth up to Bethhoron, and smote them to
Azekah, and unto Makkedah.

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et contrivit eos Jehova coram
Israel, percussitque eos plaga magna in Gibeon, et persequutus est eos
per viam ascensus Beth-horon, et percussit eos usque Azecah et usque
Makedah.

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And it came to pass, as they fled
from before Israel, *and* were in the going down to Bethhoron, that the
LORD cast down great stones from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they
died: *they were* more which died with hailstones than *they* whom the
children of Israel slew with the sword.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Dum autem fugerent a facie Israel,
et essent in descensu Beth-horon, Jehova demisit super eos lapides
magnos e coelo usque ad Azecah, et mortui sunt, plures mortui sunt
lapidibus grandinis, quam quos interfecerunt filii Israel gladio.

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Then spoke Joshua to the LORD in
the day when the LORD delivered up the Amorites before the children of
Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon
Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Tunc loquutus est Josue ad Jehovam
die qua tradidit Jehova Amorrhaeum coram filiis Israel.  <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88) Dixitque in oculis Israel, Sol in Gibeon
expecta, et Luna in valle Ajalon.

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>**13.** And the sun stood still, and the
moon stayed, until the people had avenged themselves upon their enemies.
*Is* not this written in the book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in
the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a whole day.

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>**13.** Et expectavit Sol, et luna
constitit donec ulcisceretur se gens de inimicis suis. Annon hoc
scriptum est in libro Jasar? (*vel*, recti) Stetit ergo sol in medio
coeli, nec festinavit occumbere circiter die una integra.

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span>**14.** And there was no day like that
before it or after it, that the LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man:
for the LORD fought for Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span>**14.** Et non fuit sicut dies illa ante
eam nec post eam, qua exaudivit Jehova vocem viri: Jehova enim pugnabat
pro Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span><span id="xiii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span>**1.** *Now it came to pass,* etc He had
formerly briefly glanced at, but now more fully details the conspiracy
of the kings, who dwelt both in the mountains and in the plain. For
after mentioning that they were struck with fear, and leagued together
to make common war, he had broken off abruptly, and proceeded to speak
of the Gibeonites. But what he had previously said of the kings in
general, he now applies only to one individual; not because Adoni-zedek
alone was afraid, but because he stirred up all the others, and was the
principal originator and leader in carrying on the war against the
Israelites. This is sufficiently expressed by the plural number of the
verb; for it is said, When Adoni-zedek had heard — they feared greatly.
From this it appears that they were all of the same mind, but that while
some of them held back from fear, he who possessed greater authority,
and was nearer the danger, invited the four others to arms.  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span>In the beginning of the chapter it is again
told, how the five kings formed an alliance to meet the Israelites, and
ward off the overthrow with which they were all threatened. But as the
Gibeonites had meanwhile surrendered, they first turned their arms
against them, both that by inflicting punishment upon them, as the
betrayers of their country, they might make them an example to all their
neighbors, and that by striking terror into those vanquished enemies,
they might also inspire their own soldiers with confidence. They
resolve, therefore, to attack the Gibeonites who, by their embassy, had
made a disruption and opened a passage to the Israelites. They had,
indeed, a fair pretext for war, in resolving to punish the effeminacy of
those who had chosen to give their sanction to strangers, about to lay
the whole country waste, rather than faithfully defend their neighbors.
And the Gibeonites experienced how useless their crafty counsel must
have been, had they not been saved in pity by the Israelites. Meanwhile
the Lord allowed them to be involved in danger, in order that, being
twice freed, they might more willingly and meekly submit to the yoke.

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span><span id="xiii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>**6.** *And the men of Gibeon sent unto
Joshua,* etc The course of the narrative is inverted; for the Gibeonites
certainly did not wait till they were besieged, but on seeing an army
levied and prepared, and having no doubt that they would have to sustain
the first onset, as they had incurred general hatred, they anticipate
the attack, and hasten to have recourse to the protection of Joshua.
 <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) To desert those to whom life had
been given, would have been at once unlawful, unjust, and inhumane. Nay,
as their surrender had been consequent on the agreement, they were
entitled to be defended against violence and injury. With justice,
therefore, they implore the Israelites, under whose protection they
were; and there is no hesitation on the part of Joshua, who judges it to
be his duty to defend those whose submission he had agreed to accept.
They had deceived him, it is true, but after the fraud had been
detected, and they had confessed it, interposing some palliating
circumstances, they had obtained pardon.

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span>Equity and a sense of duty thus did not
allow the Israelites to abandon the Gibeonites to their fate. Still,
Joshua is entitled to praise for his promptitude in complying with the
request, and sending assistance without delay. He is said to have
marched during the whole night, and thus could not have proceeded with
greater haste had the safety of the whole people been at stake. Had the
same sincerity always been evinced by profane nations, they would rather
have assisted their allies in due time than avenged their disasters
after they had suffered them. The term *suddenly* ought not, however, to
be confined to a single day, as if Joshua had accomplished three days’
journey in a single night, and made his appearance among the Gibeonites
next morning. All that is meant to be expressed is his great speed, and
his not delaying his departure till next day.  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span>Though the Israelites moved their camp from
Ai or that neighborhood, it was the third day before they entered the
confines of the Gibeonites. Granting that they then proceeded slowly in
order of battle, Joshua was still at some distance when application is
made to him to assist the Gibeonites. We have seen that Gilgal was the
first station after crossing the Jordan, and therefore more remote than
Jericho. If any one deems it absurd, that after receiving the submission
of several cities, he should have turned backwards, and left an empty
district, the recovery of which from the enemy might again cost new
labor, I answer, there was no ground to fear that the enemy would come
forward to occupy it, and engage in an expedition attended with great
danger and difficulty. It is probable that when a body of troops was
selected to attack Jericho, the women, children, and all others unfit
for war remained in that quiet corner, where they might have the
protection of those of the Reubenites, Gadites, and half tribe of
Manasseh, who had been left on the opposite bank of the Jordan. For to
what end would they have carried with them into their battles children
and women heavy with child, or nursing babes at their breasts? How,
during the incursions of the enemy, could food be found for such a
multitude, or water sufficient to supply all their flocks and herds? I
conclude, therefore, that Joshua and his soldiers returned to their
tents that they might refresh themselves for a little with their wives
and children, and there deposit the spoils with which they had been
enriched.

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span><span id="xiii.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span>**8***. And the Lord discomfited them,* etc
It is uncertain whether the Lord anticipated the movement, and armed
Joshua by his oracle, drawing him forth from Gilgal before he had taken
any step, or whether he only confirmed him after he had made his
preparations for setting out. It seems to me more likely that Joshua did
not rush forth as soon as he was asked without consulting God, but at
length, after being informed of his will, took up arms boldly and
speedily. As he had lately been chastised for excessive facility, it is
at least a probable conjecture that in this case of difficulty, he
attempted nothing except in so far as he had a divine command. The Lord,
therefore, had respect to the wretched Gibeonites when he did not allow
them to remain destitute without the assistance of his people.

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span>Joshua is made confident of victory in
order that he may succor them; for God stimulates us more powerfully to
the performance of duty by promising than by ordering. That which is
here promised to one belongs to all, but for the sake of honoring
Joshua, it is specially deposited with him that he may afterwards be the
bearer of it to his army. For God does not speak from heaven
indiscriminately to all sorts of persons, but confers the honor only on
excellent servants and chosen prophets.

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span>It is moreover worthy of notice that Joshua
did not abuse the divine promise by making it an excuse for
sluggishness, but felt the more vehemently inflamed after he was assured
of a happy issue. Many, while they ostentatiously express their faith,
become lazy and slothful from perverse security. Joshua hears that
victory is in his hand, and that he may gain it, runs swiftly to battle.
For he knew that the happy issue was revealed, not for the purpose of
slackening his pace or making him more remiss, but of making him exert
himself with greater zeal. Hence it was that he took the enemy by
surprise.

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span><span id="xiii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span>**10.** *And the Lord discomfited them,*
etc In the first slaughter the Lord exerted his own might, but used the
swords of the people. Hence we infer that whenever he works by men,
nothing is detracted from his glory, but whatever is done redounds to
him alone. For when he employs the co-operation of men, he does not call
in allies as a subsidiary force, or borrow anything from them; but as he
is able to accomplish whatever he pleases by a mere nod, he uses men
also as instruments to show that they are ruled by his hand and will.
Meanwhile it is said with truth in either way, that the enemy were
routed and crushed by God, or by the Israelites, inasmuch as God crushed
them by the instrumentality of the Israelites.

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span>In the second slaughter the hand of God
appeared more clearly, when the enemy were destroyed by hail. And it is
distinctly stated that more were destroyed by hail than were slain by
the sword, that there might be no doubt of the victory having been
obtained from heaven. Hence again it is gathered that this was not
common hail, such as is wont to fall during storms. For, in the first
place, more would have been wounded or scattered and dispersed than
suddenly destroyed; and secondly, had not God darted it directly, part
would have fallen on the heads of the Israelites. Now, when the one army
is attacked separately, and the other, kept free from injury, comes
forward as it were to join auxiliary troops, it becomes perfectly clear
that God is fighting from heaven. To the same effect it is said that God
threw down great stones of hail from heaven: for the meaning is that
they fell with extraordinary force, and were far above the ordinary
size. If at any time, in common battles, a storm has suddenly arisen,
and has proved useful to one of the parties, God has seemed to give that
party a token of his favor and hence the line, Dearly beloved of heaven
is he on whose side the elements are enlisted.  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) Here we have the account of a more
distinguished miracle, in which the omnipotence of God was openly
displayed.

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span><span id="xiii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span>**12.** *Then spoke Joshua to the Lord,*
etc Such is the literal reading, but some expound it as meaning *before*
Jehovah: for to speak to God, who, as piety dictates, is to be
suppliantly petitioned, seems to be little in accordance with the
modesty of faith, and it is immediately subjoined that Joshua addressed
his words to the sun. I have no doubt that by the former clause prayer
or vow is denoted, and that the latter is an expression of confidence
after he was heard: for to command the sun to stand if he had not
previously obtained permission, would have been presumptuous and
arrogant. He first, then, consults God and asks: having forthwith
obtained an answer, he boldly commands the sun to do what he knows is
pleasing to God.

<span id="xiii.i-p55"></span>And such is the power and privilege of the
faith which Christ inspires, (<span id="xiii.i-p55.1"></span>[Mt
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020)<span id="xiii.i-p55.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p55.2"></span>[Lu
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#006)<span id="xiii.i-p55.2"></span>)
that mountains and seas are removed at its command. The more the godly
feel their own emptiness, the more liberally does God transfer his power
to them, and when faith is annexed to the word, he in it demonstrates
his own power. In short, faith borrows the confidence of command from
the word on which it is founded. Thus Elias, by the command of God, shut
and opened the heaven, and brought down fire from it; thus Christ
furnished his disciples with heavenly power to make the elements subject
to them.

<span id="xiii.i-p56"></span>Caution, however, must be used, lest any
one may at his own hand presume to give forth rash commands. Joshua did
not attempt to delay and check the course of the sun before he was well
instructed as to the purpose of God. And although, when he is said to
have spoken with God, the words do not sufficiently express the modesty
and submission which become the servant of God in giving utterance to
his prayers, let it suffice us briefly to understand as implied, that
Joshua besought God to grant what he desired, and on obtaining his
request, became the free and magnanimous herald of an incredible miracle
unlike any that had previously taken place. He never would have ventured
in the presence of all to command the sun so confidently, if he had not
been thoroughly conscious of his vocation. Had it been otherwise, he
would have exposed himself to a base and shameful affront. When, without
hesitation, he opens his mouth and tells the sun and the moon to deviate
from the perpetual law of nature, it is just as if he had adjured them
by the boundless power of God with which he was invested. Here, too, the
Lord gives a bright display of his singular favor toward his Church. As
in kindness to the human race he divides the day from the night by the
daily course of the sun, and constantly whirls the immense orb with
indefatigable swiftness, so he was pleased that it should halt for a
short time till the enemies of Israel were destroyed.  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93)

<span id="xiii.i-p58"></span><span id="xiii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p59"></span>**13.** *And the sun stood still,* etc The
question how the sun stood in Gibeon, is no less unseasonably raised by
some than unskillfully explained by others.  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) For Joshua did not subtlety place the sun
in any particular point, making it necessary to feign that the battle
was fought at the summer solstice, but as it was turning towards the
district of Ajalon as far as the eye could discern, Joshua bids it stay
and rest there, in other words, remain above what is called the horizon.
In short, the sun, which was already declining to the west, is kept from
setting.  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)

<span id="xiii.i-p62"></span>I do not give myself any great anxiety as
to the number of the hours; because it is enough for me that the day was
continued through the whole night. Were histories of that period extant,
they would doubtless celebrate this great miracle; lest its credibility,
however, should be questioned, the writer of this book mentions that an
account of it was given elsewhere, though the work which he quotes has
been lost, and expounders are not well agreed as to the term Jazar.
Those who think Moses is meant, insist on referring the example which is
here given to general predictions. As Moses applies this name to the
chosen people, it is more congruous to hold that commentaries on the
events in their history are meant. I, for my part, understand by it
either God or Israel, rather than the author of a history.  <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="xiii.i-p64"></span><span id="xiii.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p65"></span>**14.** *And there was no day like that,*
etc We read in Isaiah and in the Sacred History, that the course of the
sun was afterwards changed as a favor to King Hezekiah. (<span
id="xiii.i-p65.1"></span>[Isa
38:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p65.1"></span>)
For to assure him that his life was still to be prolonged fifteen years,
the shadow of the sun was carried back over ten degrees on which it had
gone down. It is not, therefore, absolutely denied that anything similar
had ever been conceded to any other person, but the miracle is extolled
as singular. The rendering of the word <span
id="xiii.i-p65.2"></span>שמע, by *obeyed,* as adopted by some, I reject
as too harsh. For although it is said in <span
id="xiii.i-p65.3"></span>[Ps. 145:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019)<span id="xiii.i-p65.3"></span>,
that the Lord does according to the desire of his servants, which may be
held to be equivalent to obeying, it is better to avoid anything which
seems to give a subordinate office to God.  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) Simply, therefore, the excellence of the
miracle is praised, as nothing like it had been seen before or had
happened after. The second clause of the verse celebrates the kindness
and condescension of God in hearing Joshua, as well as his paternal
favor towards the people, for whom he is said to have fought.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
10:15-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#015)<span
id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**15.** And Joshua returned, and all Israel
with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span>**15.** Reversus autem est Josue et
universus Israel cum eo ad castra in Gilgal.

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span>**16.** But these five kings fled, and hid
themselves in a cave at Makkedah.

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span>**16.** Fugerant vero ipsi reges, et
absconderant se in spelunca in Makeda.

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span>**17.** And it was told Joshua, saying, The
five kings are found hid in a cave at Makkedah.

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span>**17.** Et nuntiatum est Josue his verbis,
Inventi sunt quinque reges absconditi in spelunca in Makeda.

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>**18.** And Joshua said, Roll great stones
upon the mouth of the cave, and set men by it for to keep them:

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span>**18.** Tunc dixit Josue, Devolvite saxa
magna ad os speluncae, et constituite juxta eam viros ut custodiant eos.

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span>**19.** And stay you not, *but* pursue
after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
enter into their cities: for the LORD your God has delivered them into
your hand.

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span>**19.** Vos autem persequimini  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) inimicos vestros, et caudam eorum
caedite, nec sinatis eos ingredi urbes suas: tradidit enim eos Jehova
Deus vester in manum vestram.

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span>**20.** And it came to pass, when Joshua
and the children of Israel had made an end of slaying them with a very
great slaughter, till they were consumed, that the rest *which* remained
of them entered into fenced cities.

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span>**20.** Quum autem finem fecisset Josue,
et filii Israel percutiendi plaga magna valde, donec consumerentur, et
superstites qui evaserant ex ipsis ingressi essent urbes munitas.

<span id="xiii.ii-p15"></span>**21.** And all the people returned to the
camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace: none moved his tongue against any
of the children of Israel.

<span id="xiii.ii-p16"></span>**21.** Reversi sunt universus populus ad
castra ad Josue in Makeda in pace: non movit contra filios Israel
quisquam linguam suam.

<span id="xiii.ii-p17"></span>**22.** Then said Joshua, Open the mouth
of the cave, and bring out those five kings unto me out of the cave.

<span id="xiii.ii-p18"></span>**22.** Tunc dixit Josue, Aperite os
speluncae, et adducite ad me quinque illos reges de spelunca.

<span id="xiii.ii-p19"></span>**23.** And they did so, and brought forth
those five kings unto him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the
king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, *and* the king
of Eglon.

<span id="xiii.ii-p20"></span>**23.** Atque ita fecerunt, nempe
adduxerunt ad eum quinque illos reges de spelunca, regem Jerusalem,
regem Hebron, regem Jarmuth, regem Lachis, regem Eglon.

<span id="xiii.ii-p21"></span>**24.** And it came to pass, when they
brought out those kings unto Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men
of Israel, and said unto the captains of the men of war which went with
him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they
came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.

<span id="xiii.ii-p22"></span>**24.** Quumque eduxissent quinque reges
illos ad Josue, vocavit Josue omnes viros Israel, dixitque ducibus
virorum bellatorum, qui profecti erant secum, Accedite, ponite pedes
vestros super colla regum istorum. Et accesserunt, posueruntque pedes
suos super colla ipsorum.

<span id="xiii.ii-p23"></span>**25.** And Joshua said unto them, Fear
not, nor be dismayed, be strong and of good courage: for thus shall the
LORD do to all your enemies against whom you fight.

<span id="xiii.ii-p24"></span>**25.** Tunc dixit ad eos Josue, Ne
timeatis, et ne paveatis, fortes estoate, et roborate vos: sic enim
faciet Jehova omnibus inimicis vestris contra quos pugnatis.

<span id="xiii.ii-p25"></span>**26.** And afterward Joshua smote them,
and slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were hanging upon
the trees until the evening.

<span id="xiii.ii-p26"></span>**26.** Posthaec percussit eos Josue, et
interfecit eos, et suspendit in quinque lignis, fueruntque suspensi in
lignis usque ad vesperum.

<span id="xiii.ii-p27"></span>**27.** And it came to pass at the time of
the going down of the sun, *that* Joshua commanded, and they took them
down off the trees, and cast them into the cave wherein they had been
hid, and laid great stones in the cave’s mouth, *which remain* until
this very day.

<span id="xiii.ii-p28"></span>**27.** Fuit praeterea tempore quo
occumbit sol praecepit Josue, et deposuerunt eos e lignis,
projeceruntque eos in speluncam in qua se absconderant, et posuerunt
lapides magnos ad os speluncae usque in hunc diem.

<span id="xiii.ii-p29"></span>**28.** And that day Joshua took Makkedah,
and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof he utterly
destroyed, them, and all the souls that *were* therein; he let none
remain: and he did to the king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of
Jericho.

<span id="xiii.ii-p30"></span>**28.** Makedam vero cepit Josue eo die,
et percussit eam acie gladii, et regem ejus occidit una cum illis, et
nullam animam quae esset in ea reliquit superstitem, fecitque regi
Makeda quemadmodum fecerat regi Jericho.

<span id="xiii.ii-p31"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p32"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p33"></span>**15.** *And Joshua returned,* etc This
verse is not inserted in its proper place,  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) for shortly after the end of the battle
is added, and the punishment inflicted on the kings, which was
subsequent to the battle. We are then told of the encampment in
Makkedah, and at last, in the end of the chapter, the return to Gilgal,
which was introduced at the beginning without regard to the order of
time, is repeated. Hence the narrative of the flight and concealment of
the kings is connected with the former transactions. For having been
informed during the heat of the battle that they were hiding in a cave,
Joshua, fearing that if he were to set about capturing them, the others
might escape, prudently contented himself with ordering the mouth of the
cave to be blocked up with large stones, and setting sentinels over
them, that being thus shut up, as it were in prison, they might at a fit
time be brought forth and put to death. Hence, too, it appears that the
army of the enemy was very large, because although the Israelites
pressed closely upon them in their flight, and the sun himself gave an
additional period for slaying them, it was impossible, notwithstanding,
to prevent numbers of them from escaping into fortified cities. The
divine assistance afforded to the Israelites was, however, sufficiently
attested by the fact that they continued till they were wearied slaying
at will all whom they met, and then returned safe. For the expression,
that no one dared to move the tongue, implies that the Israelites gained
a bloodless victory,  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) as if they
had gone forth not to fight, but merely to slay.

<span id="xiii.ii-p36"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p37"></span>**18.** *And Joshua said, Roll,* etc The
enemy having been completely routed, Joshua is now free, and, as it
were, at leisure, to inflict punishment on the kings. In considering
this, the divine command must always be kept in view. But for this it
would argue boundless arrogance and barbarous atrocity to trample on the
necks of kings, and hang up their dead bodies on gibbets. It is certain
that they had lately been raised by divine agency to a sacred dignity,
and placed on a royal throne. It would therefore have been contrary to
the feelings of humanity to exult in their ignominy, had not God so
ordered it. But as such was his pleasure, it behooves us to acquiesce in
his decision, without presuming to inquire why he was so severe.

<span id="xiii.ii-p38"></span>At the same time, we must recollect, as I
formerly hinted, first, that all from the least even to the greatest
were deserving of death, because their iniquity had reached the highest
pitch, and the kings, as more criminal than the others, deserved severer
punishment; and secondly, that it was expedient to give an example of
inexorable rigor in the person of the kings, whom the people, from a
perverse affectation of clemency, might have been too much disposed to
pardon. It was the will of God that all should be destroyed, and he had
imposed the execution of this sentence on his people. Had he not
stimulated them strongly to the performance of it, they might have found
specious pretexts for giving pardon. But a mercy which impairs the
authority of God at the will of man, is detestable.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) Now, however, when regal honor is not
spared, all handle for humanity to the plebeians and common vulgar is
cut off.

<span id="xiii.ii-p40"></span>By this instance, the Lord shows us the
great interest he takes in his elect people; for it was an instance of
rare condescension to place kings under their feet, and allow them to
insult over their dignity, as if they had been petty robbers; as it is
said in the Psalm, A two-edged sword is in their hand to execute
vengeance on the nations, to bind their kings with fetters, and their
nobles with chains of iron; to execute the judgment written: this honor
have all the saints. (<span id="xiii.ii-p40.1"></span>[Ps
149:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#006)<span
id="xiii.ii-p40.1"></span>) That fearful sight had at the same time the
effect of striking terror, so as to prevent the Israelites from
imitating the manners of nations whose crimes they had seen so severely
punished. Accordingly, we repeatedly meet in the books of Moses with
this warning, You have seen how God took vengeance on the nations who
were in the land of Canaan before you. Beware, therefore, of provoking
the wrath of your God by their perverse doings. In one word, that God
might be worshipped with greater sanctity, he ordered the land to be
purged of all pollutions, and as the inhabitants had been excessively
wicked, he willed that his curse should rest upon them in a new and
unwonted manner.

<span id="xiii.ii-p41"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p42"></span>**25.** *And Joshua said unto them, Fear
not, etc* Joshua now triumphs in the persons of the five kings over all
the others who remained. For he exhorts his own people to confidence,
just as if those who still stood unsubdued were actually prostrate under
their feet. Hence we gather, that by the trampling down of a few, the
whole people were so elated, that they looked down with contempt on all
the others, as if they were already overthrown. And, certainly, we have
here a brighter display of the divine power, which could thus inspire
confidence for the future.

<span id="xiii.ii-p43"></span>It is to be observed, however, that the
kings were hung up, not for the purpose of exercising greater severity
upon them, but merely by way of ignominy, as they were already slain. It
was expedient that this memorable act of divine vengeance should be
openly displayed in the view of all. Perhaps, also, it was the divine
purpose to infuriate the other nations by despair, and drive them to
madness, that they might bring down swifter destruction on themselves,
whetting the wrath of the Israelites by their obstinacy. The same
ignominy is inflicted on the king of Makkedah, though he had not led out
his forces, and a similar destruction is executed on the whole people,
who had kept quiet within their walls.  <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) It is probable, indeed, that they had
made some hostile attempt, but the special reason was, that God had
passed the same sentence upon all. Why the dead bodies were thrown into
the cave at evening, I have elsewhere explained. Moreover, this whole
history holds up to us as in a mirror, how, when the Lord is seated on
his tribunal, all worldly splendor vanishes before him, and the glory of
those who seemed to excel is turned by his judgment into the greatest
disgrace.

<span id="xiii.iii"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
10:29-43](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#029)<span
id="xiii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p2"></span>**29.** Then Joshua passed from Makkedah,
and all Israel with him, unto Libnah, and fought against Libnah:

<span id="xiii.iii-p3"></span>**29.** Transivit deinde Josue et
universus Israel cum eo de Makeda in Libna, et oppugnavit Libna.

<span id="xiii.iii-p4"></span>**30.** And the LORD delivered it also,
and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it with the
edge of the sword, and all the souls that *were* therein; he let none
remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of
Jericho.

<span id="xiii.iii-p5"></span>**30.** Tradiditque Jehova illam etiam in
manum Israel, et regem ejus, et percussit eam acie gladii, omnemque
animam quae erat in ea: non reliquit in ea superstitem, fecitque regi
ejus quemadmodum fecerat regi Jericho.

<span id="xiii.iii-p6"></span>**31.** And Joshua passed from Libnah, and
all Israel with him, unto Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought
against it:

<span id="xiii.iii-p7"></span>**31.** Postea transivit Josue, et
universus Israel cum eo de Libna in Lachis, et castrametatus est juxta
eam, et oppugnavit eam.

<span id="xiii.iii-p8"></span>**32.** And the LORD delivered Lachish
into the hand of Israel, which took it on the second day, and smote it
with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that *were* therein,
according to all that he had done to Libnah.

<span id="xiii.iii-p9"></span>**32.** Deditque Jehova Lachis in manum
Israel, et cepit eam die secunda, et percussit eam acie gladii, omnemque
animam quae erat in ea prorsus ut fecerat Libna.

<span id="xiii.iii-p10"></span>**33.** Then Horam king of Gezer came up
to help Lachish; and Joshua smote him and his people, until he had left
him none remaining.

<span id="xiii.iii-p11"></span>**33.** Ascendit autem Horam rex Geser ad
opem ferendam Lachis, et percussit eum Josue ac populum ejus, ut non
reliquerit ei superstitem.

<span id="xiii.iii-p12"></span>**34.** And from Lachish Joshua passed
unto Eglon, and all Israel with him; and they encamped against it, and
fought against it:

<span id="xiii.iii-p13"></span>**34.** Transivit insuper Josue et
universus Israel cum eo de Lachis in Eglon, et castrametati sunt contra
eam, et oppugnaverunt eam.

<span id="xiii.iii-p14"></span>**35.** And they took it on that day, and
smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that *were*
therein he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done
to Lachish.

<span id="xiii.iii-p15"></span>**35.** Ceperuntque eam die illo, et
percusserunt acie gladii, et omnem animam quae illic erat, die illa
interfecit prorsus ut fecerat Lachis.

<span id="xiii.iii-p16"></span>**36.** And Joshua went up from Eglon,
and all Israel with him, unto Hebron; and they fought against it:

<span id="xiii.iii-p17"></span>**36.** Ascendit postea Josue et
universus Israel cum eo ab Eglon in Hebron, et oppugnaverunt eam.

<span id="xiii.iii-p18"></span>**37.** And they took it, and smote it
with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the cities
thereof, and all the souls that *were* therein; he left none remaining,
according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed it utterly,
and all the souls that *were* therein.

<span id="xiii.iii-p19"></span>**37.** Et ceperunt eam, et percusserunt
acie gladii, et regem ejus, et omnia oppida ejus, atque omnem animam
quae illic erat: non reliquit superstitem prorsus ut fecerat Eglon.
Perdidit ergo eam atque omnem animam quae illic erat.

<span id="xiii.iii-p20"></span>**38.** And Joshua returned, and all
Israel with him, to Debir; and fought against it:

<span id="xiii.iii-p21"></span>**38.** Postea reversus est Josue, et
universus Israel cum eo in Debir, et oppugnavit eam.

<span id="xiii.iii-p22"></span>**39.** And he took it, and the king
thereof, and all the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge
of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he
left none remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and
to the king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king.

<span id="xiii.iii-p23"></span>**39.** Et ceperunt eam, et percusserunt
acie gladii, et regem ejus, et omnia oppida ejus, percusseruntque eos
acie gladii, atque interfecerunt omnem animam quae illic erat. Non
reliquit superstitem, quemadmodum fecerat Hebron, sic fecit Debir, et
regi ejus: et quemadmodum fecerat Libna, et regi ejus.

<span id="xiii.iii-p24"></span>**40.** So Joshua smote all the country
of the hills, and of the south, and of the vale, and of the springs, and
all their kings: he left none remaining, but utterly destroyed all that
breathed, as the LORD God of Israel commanded.

<span id="xiii.iii-p25"></span>**40.** Percussit itaque Josue omnem
terram montanam, et meridianam, et campestrem, descensus acclives, et
omnes reges earum: non reliquit superstitem: et omnem animam interfecit,
quemadmodum praeceperat Jehova Deus Israel.

<span id="xiii.iii-p26"></span>**41.** And Joshua smote them from
Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even unto
Gibeon.

<span id="xiii.iii-p27"></span>**41.** Percussit itaque Josue a Cades
Barne usque ad Asa, et universam terram Gosen usque ad Gibeon.

<span id="xiii.iii-p28"></span>**42.** And all these kings and their
land did Joshua take at one time, because the LORD God of Israel fought
for Israel.

<span id="xiii.iii-p29"></span>**42.** Cunctos vero reges istos, et
terram eorum cepit Josue simul: quia Jehova Deus Israelis pugnabat pro
Israele.

<span id="xiii.iii-p30"></span>**43.** And Joshua returned, and all
Israel with him, unto the camp to Gilgal.

<span id="xiii.iii-p31"></span>**43.** Inde reversus est Josue et
universus Israel cum eo in castra in Gilgal.

<span id="xiii.iii-p32"></span> 

<span id="xiii.iii-p33"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p34"></span>**29.** *Then Joshua. passed,* etc We
have now a description of the taking of the cities, out of which the
army of the enemy had been raised; and herein God displayed his power no
less wonderfully than in the open field, especially when the rapidity is
considered. For although those who had fled hither in trepidation might
have produced some degree of panic, still, when the fear was allayed,
they might be useful for defense.  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) The garrison had been increased by
their numbers. When, therefore, in a short period of time, Joshua takes
all the cities, and gains possession of the smaller towns, the presence
of God was conspicuously manifested in a success no less incredible than
unexpected. For had they, when attacked, only shut their gates, as
Joshua had not brought either ladders by which he might scale the walls,
or engines by which he might throw them down, each siege might have been
attended with considerable fatigue and delay. Therefore, when he takes
one the following day, and another the very day after attacking it,
these continued, easy, and rapid victories, are evidently beyond human
agency.

<span id="xiii.iii-p36"></span>Not without cause, then, in the end of
the chapter, is the goodness of God expressly celebrated, as it had been
made manifest that he was fighting for Israel, when Joshua at once took
and vanquished so many kings, with their territories. Indeed, he could
never, even in a course of inspection, have passed so quickly from city
to city, had not a passage been divinely opened by the removal of
obstacles. The miracle was increased when the king of Geser, who had
come to the help of others, doubtless with full confidence in the
result, was suddenly put to rout, almost without an effort, and did not
even delay the advance of the Israelites. Those who were slain in the
cities represent, as in a mirror, those whose punishment the Almighty
holds suspended, while he actually takes vengeance on others. For though
they plume themselves on the reprieve thus afforded them, their
condition is worse than if they were immediately dragged to death.
 <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) It looks as if it would have
been a dire calamity to fall in the field of battle; and making their
escape, they seek safety within their walls. But what awaited them there
was much more dreadful. Their wives and their children are butchered in
their sight, and their own death is more ignominious than if they had
perished sword in hand. Hence there is no reason to envy the reprobate
the short time which the Lord sometimes grants them, because when they
have begun to promise themselves safety, sudden destruction will come
upon them. (<span id="xiii.iii-p37.3"></span>[1Th
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="xiii.iii-p37.3"></span>.)
 <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) Meanwhile, let us learn not to
abuse the patience of God when he defers to execute his judgment, and,
instead of indulging in self-complacency when we seem to have been
delivered from any danger, or when means of escape from it present
themselves, let us reflect on the words of Jeremiah, (<span
id="xiii.iii-p38.2"></span>[Jer
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002)<span id="xiii.iii-p38.2"></span>)
that while the basket of early figs  <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) had at least some savor, the other was
so sour that they could not be eaten.

<span id="xiii.iii-p40"></span><span id="xiii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p41"></span>**40.** *So Joshua smote all the
country,* etc Here the divine authority is again interposed in order
completely to acquit Joshua of any charge of cruelty. Had he proceeded
of his own accord to commit an indiscriminate massacre of women and
children, no excuse could have exculpated him from the guilt of
detestable cruelty, cruelty surpassing anything of which we read as
having been perpetrated by savage tribes scarcely raised above the level
of the brutes. But that at which all would otherwise be justly
horrified, it becomes them to embrace with reverence, as proceeding from
God. Clemency is justly praised as one of the principal virtues; but it
is the clemency of those who moderate their wrath when they have been
injured, and when they would have been justified, as individuals, in
shedding blood. But as God had destined the swords of his people for the
slaughter of the Amorites, Joshua could do nothing else than obey his
command.

<span id="xiii.iii-p42"></span>By this fact, then, not only are all
mouths stopped, but all minds also are restrained from presuming to pass
censure. When any one hears it said that Joshua slew all who came in his
way without distinction, although they threw down their arms and
suppliantly begged for mercy, the calmest minds are aroused by the bare
and simple statement, but when it is added, that so God had commanded,
there is no more ground for obloquy against him, than there is against
those who pronounce sentence on criminals. Though, in our judgment at
least, the children and many of the women also were without blame, let
us remember that the judgment-seat of heaven is not subject to our laws.
Nay, rather when we see how the green plants are thus burned, let us,
who are dry wood, fear a heavier judgment for ourselves. And certainly,
any man who will thoroughly examine himself, will find that he is
deserving of a hundred deaths. Why, then, should not the Lord perceive
just ground for one death in any infant which has only passed from its
mother’s womb? In vain shall we murmur or make noisy complaint, that he
has doomed the whole offspring of an accursed race to the same
destruction; the potter will nevertheless have absolute power over his
own vessels, or rather over his own clay.  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107)

<span id="xiii.iii-p44"></span>The last verse  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) confirms the observation already made,
that the fixed station of the whole people was in Gilgal; and that the
soldiers who had gone out to war, returned thither, both that they might
rest from their fatigues, and place their booty in safety. It would not
have been proper to allow them to be more widely scattered till the
casting of the lot had shown where each was to have his permanent abode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc07012.htm#fr_88) <span
id="xiii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span> An additional clause not found in the
original, and excluded by the common versions, is here inserted in the
Septuagint in the following terms, “<span id="xiii.i-p26.1"></span>ἡνίκα
συνέτριψεν αὐτοὺς ἐν Γαβαὼν καὶ συνετρίβησαν ἀπὸ προσώπου υἱω̑ν Ισραήλ;”
“When he crushed them in Gibeon, and they were crushed before the face
of the children of Israel.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc07012.htm#fr_89) <span
id="xiii.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span> French, “<span
id="xiii.i-p34.1"></span>Appela et suscita les autres a prendre les
armes;” “Called upon, and stirred up the others to take up arms.”
Jerusalem was only about five miles S.S.E. from Gibeon, while the other
towns, situated S.S.W., were at distances varying from twenty to thirty
miles. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc07012.htm#fr_90) <span
id="xiii.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span> The conjecture that the narrative is here
inverted, seems somewhat gratuitous. Lachish, the most remote of the
towns, was not more than thirty miles distant, and Jerusalem, as has
been mentioned, was only five; and, therefore, in so far as distance
merely is concerned, there is nothing to prevent us from holding in
accordance with the literal purport of the narrative, that the kings had
suddenly advanced against Gibeon, and were actually besieging it when
the Gibeonites dispatched their embassy to Joshua.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc07012.htm#fr_91) <span
id="xiii.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span> Here, again, apparently from exaggerating
the distance, Calvin thinks it necessary to resort to an ingenious
explanation, and give a kind of coloring to the narrative. The distance
from Gilgal to Gibeon was more than eighteen miles, and this might
certainly be accomplished by a forced march in the course of a single
night. Calvin says we are not to suppose that “Joshua accomplished three
days’ journey in a single night.” But it is nowhere said that Gibeon was
*three days’ journey* from Gilgal. The words are,

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span>“The Israelites journeyed and came into the
cities on the third day.” (<span id="xiii.i-p41.1"></span>[Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017)<span id="xiii.i-p41.1"></span>).

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span>In other words, the Israelites, on this
particular occasion, employed three days, or rather, if we adopt the
common Hebrew mode of computation, part of a first, the whole of a
second, and part of a third day. Such a statement scarcely justifies the
inference that the average time of making the journey between the two
places was three days. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc07012.htm#fr_92) <span
id="xiii.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span> The passage here inserted is a quotation
from the Latin poet Claudian, who, in his panegyric on Theodosius,
referring to a victory of that emperor, in which the elements seem to
war in his favor, exclaims —

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span><span id="xiii.i-p52.1"></span>O nimium
dilecte Deo, tibi militat aether,  
Et conjurati veniunt ad classica venti!— Ed.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc07012.htm#fr_93) <span
id="xiii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p57"></span> One might almost suspect from this
concluding sentence, that Calvin was a stranger to the Copernican
system, and still continued to believe that it was not the earth but the
sun that revolved. As we know, however, that he was before his age in
many points, so we cannot believe that he was behind it in this. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc07012.htm#fr_94) <span
id="xiii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p60"></span> The rebuke here administered to those who
attempt to explain the miracle applies with double force to those who
attempt to explain it away. It is rather strange that among this number
are some of the most distinguished Jewish rabbis as Levi-ben-Gerson and
Maimonides, both of whom maintain that there was no miracle, but only
something very like one. Their chief inducement to adopt this very
extraordinary view, is zeal for the honor of Moses, which they think
would be seriously impugned by admitting that a miracle which he never
performed was performed by the instrumentality of his successor Joshua.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc07012.htm#fr_95) <span
id="xiii.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p61"></span> French “<span id="xiii.i-p61.1"></span>En
somme, le soleil remonte estant ja commence a se coucher;” “In a word,
the sun remounts after he had begun to set.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc07012.htm#fr_96) <span
id="xiii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p63"></span> French, “<span
id="xiii.i-p63.1"></span>Quant a moy, pour dire la verite, je le prends
comme s’il estoit parle de Dieu ou du peuple d’Israel, plutost que de
celuy qui a escrit Phistoire;” “For my part, to tell the truth, I
understand it as it were spoken of God, or of the people of Israel,
rather than of him who wrote the history.” The view here adopted as to
the meaning of Jasher has the sanction of many expositors of eminence,
both ancient and modern, who consider it to have been some record in
which an account of the leading events in the history of the chosen
people was regularly inserted, and which might thus come to be commonly
spoken of as the Book of the Just, very much in the same way as we are
accustomed to speak of the Book of Worthies, the Book of Martyrs, etc.
The only other allusion to the Book of Jasher is in <span
id="xiii.i-p63.2"></span>[2Sa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#018)<span id="xiii.i-p63.2"></span>,
where it is referred to as containing, or at least in connection with
David’s lament over Saul and Jonathan. Founding on this reference, De
Wette and other rationalists argue that the Book of Joshua is not of the
early date usually ascribed to it, and must have been written after the
time of David. This argument assumes that Jasher is the name of an
author living in the time, or subsequently to the time, of David, and,
but for this assumption, for which no good grounds are shown, is utterly
destitute of plausibility. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc07012.htm#fr_97) <span
id="xiii.i-p65.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p66"></span> French, “<span
id="xiii.i-p66.1"></span>Neantmoins si est ce meilleur d’eviter toujours
toutes facons de parler derogantes a la majeste de Dieu, comme s’il
estoit question de la ranger;” “Nevertheless it is better to avoid all
modes of speaking derogatory to the majesty of God, as if it were
intended to make him subordinate.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc07012.htm#fr_98) <span
id="xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span> The words “stay you not,” contained in
the original, and in the Septuagint, the English, and other versions,
are omitted in Calvin’s Latin. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc07012.htm#fr_99) <span
id="xiii.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p34"></span> It is altogether omitted in the
Septuagint. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc07012.htm#fr_100) <span
id="xiii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p35"></span> “A bloodless victory.” Latin, “<span
id="xiii.ii-p35.1"></span>Incruenta victoria.” French, “<span
id="xiii.ii-p35.2"></span>De la part des Israelites ils ont acquis la
victoire sans qu’il leur ait couste la vie d’un seul homme;” “On the
part of the Israelites they gained the victory without its having cost
them the life of a single man.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc07012.htm#fr_101) <span
id="xiii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p39"></span> French, “<span
id="xiii.ii-p39.1"></span>Or c’este une misericorde qui merite d’estre
deteestee, quand elle derogue a l’authorite de Dieu, et qu’elle la
deminue selon qu’il semble bon aux hommes;” “Now it is a mercy which
deserves to be detested, when it derogates from the authority of God,
and lessens it according as it seems good to men.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc07012.htm#fr_102) <span
id="xiii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p44"></span> French, “<span
id="xiii.ii-p44.1"></span>Tout le peuple qui n’estoit point sorti de la
ville n’en a pas eut meilleur conte;” “All the people who had not come
out from the town did not get easier off.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc07012.htm#fr_103) <span
id="xiii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p35"></span> French, “<span
id="xiii.iii-p35.1"></span>Ils pourroyentt servir de defense pour garder
les villes;” “They might serve for defense to guard the towns.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc07012.htm#fr_104) <span
id="xiii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p37"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xiii.iii-p37.1"></span>Quam si mox ad mortem traherentur.” French,
“<span id="xiii.iii-p37.2"></span>Que s’ils estoyent depeschez
soudainement sur le champ;” “Than if they were dispatched suddenly on
the spot.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc07012.htm#fr_105) <span
id="xiii.iii-p37.4"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p38"></span> The original text had the reference to
<span id="xiii.iii-p38.1"></span>2 Thessalonians 5:3<span
id="xiii.iii-p38.1"></span>, an obvious typesetting error. —*fj.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc07012.htm#fr_106) <span
id="xiii.iii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p39"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xiii.iii-p39.1"></span>Ficus praecoces.” French, “<span
id="xiii.iii-p39.2"></span>Les figues hastives;” “Precocious figs, or
figs too hastily ripened.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc07012.htm#fr_107) <span
id="xiii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p43"></span> French, “<span
id="xiii.iii-p43.1"></span>Car cela n’empeschera point que le potier
n’ait puissance de faire de ses pots tout ce qu’il luy plaira;” “For
that will not hinder the potter from having power to make of his pots
whatever he pleases.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc07012.htm#fr_108) <span
id="xiii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.iii-p45"></span> This verse is also omitted by the
Septuagint. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](cc07013)
