[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07002)  [Next](cc07004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>A BRIEF COMMENTARY

<span id="iv-p2"></span>ON

<span id="iv-p3"></span>THE BOOK OF JOSHUA

<span id="iv-p4"></span>BY JOHN CALVIN,

<span id="iv-p5"></span>A SHORT TIME BEFORE HIS DEATH

<span id="iv-p6"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now after the death of Moses the
servant of the LORD it came to pass, that the LORD spoke unto Joshua the
son of Nun, Moses’ minister, saying,

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fuit autem post mortem Mosis, ut Jehova
alloqueretur Josue, dicendo,  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11)

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Moses my servant is dead; now therefore
arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land
which I do give to them, *even* to the children of Israel.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**2.** Moses servus meus mortuus est: nunc
ergo surge, trajice Jordanem istum tu, et omnis hic populus, ad terram
quam ego do illis, nempe filiis Israel.

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Every place that the sole of your foot
shall tread upon, that have I given unto you, as I said unto Moses.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**3.** Omnem locum quem calcaverit planta
pedis vestri vobis dedi; quemadmodum locutus sum Mosi.

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** From the wilderness and this Lebanon
even unto the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the
Hittites, and unto the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall
be your coast.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>**4.** A desserto et Libano isto usque ad
flumen magnum, flumen Euphraten, tota terra Hittaeorum usque ad mare
magnum ad occasum solis, erit terminus vester.

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span><span id="iv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span>**1.** *Now, after,* etc Here, first, we see
the steadfastness of God in watching over his people, and providing for
their safety. The sanction given to Joshua’s appointment, as new leader
by a renewed commission,  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) was
intended to indicate the continuance of his favor, and prevent the
people from thinking themselves forsaken in consequence of the death of
Moses. Joshua, indeed, had already been chosen to rule the people; and
not only invested with the office, but also endowed with spiritual
gifts. But as the most valiant, however well provided, are apt to halt
or waver when the period for action arrives, the exhortation to Joshua
to make ready forthwith for the expedition was by no means superfluous.
Still, however, the call thus formally given was not so much on his own
account, as to inspire the people with full confidence in following a
leader whom they saw advancing step by step in the path divinely marked
out for him.  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13)

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>**2.** *Moses my servant,* etc A twofold
meaning may be extracted — the one, since Moses is dead, the whole
burden has now devolved upon thee, take the place of him to whom thou
has been appointed successor; the other, although Moses is dead, do not
desist, but go forward. I prefer the former, as containing the inference
that he should, by right of succession, take up the office which Moses
had left vacant.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) The epithet or
surname of *servant* applied to Moses, has respect to his government of
the people and his exploits; for it ought to be accommodated to actual
circumstances.  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) The allusion here
is not to the Law but to the leadership, which had passed to Joshua by
the decease of Moses, and God thus acknowledges his servant, not so much
with the view of praising him, as of strengthening the authority of
Joshua, who had been substituted in his place. And as the people might
not have acquiesced sufficiently in a bare command, he promises, while
ordering them to pass the Jordan, to give them peaceable possession of
the whole country, and of every spot of it on which they should plant
their foot. For as nothing tends more than distrust to make us sluggish
and useless, so when God holds forth a happy issue, confidence inspires
us with rigor for any attempt.

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>It may be added, that he does now begin for
the first time to give them good hopes, by making a promise of which
they had not previously heard, but recalls to their remembrance what
Moses had formerly testified. He says, therefore, that the time had now
come for exhibiting and performing that which he had promised to Moses.
Should any one object that the same thing had been said to Abraham long
before Moses was born, nay, that the perpetual covenant deposited with
Abraham included everything which was heard by Moses four hundred years
after;  <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) I answer, that here no
notice is taken of the ancient promise which was everywhere known and
celebrated, and that Moses is produced as a witness whose memory was
more recent, and by whose death the confidence of the people might have
been shaken, had not God declared that the accomplishment of all which
he had said was at hand.

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span>**4.** *From the wilderness and this
Lebanon,* etc How the truth and fulfillment of this promise surmounted
all the obstacles interposed by the wickedness of the people, though
they did not obtain immediate possession of the whole territory, I have
explained in the Argument. For although God had unfolded the inestimable
treasures of his beneficence by constituting them lords of the country,
it did not follow that their misconduct was not to be chastised. Nay,
there behooved to be a fulfillment of the threatening which Moses had
denounced, viz., that if the nations doomed to destruction were not
destroyed, they would prove thorns and stings in their eyes and sides.
But as the promise was by no means broken or rendered void by the delay
of forty years, during which they were led wandering through the desert,
so the entire possession, though long suspended, proved the faithfulness
of the decree by which it had been adjudged.

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>The people had it in their power to obtain
possession of the prescribed boundaries in due time; they declined to do
so. For this they deserved to have been expelled altogether.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) But the divine indulgence granted them an
extent of territory sufficient for their commodious habitation; and
although it had been foretold that, in just punishment, the residue of
the nations whom they spared would prove pernicious to them, still, they
suffered no molestation, unless when they provoked the Divine anger by
their perfidy and almost continual defection: for as often as their
affairs became prosperous, they turned aside to wantonness. Still, owing
to the wonderful goodness of God, when oppressed by the violence of the
enemy, and, as it were, thrust down to the grave, they continued to live
in death; and not only so, but every now and then deliverers arose, and,
contrary to all hope, retrieved them from ruin.  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span>The *Great Sea* means the Mediterranean, and
to it the land of the Hittites forms the opposite boundary; in the same
way Lebanon is opposed to the Euphrates; but it must be observed that
under Lebanon the desert is comprehended, as appears from another
passage.  <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span>**5.** There shall not any man be able to
stand before thee all the days of thy life: as I was with Moses, *so* I
will be with thee: I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Non consistet quisquam contra te
cunctis diebus vitae tuae; quia sicuti fui cum Mose, ita ero tecum; non
te deseram, neque derelinquam.

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span>**6.** Be strong and of a good courage: for
unto this people shall thou divide for an inheritance the land, which I
swear unto their fathers to give them.

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Confirmare, ergo, et roborare; quia tu
in haereditatem divides populo huic terram, de qua juravi patribus eorum
me daturum illis.

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span>**7.** Only be thou strong and very
courageous, that thou may observe to do according to all the law, which
Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it *to* the right hand or
*to* the left, that thou may prosper whithersoever thou goes.

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span>**7.** Tantum confirmare et roborare
vehementer: ut custodias et facias secundum totam legem quam praecepit
tibi Moses servus meus; non recedes ad dextram vel ad sinistram ut
prudenter (*vel* prospere) agas in omnibus.

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span>**8.** This book of the law shall not depart
out of thy mouth; but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that
thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein: for
then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good
success.

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span>**8.** Non recedat liber legis hujus ab ore
tuo; sed mediteris in eo, die et nocte, ut custodias et facias, secundum
id totum quod scriptum est in eo. Tunc enim secundas reddes vias tuas,
et tunc prudenter ages.

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span>**9.** Have not I commanded thee? Be strong
and of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the
LORD thy God *is* with thee whithersoever thou goes.

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span>**9.** Nonne praecepi tibi, ut te confirmes,
et te robores? Ne formides, neque animo fragaris; quoniam tecum sum
Jehova Deus tuus in omnibus ad quae tu pergis.

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span><span id="iv.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p14"></span>**5.** *There shall not any man,* etc As a
contest was about to be waged with numerous and warlike enemies, it was
necessary thus to inspire Joshua with special confidence. But for this,
the promise of delivering over the land which God had given, would ever
and anon have become darkened; for how vast the enterprise to overthrow
so many nations! This objection therefore is removed. And the better to
free him from all doubt, he is reminded of the victories of Moses, by
which God had made it manifest that nothing was easier for him than
utterly to discomfit any host however great and powerful. Joshua,
therefore, is ordered to behold in the assistance given to Moses the
future issue of the wars which he was to undertake under the same
guidance and protection. For the series of favors is continued without
interruption to the successor.

<span id="iv.ii-p15"></span>What follows is to the same effect, though
it is more fully expressed by the words, *I will not fail thee,* etc
Hence the Apostle, (<span id="iv.ii-p15.1"></span>[Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005)<span id="iv.ii-p15.1"></span>,)
when wishing to draw off believers from avarice, makes an application of
these words for the purpose of calming down all anxieties, and
suppressing all excessive fears. And in fact, the distrust which arises
from anxiety kindles in us such tumultuous feelings that on the least
appearance of danger, we turmoil and miserably torment ourselves until
we feel assured that God both will be with us and more than suffice for
our protection. And, indeed, while he prescribes no other cure for our
timidity, he reminds us that we ought to be satisfied with his present
aid.

<span id="iv.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p17"></span>**6.** *Be strong,* etc An exhortation to
fortitude is added, and indeed repeated, that it may make the deeper
impression. At the same time the promise is introduced in different
words, in which Joshua is assured of his divine call, that he might have
no hesitation in undertaking the office which had been divinely
committed to him, nor begin to waver midway on being obliged to contend
with obstacles. It would not have been enough for him diligently to
begirt himself at the outset without being well prepared to persevere in
the struggle.

<span id="iv.ii-p18"></span>Although it is the property of faith to
animate us to strenuous exertion, in the same way as unbelief manifests
itself by cowardice or cessation of effort, still we may infer from this
passage, that bare promises are not sufficiently energetic without the
additional stimulus of exhortation. For if Joshua, who was always
remarkable for alacrity, required to be incited to the performance of
duty, how much more necessary must it be that we who labor under so much
sluggishness should be spurred forward.

<span id="iv.ii-p19"></span>We may add, that not once only or by one
single expression are strength and constancy required of Joshua, but he
is confirmed repeatedly and in various terms, because he was to be
engaged in many and various contests. He is told to be of strong and
invincible courage. Although these two epithets make it obvious that God
was giving commandment concerning a most serious matter, still not
contented with this reduplication, he immediately after repeats the
sentence, and even amplifies it by the addition of the adverb *very.*

<span id="iv.ii-p20"></span>From this passage, therefore, let us learn
that we can never be fit for executing difficult and arduous matters
unless we exert our utmost endeavors, both because our abilities are
weak, and Satan rudely assails us, and there is nothing we are more
inclined to than to relax our efforts.  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) But, as many exert their strength to no
purpose in making erroneous or desultory attempts, it is added as a true
source of fortitude that Joshua shall make it his constant study to
observe the Law. By this we are taught that the only way in which we can
become truly invincible is by striving to yield a faithful obedience to
God. Otherwise it were better to lie indolent, and effeminate than to be
hurried on by headlong audacity.

<span id="iv.ii-p22"></span>Moreover, God would not only have his
servant to be strong in keeping the Law, but enjoins him to contend
manfully, so as not to faint under the burden of his laborious office.
But as he might become involved in doubt as to the mode of disentangling
himself in matters of perplexity, or as to the course which he ought to
adopt, he refers him to the teaching of the Law, because by following it
as a guide he will be sufficiently fitted for all things. He says, You
shall act prudently in all things, provided you make the Law your
master; although the Hebrew word <span id="iv.ii-p22.1"></span>שכל,
means to act not only *prudently* but *successfully,* because temerity
usually pays the penalty of failure.

<span id="iv.ii-p23"></span>Be this as it may, by submitting entirely to
the teaching of the Law he is more surely animated to hope for divine
assistance. For it is of great consequence, when our fears are excited
by impending dangers, to feel assured that we have the approbation of
God in whatever we do, inasmuch as we have no other object in view than
to obey his commands. Moreover, as it would not be enough to obey God in
any kind of way,  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) Joshua is
exhorted to practice a modesty and sobriety which may keep him within
the bounds of a simple obedience.

<span id="iv.ii-p25"></span>Many, while possessed of right intention,
sometimes imagine themselves to be wiser than they ought, and hence
either overlook many things through carelessness, or mix up their own
counsels with the divine commands. The general prohibition, therefore,
contained in the Law, forbidding all men to add to it or detract from
it, God now specially enforces on Joshua. For if private individuals in
forming their plan of life behoove to submit themselves to God, much
more necessary must this be for those who hold rule among the people.
But if this great man needed this curb of modesty that he might not
overstep his limits, how intolerable the audacity if we, who fall so far
short of him, arrogate to ourselves greater license? More especially,
however, did God prescribe the rule of his servant, in order that those
who excel in honor might know that they are as much bound to obey it as
the meanest of the people.

<span id="iv.ii-p26"></span><span id="iv.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p27"></span>**8.** *This book of the Law,* etc Assiduous
meditation on the Law is also commanded; because, whenever it is
intermitted, even for a short time, many errors readily creep in, and
the memory becomes rusted, so that many, after ceasing from the
continuous study of it, engage in practical business, as if they were
mere ignorant tyros. God therefore enjoins his servant to make daily
progress, and never cease, during the whole course of his life, to
profit in the Law. Hence it follows that those who hold this study in
disdain, are blinded by intolerable arrogance.

<span id="iv.ii-p28"></span>But why does he forbid him to allow the Law
to depart from his mouth rather than from his eyes? Some interpreters
understand that the *mouth* is here used by synecdoche for *face;* but
this is frigid. I have no doubt that the word used is peculiarly
applicable to a person who was bound to prosecute the study in question,
not only for himself individually, but for the whole people placed under
his rule. He is enjoined, therefore, to attend to the teaching of the
Law, that in accordance with the office committed to him, he may bring
forward what he has learned for the common benefit of the people. At the
same time he is ordered to make his own docility a pattern of obedience
to others. For many, by talking and discoursing, have the Law in their
mouth, but are very bad keepers of it. Both things, therefore, are
commanded, that by teaching others, he may make his own conduct and
whole character conformable to the same rule.

<span id="iv.ii-p29"></span>What follows in the second clause of the
verse shows, that, everything which profane men endeavor to accomplish
in contempt of the word of God, must ultimately fail of success, and
that however prosperous the commencement may sometimes seem to be, the
issue will be disastrous; because prosperous results can be hoped for
only from the divine favor, which is justly withheld from counsels
rashly adopted, and from all arrogance of which contempt of God himself
is the usual accompaniment. Let believers, therefore, in order that
their affairs may turn out as they wish, conciliate the divine blessing
alike by diligence in learning and by fidelity in obeying.

<span id="iv.ii-p30"></span>In the end of the verse, because the term
used is ambiguous, as I have already observed, the sentence is repeated,
or a second promise is added. The latter is the view I take. For it was
most suitable, that after the promised success, Joshua should be
reminded that men never act skillfully and regularly except in so far as
they allow themselves to be ruled by the word of God. Accordingly, the
prudence which believers learn from the word of God, is opposed to the
confidence of those who deem their own sense sufficient to guide them
aright.  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22)

<span id="iv.ii-p32"></span><span id="iv.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p33"></span>**9.** *Have not I commanded,* etc Although
in Hebrew a simple affirmation is often made in the form of a question,
and this phraseology is of very frequent occurrence, here, however, the
question is emphatic, to give an attestation to what had previously been
taught, while the Lord, by bringing his own authority distinctly
forward, relieves his servant from care and hesitancy. He asks, Is it
not I who have commanded thee? I too will be present with thee. Observe
the emphasis: inasmuch as it is not lawful to resist his command.  <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) This passage also teaches that nothing is
more effectual to produce confidence than when trusting to the call and
the command of God, and feeling fully assured of it in our own
conscience, we follow whithersoever he is pleased to lead.

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
1:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p2"></span>**10.** Then Joshua commanded the officers
of the people, saying,

<span id="iv.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Tunc praecepit Josue praefectis
populi dicendo,

<span id="iv.iii-p4"></span>**11.** Pass through the host, and command
the people, saying, Prepare you victuals; for within three days you
shall pass over this Jordan, to go in to possess the land, which the
LORD your God give you to possess it.

<span id="iv.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Transite per medium castrorum et
praecipite populo, dicendo, Parate vobis annonam: quia post tres dies
transibitis Jordanem hunc, ut intretis et possideatis terram, quam
Jehova Deus vester dat vobis possidendam.

<span id="iv.iii-p6"></span>**12.** And to the Reubenites, and to the
Gadites, and to half the tribe of Manasseh, spoke Joshua, saying,

<span id="iv.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Ad Reubenitas vero et Gaditas et
dimidiam tribum Manasse locutus est Josue, dicendo,

<span id="iv.iii-p8"></span>**13.** Remember the word which Moses the
servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, The LORD your God has given
you rest, and has given you this land.

<span id="iv.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Recordamini verbi quod praecepit
vobis Moses servus Jehovae, dicendo, Jehova Deus vester reddidit vos
quietos et dedit vobis terram hanc:

<span id="iv.iii-p10"></span>**14.** Your wives, your little ones, and
your cattle, shall remain in the land which Moses gave you on this side
Jordan; but you shall pass before your brethren armed, all the mighty
men of valor, and help them;

<span id="iv.iii-p11"></span>**14.** Uxores vestrae, parvuli vestri, et
pecora vestra residebunt in terra quam dedit vobis Moses trans Jordanem;
vos autem transibitis armati ante fratres vestros, quicunque erunt viri
bellicosi, juvabitisque eos.

<span id="iv.iii-p12"></span>**15.** Until the LORD have given your
brethren rest, as *he has given* you, and they also have possessed the
land which the LORD your God give them: then you shall return unto the
land of your possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the LORD’S servant
gave you on this side Jordan toward the sunrising.

<span id="iv.iii-p13"></span>**15.** Donec quietem praestiterit Jehova
fratribus vestris sicut vobis et possideant ipsi quoque terram quam
Jehova Deus vester dat eis: et tunc redibitis ad terram haereditatis
vestrae, possidebitisque eam quam dedit vobis Moses servus Jehovae ultra
Jordanem ad exortum solis.

<span id="iv.iii-p14"></span>**16.** And they answered Joshua, saying,
All that thou commands us we will do, and whithersoever thou send us, we
will go.

<span id="iv.iii-p15"></span>**16.** Tunc responderunt, dicendo, Omnia
quae praecepisti nobis faciemus, et ad omnia ad quae miseris nos,
ibimus.

<span id="iv.iii-p16"></span>**17.** According as we hearkened unto
Moses in all things, so will we hearken unto thee: only the LORD thy God
be with thee, as he was with Moses.

<span id="iv.iii-p17"></span>**17.** Sicut in omnibus obedivimus Mosi,
sic obediemus tibi: tantum sit Jehova Deus tuus tecum sicut fuit cum
Mose.

<span id="iv.iii-p18"></span>**18.** Whosoever *he be* that doth rebel
against thy commandment, and will not hearken unto thy words in all that
thou commands him, he shall be put to death: only be strong and of a
good courage.

<span id="iv.iii-p19"></span>**18.** Quisquis fuerit qui rebellaverit
ore tuo, nec verbis tuis aquieverit in omnibus quae ei mandaveris,
interficiatur. Tantum confirmare et roborare.

<span id="iv.iii-p20"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii-p21"></span><span id="iv.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p22"></span>**10.** *Then Joshua commanded*  <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) etc It may be doubted whether or not this
proclamation was made after the spies were sent, and of course on their
return. And certainly I think it not only probable, but I am fully
convinced that it was only after their report furnished him with the
knowledge he required, that he resolved to move his camp. It would have
been preposterous haste to hurry on an unknown path, while he considered
it expedient to be informed on many points before setting foot on a
hostile territory. Nor is there anything novel in neglecting the order
of time, and afterwards interweaving what had been omitted. The second
chapter must therefore be regarded as a kind of interposed parenthesis,
explaining to the reader more fully what had happened, when Joshua at
length commanded the people to collect their vessels.

<span id="iv.iii-p24"></span>After all necessary matters had been
ascertained, he saw it was high time to proceed, and issued a
proclamation, ordering the people to make ready for the campaign. With
the utmost confidence he declares that they will pass the Jordan after
the lapse of three days: this he never would have ventured to do,
without the suggestion of the Spirit. No one had attempted the ford, nor
did there seem to be any hope that it could be done.  <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) There was no means of crossing either by
a bridge or by boats: and nothing could be easier for the enemy than to
prevent the passage. The only thing, therefore, that remained was for
God to transport them miraculously. This Joshua hoped for not at random,
nor at his own hand, but as a matter which had been divinely revealed.
The faith of the people also was conspicuous in the promptitude of their
obedience: for, in the view of the great difficulties which presented
themselves, they never would have complied so readily had they not cast
their care upon God. It cannot be doubted that He inspired their minds
with this alacrity, in order to remove all the obstacles which might
delay the fulfillment of the promise.

<span id="iv.iii-p26"></span><span id="iv.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p27"></span>**12.** *And to the Reubenites,* etc An
inheritance had been granted them beyond the Jordan, on the condition
that they should continue to perform military service with their
brethren in expelling the nations of Canaan. Joshua therefore now
exhorts them to fulfil their promise, to leave their wives, their
children, and all their effects behind, to cross the Jordan, and not
desist from carrying on the war till they had placed their brethren in
peaceable possession. In urging them so to act, he employs two
arguments, the one drawn from authority and the other from equity. He
therefore reminds them of the command given them by Moses, from whose
decision it was not lawful to deviate, since it was well known to all
that he uttered nothing of himself, but only what God had dictated by
his mouth. At the same time, without actually asserting, Joshua
indirectly insinuates, that they are bound, by compact, inasmuch as they
had engaged to act in this manner.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)
He next moves them by motives of equity, that there might be no
inequality in the condition of those to whom the same inheritance had
been destined in common. It would be very incongruous, he says, that
your brethren should be incurring danger, or, at least, toiling in
carrying on war, and that you should be enjoying all the comforts of a
peaceful settlement.

<span id="iv.iii-p29"></span>When he orders them to precede or pass
before, the meaning is, not that they were to be the first to enter into
conflict with the enemy, and in all emergencies which might befall them,
were to bear more than their own share of the burden; he only in this
way urges them to move with alacrity, as it would have been a kind of
tergiversation to keep in the rear and follow slowly in the track of
others. The expression*, pass before your brethren,* therefore, does not
mean to stand in the front of the battle, but simply to observe their
ranks, and thereby give proof of ready zeal. For it is certain that as
they were arranged in four divisions they advanced in the same order. As
he calls them men of war, we may infer, as will elsewhere more clearly
appear, that the aged, and others not robust, were permitted to remain
at home in charge of the common welfare, or altogether relieved from
public duty, if in any way disabled from performing it.

<span id="iv.iii-p30"></span><span id="iv.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p31"></span>**16.** *And they answered,* etc They not
only acquiesce, but freely admit and explicitly detail the obedience
which they owe. Our obligations are duly discharged only when we perform
them cheerfully, and not in sadness, as Paul expresses it. (<span
id="iv.iii-p31.1"></span>[2Co 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii-p31.1"></span>.) If it is objected that there is little
modesty in their boast of having been obedient to Moses whom they had
often contradicted, I answer, that though they did not always follow
with becoming ardor, yet they were so much disposed to obey, that their
moderation was not only tolerable, but worthy of the highest praise,
when it is considered how proudly their fathers rebelled, and how
perversely they endeavored to shake off a yoke divinely imposed upon
them. For the persons who speak here were not those rebellious spirits
of whom God complains (<span id="iv.iii-p31.2"></span>[Ps
95:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii-p31.2"></span>) that he was provoked by them, but persons
who, subdued by the examples of punishment, had learned quietly to
submit.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27)

<span id="iv.iii-p33"></span>Indeed, it is not so much to herald their
own virtues as to extol the authority of Joshua, when they declare that
they will regard him in the same light in which they regarded Moses. The
groundwork of their confidence is at the same time expressed in their
wish or prayer, that God may be present to assist his servant Joshua as
he assisted his servant Moses. They intimate that they will be ready to
war under the auspices of their new leader, because they are persuaded
that he is armed with the power and hope that he will be victorious by
the assistance of God, as they had learned by experience how wonderfully
God assisted them by the hand of Moses. We may infer, moreover, that
they actually felt this confidence, both because they call to mind their
experiences of God’s favor to animate themselves, and because they
regard Joshua as the successor of Moses in regard to prosperous results.

<span id="iv.iii-p34"></span>The epithet *thy God*  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) is not without weight, as it evidently
points to a continued course of divine favor. The form of expression
also is intermediate between the confidence of faith and prayer.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) Accordingly, while they intimate that
they cherish good hope in their minds, they at the same time have
recourse to prayer, under a conviction of the arduousness of the work.
Immediately after, when they of their own accord exhort him to
constancy, they show that they are ready to follow and to imitate him in
his confidence. Here, it is to be observed, that though Joshua was a
model of courage, and animated all, both by deed and precept, he was in
his turn stimulated onwards, that his own alacrity might be more
effectual in arousing that of the people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc07003.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span> The copulative particle which commences the
Book, and is usually translated *and*, or, as in our English version,
*now*, evidently connects it with some previous writing, and seems to
vindicate the place which it holds in the Canon as a continuation of the
Book of Deuteronomy. In the first verse, Calvin’s Latin version omits
the epithets, “Servant of the Lord,” and “Moses’ minister,” applied
respectively to Joshua and Moses. The Hebrew contains both, but the
former is omitted by the ordinary text of the Septuagint, though placed
among its various readings. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc07003.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iv.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span> “A renewed commission.” Latin, “<span
id="iv.i-p14.1"></span>Repetitis mandatis.” French, “<span
id="iv.i-p14.2"></span>En reiterant les articles de sa commission;” “By
reiterating the articles of his commission.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc07003.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iv.i-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span> Or rather, “Who they saw, did not advance a
single step till the Lord had preceded him.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc07003.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iv.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span> “Which Moses had left vacant.” Latin, “<span
id="iv.i-p18.1"></span>Ex qua decesserat Moses.” French, “<span
id="iv.i-p18.2"></span>De laquelle Moyse estoit sorti ayant fait son
temps;” “Which Moses had left, having held his own time of it.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc07003.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iv.i-p18.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span> “To actual circumstances.” Latin, “<span
id="iv.i-p19.1"></span>Ad circumstantiam loci.” French, “<span
id="iv.i-p19.2"></span>A la circonstance du passage;” “To the
circumstance of the passage.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc07003.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iv.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span> The French here gives the same meaning in a
paraphrastic form, “<span id="iv.i-p21.1"></span>Ou mesmes qu’a parler
proprement, tout ce qui a este dit a Moyse dependoit de l’alliance
perpetuelle que Dieu avoit mise en garde entre les mains d’Abraham
quatre cens ans auparavant.” “Or even, to speak properly, all that was
said to Moses depended on the perpetual covenant which God had deposited
in the hands of Abraham four hundred years before.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc07003.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iv.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span> The two last sentences form only one in the
French, which is as follows, “<span id="iv.i-p25.1"></span>Le peuple
pouuoit du premier coup, et des l’entree s’estendre jusqu’aux bornes que
Dieu lui mesme auoit marquees; il n’a pas voulu: il estoit bien digne
d’en estre mis dehors, et du tout forclos.” “The people might at the
first blow, and immediately on their entrance, have extended themselves
to the limits which God himself had marked; they would not: they well
deserved to be put out and wholly foreclosed.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc07003.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iv.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span> Latin, “<span id="iv.i-p26.1"></span>Qui
praeter spem rebus perditis succurrerent;” French, “<span
id="iv.i-p26.2"></span>Qui outre toute esperance venoyent a remedier aux
affaires si fort deplorez, et redresser aucunement l’estat du peuple;”
“Who, beyond all hope, came to remedy the very deplorable affairs, and,
in some degree, restore the condition of the people.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc07003.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iv.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span> Calvin’s language here is not very clear,
and seems to convey an erroneous impression. The *desert* or
*wilderness*, instead of being comprehended under Lebanon, is obviously
contrasted with it, and forms the south, while Lebanon forms the north
frontier. We have thus three great natural boundaries — Lebanon on the
north, the desert of Sin on the south, and the Mediterranean on the
west. The eastern boundary occasions more difficulty. According to some,
the Euphrates is expressly mentioned as this boundary, and an attempt is
made to reconcile the vast difference between the actual possession of
the Israelites, even in the most prosperous period of their history, and
the tract of country thus bounded, by having recourse to the explanation
of St. Augustine, who, in his Commentary on <span
id="iv.i-p28.1"></span>[Joshua 21](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#000)<span
id="iv.i-p28.1"></span>, gives it as his opinion that the country
extending eastward beyond the proper limits of Canaan was intended to be
given not so much for possession as for tribute. This view receives some
confirmation from the extensive conquests which were made by David and
Solomon. According to other expositors, the Euphrates is intended to be
taken in connection with Lebanon so as to form, by one of its windings
or branches, part of the north boundary, while the east boundary is left
indefinite, or rather, was so well defined by the Jordan that it did not
require to be separately mentioned. In this general uncertainty, there
is much practical wisdom in Calvin’s suggestion in his Argument, that
the indefiniteness of the boundaries assigned to the promised land,
contrasted with its actual limits, tended to elevate the minds of Old
Testament believers, and carry them beyond the present to a period when,
under a new and more glorious dispensation, the promise would be
completely fulfilled. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc07003.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p21"></span> French, “<span id="iv.ii-p21.1"></span>Et
il ne faut qu’un rien pour nous faire perdre courage;” “and a mere
nothing is all that is necessary to make us lose courage.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc07003.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p24"></span> The French adds, “<span
id="iv.ii-p24.1"></span>Ou en quelques points;” “Or in some points.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc07003.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p31"></span> The French paraphrases the whole sentence
thus: “<span id="iv.ii-p31.1"></span>Ainsi la prudence et sagesse que
les fideles apprennent de la parole de Dieu, est opposee a l’assurance
de ceux auxquels il semble bien qu’ils se gouvernent assez discretement
et sagement, quand ils besongnent selon leur propre sens;” “Thus the
prudence and wisdom which believers learn from the word of God, is
opposed to the assurance of those who think they govern themselves
discreetly and wisely enough, when they manage according to their own
sense.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc07003.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p34"></span> French, “<span
id="iv.ii-p34.1"></span>C’est bien pour certain avec grande signifiance
que ceci se dit d’autant qu’il n’est pas question de resister a son
commandement;” “It is certainly with great significancy that this is
said, inasmuch as there is no question of resisting his command.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc07003.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p23"></span> It is almost impossible to doubt that the
view here taken is correct, and in confirmation of it, it may be
observed, that it receives more countenance from the original than
appears either from Calvin’s or our verse by “Then,” as if meaning, “At
that precise time;” whereas the Hebrew is simply the copulative <span
id="iv.iii-p23.1"></span>ו, which only means “And,” and is accordingly
here rendered in the Septuagint by <span id="iv.iii-p23.2"></span>καὶ.
It implies, indeed that the order issued to the prefects by Joshua was
given *subsequently* to the gracious and encouraging message which he
had received, but not that it was given *immediately* or at that
particular instant, and it thus leaves it open for us to infer, that a
period of less or greater length intervened during which the spies were
sent on their mission, and the proceedings detailed in the second
chapter took place. The sacred writer in thus omitting to follow the
order of time in his narrative, has only adopted a method which is often
convenient in itself, and which has been repeatedly followed by the most
celebrated historians, both of ancient and modern times, and nothing can
be more absurd than the inference attempted to be drawn chiefly by some
German Rationalists, from this and a few similar apparent anachronisms,
that the Book of Joshua is not so much a continuous history as a
patchwork of distinct or even contradictory narratives by different
writers. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc07003.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p25"></span> This must be taken with some
qualification, since, according to the view taken by Calvin himself, the
river must, before this, have been forded by the spies, both in going
and returning; and it is also obvious, from the direction which their
pursuers took, in endeavoring to overtake them, that what are called
“the fords,” must have been understood to be practicable, even during
the season of overflow. Still a spot or two where an individual might
manage to cross was altogether unavailable for such a body as the
Israelites, and therefore Calvin’s subsequent statement cannot be
disputed, that if they were to cross at all, human agency was
unavailing, and the only thing which remained was for God himself to
transport them miraculously. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc07003.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iv.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p28"></span> The agreement made with Moses was very
explicit. As recorded in the thirty-second chapter of Numbers, he
distinctly stipulates that they shall “go armed before the Lord to war,”
“armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he has driven out his enemies
from before him, and the land be subdued before the Lord;” and they
answer, “As the Lord has said unto thy servants so will we do: we will
pass over armed before the Lord, into the land of Canaan, that the
possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be ours.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc07003.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.iii-p31.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p32"></span> The objection taken to the modesty of the
answer seems to be founded on a misinterpretation of its true meaning.
For the original, literally interpreted, does not contain any assertion
that they had obeyed Moses in all things, as implied both in Calvin’s
Latin and in our English version, but simply means, that “in
everything,” or, “according to everything,” (<span
id="iv.iii-p32.1"></span>ככל, *kekol*,) in which they had hearkened to
Moses they would hearken to him: in other words, that they would hold
his authority to be in every respect equal to that of Moses. This
meaning is retained by the Septuagint, which renders <span
id="iv.iii-p32.2"></span>Κατὰ πάντα ὅσα ἠκούσαμεν Μωνυσὣ ἀκουσόμεθά σου.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc07003.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p35"></span> This emphasis is lost by the Septuagint,
which renders not <span id="iv.iii-p35.1"></span>ὁ Θεός σου, “thy God,”
but, “<span id="iv.iii-p35.2"></span>ὁ Θεὸς ἡμῶν,” “our God.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc07003.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.iii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p36"></span> French, “<span
id="iv.iii-p36.1"></span>Toutefois la maniere de parler qui est ici
mise, est moyenne, et peut estre prise ou pour un glorifiement de la
foy, ou pour un souhait;” “However, the manner of speaking which is here
used is of a middle kind, and may be taken either for a glorying of
faith, or for a wish.” — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc07004)
