[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07026)  [Next](cc07028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxviii"></span>

<span id="xxviii-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF

<span id="xxviii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION OF

<span id="xxviii-p3"></span>THE BOOK OF JOSHUA

<span id="xxviii.i"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="xxviii.i-p3"></span>**1** And it came to pass after the death
of Moses, that Jehovah addressed Joshua, saying, —

<span id="xxviii.i-p4"></span>**2** Moses my servant is dead: now
therefore rise, pass over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, to the
land which I give to them, namely, to the children of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.i-p5"></span>**3** Every place which the sole of your
foot shall have trod upon, I have given to you; as I said to Moses,

<span id="xxviii.i-p6"></span>**4** From the desert and that Lebanon,
even to the great sea, the river Euphrates, the whole land of the
Hittites, even to the great sea toward the setting of the sun, will be
your boundary.

<span id="xxviii.i-p7"></span>**5** No one shall stand before thee all
the days of thy life; because as I was with Moses, so will I be with
thee: I will not desert nor forsake thee.

<span id="xxviii.i-p8"></span>**6** Be firm therefore and strong; for
thou shall divide to this people as an inheritance the land which I
swore to their fathers that I would give them.

<span id="xxviii.i-p9"></span>**7** Only be firm and strong exceedingly;
that thou may keep and do according to the whole law which Moses my
servant commanded thee: thou shall not draw back to the right hand or to
the left, that thou may act prudently *(or* prosperously) in all things.

<span id="xxviii.i-p10"></span>**8** Let not the book of this law depart
from thy mouth; but meditate in it day and night, that thou may keep and
do according to all which has been written in it. For then shall thou
render thy ways prosperous, and then shall thou act prudently.

<span id="xxviii.i-p11"></span>**9** Have not I commanded thee to make
thyself firm and strong? Fear not, nor be dispirited; since I, Jehovah
thy God, am with thee in all the places to which thou goes.

<span id="xxviii.i-p12"></span>**10** Then Joshua commanded the prefects
of the people, saying, —

<span id="xxviii.i-p13"></span>**11** Pass through the midst of the
camp, and command the people, saying, Make ready provision for
yourselves; for after three days shall you pass over this Jordan, that
you may enter and possess the land, which Jehovah your God give you to
possess.

<span id="xxviii.i-p14"></span>**12** And to the Reubenites, and
Gadites, and half-tribe of Manasseh, spoke Joshua, saying, —

<span id="xxviii.i-p15"></span>**13** Remember the word which Moses, the
servant of Jehovah, commanded you, saying, Jehovah your God has rendered
you quiet, and has given you this land:

<span id="xxviii.i-p16"></span>**14** Your wives, your little ones, and
your flocks will remain in the land which Moses has given you beyond the
Jordan; but you, as many of you as are men of war, will pass over armed
before your brethren, and assist them,

<span id="xxviii.i-p17"></span>**15** Until Jehovah shall have given
rest to your brethren as to you; and they, too, possess the land which
Jehovah your God give to them; and then shall you return to the land of
your inheritance, and possess that which Moses, the servant of Jehovah,
gave you beyond Jordan toward the rising of the sun.

<span id="xxviii.i-p18"></span>**16** Then they answered Joshua, saying,
All things which thou has commanded us will we do, and to all places to
which thou shall send us, will we go.

<span id="xxviii.i-p19"></span>**17** As in all things we obeyed Moses,
so will we obey thee; only let Jehovah thy God be with thee as he was
with Moses.

<span id="xxviii.i-p20"></span>**18** Whoever he shall be that shall
rebel against thy mouth, and shall not acquiesce in thy words in all the
things which thou shall command him, let him be put to death. Only be
thou firm and strong.

<span id="xxviii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="xxviii.ii-p3"></span>**1** Now, Joshua, the son of Nun, had
sent from Sittim two men as spies secretly, saying: Go, examine the land
and Jericho. They accordingly set out and entered the house of a woman,
a harlot, whose name was Rahab, and slept there.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p4"></span>**2** And it was told to the king of
Jericho, Behold, men of the children of Israel have come hither to-night
to spy out the land.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p5"></span>**3** Then the king of Jericho sent to
Rahab, saying, Bring out the men who have gone in to thee, who have come
to thy house; for they have come to spy out the whole land.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Now the woman had taken the two men
and hidden them. Then she says, The men, indeed, came to me, but I knew
not whence they were.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p7"></span>**5** And it was when the gate was shut
in the darkness that the men went out, and I know not whither they went.
Follow them quickly, for you shall apprehend them.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p8"></span>**6** Now she had caused them to go up
upon the roof, and had hidden them under stalks of flax, arranged by her
on the roof.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p9"></span>**7** And the men pursued them by the way
of the Jordan, even to the fords; they, moreover, shut the gate as soon
as those who pursued them went out.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p10"></span>**8** But before they were asleep, she
herself went up on the roof to them.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p11"></span>**9** And she says to the men, I know
that Jehovah has given you the land, inasmuch as your terror has fallen
upon us, and all the inhabitants of the land have melted at your
presence.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p12"></span>**10** For we heard how the Lord dried
up the waters of the sea of Suph (the Red Sea) from before you when you
went out from Egypt; and what things you did to the two kings of the
Amorite, who were beyond Jordan, Sihon and Og, whom you slew.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p13"></span>**11** We heard, and our heart was
melted, neither had we any more spirit before you. For Jehovah your God
is God in heaven above and on the earth beneath.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p14"></span>**12** Now therefore swear unto me, I
pray, by Jehovah, (for I have dealt mercifully with you,) that you will
also deal mercifully with the house of my father, and give me a true
sign,

<span id="xxviii.ii-p15"></span>**13** That you will save alive my
father, and my mother, and my brothers, and my sisters, and all who are
theirs, and will rescue our souls from death.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p16"></span>**14** The men said unto her, Our life
for you unto death; only you will not betray this our conversation; then
it will be that when Jehovah shall have delivered the land to us, we
will deal truly and mercifully with you.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p17"></span>**15** She therefore let them down
through the window by a rope; for her house was in the building of the
wall, and she herself dwelt on the wall.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p18"></span>**16** And she said to them, Hasten to
the mountain, lest perchance those who are pursuing fall in with you,
and keep lurking there for three days, till those who are pursuing
return, and afterwards you will go on your way.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p19"></span>**17** Then the men said to her, We
shall be blameless from this your oath by which you have bound us.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p20"></span>**18** Behold, when we shall enter the
land, you will bind this line of purple thread in the window by which
you have let us down; moreover, you will assemble in the house with you,
your father, and your mother, and all the family of your father.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p21"></span>**19** And it shall be that whoever
shall go outside beyond the doors of the house, his blood shall be upon
his head, but we shall be blameless; and whoever shall be with you, his
blood shall be upon our head, if a hand be laid upon him.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p22"></span>**20** But if you shall betray this our
conversation, we shall be free from the oath by which you have bound us.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p23"></span>**21** She answered, As you have spoken,
so be it. Then she sent them away, and they departed; and she bound the
scarlet thread in the window.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p24"></span>**22** Having set out, they came to the
mountain, and remained there three days, till the return of those who
had pursued, who searched over the whole way, and did not find them.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p25"></span>**23** Those two, therefore, returning
after they came down from the mountain, passed over and came to Joshua
the son of Nun, and related to him whatever things had happened to them.

<span id="xxviii.ii-p26"></span>**24** And they said to Joshua, Jehovah
has delivered the whole land into our hands. For all the inhabitants of
the land have become melted before our face.

<span id="xxviii.iii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="xxviii.iii-p3"></span>**1** And Joshua rose up very early in
the morning, and he and all the children of Israel set out from Sittim,
and came as far as the Jordan, and passed the night there before
crossing.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p4"></span>**2** And it was at the end of three
days, and the prefects passed through the midst of the camp,

<span id="xxviii.iii-p5"></span>**3** And commanded the people, saying,
When you see the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, and the
priests bearing it, you shall set out from your place, and go after it.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p6"></span>**4** Nevertheless, between it and you
there will be an interval of about two thousand cubits in length: do not
approach it that you may know the way by which you are to go. For you
have not passed by that way yesterday or the day before yesterday.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p7"></span>**5** Now Joshua had said to the people,
Sanctify *(or* Prepare) yourselves: for to-morrow Jehovah will do
wonders in the midst of you.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p8"></span>**6** And Joshua spoke to the priests,
saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass before the people.
They accordingly bare the ark of the covenant, and walked before the
people.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p9"></span>**7** Now Jehovah had said to Joshua,
To-day will I begin to magnify thee in the eyes of all Israel, that they
may know that in the same way as I was with Moses will I be with thee.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p10"></span>**8** Thou, therefore, wilt command the
priests bearing the ark of the covenant, saying, When you shall have
gone in as far as the extremity (outer edge) of the water of the Jordan,
you shall stand in the Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p11"></span>**9** And Joshua said to the children
of Israel, Come hither, and hear the words of Jehovah your God.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p12"></span>**10** Joshua likewise said, Hereby
shall you know that there is a living God in the midst of you, and that
he will thoroughly drive out before you the Canaanite, the Hittite, and
the Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and
the Jebusite.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p13"></span>**11** Behold the ark of the covenant
of the ruler of the whole earth will pass before you through the Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p14"></span>**12** Now, therefore, select for you
twelve men from the tribes of Israel, one for each tribe.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p15"></span>**13** And when the soles of the feet
of the priests bearing the ark of Jehovah, the ruler of the whole earth,
shall have rested in the waters of the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan
will be cut off, and the waters flowing from above shall stand in one
heap.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p16"></span>**14** And it was that when the people
set out to cross the Jordan, the priests who bore the ark of the
covenant were before the people.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p17"></span>**15** And after those who bare the ark
came even to the Jordan, and the feet of the priests bearing the ark
were dipped in the extremity of the waters, (now the Jordan was full
beyond all its banks the whole time of harvest,)

<span id="xxviii.iii-p18"></span>**16** The waters which descended from
above stood, and rose up into one heap very far, from the city Adam
which is at the side of Sarthan, and those which descended to the sea of
the desert, the sea of salt, were consumed, were cut off: and the people
crossed over against Jericho.

<span id="xxviii.iii-p19"></span>**17** And the priests bearing the ark
of the covenant of the Lord stood unencumbered *(or* prepared) on dry
ground in the midst of the Jordan, while all Israel crossed through dry
ground, until the whole people made an end of passing the Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.iv"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="xxviii.iv-p3"></span>**1** And it was after the whole people
made an end of passing the Jordan; because Jehovah had spoken to Joshua,
saying,

<span id="xxviii.iv-p4"></span>**2** Take for you from the people twelve
men, one man from each tribe;

<span id="xxviii.iv-p5"></span>**3** And command them, saying, Take for
you hence out of the midst of the Jordan, from the place where the feet
of the unencumbered priests stand, twelve stones which you shall carry
with you, and deposit in the place where you shall remain this night.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p6"></span>**4** Then Joshua called the twelve men
whom he had appointed out of the children of Israel, one from each
tribe.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p7"></span>**5** And Joshua said to them, Pass
before the ark of Jehovah your God through the midst of the Jordan, and
let every one of you take up one stone upon his shoulder, according to
the number of the tribes of the children of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p8"></span>**6** That it may be among you,
*(Hebrew,* in the midst of you,) when your children shall to-morrow ask
their fathers, What are those stones beside you?

<span id="xxviii.iv-p9"></span>**7** Then you may answer them, When the
waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of
Jehovah, when, I say, it was crossing the Jordan, and the waters of the
Jordan were cut off, then were those stones made to be a memorial to the
children of Israel for ever.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p10"></span>**8** The children of Israel accordingly
did as Joshua had commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the middle
of the Jordan, as Jehovah had spoken to Joshua, according to the number
of the tribes of the children of Israel, and they brought them with them
to the place where they passed the night, and laid them down there.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p11"></span>**9** Joshua also erected twelve stones
in the middle of the Jordan under the station of the feet of the priests
who were carrying the ark of the covenant, and they have remained there
even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p12"></span>**10** And the priests, bearing the ark,
kept standing in the midst of the Jordan, till all the speech which
Jehovah had commanded Joshua to speak to the people was finished;
exactly as Moses had commanded Joshua himself: but the people made haste
in passing.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p13"></span>**11** And when the whole people had
made an end of passing, the ark of Jehovah passed, and the priests in
presence of the people.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p14"></span>**12** The children of Reuben, and the
children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh also passed over armed
before the children of Israel; in like manner as Moses had spoken to
them.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p15"></span>**13** Forty thousand armed men passed
over in presence of Jehovah to battle to the plains of Jericho.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p16"></span>**14** On that day Jehovah magnified
Joshua in the eyes of all Israel, and they feared him just as they had
feared Moses all the days of his life.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p17"></span>**15** And Jehovah spoke unto Joshua,
saying,

<span id="xxviii.iv-p18"></span>**16** Command the priests bearing the
ark of the testimony to ascend from the Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p19"></span>**17** And Joshua commanded the priests,
saying, Ascend from the Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p20"></span>**18** Moreover, when the priests,
bearing the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, had ascended from the midst
of the Jordan, and the soles of the feet of the priests were transferred
to the dry land, the waters of the Jordan returned to their place, and
they flowed as yesterday and the day before yesterday above all its
banks.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p21"></span>**19** Now the people ascended from the
Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal in
the east district of Jericho.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p22"></span>**20** And the twelve stones which they
had brought out of the Jordan, Joshua placed in Gilgal.

<span id="xxviii.iv-p23"></span>**21** And he spoke to the children of
Israel, saying, When your sons shall to-morrow ask their sons, saying,
What mean those stones?

<span id="xxviii.iv-p24"></span>**22** You shall explain to your sons,
saying, Israel passed through the dry land across that Jordan:

<span id="xxviii.iv-p25"></span>**23** Since Jehovah your God dried the
waters of Jordan from before your face until you passed over; in like
manner as Jehovah your God did to the Red Sea, which he dried up from
before our face till we passed over;

<span id="xxviii.iv-p26"></span>**24** That all the nations of the earth
may recognize the hand of Jehovah, how mighty he is; that you may,
during all days, fear Jehovah your God.

<span id="xxviii.v"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="xxviii.v-p3"></span>**1** And it was when all the Amorite
kings who were beyond the Jordan, on the west, and all the Canaanitish
kings who were near the sea, had heard that Jehovah had dried up the
waters of the Jordan from before the children of Israel till they passed
over, their heart was melted, and there was no longer any spirit in them
before the children of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.v-p4"></span>**2** At that time Jehovah said to Joshua,
Make for thee sharp knives, and again circumcise the children of Israel
the second time.

<span id="xxviii.v-p5"></span>**3** And Joshua made himself sharp
knives, and circumcised the children of Israel on the hill of foreskins.

<span id="xxviii.v-p6"></span>**4** Now this is the reason why Joshua
circumcised them. The whole people who had come out from Egypt, all the
males, men of war, had died in the desert on the way after they had come
out from Egypt.

<span id="xxviii.v-p7"></span>**5** For the whole people who came out
had been circumcised, but the whole people who had been born in the
desert on the way, after they had come out from Egypt, they had not
circumcised.

<span id="xxviii.v-p8"></span>**6** For the children of Israel walked
through the desert till the extinction of the whole race of the men of
war, who had come out from Egypt, who had not listened to the voice of
Jehovah, to whom Jehovah had sworn that he would not show the land of
which he had sworn to their fathers that he would give them — a land
flowing with milk and honey.

<span id="xxviii.v-p9"></span>**7** Their sons accordingly whom he
substituted in their place, Joshua circumcised, because they were
uncircumcised; for they had not circumcised them by the way.

<span id="xxviii.v-p10"></span>**8** And when the whole people were
circumcised, they remained in their place in the camp till they were
healed.

<span id="xxviii.v-p11"></span>**9** Jehovah said to Joshua, This day
have I rolled off the reproach of Egypt from you. And he called the name
of that place Gilgal even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.v-p12"></span>**10** The children of Israel therefore
encamped in Gilgal, and they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of
the month at evening in the plains of Jericho.

<span id="xxviii.v-p13"></span>**11** And they ate unfermented bread of
the produce of the land, the day after the Passover, and cake on the
very same day.

<span id="xxviii.v-p14"></span>**12** And the manna ceased the day after
they ate of the corn of the country, nor had the children of Israel
manna any longer, but they ate of the fruit of the land of Canaan that
year.

<span id="xxviii.v-p15"></span>**13** And it happened when Joshua was at
Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and behold a man stood
over against him, in whose hand was a drawn sword, and Joshua went to
him, and said to him, Art thou on our side? or art thou on our enemies’
side?

<span id="xxviii.v-p16"></span>**14** And he said, Nay, but I am prince
of the army of Jehovah: I have now come. And Joshua fell on his face to
the ground, and worshipped, and said to him, What says my Lord to his
servant?

<span id="xxviii.v-p17"></span>**15** And the prince of the army of the
Lord said to Joshua, Loose thy shoe from thy feet: for the place on
which thou stands is holiness. And Joshua did so.

<span id="xxviii.vi"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xxviii.vi-p3"></span>**1** And Jericho was closed, and was
shut up because of the children of Israel, nor could any one go out or
come in.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p4"></span>**2** And Jehovah said to Joshua, Behold,
I have delivered into thy hand Jericho, and its king, and its men of
valor.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p5"></span>**3** You shall therefore compass the
city, all the men of war, going round it once: thus shall thou do six
days.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p6"></span>**4** Moreover, seven priests shall bear
seven rams’ horns before the ark: But on the seventh day you shall
compass the city seven times, and let the priests themselves sound with
the trumpets.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p7"></span>**5** And when they shall have prolonged
the sound with the ram’s horn, as soon as you shall have heard the sound
of the trumpet, the whole people will shout with a great shout, and the
wall of the city will fall to pieces (under itself): and the people will
go up every one from his own place.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p8"></span>**6** Accordingly Joshua the son of Nun
called the priests, and said to them, Take up the ark of the covenant,
and let seven priests take seven trumpets of rams’ horns in front of the
ark of Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p9"></span>**7** He said also to the people, Pass
over, and go round the city, and let every man armed go before the ark
of the Lord.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p10"></span>**8** And it was after Joshua spoke to
the people, seven priests bore seven trumpets of rams’ horns, and
passing over before the ark of Jehovah sounded with the trumpets. And
the ark of the covenant of Jehovah followed them.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p11"></span>**9** And every man armed went before
the priests sounding with the trumpets; and he who brought up the rear
followed the ark while going and sounding with the trumpets.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p12"></span>**10** And Joshua had commanded the
people, saying, You shall not shout, neither will you let your voice be
heard, neither will a word proceed from your mouth, until the day when I
shall have said to you, Shout: then shall you shout.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p13"></span>**11** The ark of Jehovah therefore
compassed the city, going round once, and they returned to the camp; and
they remained there.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p14"></span>**12** Joshua rose again in the morning,
and the priests bore the ark of Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p15"></span>**13** And seven priests bearing seven
trumpets of ram’s horn preceded the ark of Jehovah in going; and they
sounded with the trumpets. But he that was armed preceded them, and he
who brought up the rear followed the ark of Jehovah in going, and in
sounding with the trumpets.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p16"></span>**14** They accordingly compassed the
city on the second day another time, and returned to the camp; thus did
they six days.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p17"></span>**15** But when the seventh day arrived,
they rose up as soon as it was dawn, and they went round the city after
the same manner seven times; only on that day they went round the city
seven times.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p18"></span>**16** And on the seventh time when the
priests sounded with the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, Shout,
Jehovah has delivered you the city.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p19"></span>**17** And the city will be anathema
(set apart) to Jehovah, it and whatever things are in it; only Rahab,
the harlot, shall live, she and all who shall be at home with her;
because she concealed the messengers whom we sent.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p20"></span>**18** Nevertheless, beware you of the
anathema, lest perhaps you touch something of the anathema, and take
away of the anathema, and make the camp of Israel anathema, and trouble
it.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p21"></span>**19** But all the silver and gold, and
the iron and brazen vessels, will be holiness to Jehovah; they will go
into Jehovah’s treasury.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p22"></span>**20** The people accordingly shouted
after they sounded with the trumpets. For when the people had heard the
noise of the trumpets, they shouted with a very great shout, and the
wall fell down, and the people went up, every one from his place, and
they took it.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p23"></span>**21** And they destroyed all things
which were in the city, from the man even to the woman, from the boy
even to the old man, to the ox, and the sheep, and the ass, by the edge
of the sword.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p24"></span>**22** But to the two men who had
explored the land Joshua said, Go into the house of the woman, the
harlot, and thence lead out her and whatever she has, as you have sworn
to her.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p25"></span>**23** The spies, therefore, having gone
in, led out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brothers, and
whatever she had, and led out her whole kindred, and placed them without
the camp of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p26"></span>**24** But they consumed the city with
fire, and every thing therein; only the gold and silver, the brazen and
iron vessels, they placed in the treasury of the house of Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p27"></span>**25** Therefore Rahab the harlot, and
the house of her father, and whatever she had, Joshua caused to live;
and she dwelt in the midst of Israel even to this day, because she had
concealed the messengers whom Joshua had sent to spy out Jericho.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p28"></span>**26** And Joshua made an adjuration at
that time, saying, Cursed before Jehovah be the man who shall rise to
build that city Jericho. In his first-born shall he found it, and in his
younger son shall he set up its gates.

<span id="xxviii.vi-p29"></span>**27** And Jehovah was with Joshua, and
his fame was in the whole land.

<span id="xxviii.vii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.vii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 7

<span id="xxviii.vii-p3"></span>**1** Now the children of Israel
transgressed with transgression (grievously) in the anathema, inasmuch
as Achan, son of Charmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zerah, of the tribe of
Judah, took of the anathema; and the wrath of Jehovah was kindled
against the children of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p4"></span>**2** Moreover, Joshua sent men from
Jericho against Hai, which was near Bethaven to the east of Bethel, and
he spoke with them, saying, Go up and explore the land. The men
accordingly went up and explored Hai.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p5"></span>**3** And having returned to Joshua,
they said to him, Let not the whole people go up; let about two thousand
men, or about three thousand men go up, and they shall smite Hai.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p6"></span>**4** About three thousand men therefore
went up from the people, and they fled before the men of Hai.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p7"></span>**5** And they smote about thirty-six
men of them, and pursued them from the gate even to Sebarim, and smote
them in the descent; and thus the heart of the people was melted, and
was like water.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p8"></span>**6** Moreover, Joshua rent his clothes,
and fell on his face to the ground before the ark of Jehovah even till
evening, himself and the elders of Israel, and they put dust upon their
head.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p9"></span>**7** And Joshua said, Ah, ah! Sovereign
Jehovah, how is it that thou has brought this people across the Jordan,
that thou might deliver us into the hand of the Amorite, who will
destroy us? Would that it had pleased us to remain in the desert beyond
the Jordan!

<span id="xxviii.vii-p10"></span>**8** O Lord, what shall I say after
Israel turns his back before his enemies?

<span id="xxviii.vii-p11"></span>**9** And the Canaanite and all the
inhabitants of the land will hear, and will turn against us, and will
destroy our name from the earth; and what wilt thou do to thy great
name?

<span id="xxviii.vii-p12"></span>**10** Then Jehovah said to Joshua,
Arise. Why is it that thou thus falls upon thy face?

<span id="xxviii.vii-p13"></span>**11** Israel has sinned, and they have
even transgressed my paction which I enjoined upon them, and they have
also taken of the anathema, and they have also stolen, and they have
also lied, and they have also deposited it among their vessels.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p14"></span>**12** Therefore the children of Israel
have not been able to stand before their enemies; they will turn their
back before their enemies; because they are in anathema, I will not
continue to be with you, unless you destroy the anathema from the midst
of you.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p15"></span>**13** Arise, sanctify the people, and
say, Sanctify yourselves against to-morrow; for thus says Jehovah, God
of Israel, there is anathema in the midst of thee, Israel.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p16"></span>**14** You shall therefore come near in
the morning by your tribes; and the tribe which Jehovah shall detect
will come near by families; and the family which Jehovah shall detect
shall come near by houses; and the house which Jehovah shall detect will
come near by men.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p17"></span>**15** And the man who shall be
detected in the anathema, will be burnt with fire, himself and all
things which are his, because he has transgressed the paction of
Jehovah, and has done iniquity in Israel.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p18"></span>**16** Joshua accordingly rose early in
the morning, and caused Israel to draw near by their tribes, and the
tribe of Judah was taken.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p19"></span>**17** Then he put in the kindreds of
Judah, and took the kindred of Zera; then he put in the families of Zari
by men, and the family of Zabdi was taken.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p20"></span>**18** And he took his house by men,
and Achan, son of Charmi, son of Zabdi, son of Zera, was taken.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p21"></span>**19** Then said Joshua to Achan, My
son, now give glory to Jehovah, God of Israel, and make confession to
him, and discover to me what thou has done; do not conceal it from me.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p22"></span>**20** Achan replied to Joshua and
says, Truly I have sinned to Jehovah God of Israel, and thus and thus
have I done.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p23"></span>**21** I saw among the spoils a good
Babylonish cloak, and two hundred shekels of silver, and one wedge of
gold, whose weight was fifty shekels, which I coveted and carried off;
and, behold, they are hidden in the ground, in the midst of my tent, and
the silver beneath.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p24"></span>**22** Joshua therefore sent
messengers, who ran to the tent; behold it was hid in his tent, and the
silver under it.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p25"></span>**23** And they took them from the
midst of the tent, and they brought them to Joshua, and to all the
children of Israel, and placed them before Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p26"></span>**24** Joshua, therefore, taking Achan,
the son of Zera, and the silver, and the cloak, and the golden wedge,
and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his
flocks, and his tent, and all things which were his, and at the same
time all Israel with him, led them down into the valley of Achor.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p27"></span>**25** And Joshua said, Why has thou
troubled us? Jehovah trouble thee this day. And all Israel overwhelmed
him with stones, and burnt them with fire after they stoned them with
stones.

<span id="xxviii.vii-p28"></span>**26** And they placed over him a great
heap of stones, even to this day, and Jehovah was turned from his hot
anger; therefore they called the name of that place The valley of Achor,
even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.viii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.viii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 8

<span id="xxviii.viii-p3"></span>**1** And Jehovah said to Joshua, Fear
not, dread not; take with thee all the men of war, and arise, go up to
Hai. See, I have given into thy hand the king of Hai, and his people,
his city, and his land.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p4"></span>**2** And thou shall do to Hai and its
king, as thou has done to Jericho and its king; yet its spoil and
animals you shall take to yourselves as booty. But place an ambuscade
for the city in its rear.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p5"></span>**3** Joshua accordingly arose, and all
the people of war, that they might go up against Hai; and Joshua
selected thirty thousand men of strength and valor, and sent them by
night.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p6"></span>**4** And he commanded them, saying,
Give heed, you shall lay an ambuscade for the city in its rear; do not
remove far from it, but be all of you ready.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p7"></span>**5** And I, and all the people who are
with me, will draw near the city; and when they will come out to
encounter us as formerly, we will flee before them.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p8"></span>**6** Then they will come out after us,
until we draw them away from the city; for they will say, They flee
before us as before; and we will flee before them.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p9"></span>**7** But you will rise from the
ambush, and will drive out the inhabitants of the city, and Jehovah your
God will deliver it into your hand.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p10"></span>**8** When you shall have taken the
city, you shall set it on fire; according to the word of Jehovah shall
you do. See, I have commanded you.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p11"></span>**9** Joshua accordingly sent them,
and they proceeded to the ambush, and remained between Bethel and Hai,
on the west of Hai. But Joshua remained that night in the midst of the
people.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p12"></span>**10** Afterwards Joshua rose up very
early, and reviewed the people, and went up, he and the elders of
Israel, before the people toward Hai.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p13"></span>**11** And all the men of war who were
with him, went up and drew near, and came opposite to the city, and
encamped on the north of Hai. And there was a valley between them and
Hai.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p14"></span>**12** And he brought besides about
five thousand men, whom he placed in ambush between Bethel and Hai, on
the west of the city.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p15"></span>**13** And the people approached
nearer to the whole camp which was on the north of the city, and their
ambuscade was on the west of the city itself; and Joshua proceeded that
night into the midst of the valley.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p16"></span>**14** Moreover, when the king of Hai
saw, the men of the city hastened, and rose up early, and came out to
meet Israel in battle, he and all his people, at the appointed time
before the plains; but he knew not that there was an ambuscade for him
behind the city.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p17"></span>**15** And they routed Joshua and all
Israel before them, who fled by the way of the desert.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p18"></span>**16** And the whole people who were
in the city mustered to pursue them. And they pursued Joshua, and were
drawn away from the city.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p19"></span>**17** Nor did any one remain of
Bethel and Hai who did not go out after Israel; and they left the city
open, and pursued Israel.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p20"></span>**18** And Jehovah said to Joshua,
Lift up the spear which is in thy hand against Hai, for I will give it
into thy hand. And Joshua lifted up the spear which was in his hand
against the city.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p21"></span>**19** Then those in ambush rose
suddenly from their place, and ran when he had lifted up his hand, and
they came to the city, and took it, and hastened to set fire to the
city.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p22"></span>**20** And the men of Hai turning,
saw, and lo, the smoke of the city was rising up to heaven, and they had
no room to flee this way or that. And the people who had fled turned
against their pursuers.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p23"></span>**21** Joshua, therefore, and all
Israel, when they saw that the ambuscade had taken the city, and the
smoke of the city had ascended, returned and smote the men of Hai.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p24"></span>**22** Those besides came out of the
city to encounter them, and they were in the middle between Israel, part
of whom were on this side and part on that. And they smote them, till
not one remained who had survived and escaped.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p25"></span>**23** They also took the king of Hai
alive, and placed him before Joshua.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p26"></span>**24** And when the men of Israel had
made an end of slaying all the inhabitants of Hai in the desert whither
they had pursued them, and they had all fallen by the edge of the sword
till they were consumed, all Israel returned to Hai, and smote it with
the edge of the sword.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p27"></span>**25** And the number of all who fell
on that day, male and female, was about twelve thousand, all people of
Hai.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p28"></span>**26** Moreover, Joshua did not draw
back his hand which he had raised to the spear, until he slew all the
inhabitants of Hai.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p29"></span>**27** Only the animals and the spoils
of that city the children of Israel took to themselves for booty,
according to the word of Jehovah, which Joshua had commanded them.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p30"></span>**28** Joshua therefore burnt Hai, and
made it an eternal heap, a devastation even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p31"></span>**29** And he hung the king of Hai on
a gibbet even until the time of evening; and when the sun had gone down,
Joshua commanded, and they took down his corpse from the gibbet, and
cast it forth at the entrance of the gate of the city, and placed over
it a great heap of stones, even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p32"></span>**30** Then Joshua built an altar to
Jehovah the God of Israel in mount Ebal,

<span id="xxviii.viii-p33"></span>**31** According as Moses, the servant
of Jehovah, had commanded the children of Israel; as it is written in
the book of the law of Moses, an altar of entire stones, on which they
had lifted an iron, and they sacrificed upon it holocausts to Jehovah,
and they sacrificed victims of prosperity.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p34"></span>**32** He also wrote there on stones a
duplicate law of Moses, which he wrote in presence of the children of
Israel.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p35"></span>**33** And the whole of Israel, and
their elders and prefects, and their judges, stood on this side and on
that at the ark before the priests the Levites, bearing the ark of the
covenant of Jehovah, as well the stranger as the native, half of them
against mount Garizin, and half of them against mount Ebal, as Moses,
the servant of Jehovah, had commanded, that he might first bless the
people.

<span id="xxviii.viii-p36"></span>**34** And after these things he read
all the words of the law, blessing and cursing according to all that
which is written in the book of the law.

<span id="xxviii.ix"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ix-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.ix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 9

<span id="xxviii.ix-p3"></span>**1** And when all the kings had heard,
who were beyond Jordan in the mountain, and in the plain, and in the
whole coast of the great sea from the region of Lebanon, the Hittite,
Amorite, Canaanite, Perizzite, Hivite, and Jebusite,

<span id="xxviii.ix-p4"></span>**2** They assembled together to fight
with Joshua and Israel with one consent.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p5"></span>**3** But the inhabitants of Gibeon
hearing what Joshua had done at the city of Jericho and to Hai,

<span id="xxviii.ix-p6"></span>**4** They too acted craftily. For they
went away, and pretended that they were ambassadors, and brought old
sacks on their asses, and wine-bladders, old, and broken, and bound up;

<span id="xxviii.ix-p7"></span>**5** And old and patched shoes on their
feet, and old clothes upon them, and the whole bread for their journey
was dry and musty.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p8"></span>**6** They proceeded therefore to Joshua
to the camp in Gilgal, and they said to him and to the men of Israel, We
have come from a far country, now therefore make a covenant with us.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p9"></span>**7** Then the men of Israel replied to
the Hivite, Perhaps thou dwells in the midst of me, and how shall I make
a league with thee?

<span id="xxviii.ix-p10"></span>**8** But they said to Joshua, We are
thy servants. And Joshua says to them, Who are you, and whence have you
come?

<span id="xxviii.ix-p11"></span>**9** They answered him, From a very far
country have thy servants come in the name of Jehovah thy God. For we
have heard his fame, and what things he did in Egypt,

<span id="xxviii.ix-p12"></span>**10** Likewise what things he did to
the two Amorite kings, who were beyond Jordan, Sihon, king of Hesbon,
and Og, king of Basan in Astaroth.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p13"></span>**11** And our elders, and all the
inhabitants of our land said to us, Take in your hand food for the
journey, and go to meet them, and say to them, We are your servants, and
now make a league with us.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p14"></span>**12** That is our bread; we brought it
warm from our houses on the day on which we left to come to you, and now
it is hard and dry.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p15"></span>**13** And those are the wine-bladders,
which we filled when new, and behold they are burst. And those our
clothes, and our shoes have become worn by reason of the long journey.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p16"></span>**14** The men therefore took of their
victuals, and did not inquire at the mouth of Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p17"></span>**15** And Joshua made peace with them,
and entered into a league with them, that they would permit them to
live, and the princes of the congregation swear to them.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p18"></span>**16** But three days after they had
entered into covenant with them, they heard that they were their
neighbors, and dwelt in the midst of them.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p19"></span>**17** And the children of Israel set
out and came to their cities on the third day. And their cities were
Gibeon, Chephirat, Beeroth, Ciriath-Jearim.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p20"></span>**18** And the children of Israel did
not smite them, because the princes of the congregation had sworn to
them by Jehovah God of Israel; and the whole congregation murmured
against the princes.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p21"></span>**19** Then all the princes said to all
the congregation, We have sworn to them by Jehovah God of Israel,
therefore we cannot now touch them.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p22"></span>**20** This we will do to them, we will
save them alive, lest wrath be against us because of the oath which we
have sworn to them.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p23"></span>**21** Therefore the princes said to
them, Let them live, and hew wood, and dig water for the whole
congregation, as all the princes have spoken to them.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p24"></span>**22** Joshua therefore called them, and
spoke unto them, saying, How is it that you have deceived us, saying, We
are very remote from you, seeing you dwell in the midst of us.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p25"></span>**23** Now, therefore, are you cursed,
and there shall never cease among you slaves, both hewing wood and
digging water for the house of my God.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p26"></span>**24** And they answered Joshua and
said, When it was distinctly told (by telling it was told) to thy
servants how Jehovah thy God had commanded Moses his servant to give you
the land, and utterly destroy all the dwellers of the land from before
you, we feared greatly for our lives from before you, and did that
thing.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p27"></span>**25** And now, behold, we are in thy
hand; as it pleases, and as it is right in thy eyes to do to us, thou
shall do.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p28"></span>**26** And he did to them thus, and
delivered them in the hand of the children of Israel, and they did not
slay them.

<span id="xxviii.ix-p29"></span>**27** And Joshua, on that day,
appointed them to be hewers of wood and drawers of water for the
congregation, and for the altar of Jehovah, even to this day, in the
place which he shall have chosen.

<span id="xxviii.x"></span>

<span id="xxviii.x-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.x-p2"></span>CHAPTER 10

<span id="xxviii.x-p3"></span>**1** When Adoni-zedec king of Jerusalem
had heard that Joshua had taken Hai and destroyed it, (that as he had
done to Jericho and its king, so had he done to Hai and its king,) and
that the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were
among them;

<span id="xxviii.x-p4"></span>**2** Then they feared greatly, because
Gibeon was a large city, (citizenship or territory,) as one of the Royal
cities, inasmuch as. it was greater than Hai, and all its men brave.

<span id="xxviii.x-p5"></span>**3** Therefore Adoni-zedec king of
Jerusalem sent to Hoham king of Hebron, and to Piram king of Jarmuth,
and to Japhiam king of Lachis, and to Debir king of Eglon, saying,

<span id="xxviii.x-p6"></span>**4** Come up to me, and bring
reinforcements to me, that we may smite Gibeon who has made peace with
Joshua, and the children of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.x-p7"></span>**5** Accordingly, the five Amorite kings,
— the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the
king of Lachis, the king of Eglon, they and all their armies assembled,
and went up and encamped near Gibeon, and fought against it.

<span id="xxviii.x-p8"></span>**6** Therefore the men of Gibeon sent to
Joshua to the camp in Gilgal, saying, Do not keep back thy hands from
thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and assist us, for all
the Amorite kings, dwelling in the mountain, have assembled against us.

<span id="xxviii.x-p9"></span>**7** Joshua therefore came up from
Gilgal, he and all the people of war with him, all the men of might.

<span id="xxviii.x-p10"></span>**8** And Jehovah said to Joshua, Be not
afraid of them; for I have delivered them into thy hand, nor shall any
one of them stand in thy presence.

<span id="xxviii.x-p11"></span>**9** And Joshua came upon them suddenly;
for during the whole night he went up from Gilgal

<span id="xxviii.x-p12"></span>**10** And Jehovah crushed them before
Israel, and smote them with a great overthrow in Gibeon, and pursued
them by the way of the ascent of Beth-horon, and smote them even to
Azecah, and even to Malzeda.

<span id="xxviii.x-p13"></span>**11** And when they were fleeing from
the face of Israel, and were on the descent of Beth-horon, Jehovah sent
down upon them great stones from heaven even to Azecah, and they died;
more died by the hailstones than those whom the children of Israel slew
with the sword.

<span id="xxviii.x-p14"></span>**12** Then Joshua spoke to Jehovah on
the day on which Jehovah delivered up the Amorite before the children of
Israel. And he said in the eyes of Israel, Sun, wait in Gibeon, and
Moon, in the valley of Ajalon.

<span id="xxviii.x-p15"></span>**13** And the sun waited, and the moon
stood until the people avenged themselves on their enemies. Has this not
been written in the book of Jasar? *(or,* of right.) The sun therefore
stood in the midst of heaven, and did not hasten to set for about one
entire day.

<span id="xxviii.x-p16"></span>**14** And there was no day like that
before it or after it, on which Jehovah hearkened to the voice of a man;
for Jehovah was fighting for Israel.

<span id="xxviii.x-p17"></span>**15** And Joshua and all Israel with him
returned to the camp in Gilgal.

<span id="xxviii.x-p18"></span>**16** But the kings themselves had fled,
and hid themselves in a cave in Malzeda.

<span id="xxviii.x-p19"></span>**17** And it was told to Joshua in these
words, The five kings have been found hidden in a cave in Malzeda.

<span id="xxviii.x-p20"></span>**18** Then Joshua said, Roll great
stones to the mouth of the cave, and set men near it to guard them.

<span id="xxviii.x-p21"></span>**19** But do you follow after your
enemies, and cut off their tail, *(or,* rear,) and allow them not to
enter their cities; for Jehovah your God has delivered them into your
hand.

<span id="xxviii.x-p22"></span>**20** And when Joshua and the children
of Israel had made an end of smiting them with a very great overthrow
till they were consumed, and the survivors who had escaped had entered
into fortified cities,

<span id="xxviii.x-p23"></span>**21** The whole people returned to the
camp to Joshua in Malzeda in peace; no one moved his tongue against the
children of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.x-p24"></span>**22** Then said Joshua, Open the mouth
of the cave, and bring me those five kings from the cave.

<span id="xxviii.x-p25"></span>**23** And they did so, namely, they
brought to him those five kings from the cave, the king of Jerusalem,
the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachis, the king of
Eglon.

<span id="xxviii.x-p26"></span>**24** And when they had brought out
those five kings to Joshua, Joshua called all the men of Israel, and he
said to the leaders of the men of war who had accompanied him Come near,
put your feet upon the necks of those kings. And they came near and put
their feet upon their necks.

<span id="xxviii.x-p27"></span>**25** Then Joshua said to them, Fear not
and dread not, be strong and of good courage; for Jehovah will do thus
to all your enemies against whom you fight.

<span id="xxviii.x-p28"></span>**26** After this Joshua smote them, and
slew them, and hung them on five gibbets; and they were suspended on the
gibbets till evening.

<span id="xxviii.x-p29"></span>**27** Moreover, at the time when the sun
goes down, Joshua commanded, and they took them down from the gibbets,
and cast them into the cave in which they had hid themselves, and they
placed great stones at the mouth of the cave until this day.

<span id="xxviii.x-p30"></span>**28** But Joshua on that day took
Malzeda, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and slew their king
along with them, and left no soul which was in it surviving; and did to
the king Malzeda as he had done to the king of Jericho.

<span id="xxviii.x-p31"></span>**29** Thereafter, Joshua, and all Israel
with him, passed over from Malzeda to Libna, and besieged Libna.

<span id="xxviii.x-p32"></span>**30** And Jehovah delivered it also, and
its king, into the hand of Israel, and smote it with the edge of the
sword, and did not leave surviving a single soul which was in it; and
did to its king in like manner as he had done to the king of Jericho.

<span id="xxviii.x-p33"></span>**31** Joshua afterwards passed, and all
Israel with him, from Libna to Lachis, and encamped near it, and
besieged it.

<span id="xxviii.x-p34"></span>**32** And Jehovah gave Lachis into the
hand of Israel, and he took it on the second day, and struck it with the
edge of the sword, and every soul which was in it, exactly as he had
done to Libna.

<span id="xxviii.x-p35"></span>**33** And Horam king of Gezer, went up
to give assistance to Lachis, and Joshua smote him and his people, so
that he did not leave a survivor.

<span id="xxviii.x-p36"></span>**34** Joshua, moreover, and all Israel
with him, passed from Lachis to Eglon, and they encamped against it, and
besieged it.

<span id="xxviii.x-p37"></span>**35** And they took it on that day and
smote it with the edge of the sword; and every soul which was there
Joshua slew on that day exactly as he had done to Lachis.

<span id="xxviii.x-p38"></span>**36** Joshua thereafter went up, and all
Israel with him, from Eglon to Hebron, and besieged it.

<span id="xxviii.x-p39"></span>**37** And they took it, and smote it
with the edge of the sword, and its king, and all its towns, and he did
not leave surviving a single soul which was in it, exactly as he had
done to Eglon. He accordingly destroyed it, and every soul which was in
it.

<span id="xxviii.x-p40"></span>**38** Afterwards Joshua returned, and
all Israel with him, to Debir, and besieged it.

<span id="xxviii.x-p41"></span>**39** And they took it, and smote it
with the edge of the sword, and its king and all its towns, and they
smote them with the edge of the sword, and slew every soul which was
there; he did not leave a survivor; as he had done to Hebron, so he did
to Debir and its king, as he had done to Libna and its king.

<span id="xxviii.x-p42"></span>**40** And thus Joshua smote all the land
of the mountain, and the south, and the plain, and the slopes, and all
their kings; he did not leave a survivor; he slew every soul, as Jehovah
the God of Israel had commanded.

<span id="xxviii.x-p43"></span>**41** Wherefore, Joshua smote from
Cades-Barne even to Asa, and the whole land of Gosen even to Gibeon.

<span id="xxviii.x-p44"></span>**42** And all those kings and their land
Joshua took at the same time, for Jehovah the God of Israel was fighting
for Israel.

<span id="xxviii.x-p45"></span>**43** Thence Joshua, and all Israel with
him, returned to the camp in Gilgal.

<span id="xxviii.xi"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 11

<span id="xxviii.xi-p3"></span>**1** And when Jabin king of Hasor had
heard, he sent to Jobab king of Madam, and to the king of Simerom, and
to the king of Achsaph,

<span id="xxviii.xi-p4"></span>**2** To the kings also who dwelt in the
north among the mountains and in the plain to the south of Cineroth, and
in the plain in Naphoth-Dor on the west.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p5"></span>**3** To the Canaanite on the east and
west, and to the Amorite and Hittite, and Perizzite, and Jebusite among
the mountains, and to the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mispah.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p6"></span>**4** And they went out, themselves, and
all their armies with them, many people, like the sand which is near the
sea-shore for multitude, and horses and chariots very many.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p7"></span>**5** All those kings assembled, and
coming encamped together at the waters of Merom, that they might fight
with Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p8"></span>**6** And Jehovah said unto Joshua, Fear
not before them; for to-morrow, at this time, I will deliver them all up
slain before Israel: their horses thou shall hough, and their chariots
thou shall burn with fire.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p9"></span>**7** Joshua therefore came, and all the
people of war with him, against them to the waters of Merom suddenly,
and they rushed upon them.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p10"></span>**8** And Jehovah delivered them into
the hand of Israel, and they smote them, and pursued them as far as
great Sidon, and even to the boiling springs, and even to the plain of
Mispe on the east; and they smote them till he left none of them
surviving.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p11"></span>**9** And Joshua did to them as Jehovah
had said to him; he houghed their horses, and burnt their chariots with
fire.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p12"></span>**10** And Joshua having returned, at
the same time took Hasor, and smote its king with the sword. For Hasor
had formerly been the head of all those kingdoms.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p13"></span>**11** They also smote every soul which
was therein, destroying by the edge of the sword; no soul remained; and
he burnt Hasor with fire.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p14"></span>**12** All the cities of those kings
Joshua took, and smote them with the edge of the sword, destroying them
as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p15"></span>**13** Only all the cities which
remained in their state Joshua burned not, except Hasor alone, which
Joshua burnt.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p16"></span>**14** And all the spoils of those
cities, and the cattle, the children of Israel took as booty to
themselves; nevertheless all the men they smote with the edge of the
sword, they did not leave any soul.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p17"></span>**15** As Jehovah had commanded Moses
his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua, and Joshua did so, that he might
not omit any one of all the things which Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p18"></span>**16** And Joshua took all that mountain
land, and all the south, and all the land of Goshen, and the plain and
level lands, the mountain of Israel also, and its plain.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p19"></span>**17** From the mountain of the left,
which rises towards Seir, as far as Baal-gad, in the plain of Lebanon
under Mount Hermon; also all their kings he took, and smote and slew
them.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p20"></span>**18** Many days did Joshua carry on war
with all those kings.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p21"></span>**19** There was no city which made
peace with the children of Israel except the Hivites, the inhabitants of
Gibeon; they took them all in battle.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p22"></span>**20** Because it was from Jehovah to
harden their heart to encounter Israel in war, that he might destroy
them, and no pity might remain for them; but that he might destroy them,
as Jehovah had commanded Moses.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p23"></span>**21** And Joshua came at that time and
cut off Analzim from the mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab,
and from all the mountains of Juda, and from all the mountains of
Israel; Joshua destroyed them along with their cities.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p24"></span>**22** There remained not of the Analzim
in the land of the children of Israel; only in Gad and in Ashdod was
there a residue.

<span id="xxviii.xi-p25"></span>**23** Accordingly Joshua took all the
land according as Jehovah had said to Moses, and he gave it over as an
inheritance to Israel according to their divisions by their tribes; and
the land rested from war.

<span id="xxviii.xii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 12

<span id="xxviii.xii-p3"></span>**1** These are the kings of the land
whom the children of Israel smote, and whose land they possessed beyond
the Jordan, towards the rising of the sun, from the torrent Arnon even
to Mount Hermon, and all the eastern plain.

<span id="xxviii.xii-p4"></span>**2** Sehon the Amorite king, who dwelt
in Hesbon, who ruled from Aroer to the bank of the torrent Arnon, and to
the middle of the torrent, and to the middle part of Gilead, even to the
torrent Jabbolz, which is the boundary of the children of Ammon.

<span id="xxviii.xii-p5"></span>**3** And from the plain even to the sea
of Cineroth on the east, and even to the sea of the desert, the sea of
salt on the east, by the way of Beth-hagesimoth, and from the south
under the outpourings (springs) of Pisgah.

<span id="xxviii.xii-p6"></span>**4** The boundary besides of Og king of
Basan, of the residue of the Rephaim, who dwelt in Astaroth and Hedrei,

<span id="xxviii.xii-p7"></span>**5** Who ruled in mount Hermon, and in
Salchah, and in all Basan, even to the border of Gessuri and Maachathi,
and the middle part of Gilead: (such was) the boundary of Sehon king of
Basan.

<span id="xxviii.xii-p8"></span>**6** Moses, the servant of Jehovah, and
the children of Israel, smote them, and Moses, the servant of Jehovah,
gave it for a possession to the Reubenites, and Gadites, and the half
tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="xxviii.xii-p9"></span>**7** Now these are the kings whom
Joshua and the children of Israel smote beyond the Jordan on the west,
from Baal-gad in the plain of Lebanon even to the mountain Laevis which
rises in Seir; and Joshua delivered it to the tribes of Israel for a
possession according to their portions.

<span id="xxviii.xii-p10"></span>**8** Among the mountains, and in the
plain, and in the lowlands, and in Asdoth, and in the desert, and in the
south; the Hittite, the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the
Hivite, and the Jebusite:

<span id="xxviii.xii-p11"></span>**9** The king of Jericho, one; the
king of Hai, who was on the side of Bethel, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p12"></span>**10** The king of Jerusalem, one; the
king of Hebron, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p13"></span>**11** The king of Jarmath, one; the
king of Lachis, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p14"></span>**12** The king of Eglon, one; the king
of Jeser, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p15"></span>**13** The king of Debir, one; the king
Jeder, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p16"></span>**14** The king of Hormah, one; the
king of Arad, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p17"></span>**15** The king of Libna, one; the king
of Adulam, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p18"></span>**16** The king of Makeda, one; the
king of Bethel, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p19"></span>**17** The king of Tapuah, one; the
king of Epher, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p20"></span>**18** The king of Aphek, one; the king
of Lasaron, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p21"></span>**19** The king of Madon, one; the king
of Asor, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p22"></span>**20** The king of Simron Meron, one;
the king of Achsaph, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p23"></span>**21** The king of Taanach, one; the
king of Megiddo, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p24"></span>**22** The king of Kedesch, one; the
king of Jocnam at Carmel, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p25"></span>**23** The king of Dor, at Naphath-dor,
one; the king of Grim in Gilgal, one;

<span id="xxviii.xii-p26"></span>**24** The king of Thirsa, one; all the
kings thirty and one.

<span id="xxviii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 13

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p3"></span>**1** And when Joshua had become old
and stricken in years, Jehovah said to him, Thou has become old and
stricken in years, and very much land still remains to be possessed.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p4"></span>**2** This is the land which remains:
all the limits of the Philistines, and all Gessuri,

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p5"></span>**3** From the Nile, which is in the
direction of Egypt, even to the border of Ekron, which is on the north,
which is considered part of Canaan: five princedoms of the Philistines,
Azath, Asdod, Askalon, Gittha, Ekron, and Avei.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p6"></span>**4** From the south, the whole land of
the Canaanite and Meara, which belongs to the Sidonians, even to Paera,
even to the border of the Amorite;

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p7"></span>**5** And the land of Gibli, and all
Lebanon toward the sun-rising, from Baal-gad under mount Hermon, until
you come to Haemath.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p8"></span>**6** All the inhabitants of the
mountain, from Lebanon even to the boiling springs, all the Sidonians
will I drive out from before the children of Israel; only do thou cast
the lot, that it may be for an inheritance to Israel, as I have
commanded thee.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p9"></span>**7** Now, therefore, divide the land
for an inheritance to the nine tribes and the half tribe of Manasseh;

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p10"></span>**8** Besides it the Reubenites, and
Gadites have received their portions, which Moses gave them beyond
Jordan on the east, as Moses, the servant of Jehovah, gave them;

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p11"></span>**9** From Aroer, which is near the
bank of the river Arnon, and the city itself, which is in the midst of
the valley, and the whole plain of Medeba as far as Debon;

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p12"></span>**10** And all the cities of Sihon,
the Amorite king, who reigned in Hesbon, even to the boundary of the
children of Ammon;

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p13"></span>**11** And Gilead, and the border of
Gessuri, and Maachathi, and the whole of mount Hermon, and all Basan as
far as Salchah;

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p14"></span>**12** The whole kingdom of Og in
Basan, who reigned in Astaroth, and in Edrei; the remains of the residue
of the Rephaim, whom Moses smote and expelled.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p15"></span>**13** But the children of Israel did
not expel the Geshurites and Maacathites; therefore Geshur and Maachath
have dwelt in the midst of Israel even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p16"></span>**14** Only to the tribe of Levi did
he not give an inheritance: the sacrifices of Jehovah the God of Israel
are their inheritance, as he spoke concerning it.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p17"></span>**15** Moses therefore gave to the
tribe of Reuben by their families:

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p18"></span>**16** And their border was from
Aroer, which is near the bank of the torrent Arnon, and the city which
is in the midst of the valley, and the whole plain which is near Medeba.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p19"></span>**17** Hesbon and all its cities which
were in the plain; Debon and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baalmeon,

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p20"></span>**18** And Jahasah, and Cedemoth, and
Mephaath.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p21"></span>**19** And Ciriathaim, and Sibmah, and
Sereth-sahar in the mountain of the valley,

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p22"></span>**20** And Beth-peor, and
Asdoth-Pisgah, and Beth-Jesimoth.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p23"></span>**21** And all the cities of the
plain, and the whole kingdom of Sihon the Amorite king, who reigned in
Hesbon, whom Moses slew: and the princes of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and
Sur, and Hur, and Reba, leaders of Sihon, inhabitants of the land.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p24"></span>**22** And Balaam son of Beor, the
diviner, the children of Israel slew with the sword among their slain.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p25"></span>**23** And the boundary of the
children of Israel was the Jordan and its boundary. This is the
inheritance of the children of Reuben by their families, cities, and
villages.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p26"></span>**24** And Moses gave to the tribe of
Gad, to the children of Gad by their families:

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p27"></span>**25** And their boundary was Jazer,
and all the cities of Gilead, and the half of the land of the children
of Ammon, even to Aroer which is before Rabbah:

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p28"></span>**26** And from Hesbon even to Ramath
of Mispe itself, and Bethonim; and from Mahanaim even to the border of
Debir itself;

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p29"></span>**27** And in the valley of
Beth-haran, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Saphon; a remnant of the
kingdom of Sihon king of Hesbon, the Jordan and its confines, even to
the extremity of the Sea of Chinnereth, beyond Jordan on the east.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p30"></span>**28** This is the inheritance of the
children of Gad, by their families, their cities, and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p31"></span>**29** Moses, moreover, gave to the
half tribe of Manasseh: and there was to the half tribe of the children
of Manasseh by their families,

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p32"></span>**30** Their border, I say, was from
Mahanaim, all of Basan, the whole kingdom of Og king of Basan, and all
of Havoth-Jair which are in Basan, sixty cities ·

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p33"></span>**31** And the half of Gilead, and
Astaroth, and Edrei, cities of Og king of Basan, of the sons of Machir,
the son of Manasseh, to the half part of the sons of Machir by their
families.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p34"></span>**32** Those are the inheritances
which Moses delivered in the plains of Moab, from the passage of Jordan
to Jericho itself, on the east.

<span id="xxviii.xiii-p35"></span>**33** But to the tribe of Levi Moses
did not give an inheritance; Jehovah the God of Israel himself is their
inheritance, as he said to them (or concerning them.)

<span id="xxviii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 14

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p3"></span>**1** These are the territories which
the children of Israel received as an inheritance, in the land of
Canaan, which Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun, and the
heads of the tribes of the children of Israel, delivered to them, for an
inheritance,

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p4"></span>**2** By the lot of their inheritance,
as Jehovah had commanded by the hand of Moses, to give to the nine
tribes and the half tribe.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p5"></span>**3** For Moses had given to the two
tribes and to the half tribe beyond the Jordan. But he had not given to
the Levites an inheritance in the midst of them.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p6"></span>**4** For the sons of Joseph were the
two tribes of Manasseh and Ephraim: accordingly they did not give a
portion to the Levites in the land except cities to dwell in, and the
suburbs of them for their herds and flocks.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p7"></span>**5** As Moses had commanded, so did the
children of Israel, and they divided the land.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p8"></span>**6** And the children of Judah came
near to Joshua in Gilgal, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite
said to him, Thou knowest the word which Jehovah spoke to Moses the man
of God, concerning me and concerning thee in Cades-barnea.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p9"></span>**7** I was forty years old when Moses
the servant of Jehovah sent me from Cades-Barnea to explore the land,
and I reported the matter to him as it was in my heart.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p10"></span>**8** And when my brethren who had come
down with me melted the heart of the people, I perseveringly followed
Jehovah my God.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p11"></span>**9** And Moses swear on that day,
saying, Surely the land which thy foot has trod shall be thine for an
inheritance, and to thy children for ever, because thou has
perseveringly followed Jehovah thy God.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p12"></span>**10** And now Jehovah has granted me
life as he had said. Forty-five years have elapsed since the time when
the Lord declared this matter to Moses, and since Israel has walked
through the desert: and now, indeed, this day am I eighty-five years of
age.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p13"></span>**11** And still am I this day vigorous
as on that day on which Moses sent me; as great as my vigor was then, so
great is my vigor this day for battle, both for going out and coming in.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p14"></span>**12** Now, therefore, give me that
mountain, as Jehovah spoke on that day, For thou did hear on that day
that the Anakim are there, and cities great and fortified: perhaps
Jehovah will be with me, and I shall drive them out, as Jehovah said.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p15"></span>**13** And Joshua blessed him, and gave
Hebron to Caleb himself the son of Jephunneh for an inheritance.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p16"></span>**14** Therefore has Hebron belonged to
Caleb himself the son of Jephunneh, the Kenezite for an inheritance unto
this day, because he perseveringly followed Jehovah, the God of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xiv-p17"></span>**15** Now the name of Hebron was
formerly Ciriath-arba, which Arba was a great man among the Anakim, and
the land rested from war.

<span id="xxviii.xv"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 15

<span id="xxviii.xv-p3"></span>**1** And there was a lot to the children
of Judah by their families near the border of Edom, and the desert of
Sin towards the south, from the extremity of the south.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p4"></span>**2** And their south boundary was from
the extremity of the salt sea, that is, from the rock which looks
towards the south.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p5"></span>**3** And it goes out towards the south
of Maale-acrabim, and thence passes over into Sin: and proceeding from
the south in Cades-barnea, it passes over thence into Esron, and again
goes up in Adar, and makes a circuit in Carcaa.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p6"></span>**4** Thence it passes into Asmon, and
goes out to the torrent of Egypt: and the outgoings of this boundary are
toward the west: that will be your boundary toward the south.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p7"></span>**5** And the boundary toward the east is
the salt sea, even to the extremity of the Jordan; and the boundary of
the north corner is from the rock of the sea, from the extremity of the
Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p8"></span>**6** And that boundary goeth up into
Beth-hoglah, and passes from the north to Beth-araba: and thence that
boundary goeth up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p9"></span>**7** That boundary, moreover, goeth up
into Debir from the valley of Achor, and towards the north looks to
Gilgal, which is over against the ascent of Adummim, which, indeed, is
to the torrent on the south: and that boundary passes to the waters of
En-semes, and its outgoings are at En-rogel.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p10"></span>**8** And that boundary goeth up to the
valley of the son of Hinnom, to the side of the Jebusite on the south;
the same is Jerusalem: that boundary, moreover, goeth up to the top of
the mountain which is over against the valley of Hinnom on the west,
which valley is at the extremity of the valley of Rephaim on the north.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p11"></span>**9** And the boundary goes round from
the top of the mountain, to the fountain of the water of Nephthoah, and
goeth out to the cities of mount Ephron, and that boundary makes a
circuit in Baala, the same is Ciriath-Jearim.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p12"></span>**10** And thence that boundary winds
round from Baala on the west to mount Seir, and thence passes through to
the side of mount Jearim on the north, the same is Chesalon, and it
goeth down into Beth-semes, and passes over into Timna.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p13"></span>**11** And the boundary goeth out to the
side of Ecron on the north, and that boundary makes a circuit to
Sichron, and passes through even to mount Baala: and thence goes out
into Jabneel: and the outgoings of this boundary are at the sea.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p14"></span>**12** Moreover, the west boundary is at
the great sea and its coast: that is the boundary of the children of
Judah round about, by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p15"></span>**13** And he gave to Caleb the son of
Jephunneh in the midst of the children of Judah, according to the word
of Jehovah to Joshua, the portion of Ciriath-arba, the father of Anac,
the same is Hebron.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p16"></span>**14** Caleb drove thence the three sons
of Anac, Sezadi, and Haiman, and Thalmai, who were sons of Anac.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p17"></span>**15** And he went up from thence to the
inhabitants of Debir, whose name was formerly Ciriath-sepher.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p18"></span>**16** And Caleb said, To him who shall
smite Ciriath-sepher and take it, will I give my daughter Achsa to wife.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p19"></span>**17** And Othoniel the son of Cenas,
the brother of Caleb, took it, and he gave him Achsa his daughter to
wife.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p20"></span>**18** And it was when she came, that
she persuaded him to ask a field of her father, and she dismounted from
the ass, and Caleb said to her, What would thou?

<span id="xxviii.xv-p21"></span>**19** She answered, Give me a blessing;
since thou has given me an arid land, give me springs of water. And he
gave her upper springs and lower springs.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p22"></span>**20** That is the inheritance of the
tribe of the children of Judah by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p23"></span>**21** And the cities in the extremity
of the tribe of Judah, near the border of Edom on the south were Capsee,
and Eder, and Jagur,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p24"></span>**22** And Cina, and Dimona, and Adada,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p25"></span>**23** And Cedes, and Hasor, and Ithnan,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p26"></span>**24** Ziph, and Telem, and Bealot,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p27"></span>**25** And Hazor, and Hadatha, and
Cerioth, Hesron, the same is Hazor.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p28"></span>**26** Amam, and Sema, and Molada,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p29"></span>**27** And Hasar-Gadda, and Hesmon, and
Beth-phelet,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p30"></span>**28** And Hasar-sual, and Beerseba, and
Biziotheia,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p31"></span>**29** Baala, and Jim, and Asem,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p32"></span>**30** And Eltholad, and Chesil, and
Hormah,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p33"></span>**31** And Siclag, and Madmannah, and
Sensannah,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p34"></span>**32** And Lebaoth, and Silhim, and Ain,
and Rimon: all the cities twenty-nine, and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p35"></span>**33** In the plain Esthaol, and Sora,
and Asnah,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p36"></span>**34** And Zanoah, and En-gannim, and
Thaphuah, and Enam,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p37"></span>**35** Jarmuth, and Adulam, Sochoch, and
Azecah,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p38"></span>**36** And Saaraim, and Adithaim, and
Gederah, and Gederothaim: fourteen cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p39"></span>**37** Senam, and Hadasa, and Migdalgad,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p40"></span>**38** And Dilan, and Mispeh, and
Jocteel,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p41"></span>**39** Lachis, and Boscath, and Eglon,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p42"></span>**40** And Chabbon, and Lahmam, and
Chithlis,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p43"></span>**41** And Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and
Naamah, Makeda: sixteen cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p44"></span>**42** Liona, and Ether, and Asan,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p45"></span>**43** And Jephtha, and Asna, and Nesib,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p46"></span>**44** And Cheila, and Achzib, and
Marezah: nine cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p47"></span>**45** Ecron, and its towns and its
villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p48"></span>**46** From Ecron, and to the sea, all
which are on the side of Asdod, and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p49"></span>**47** Asdod, its towns and its
villages: Azza, its towns and its villages, even to the torrent of
Egypt, and the great sea; and this is its boundary.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p50"></span>**48** And in the mountain, Samir and
Jarbur, and Sochoch,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p51"></span>**49** And Dannah, and Ciriath-sannah,
the same is Debir,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p52"></span>**50** And Ahab, and Estemoth, and Anim,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p53"></span>**51** And Gosan, and Holon, and Giloh:
eleven cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p54"></span>**52** Arab, and Dumah, and Esan,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p55"></span>**53** And Janum, and Beth-thappuah, and
Aphecah,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p56"></span>**54** And Humtha, and Ciriath-Arba, the
same is Hebron, and Sior: nine cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p57"></span>**55** Mahon, Carmel, and Ziph, and
Juttah,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p58"></span>**56** And Jezreel, and Jocdean, and
Zaura,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p59"></span>**57** Cain, Giba, and Thimna: ten
cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p60"></span>**58** Hal-hul, and Beth-sur, and Gedor,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p61"></span>**59** And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and
Elthecon: six cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p62"></span>**60** Ciriath-baal, the same is
Ciriath-Jearim, and Rabba: two cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p63"></span>**61** In the desert Beth-arabah Middin,
and Sech-acha,

<span id="xxviii.xv-p64"></span>**62** And Nibsan, and the city of Salt,
and En-gedi: six cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xv-p65"></span>**63** Moreover, the children of Judah
were not able to expel the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem;
therefore the Jebusite has dwelt with the children of Judah in Jerusalem
even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p3"></span>**1** And the lot for the children of
Joseph fell out from the Jordan to Jericho, to the waters of Jericho on
the east, to the desert which goeth up from Jericho to mount Bethel.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p4"></span>**2** And it goeth out from Bethel into
Luz, and hence passes through to the boundary of Archi Atharoth.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p5"></span>**3** It afterward goeth up to the sea,
to the border of Japhletus, even to the border of lower Beth-horon, and
even to Gazer, and its outgoings are at the sea.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p6"></span>**4** And thus the children of Joseph,
Manasseh, and Ephraim received their inheritance.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p7"></span>**5** And this was the boundary of the
children of Ephraim by their families; the border of their inheritance
was, I say, on the east from Atroh-Addar, even to upper Beth-horon.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p8"></span>**6** And that border goes out to the
sea, to Michmethath on the north; and the boundary goes round to the
east, to Thaanath-Siloh, and crosses it from the east to Janoah.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p9"></span>**7** And it descends from Janoah in
Atharoth, and Maarath, and reaches to Jericho, and goeth out to Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p10"></span>**8** From Thappuah the boundary
proceeds to the sea, to the torrent of reeds, and its outgoings are at
the sea; this is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim
by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p11"></span>**9** And cities were set apart for the
children of Ephraim in the midst of the inheritance of the children of
Manasseh, all the cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xvi-p12"></span>**10** Nor did they expel the Canaanite
dwelling in Gazer; wherefore the Canaanite has dwelt in the middle of
Ephraim to this day, and been tributary to him.

<span id="xxviii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 17

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p3"></span>**1** There was also a lot to the tribe
of Manasseh, (for he was the first-born of Joseph,) to Machir himself,
the first-born of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, (for he was a man of
war,) to him, I say, there was Gilead and Basan.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p4"></span>**2** There was likewise to the other
children of Manasseh by their families, to the sons of Abiezer, and the
sons of Helec, and the sons of Asriel, and the sons of Sechem, and the
sons of Hepher, and the sons of Semida. These are the children of
Manasseh, the male children by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p5"></span>**3** Moreover, to Selophead, the son
of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh,
there were no sons but daughters whose names are these, Mahala, and Noa,
Hogla, Milcha, and Thirsa.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p6"></span>**4** These came into the presence of
Eleazar the priest, and into the presence of Joshua, the son of Nun, and
into the presence of the princes, saying, Jehovah commanded Moses to
give us an inheritance in the midst of our brethren. He therefore gave
them according to the word of Jehovah, an inheritance in the midst of
the brethren of their father.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p7"></span>**5** And there fell to Manasseh ten
inheritances, besides the land of Gilead and Basan, which were beyond
Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p8"></span>**6** For the daughters of Manasseh
obtained an inheritance in the midst of the sons; and the land of Gilead
was to the other children of Manasseh.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p9"></span>**7** And the boundary of Manasseh was
from Aser to Michmethath, which is before Sechem, and the boundary
proceeds to the right, to the inhabitants of En-thappua.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p10"></span>**8** To Manasseh himself belonged the
land of Thappua; but the Thappua which was at the border of Manasseh
belongs to the children of Ephraim.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p11"></span>**9** And the boundary descends to the
torrent of reeds, to the south of the torrent itself; these cities in
the midst of the cities of Manasseh belong to the tribe of Ephraim; but
the boundary of Manasseh is on the north of the torrent itself, and its
outgoings are at the sea.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p12"></span>**10** On the south it belongs to
Ephraim himself, and on the north to Manasseh himself, and the sea is
its boundary, and they meet together in Aser on the north, and in
Issachar on the east.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p13"></span>**11** And it was to Manasseh himself
in Issachar, and in Aser, Beth-sean, and its towns; and Ibleam and its
towns; and the inhabitants of Dor and its towns; and the inhabitants of
Endor and its towns, and the inhabitants of Thaanach, and its towns; and
the inhabitants of Megiddo, three districts.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p14"></span>**12** And the children of Manasseh
were not able to expel the inhabitants of those cities, but the
Canaanite began to dwell in the land itself.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p15"></span>**13** But when the children of Israel
had acquired strength, they made the Canaanite tributary, and did not by
expelling expel (completely expel) him.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p16"></span>**14** And the children of Joseph
spoke unto Joshua, saying, Why has thou given me one lot for an
inheritance, and one inheritance, seeing I am a numerous people, so has
Jehovah hitherto blessed me?

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p17"></span>**15** And Joshua said unto them, If
thou art a numerous people, go up into the wood, and cut down for
thyself there, in the land of the Perizzite, and the Rephaim, if the
mountain of Ephraim is narrow for thee.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p18"></span>**16** And the children of Joseph
replied to him, That mountain will not suffice us, and there are iron
chariots to every Canaanite who dwells in the land of the valley, and to
him who dwells in Beth-sean and its towns, and to him who dwells in the
valley of Jezrael.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p19"></span>**17** And Joshua spoke to the house
of Joseph, namely, to Ephraim and Manasseh, saying, Thou art a numerous
people and has great courage: thou shall not have *(merely)* a single
lot.

<span id="xxviii.xvii-p20"></span>**18** For the mountain will be thine,
inasmuch as it is a wood; thou shall therefore cut it down, and its
outgoing shall be thine; for thou shall expel the Canaanite, though he
have iron chariots, and though he be brave.

<span id="xxviii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p3"></span>**1** And the whole multitude of the
children of Israel assembled in Silo, and placed there the tabernacle of
convention, after the land was subdued before them.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p4"></span>**2** And there had remained of the
children of Israel, to whom they had not divided their inheritance,
seven tribes.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p5"></span>**3** And Joshua said unto the
children of Israel, How long do you delay to go in to possess the land
which Jehovah the God of your fathers has given you?

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p6"></span>**4** Each tribe of you give up three
men whom I will send; and they shall rise and walk through the land, and
shall describe it according to its inheritance; afterwards they shall
return to me.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p7"></span>**5** And they shall divide it into
seven portions; Judah will stand in his confines on the south, and the
families of Joseph will stand in their confines on the north.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p8"></span>**6** And do you describe the land in
seven portions, and bring it hither to me: then I will cast the lot here
before Jehovah our God.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p9"></span>**7** For there is no part to the
Levites in the midst of you, because the priesthood of Jehovah is their
inheritance; and Gad, and Reuben, and the half tribe of Manasseh, have
received their inheritance beyond the Jordan on the east, which Moses
the servant of Jehovah gave to them.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p10"></span>**8** And those men rose up, and went
away; and Joshua commanded those who went to describe the land, saying,
Go and walk through the land, and describe it; afterwards you will
return to me, and I will cast the lot for you here in Silo.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p11"></span>**9** The men therefore went away,
and passed through the land, and described it by cities in seven parts,
in a book: and they returned to Joshua, to the camp in Silo.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p12"></span>**10** And Joshua cast a lot for them
in Silo before the Lord; and there Joshua divided the land to the
children of Israel according to their portions.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p13"></span>**11** And the lot of the tribe of
the children of Benjamin by their families came up, and the boundary of
their lot fell out between the children of Judah and the children of
Joseph.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p14"></span>**12** And their boundary was on the
side of the north by the Jordan; and their boundary went up to the side
of Jericho on the north, and went up to the mountain at the sea; and
their outgoings are at the desert of Beth-aven.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p15"></span>**13** And thence the boundary passes
through into Luz to the side of southern Luz, (the same is Bethel,) and
the boundary descends into Ateroth-Adar near the mountain which is on
the south of lower Beth-horon itself.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p16"></span>**14** And the boundary is marked
out, and goes round to the side of the sea at the south, from the
mountain which is over against Beth-horon on the south; and its
outgoings are at Ciriath-Baal, (the same is Ciriath-Jearim,) a city of
the sons of Judah, that is, the side of the sea.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p17"></span>**15** And the side on the south is
from the extremity of Ciriath-Jearim; accordingly the boundary goeth out
to the sea, goeth out, I say, to the fountain of the waters of
Nephthoah.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p18"></span>**16** And the boundary descends to
the extremity of the mountain which is over against the valley of
Ben-Hinnom, and which is in the valley of the Rephaim on the north, and
it descends to the valley of Hinnom to the side of the Jebusite on the
south, and thence descends to En-rogel.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p19"></span>**17** And it makes a circuit from
the north, and goes out to En-semes, and proceeds outwards to Gehloth,
which is over against the acclivity of Adummim; and descends to Eben of
Bohan, the son of Reuben.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p20"></span>**18** Thence it passes through to
the side which is over against the plain on the north, and descends into
Arabah.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p21"></span>**19** Thence the boundary passes
through to the side of Beth-hogla on the north; and the outgoings of its
boundary are at the limit of the salt sea on the north, at the extremity
of the Jordan on the south; that is the south boundary.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p22"></span>**20** And the Jordan bounds it on
the east side. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by
his boundaries round about by his families.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p23"></span>**21** And these were the cities of
the tribe of the children of Benjamin by their families, Jericho, and
Beth-hoglah, and the valley of Cesis.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p24"></span>**22** And Beth-araba, and Semarain,
and Bethel,

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p25"></span>**23** And Avim, and Parah, and
Ophrah,

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p26"></span>**24** And Haamonai, and Ophni, and
Gaba; twelve cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p27"></span>**25** Gibon, and Raamah, and
Beeroth,

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p28"></span>**26** And Mispeh, and Chephirah, and
Mosah,

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p29"></span>**27** And Recem, and Irpeel, and
Tharalah.

<span id="xxviii.xviii-p30"></span>**28** And Sela Eleph, and Jebusi,
(the same is Jerusalem,) Gibath, Ciriath, fourteen cities and their
villages; this is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin by their
families.

<span id="xxviii.xix"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xix-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xix-p2"></span>CHAPTER 19

<span id="xxviii.xix-p3"></span>**1** And the second lot came out to
Simeon, the tribe of the children of Simeon by their families; and their
inheritance was in the midst of the inheritance of the children of
Judah.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p4"></span>**2** And they had for their inheritance
Beer-seba, and Seba, and Moladah,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p5"></span>**3** And Hasar-Sual, and Balah, and
Asen,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p6"></span>**4** And Eltholad, and Bethul, and
Hormah,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p7"></span>**5** And Siclag, and Beth-Marcaboth,
and Hasarsusa,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p8"></span>**6** And Beth-Lebaoth, and Saruhen;
thirteen cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p9"></span>**7** Ain, Rimmon, and Ether, and Asan;
four cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p10"></span>**8** And all the villages which were
around those cities even to Baalath-beer, southern Ramath. This is the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p11"></span>**9** Out of a portion of the children
of Judah was made the inheritance of the children of Simeon: for the
portion of the children of Judah was too great for them, and thus the
children of Simeon received an inheritance in the midst of their
inheritance.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p12"></span>**10** And the third lot came up for
the sons of Zabulon, by their families, and the boundary of their
inheritance was even to Sarid.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p13"></span>**11** And their boundary goes up to
the sea, and Maralah, and reaches to Dabbaseth, and arrives at the river
which is over against Jocnea.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p14"></span>**12** And returns from Sarid to the
east, that is, to the sun-rising, to the border of Chisloth-Thabor, and
thence goes out to Dabrath, and goes up to Japhia.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p15"></span>**13** Thence, moreover, it passes to
the east, at its rising, to Githah-Hepher, and Ihtahcasin: and thence it
goes out into Rimmon, and winds round to Neah.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p16"></span>**14** The same boundary likewise winds
round from the north to Hannathon: and its goings out are to the valley
of Iphthael,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p17"></span>**15** And Catthath, and Nahalal, and
Simron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem: twelve cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p18"></span>**16** This is the inheritance of the
children of Zabulon by their families: these cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p19"></span>**17** The fourth lot came out to
Issachar, to the children of Issachar, I say, by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p20"></span>**18** And their boundary was Jezrael,
and Chesuloth, and Sunem.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p21"></span>**19** And Hapharaim, and Sion, and
Ana-harat,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p22"></span>**20** And Rabbith, and Cision, and
Abeth,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p23"></span>**21** And Remeth, and Engannim, and
Enhaddad, and Beth-passes.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p24"></span>**22** And their boundary reached to
Thabor, and Sahasima, and Beth-semes: and the outgoings of their
boundary will be at the Jordan sixteen cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p25"></span>**23** This is the inheritance of the
tribe of the children of Issachar by their families, their cities and
villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p26"></span>**24** And the fifth lot came out for
the tribe of the children of Aser by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p27"></span>**25** And their boundary was Helcath,
and Hali, and Bethen, and Achsaph,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p28"></span>**26** And Alamelech, and Amad, and
Misal: and it reached to Carmel at the sea, and to Sihor-libnath.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p29"></span>**27** And it returns to the east in
Beth-dagon, and reaches to Zabulon, and to the valley of Iphtahel on the
north, and to Beth-emec, and Neel, and it goes out to Chabul on the
left,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p30"></span>**28** And Ebron, and Rehob, and
Hammon, and Canah, even to great Sidon

<span id="xxviii.xix-p31"></span>**29** And the boundary returns to
Ramah, even to the fortified city of the rock; thence the boundary
returns to Hosah, and its outgoings are at the sea by the coast of
Achzib;

<span id="xxviii.xix-p32"></span>**30** And Ummah, and Aphec, and Rehob:
twenty-two cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p33"></span>**31** This is the inheritance of the
tribe of the children of Aser by their families; those cities and their
villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p34"></span>**32** To the sons of Naphtali the
sixth lot came out, to the sons of Naphtali, I say, by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p35"></span>**33** And their boundary was by
Heleph, and by Elon in Saanannim, and Adami, Neceb, and Jabneel, even to
the lake, and its outgoings are at the Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p36"></span>**34** Afterwards the boundary returns
to the sea at Aznoth-thabor, and proceeds thence to Huccoc, and reaches
to Zabulon on the south, and reaches to Aser on the west, and to Judah
on the Jordan on the east.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p37"></span>**35** And the fortified cities are
Siddim, Ser, and Hammath, Raccath, and Chinnereth,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p38"></span>**36** And Adamah, and Ramah, and
Hasor,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p39"></span>**37** And Cedes, and Hedrei, and
En-Hasor,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p40"></span>**38** And Iron, and Migdal-el, Horem,
and Beth-anath, and Beth-semes nineteen cities and their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p41"></span>**39** This is the inheritance of the
tribe of the children of Naphtali, by their families, their cities, and
their villages.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p42"></span>**40** The seventh lot came out to the
tribe of the children of Dan, by their families.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p43"></span>**41** And the boundary of their
inheritance was Sorah, and Esthaol, and Ir-semes,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p44"></span>**42** And Saalabbin, and Ajalon, and
Ithlah,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p45"></span>**43** And Elon, and Thimnathah, and
Ecron,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p46"></span>**44** And Elthece, and Gibbethon, and
Baalath,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p47"></span>**45** And Jehud, and Bene-berac, and
Gath-rimon,

<span id="xxviii.xix-p48"></span>**46** And Mehaiarcon, and Raccon, with
its boundary against Japho.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p49"></span>**47** And the boundary of the children
of Dan went out from them: and the children of Dan went up and fought
with Lesem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
received it with their inheritance, and dwelt in it, and they called
Lesem Dan after the name of Dan their father.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p50"></span>**48** This is the inheritance of the
tribe of the children of Dan, by their families; those cities and their
towns.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p51"></span>**49** And when they had made an end of
dividing the land, assigning each their boundaries, the children of
Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua himself the son of Nun, in the
midst of them:

<span id="xxviii.xix-p52"></span>**50** According to the word of
Jehovah, they gave him the city which he asked, Thimnath-serah in mount
Ephraim; and he built a city and dwelt in it.

<span id="xxviii.xix-p53"></span>**51** Those are the inheritances,
possession of which was delivered by Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the
son of Nun, and the chiefs of the fathers of the tribes of the children
of Israel, by lot, in Silo, before Jehovah, at the door of the
tabernacle of convention; and they made an end of dividing the land.

<span id="xxviii.xx"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xx-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xx-p2"></span>CHAPTER 20

<span id="xxviii.xx-p3"></span>**1** And Jehovah spoke to Joshua,
saying,

<span id="xxviii.xx-p4"></span>**2** Address the children of Israel in
these words, Give cities of refuge of which I spoke to you by the hand
of Moses;

<span id="xxviii.xx-p5"></span>**3** That the homicide, who has taken
away a life through mistake, not knowingly, may flee thither: and they
will be to you for a refuge from the kinsman of blood.

<span id="xxviii.xx-p6"></span>**4** And he shall fly to one of those
cities, and shall stand at the door of the gate of the city, and speak
his words in the ears of the elders of the city itself, and they will
receive him into the city, and give him a place, and he shall dwell with
them.

<span id="xxviii.xx-p7"></span>**5** And when the kinsman of blood shall
have pursued him, they shall not deliver up the homicide into his hand;
because he smote his neighbor unknowingly, and had no hatred to him in
time past, (yesterday and the day before yesterday.)

<span id="xxviii.xx-p8"></span>**6** And he will dwell in that city
until he stand before the assembly for judgment, even until the high
priest, who shall be in those days, shall die: for then the homicide
will return, and come to his city, and to his house, to the city whence
he had fled.

<span id="xxviii.xx-p9"></span>**7** And they assigned Cedes in Galilee,
in mount Naphtali, and Sechem in mount Ephraim, and Ciriath-arba (the
same is Hebron) in mount Judah.

<span id="xxviii.xx-p10"></span>**8** And from beyond the Jordan of
Jericho on the east, they gave Beser, in the desert in the plain, of the
tribe of Reuben: and Ramoth in Gilead of the tribe of Gad; and Golan in
Basan, of the tribe of Manasseh.

<span id="xxviii.xx-p11"></span>**9** Those were the cities of
convention to all the children of Israel, and to the stranger sojourning
in the midst of them, that whosoever had slain any one by mistake might
flee thither, and not die by the hand of the kinsman of blood before he
had stood before the assembly.

<span id="xxviii.xxi"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 21

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p3"></span>**1** And the princes of the fathers of
the Levites came near to Eleazar the priest, and to Joshua the son of
Nun, and to the princes of the fathers of the tribes of the children of
Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p4"></span>**2** And spoke to them in Silo, in the
land of Canaan, saying, Jehovah commanded by the hand of Moses, that you
should give us cities to dwell in, and their suburbs for our cattle.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p5"></span>**3** Therefore the children of Israel
gave to the Levites of their inheritance, according to the word of
Jehovah, those cities and their suburbs.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p6"></span>**4** And the lot fell out by the
families of the Ceathites, and there were to the children of Aaron the
priest, of the Levites, of the tribe of Judah, and of the tribe of
Simeon, and of the tribe of Benjamin, by lot, thirteen cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p7"></span>**5** And to the remaining sons of
Ceath, of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and of the tribe of Dan,
and of the half tribe of Manasseh, by lot, ten cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p8"></span>**6** But to the sons of Gerson, of the
families of the tribe of Issachar, and of the tribe of Aser, and of the
tribe of Naphtali, and of the half tribe of Manasseh in Basan, by lot,
thirteen cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p9"></span>**7** To the children of Merari by their
families, of the tribe of Reuben, and of the tribe of Gad, and of the
tribe of Zabulon, twelve cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p10"></span>**8** The children of Israel, I say,
gave to the Levites those cities and their suburbs, by lot, as Jehovah
had commanded by the hand of Moses.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p11"></span>**9** They gave therefore of the tribe
of the children of Judah, and of the tribe of the children of Simeon,
those cities which he called by name.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p12"></span>**10** And they were to the sons of
Aaron, of the families of Ceath, of the sons of Levi; for theirs was the
first lot:

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p13"></span>**11** And they gave to them
Ciriath-arba of the father of Anac, (the same is Hebron,) in mount
Judah, and its suburbs round about it.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p14"></span>**12** But the field of that city and
its villages they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh, for his
possession.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p15"></span>**13** To the sons of Aaron the priest,
I say, they gave the city of refuge, for the homicide, Hebron and its
suburbs, and Libna and its suburbs.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p16"></span>**14** And Jathir and its suburbs, and
Esthemoa and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p17"></span>**15** Holon and its suburbs, and Debir
and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p18"></span>**16** And Ain and its suburbs, and
Juttah and its suburbs, and Beth-semes and its suburbs: nine cities of
those two tribes.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p19"></span>**17** And of the tribe of Benjamin,
Gibeon and its suburbs, and Geba and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p20"></span>**18** Anathoth and its suburbs, Almon
and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p21"></span>**19** All the cities of the sons of
Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities and their suburbs.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p22"></span>**20** But to the families of the sons
of Cahath, Levites who remained of the sons of Cahath, (now the cities
of their lot were of the tribe of Ephraim.)

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p23"></span>**21** They gave to them, I say, as a
city of refuge for the homicide, Sechem and its suburbs, in mount
Ephraim, and Geser and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p24"></span>**22** And Cibsaim and its suburbs, and
Beth-boron and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p25"></span>**23** And of the tribe of Dan, Elthece
and its suburbs, and Gibbethon and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p26"></span>**24** And Ajalon and its suburbs, and
Gath-rimmon and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p27"></span>**25** And of the half tribe of
Manasseh, Thaanach and its suburbs, Gath-rimmon and its suburbs: two
cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p28"></span>**26** All the ten cities and their
suburbs, to the remaining families of the sons of Cahath.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p29"></span>**27** Moreover, to the sons of Gerson
of the families of the Levites, from the half tribe of Manasseh, as a
city of refuge for the homicide, Golan in Basan and its suburbs,
Beesthera and its suburbs: two cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p30"></span>**28** Of the tribe of Issachar, Cision
and its suburbs, Dabrath and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p31"></span>**29** Jarmuth and its suburbs,
Engannim and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p32"></span>**30** And of the tribe of Aser, Misal
and its suburbs, Abdon and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p33"></span>**31** Helcath and its suburbs, and
Rehob and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p34"></span>**32** And of the tribe of Naphtali, as
a city of refuge for the homicide, Cedes in Galilee and its suburbs, and
Hamath-Dor and its suburbs, and Carthan and its suburbs: three cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p35"></span>**33** All the cities of the
Gersonites, by their families, were thirteen cities and their suburbs.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p36"></span>**34** And to the families of the sons
of Merari remaining of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zabulon, Jocnea
and its suburbs, Cartha and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p37"></span>**35** Dimnah and its suburbs, Nahalal
and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p38"></span>**36** And of the tribe of Reuben,
Beser and its suburbs, and Jehasa and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p39"></span>**37** Cedemoth and its suburbs,
Mephaath and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p40"></span>**38** And of the tribe of Gad, as a
city of refuge from the homicide, Ramoth in Gileath and its suburbs,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p41"></span>**39** Hesbon and its suburbs, Jazer
and its suburbs: four cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p42"></span>**40** All the cities of the sons of
Merari by their families which remained of the families of the Levites,
as was their lot, were twelve cities.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p43"></span>**41** All the cities of the Levites in
the midst of the possession of the children of Israel, were eighty-four
cities and their suburbs.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p44"></span>**42** Those were single cities, and
their suburbs were round about them; so was it with all those cities,

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p45"></span>**43** Jehovah, therefore, gave to
Israel the whole land, of which he had sworn that he would give it to
their fathers; and they possessed it and dwelt in it.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p46"></span>**44** Jehovah also gave them rest
round about, exactly as Jehovah had sworn to their fathers; nor was
there any one of all their enemies who could resist them; Jehovah
delivered all their enemies into their hand.

<span id="xxviii.xxi-p47"></span>**45** Not a word failed of all the
good word which Jehovah had spoken to the house of Israel; all things
were fulfilled.

<span id="xxviii.xxii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 22

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p3"></span>**1** Then Joshua called the Reubenites
and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p4"></span>**2** And said to them, you have kept
all things which Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, and you
have obeyed my voice in all things which I have commanded you.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p5"></span>**3** You have not deserted your
brethren now for many days, even to this day, but you have carefully
observed the command of Jehovah your God.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p6"></span>**4** And now Jehovah your God has
given rest to your brethren, as he had said to them; now, therefore,
return and set out to your tents, to the land of your possession, which
Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you beyond the Jordan.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p7"></span>**5** Only observe carefully to do the
commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded
you, to love Jehovah your God, and walk in all his ways, and observe his
precepts, and adhere to him, and serve him with all your heart and all
your soul.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p8"></span>**6** And Joshua blessed them, and
discharged them, and they went away to their tents.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p9"></span>**7** Now, to the half tribe of
Manasseh Moses had given (an inheritance) in Basan; and to the other
half, Joshua gave (an inheritance) with their brethren beyond Jordan on
the west. And also when Joshua was dismissing them to their tents, and
had blessed them,

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p10"></span>**8** Then he spoke to them, saying,
Return with much riches to your tents, and with very much property, with
silver, and gold, and brass, and iron, and very much raiment; divide the
spoils of your enemies with your brethren.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p11"></span>**9** Accordingly, both the children
of Reuben and the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh
returned, and went away from the children of Israel, from Silo, which is
in the land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, to the land of their
possession, in which they had received a possession, according to the
word of Jehovah, by the hand of Moses.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p12"></span>**10** And they came to the limits of
the Jordan, which were in the land of Canaan, and the children of
Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, built
there an altar near the Jordan, an altar of conspicuous appearance.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p13"></span>**11** And the children of Israel
heard it said, Behold, the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad,
and the half tribe of Manasseh, have built an altar over against the
land of Canaan, on the confines of the Jordan, at the crossing of the
children of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p14"></span>**12** The children of Israel, I say,
heard, and the whole body of the children of Israel assembled in Silo,
to go up against them to battle.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p15"></span>**13** And the children of Israel sent
to the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half
tribe of Manasseh, to the land of Gilead, Phinehas, son of Eleazar the
priest,

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p16"></span>**14** And ten princes with him, a
single prince for each house, selected from all the tribes of Israel;
for there were single princes of the families of their fathers among the
thousands of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p17"></span>**15** They came, therefore, to the
children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of
Manasseh, to the land of Gilead, and spoke with them, saying,

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p18"></span>**16** Thus says the whole
congregation of Jehovah, What falsehood is this which you have devised
against the God of Israel, in turning away this day from going after
Jehovah, by building an altar for yourselves to rebel this day against
Jehovah?

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p19"></span>**17** Is it little for us to have
been involved in the iniquity of Peor, from which we are not yet
cleansed even at the present day, and yet there was a plague in the
congregation of Jehovah?

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p20"></span>**18** Now you are turning aside this
day from going after Jehovah, and it will be that you will rebel this
day against Jehovah, and to-morrow he will be wroth against the whole
congregation of Israel;

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p21"></span>**19** And, indeed, if the land of
your possession is impure, pass over to the land of the possession of
Jehovah, in which the tabernacle of Jehovah dwells, and receive
possessions in the midst of us, and rebel not against Jehovah, nor
revolt from us by building an altar for yourselves besides the altar of
Jehovah our God.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p22"></span>**20** Did not Achan, the son of
Zerah, sin grossly in the anathema, and was (there not) anger against
the whole congregation of Israel? That man did not die alone on account
of his iniquity.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p23"></span>**21** And the children of Reuben, and
the children of Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh answered and spoke
with the princes of the thousands of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p24"></span>**22** Jehovah, God of gods, Jehovah,
God of gods, himself knoweth, and Israel will know; if it be through
rebellion, if it be through falsehood, against Jehovah, save us not this
day.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p25"></span>**23** If we have thought to build for
us an altar, to turn away from going after Jehovah; if to sacrifice upon
it burnt-offerings and sacrifice; and if to make upon it sacrifices of
prosperity, let Jehovah himself inquire:

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p26"></span>**24** And if we have not rather done
it from a fear of this thing, saying, Your children will to-morrow speak
unto our children, saying, What have you to do with Jehovah the God of
Israel?

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p27"></span>**25** For Jehovah has put the Jordan
as a boundary between us and you, you children of Reuben and children of
Gad; you have no portion in Jehovah; and your children will make our
children desist from fearing Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p28"></span>**26** And we said, Let us now give
our endeavor to build an altar, neither for burnt-offerings nor for
sacrifice;

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p29"></span>**27** But that it may be a witness
betwixt us and you, and between our generations after us, that we may
diligently serve Jehovah before him in our burnt-offerings, and our
sacrifices, and our offerings of prosperity; and lest your children may
to-morrow say to our children, You have no part in Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p30"></span>**28** We said therefore, And it shall
be, if they say to us or to our generations to-morrow, then shall we
say, You see the likeness of an altar to Jehovah, which our fathers
made, not for burnt-offering, nor for sacrifice, but to be a witness
between us and you.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p31"></span>**29** Far be it from us to rebel
against Jehovah, and to turn away this day from going after Jehovah, by
building an altar for a burnt-offering, for oblation, and for sacrifice,
beyond the altar of Jehovah our God, which is before his tabernacle.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p32"></span>**30** Moreover, when Phinehas the
priest, and the princes of the congregation, and the heads of the
thousands of Israel who were with him, had heard the words which the
children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the children of
Manasseh had spoken, it was pleasing in their eyes.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p33"></span>**31** And Phinehas, the son of
Eleazar the priest, said to the children of Reuben, and to the children
of Gad, and to the children of Manasseh, This day we know that Jehovah
is in the midst of us, in that you have not sinned that sin against
Jehovah; then you have freed the children of Israel from the hand of
Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p34"></span>**32** Therefore Phinehas, the son of
Eleazar the priest, and those princes returned from the children of
Reuben, and from the children of Gad, from the land of Gilead to the
land of Canaan, to the other children of Israel, and reported the matter
to them.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p35"></span>**33** And the thing was pleasing in
the eyes of the children of Israel, and the sons of Israel blessed God,
and did not determine to go up against them to battle, to destroy the
land in which the children of Reuben and the children of Gad were
dwelling.

<span id="xxviii.xxii-p36"></span>**34** And the children of Reuben and
the children of Gad called the altar Hed, saying, For it will be a
witness between us that Jehovah is God.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 23

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p3"></span>**1** And it was after many days,
after Jehovah gave rest to Israel from all their enemies round about,
that Joshua became old and stricken in years.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p4"></span>**2** Then Joshua called all Israel,
their elders, their heads, and their judges, and their prefects, and
said to them, I am old and stricken in years,

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p5"></span>**3** And you have seen all that
Jehovah your God has given to all those nations in your sight, because
Jehovah your God has fought for you.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p6"></span>**4** See that those remaining nations
have been distributed to you for an inheritance by your tribes, from the
Jordan, and all the nations which I have destroyed, even to the great
sea towards the setting of the sun.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p7"></span>**5** And Jehovah your God will
himself drive them before you, and will drive them out from your
presence, and you shall possess their land by hereditary right, as
Jehovah your God spoke to you.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p8"></span>**6** Be very strong, therefore, to
keep and do whatever is written in the book of the law of Moses, not to
recede from it, either to the right hand or the left;

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p9"></span>**7** Do not become mingled with those
nations which remain with you, and do not make mention of the name of
their gods, nor swear by them, nor serve them, nor bow yourselves to
them;

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p10"></span>**8** But cleave to Jehovah your God,
as you have done even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p11"></span>**9** Therefore he has driven out
before you great nations and strong, nor has any one stood in your
presence even to this day.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p12"></span>**10** One man of you has pursued a
thousand, because Jehovah your God is he who fights for you, as he had
spoken to you.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p13"></span>**11** Be very watchful over your
souls in loving Jehovah your God.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p14"></span>**12** For if you shall turn and turn
away, and adhere to those remaining nations, those remaining nations, I
say, which are with you, and contract marriages with them, and mingle
yourselves with them, and they with you;

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p15"></span>**13** Then know how that after this
Jehovah your God will not drive out all those nations from your face;
but they will be to you for a snare, and an offence, and a scourge in
your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until you perish from that best
land which Jehovah your God has given you.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p16"></span>**14** And lo, I am this day entering
the way of all the earth; know, therefore, with your whole heart and
your whole soul, that not one word has fallen of all the most excellent
words which Jehovah your God spoke over you; all things have happened to
you; not one word of them has fallen.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p17"></span>**15** Therefore, as every good word
which Jehovah your God spoke to you has been fulfilled, so Jehovah will
bring upon you every evil word, until he destroy you from that best land
which Jehovah your God has given you.

<span id="xxviii.xxiii-p18"></span>**16** When you shall have
transgressed the covenant of Jehovah your God, which he commanded you,
and shall have gone away and served other gods, and bowed yourselves
unto them, the wrath of Jehovah will be kindled against you, and you
will perish quickly from the most excellent land which he has given you.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p1"></span>

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 24

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p3"></span>**1** And thus Joshua assembled all the
tribes of Israel in Sichem, and called the elders of Israel, and their
heads, and their judges, and their prefects; and they stood before God.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p4"></span>**2** And Joshua said unto the whole
people, Thus says Jehovah the God of Israel, Your fathers dwelt beyond
the river at the beginning, as Terah, the father of Abraham and father
of Nachor, and they served strange gods.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p5"></span>**3** And I brought your father Abraham
from the place which was beyond the river, and I led him through the
whole land of Canaan, and I multiplied his seed and gave him Isaac.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p6"></span>**4** And to Isaac I have Jacob and
Esau; and to Esau I gave mount Seir, that he might possess it; but Jacob
and his sons went down into Egypt.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p7"></span>**5** And I sent Moses and Aaron, and
smote Egypt, as I did in the midst of it, and I afterwards led you out.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p8"></span>**6** And I led your fathers out of
Egypt, and you came down to the sea, and the Egyptians pursued your
fathers with chariots and horses even to the Red Sea.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p9"></span>**7** Then they cried to Jehovah, and
he placed darkness between you and the Egyptians, and he brought the sea
over him and covered him; and your eyes saw what I did in the desert,
and you dwelt in the desert during many days.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p10"></span>**8** Afterwards I brought you to the
land of the Amorite, dwelling beyond the Jordan; and they fought with
you, and I delivered them into your hand; and you possessed their land,
and I destroyed them before your face.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p11"></span>**9** And Balac the son of Sippor, the
king of Moab, rose up and fought with Israel; and he sent and called
Bileam, the son of Beor, to curse you.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p12"></span>**10** And I refused to hear Bileam;
but blessing I blessed you, and freed you from his hand.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p13"></span>**11** And you crossed the Jordan and
came to Jericho, and the men of Jericho, the Amorite, and the Perezite,
and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Girgashite, and the Hivite,
and the Jebusite fought against you, and I delivered them into your
hand.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p14"></span>**12** And I sent before you hornets,
who expelled them before your face, the two kings of the Amorite, not by
thy sword nor by thy bow.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p15"></span>**13** And I gave to you a land in
which you labored not, and cities which you built not, and you dwelt in
them; of vineyards and oliveyards which you planted not, you eat.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p16"></span>**14** Now therefore fear Jehovah, and
serve him in perfection and truth, and take away the gods which your
fathers served beyond the river and in Egypt, and serve Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p17"></span>**15** But if it is irksome to you to
serve Jehovah, choose you this day whom you are to worship; whether the
gods whom your fathers who were beyond the river served, or the gods of
the Amorite, in whose land you dwell; but I and my house will worship
Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p18"></span>**16** And the people answered him,
saying, Far be it from us to forsake Jehovah, by serving strange gods;

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p19"></span>**17** For Jehovah our God is he who
led us and our fathers out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
slaves, and who did in our eyes those great signs: and he preserved us
in all the way in which we walked, and among all the nations through the
midst of whom we passed.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p20"></span>**18** And Jehovah drove out all the
nations, and also the Amorite, the inhabitant of the land, from our
face; even will we serve Jehovah, for he is our God.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p21"></span>**19** And Joshua said unto the
people, You will not be able to serve Jehovah, inasmuch as he is a holy
God, he is a jealous God; he will not spare your wickedness and your
sins.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p22"></span>**20** If you shall forsake Jehovah,
and serve a strange god, he will turn, and do you evil, and consume you,
after he has done you good.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p23"></span>**21** And the people answered him, By
no means; but we will serve Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p24"></span>**22** And Joshua said unto the
people, You are witnesses against yourselves, that you have chosen
Jehovah, to serve him; and they said, (We are) witnesses.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p25"></span>**23** Now therefore take away the
strange gods which are in the midst of you, and incline your heart to
Jehovah the God of Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p26"></span>**24** And the people answered,
Jehovah our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p27"></span>**25** Joshua therefore made a
covenant with the people on that day; and held forth to them precept and
judgment in Sichem.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p28"></span>**26** Joshua wrote those words in the
book of the law of God; he also brought a great stone, and placed it
there beneath the oak which was in the sanctuary of Jehovah.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p29"></span>**27** And Joshua said to all the
people, Behold, that stone will be for a testimony to you, for it has
heard all the words of Jehovah which he has spoken to us, and it will be
for a testimony against you, lest perchance you lie against your God.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p30"></span>**28** And Joshua sent back the
people, every one to his own inheritance.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p31"></span>**29** And these things having been
done, Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died at the age of
a hundred and ten years.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p32"></span>**30** And they buried him in the
border of his inheritance in Thimnat-serah, which is on mount Ephraim,
to the north of mount Gaas.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p33"></span>**31** And Israel served Jehovah all
the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders, who lived long after
Joshua, and who had known all the work of Jehovah, which he had done to
Israel.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p34"></span>**32** And the bones of Joseph, which
the children of Israel had brought out of Egypt, they buried in Sichem,
in a part of the field which Jacob had acquired from the children of
Hamor, the father of Sichem, for a hundred pieces of money, and the
children of Joseph had them in their possession.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p35"></span>**33** Moreover, Eleazar the son of
Aaron died, and they buried him in Gibeath, belonging to Phinehas his
son, which was given him in mount Ephraim.

<span id="xxviii.xxiv-p36"></span>THE END OF THE NEW TRANSLATION  
OF THE BOOK OF JOSHUA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc07028)
