[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc07023)  [Next](cc07025.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxv"></span>

<span id="xxv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 22

<span id="xxv.i"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
22:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001.md)<span id="xxv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and
the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh,

<span id="xxv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Tunc accersivit Josue Rubenitas et
Gaditas ac dimidiam tribum Manasse,

<span id="xxv.i-p4"></span>**2.** And said unto them, You have kept all
that Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed my
voice in all that I commanded you:

<span id="xxv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Dixitque ad eos, Vos custodistis omnia
quae praecepit vobis Moses servus Jehovae, et obedistis voci meae in
cunctis quae praecepi vobis.

<span id="xxv.i-p6"></span>**3.** You have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of
the LORD your God.

<span id="xxv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Non deseruistis fratres vestros jam
diebus multis usque ad diem hanc, sed custodistis custodiam praecepti
Jehovae Dei vestri.

<span id="xxv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And now the LORD your God has given
rest unto your brethren, as he promised them: therefore now return you,
and get you unto your tents, *and* unto the land of your possession,
which Moses the servant of the LORD gave you on the other side Jordan.

<span id="xxv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Nunc autem requiem dedit Jehova Deus
vester fratribus vestris, quemadmodum dixerat eis: nunc igitur
revertimini, et proficiscimini ad tabernacula vestra, ad terram
possessionis vestrae, quam dedit vobis Moses servus Jehovae trans
Jordanem.

<span id="xxv.i-p10"></span>**5.** But take diligent heed to do the
commandment and the law, which Moses the servant of the LORD charged
you, to love the LORD your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep
his commandments, and to cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your
heart and with all your soul.

<span id="xxv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tantum observate diligenter ut
faciatis praeceptum et legem quam praecepit vobis Moses servus Jehovae,
ut diligatis Jehovam Deum vestrum, et ambuletis in omnibus viis ejus,
servetisque praecepta ejus, et adhaereatis ei, atque serviatis ei toto
corde vestro, et tota anima vestra.

<span id="xxv.i-p12"></span>**6.** So Joshua blessed them, and sent them
away: and they went unto their tents.

<span id="xxv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Benedixitque eis Josue, ac dimisit
eos, abieruntque in tabernacula sua.

<span id="xxv.i-p14"></span>**7.** Now to the *one* half of the tribe of
Manasseh Moses had given *possession* in Bashan: but unto the *other*
half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this side Jordan
westward. And when Joshua sent them away also unto their tents, then he
blessed them,

<span id="xxv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Dimidiae autem tribui Manasse dederat
Moses in Basan: alteri autem ejus parti dedit Josue cum fratribus suis
trans Jordanem ad occidentem. Et etiam quum dimitteret eos Josue in
tabernacula sua, et benedixisset eis.

<span id="xxv.i-p16"></span>**8.** And he spoke unto them, saying,
Return with much riches unto your tents, and with very much cattle, with
silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much
raiment: divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren.

<span id="xxv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Tunc dixit ad eos, dicendo. Cum
divitiis multis revertimini ad tabernacula vestra, et cum aquisitione
multa valde, cum argento, et auro, et aere, et ferro, et vestibus multis
valde: dividite spolia inimicorum vestrorum cum fratribus vestris.

<span id="xxv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed
from the children of Israel out of Shiloh, which *is* in the land of
Canaan, to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their
possession, whereof they were possessed, according to the word of the
LORD by the hand of Moses.

<span id="xxv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Reversi sunt itaque, et abierunt
filii Ruben, et filii Gad, et dimidia tribus Manasse a filiis Israel de
Silo quae est in terra Channan, ut irent ad terram Gilead, ad terram
possessionis suae, in qua possessionem acceperunt secundum sermonem
Jehovae per manum Mosis.

<span id="xxv.i-p20"></span> 

<span id="xxv.i-p21"></span><span id="xxv.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p22"></span>**1.** *Then Joshua called the Reubenites,*
etc Here is related the discharge of the two tribes and half-tribe, who
had followed the rest of the people, not that they might acquire
anything for themselves, but that, as they had already obtained
dwellings and lands without lot, they might carry on war in common with
their brethren, until they also should have a quiet inheritance. Now, as
they had been faithful companions and helpers to their brethren, Joshua
declares that they were entitled to their discharge, and thus sends them
back to their homes released and free. It is asked, however, how he can
consider them to have performed their due measure of military service,
while the enemy were still in possession of part of the land, of which
the sole possession was to be the proper termination of the war?  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177.md) But if we bear in mind what I lately
said, the knot will be loosed. Had the Israelites followed the
invitation of God, and seconded his agency, nay, when he was stretching
out his hand to them, had they not basely drawn back,  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178.md) the remaining part of the war would
have been finished with no danger and little trouble. From their own
sloth, therefore, they refused what God was ready to bestow. And thus it
happened that the agreement by which the two tribes and half-tribe had
bound themselves, ceased to be binding. For the only obligation they had
undertaken was to accompany the ten tribes, and contend for their
inheritance as strenuously as if their condition had been exactly the
same. Now, when they have perseveringly performed their part as faithful
allies, and the ten tribes contented with their present fortune, not
only do not demand, but rather tacitly repudiate their assistance, a
free return to their homes is justly allowed them. They, indeed, deserve
praise for their patient endurance, in not allowing weariness of the
service to make them request their discharge, but in waiting quietly
till Joshua of his own accord sends for them.  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179.md)

<span id="xxv.i-p26"></span><span id="xxv.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p27"></span>**5.** *But take diligent heed,* etc He thus
releases and frees them from temporary service, that he may bind them
for ever to the authority of the one true God. He therefore permits them
to return home, but on the condition that wherever they may be they are
to be the soldiers of God; and he at the same time prescribes the mode,
namely, the observance of his Law. But since such is the vanity and
inconstancy of the human mind, that religion easily fades away from the
heart, while carelessness and contempt creep in, he requires of them
zeal and diligence in executing the Law. He calls it the Law of Moses,
that they may not be carried to and fro by airy speculations, but remain
fixed in the doctrine which they had learned from the faithful servant
of God. He touches also on the end and sum of the Law, love to God, and
adherence to him, because outward worship would otherwise be of little
value. He confirms the same thing by other words, by which sincerity is
denoted, namely, serving the Lord with their whole heart and soul.

<span id="xxv.i-p28"></span><span id="xxv.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p29"></span>**8.** *Return with much riches*, etc As it
was formerly seen that the greater part of the two tribes were left in
their territories beyond the Jordan, when the others passed over to
carry on the war, it was fair that, as they had lived in case with their
families, or been only occupied with domestic concerns, they should be
contented with their own livelihood and the produce of their own labor.
And they certainly could not, without dishonesty, have demanded that any
part of the booty and spoil should be distributed among them, when they
had taken no share in all the toil and the danger. Joshua, however, does
not insist on the strictly legal view, but exhorts the soldiers to deal
liberally with their countrymen, by sharing the prey with them. Here
some one may unseasonably raise the question, Whether or not the booty
was common? For Joshua does not decide absolutely that it is their duty
to do as he enjoins; he admonishes them that, after they have been
enriched by the divine blessing, it would betray a want of proper
feeling not to be liberal and kind towards their brethren, especially as
it was not their fault that they did not take part in the same
expedition. Moreover, when he bids them divide, he does not demand an
equal partition, such as that which is usual among partners and equals,
but only to bestow something that may suffice to remove all cause of
envy and hatred.  <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180.md)

<span id="xxv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
22:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010.md)<span id="xxv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p2"></span>**10.** And when they came unto the borders
of Jordan, that *are* in the land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and
the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar
by Jordan, a great altar to see to.

<span id="xxv.ii-p3"></span>**10.** Devenerunt autem ad limites Jordanis
qui erant in terra Chanaan, et aedificaverunt filii Ruben, et filii Gad,
et dimidia tribus Manasse, ibi altare juxta Jordanem, altare magnum
visu.

<span id="xxv.ii-p4"></span>**11.** And the children of Israel heard
say, Behold, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
tribe of Manasseh have built an altar over against the land of Canaan,
in the borders of Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel.

<span id="xxv.ii-p5"></span>**11.** Audierunt autem filii Israel dici,
Ecce aedificaverunt filii Ruben, et filii Gad, et dimidia tribus
Manasse, altare e regione terrae Chanaan, in confinibus Jordanis in
transitu filiorum Israel.

<span id="xxv.ii-p6"></span>**12.** And when the children of Israel
heard *of it*, the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered
themselves together at Shiloh, to go up to war against them.

<span id="xxv.ii-p7"></span>**12.** Audierunt, inquam, filii Israel, et
convenerunt universus coetus filiorum Israel in Silo, ut ascenderent
contra eos ad pugnam.

<span id="xxv.ii-p8"></span>**13.** And the children of Israel sent unto
the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half
tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar
the priest,

<span id="xxv.ii-p9"></span>**13.** Miserunt autem filii Israel ad
filios Ruben, et ad filios Gad, et ad dimidiam tribum Manasse, ad terram
Gilead, Phinees filium Eleazar sacerdotis.

<span id="xxv.ii-p10"></span>**14.** And with him ten princes, of each
chief house a prince throughout all the tribes of Israel; and each one
*was* an head of the house of their fathers among the thousands of
Israel.

<span id="xxv.ii-p11"></span>**14.** Et decem principes cum eo, singulos
principes per singulas domos avitas ex omnibus tribubus Israel: singuli
namque principes familiarum patrum suorum erant in millibus Israel.

<span id="xxv.ii-p12"></span>**15.** And they came unto the children of
Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh,
unto the land of Gilead, and they spoke with them, saying,

<span id="xxv.ii-p13"></span>**15.** Venerunt ergo ad filios Ruben, et
ad filios Gad, et ad dimidiam tribum Manasse, ad terram Gilead,
loquutique sunt cum eis, dicendo,

<span id="xxv.ii-p14"></span>**16.** Thus says the whole congregation of
the LORD, What trespass *is* this that you have committed against the
God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the LORD, in that
you have built you an altar, that you might rebel this day against the
LORD?

<span id="xxv.ii-p15"></span>**16.** Sic dicunt universus coetus
Jehovae, Quae est praevaricatio ista, qua praevaricati estis contra Deum
Israel, ut avertamini hodie ne eatis post Jehovam aedificando vobis
altare, ut rebelletis hodie contra Jehovam?

<span id="xxv.ii-p16"></span>**17.** *Is* the iniquity of Peor too
little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although
there was a plague in the congregation of the LORD,

<span id="xxv.ii-p17"></span>**17.** An parum nobis est cum iniquitate
Peor, a qua nec dum sumus mundati etiam hodie, et tamen fuit plaga in
coetu Jehovae?

<span id="xxv.ii-p18"></span>**18.** But that you must turn away this
day from following the LORD? and it will be, *seeing* you rebel to day
against the LORD, that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole
congregation of Israel.

<span id="xxv.ii-p19"></span>**18.** Vos autem avertimini hodie ne eatis
post Jehovam, et erit, vos rebellabitis hodie contra Jehovam, et cras in
totum coetum Israel irascetur.

<span id="xxv.ii-p20"></span>**19.** Notwithstanding, if the land of
your possession *be* unclean, *then* pass you over unto the land of the
possession of the LORD, wherein the LORD’S tabernacle dwells, and take
possession among us: but rebel not against the LORD, nor rebel against
us, in building you an altar beside the altar of the LORD our God.

<span id="xxv.ii-p21"></span>**19.** Et quidem si immunda est terra
possessionis vestrae, transite ad terram possessionis Jehovae, in qua
habitat tabenaculum Jehovae, et possessiones accipite in medio nostrum
et contra Jehovam ne rebellitis: neque a nobis deficiatis, aedificendo
vobis altare praeter altare Jehovae Dei nostri.

<span id="xxv.ii-p22"></span>**20.** Did not Achan the son of Zerah
commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the
congregation of Israel? and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.

<span id="xxv.ii-p23"></span>**20.** Nonne Achan filius Zerah
praevaricatus est praevaricatione in anathemate, et contra omnem coetum
Israel fuit ira? Et ille vir unus non obiit propter iniquitatem suam.

<span id="xxv.ii-p24"></span> 

<span id="xxv.ii-p25"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p26"></span>**10.** *And when they came unto the
borders,* etc The history here is particularly deserving of notice, when
the two tribes and half-tribe, intending to erect a memorial of common
faith and fraternal concord, allowed themselves from inconsiderate zeal
to adopt a method which was justly suspected by their brethren. The ten
tribes, thinking that the worship of God was violated with impious
audacity and temerity, were inflamed with holy wrath, and took up arms
to use them against their own blood; nor were they appeased till they
had received full satisfaction. The motive for erecting the altar was
right in itself. For the object of the children of Reuben, Gad, and
Manasseh, was to testify that though they were separated from their
brethren by the intervening stream, they were, however, united with them
in religion, and cherished a mutual agreement in the doctrine of the
Law. Nothing was farther from their intention than to innovate in any
respect in the worship of God. But they sinned not lightly in attempting
a novelty, without paying any regard to the high priest, or consulting
their brethren, and in a form which was very liable to be misconstrued.

<span id="xxv.ii-p27"></span>We know how strictly the Law prohibited two
altars, (<span id="xxv.ii-p27.1"></span>[Ex
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)<span id="xxv.ii-p27.1"></span>.md)
for the Lord wished to be worshipped in one place only. Therefore, when
on the very first blush of the case, all were at once led to think that
they were building a second altar, who would not have judged them guilty
of sacrilege in framing a ritual of a degenerate description, at
variance with the Law of God? Seeing, then, that the work might be
deemed vicious, they ought, at least, in so great and so serious a
matter, to have made their brethren sharers in their counsel; more
especially were they in the wrong in neglecting to consult the high
priest, from whose lips the divine will was to be ascertained. They
were, therefore, deserving of blame, because, as if they had been alone
in the world, they considered not what offence might arise from the
novelty of the example. Wherefore, let us learn to attempt nothing
rashly, even should it be free from blame, and let us always give due
heed to the admonition of St. Paul, (<span id="xxv.ii-p27.2"></span>[1Co
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#012.md)<span id="xxv.ii-p27.2"></span>;
<span id="xxv.ii-p27.3"></span>[1Co
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023)<span id="xxv.ii-p27.3"></span>.md)
that it is necessary to attend not only to what is lawful, but to what
is expedient; more especially let us sedulously beware of disturbing
pious minds  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181.md) by the introduction
of any kind of novelty.

<span id="xxv.ii-p29"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p30"></span>**11.** *And the children of Israel heard
say,* etc There is no doubt that they were inflamed with holy zeal, nor
ought their vehemence to seem excessive in taking up arms to destroy
their countrymen on account of a pile of stones. For they truly and
wisely judged that the lawful sanctuary of God was polluted and his
worship profaned, that sacred things were violated, pious concord
destroyed, and a door opened for the license of superstitious practices,
if in two places victims were offered to God, who had for these reasons
so solemnly bound the whole people to a single altar. Not rashly,
therefore, do the ten tribes, on hearing of a profane altar, detest its
sacrilegious audacity.

<span id="xxv.ii-p31"></span>Here, then, we have an illustrious display
of piety, teaching us that if we see the pure worship of God corrupted,
we must be strenuous, to the utmost of our ability, in vindicating it.
The sword, indeed, has not been committed to the hands of all; but every
one must, according to his call and office, study manfully and firmly to
maintain the purity of religion against all corruption’s. More
especially deserving of the highest praise was the zeal of the
half-tribe of Manasseh, who, setting aside all regard to the flesh, did
not spare their own family. I admit, however, that this zeal, though
pious, was not free from turbulent impetuosity, inasmuch as they hasten
to declare war before they inquired concerning the mind of their
brethren, and properly ascertained the state of the case. War, I admit,
was declared only under conditions; for they send ambassadors to bring
back word after they had carefully investigated the matter, and they
move not a finger in the way of inflicting punishment till they are
certified of the existence of the crime. Excuse, therefore, may be made
for the fervor of their passion, while they prepare for battle in the
event of any defection being discovered.  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182.md)

<span id="xxv.ii-p33"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p34"></span>**16.** *Thus says the whole congregation,*
etc Just as if it had been known that this second altar was opposed to
the one only altar of God, they begin with upbraiding them, and that in
a very harsh and severe manner. They thus assume it as confessed, that
the two tribes had built the altar with a view of offering sacrifices
upon it. In this they are mistaken, as it was destined for a different
use and purpose. Moreover, had the idea which they had conceived been
correct, all the expostulation which they employ would have been just;
for it was a clear case of criminal revolt to make any change in the Law
of God, who values obedience more than all sacrifices, (<span
id="xxv.ii-p34.1"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022)<span id="xxv.ii-p34.1"></span>.md)
and there would have been perfect ground for condemning them as
apostates, in withdrawing from the one only altar.

<span id="xxv.ii-p35"></span><span id="xxv.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p36"></span>**17.** *Is the iniquity of Peor too little
for us?* etc They represent the crime as more heinous, from their
perverse obstinacy in not ceasing ever and anon to provoke the Lord by
their abominations. They bring forward one signal example of recent
occurrence. While they were encircling the sanctuary of God from the
four cardinal points, like good watchmen of God, and when they had
received the form of due worship, and were habituated to it by constant
exercise, they had allowed themselves, through the seductive allurements
of harlots, to be polluted by foul superstitions, and had worshipped
Baal-Peor. As the whole people were implicated in this crime, the ten
ambassadors do not hesitate to admit, that they were partners in the
guilt. They therefore ask, Is not the iniquity which we contracted in
the matter of Baal-Peor sufficient? They add, that they were not yet
purified from it, just as if they had said, that the remembrance of it
was not yet entirely buried, or that the vengeance of God was not yet
extinguished; and hence they infer, that the two tribes and the half
tribe, while with impious contumacy they turn aside from God, and shake
off his yoke, not only consult ill for themselves, but are calling down
similar destruction on the whole people, because God will avenge the
insult offered him to a wider extent. This they confirm by the example
of Achan, who, though he was alone when he secretly stole of the
accursed thing, did not alone undergo the punishment of his sacrilege,
but also dragged others along with him, as it was seen that some fell in
the line of battle, while all were shamefully put to flight, because
pollution attached to the people.

<span id="xxv.ii-p37"></span>They reason from the less to the greater.
If the anger of God burnt against many for the clandestine misdeed of
one man, much less would he allow the people to escape if they connived
at manifest idolatry. A middle view, however, is inserted, that if the
two tribes and half tribe built up an altar, and if their condition was
worse from not dwelling in the land of Canaan, let them rather come and
obtain a settlement also in the land of Canaan, but let them not provoke
God by a wicked rivalship.  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183.md)
Hence we infer, that they were not urged by some turgid impetus, since,
even at their own loss and expense, they are willing kindly to offer
partnership to those who had demanded a settlement and domicile for
themselves elsewhere.

<span id="xxv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
22:21-34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021.md)<span
id="xxv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p2"></span>**21.** Then the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto
the heads of the thousands of Israel,

<span id="xxv.iii-p3"></span>**21.** Responderunt autem filii Ruben, et
filii Gad, et dimidia tribus Manasse, loquutique sunt cum principibus
millium Israel.

<span id="xxv.iii-p4"></span>**22.** The LORD God of gods, the LORD God
of gods, he knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if *it be* in rebellion,
or if in transgression against the LORD, (save us not this day,)

<span id="xxv.iii-p5"></span>**22.** Deus deorum Jehova, Deus deorum
Jehova ipse novit, et Israel cognoscet, si per rebellionem, et si per
prevaricationem in Jehovam, ne serves nos die hac.

<span id="xxv.iii-p6"></span>**23.** That we have built us an altar to
turn from following the LORD, or if to offer thereon burnt offering or
meat offering, or if to offer peace offerings thereon, let the LORD
himself require *it*;

<span id="xxv.iii-p7"></span>**23.** Si cogitavimus aedificare nobis
altare, ut averteremur ne iremus post Jehovam, et si ad immolandum super
illud holocausta et sacrificium, et si ad faciendum super illud
sacrificia prosperitatum, Jehova ipse inquirat.

<span id="xxv.iii-p8"></span>**24.** And if we have not *rather* done it
for fear of *this* thing, saying, In time to come your children might
speak unto our children, saying, What have you to do with the LORD God
of Israel?

<span id="xxv.iii-p9"></span>**24.** Et si non potius timore hujusce rei
fecimus hoc dicendo: Cras dicent filii vestri filiis nostris dicendo:
Quid vobis et Jehovae Deo Israel?

<span id="xxv.iii-p10"></span>**25.** For the LORD has made Jordan a
border between us and you, you children of Reuben and children of Gad;
you have no part in the LORD: so shall your children make our children
cease from fearing the LORD.

<span id="xxv.iii-p11"></span>**25.** Nam terminum posuit Jehova inter
nos et vos filii Ruben et filii Gad, Jordanem: non est vobis portio in
Jehova: et cessare facient filii vestri filios nostros, ut non timeant
Jehovam.

<span id="xxv.iii-p12"></span>**26.** Therefore we said, Let us now
prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice:

<span id="xxv.iii-p13"></span>**26.** Et diximus, Demus nunc operam ut
aedificemus altare, non pro holocausto, nec pro sacrificio:

<span id="xxv.iii-p14"></span>**27.** But *that* it *may be* a witness
between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we might do the
service of the LORD before him with our burnt offerings, and with our
sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your children may not say
to our children in time to come, You have no part in the LORD.

<span id="xxv.iii-p15"></span>**27.** Sed ut testis sit inter nos et
vos, et inter generationes nostras post nos, ut serviamus servitutem
Jehovae coram eo in holocaustis nostris, et in sacrificiis nostris, et
prosperitatibus nostris: et ne dicant filii vestri cras filiis nostris,
Non est vobis pars in Jehova.

<span id="xxv.iii-p16"></span>**28.** Therefore said we, that it shall
be, when they should *so* say to us or to our generations in time to
come, that we may say *again*, Behold the pattern of the altar of the
LORD, which our fathers made, not for burnt offerings, nor for
sacrifices; but it *is* a witness between us and you.

<span id="xxv.iii-p17"></span>**28.** Diximus itaque, Et erit, si
dixerint nobis aut generationibus nostris cras, tum dicemus, Videte
similitudinem altaris Jehovae quod fecerunt patres nostri, non pro
holocausto, neque pro sacrificio, sed ut testis sit inter nos et vos.

<span id="xxv.iii-p18"></span>**29.** God forbid that we should rebel
against the LORD, and turn this day from following the LORD, to build an
altar for burnt offerings, for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside
the altar of the LORD our God that *is* before his tabernacle.

<span id="xxv.iii-p19"></span>**29.** Absit a nobis ut rebellemus contra
Jehovam, et avertamur hodie ne eamus post Jehovam, aedificando altare
pro holocausto, pro oblatione, et pro sacrificio, ultra altare Jehovae
Dei nostri quod est ante tabernaculum ejus.

<span id="xxv.iii-p20"></span>**30.** And when Phinehas the priest, and
the princes of the congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel
which *were* with him, heard the words that the children of Reuben and
the children of Gad and the children of Manasseh spoke, it pleased them.

<span id="xxv.iii-p21"></span>**30.** Porro quum audisset Phinees
sacerdos, et principes coetus, capitaque millium Israel qui cum eo
erant, verba quae loquuti fuerant filii Ruben, et filii Gad, et filii
Mannasse, placuit in oculis eorum.

<span id="xxv.iii-p22"></span>**31.** And Phinehas the son of Eleazar
the priest said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad,
and to the children of Manasseh, This day we perceive that the LORD *is*
among us, because you have not committed this trespass against the LORD:
now you have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the
LORD.

<span id="xxv.iii-p23"></span>**31.** Dixitque Phinees filius Eleazar
sacerdotis filiis Ruben, et filiis Gad, et filiis Manasse, Hodie novimus
quod in medio nostri sit Jehova, quod non praevaricati sitis contra
Jehovam praevaricationem istam: tunc liberastis filios Israel de manu
Jehovae.

<span id="xxv.iii-p24"></span>**32.** And Phinehas the son of Eleazar
the priest, and the princes, returned from the children of Reuben, and
from the children of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of
Canaan, to the children of Israel, and brought them word again.

<span id="xxv.iii-p25"></span>**32.** Reversus est igitur Phinees filius
Eleazar sacerdotis, et principes illi a filiis Ruben, et a filiis Gad,
de terra Gilead ad terram Chanaan ad reliquos filios Israel, et
retulerunt eis rem.

<span id="xxv.iii-p26"></span>**33.** And the thing pleased the children
of Israel; and the children of Israel blessed God, and did not intend to
go up against them in battle, to destroy the land wherein the children
of Reuben and Gad dwelt.

<span id="xxv.iii-p27"></span>**33.** Placuitque res in oculis filiorum
Israel, atque benedixerunt Deo filii Israel: neque decreverunt ascendere
contra eos ad pugnam, ut disperderent terram in qua filii Ruben et filii
Gad habitabant.

<span id="xxv.iii-p28"></span>**34.** And the children of Reuben and the
children of Gad called the altar *Ed*: for it *shall be* a witness
between us that the LORD *is* God.

<span id="xxv.iii-p29"></span>**34.** Vocaverunt autem filii Ruben et
filii Gad altare Hed, dicendo: Quia testis erit inter nos quod Jehova
est Deus.

<span id="xxv.iii-p30"></span> 

<span id="xxv.iii-p31"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p32"></span>**21.** *Then the children of Reuben,* etc
The state of the case turns on the definition. For the children of
Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh, explain that they had a different intention,
and thus exculpate themselves from the charge, inasmuch as the nature of
the proceeding was quite different from what the others supposed. In not
making a disturbance,  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) nor
picking a quarrel for the injustice done, to them they give an example
of rare modesty, which is held forth for our imitation; so that if at
any time anything we have rightly done happen to be unjustly and falsely
blamed by those not acquainted with its nature, we may deem it
sufficient to refute the censure only so far as may be necessary for
clearing ourselves. Moreover, that the more credit may be given to them,
and that they may the better attest their integrity, they, by a solemn
protest, put far from them the wickedness of which they were suspected.
For there is force and meaning in the reduplication, The Lord God of
gods, the Lord God of gods, by which they with vehemence affirm, how
faithfully they desire to persevere in the doctrine of the Law, and how
greatly they abhor all contrary superstitions. But as their intention
was not patent to men, and every one explained it variously, according
to his own sense, they appeal to the judgment of God, and offer to
submit to punishment if he decide that they had attempted anything
wickedly. And to prove that they are not like hypocrites who, with
abandoned wickedness, appeal to God a hundred times as judge even when
they are convicted in their own minds, they not only bring forward
conscience, but at the same time declare, that the whole people will be
witness; as if they had said, that it will be made palpable by the fact
itself, that they never had any intention of devising any new form of
worship; and they rightly explain, how the altar would have been
unlawful, namely, if they had built it for the purpose of offering
sacrifice. For the Law did not condemn the mere raising of heaps of
stones, but only enjoined that sacrifices should be offered in one
place, for the purpose of retaining the people in one faith, lest
religion should be rent asunder, lest license should be given to human
presumption, and thus every man might turn aside to follow his own
fictions. We thus see how an explanation of the nature of the deed
removes the detestation which the ten tribes had conceived of it.  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md)

<span id="xxv.iii-p35"></span>It is not strictly correct, though
appropriate enough, for the rudeness of sense, to place our God above
all gods. For it is impossible to compare him with others, seeing that
no others actually exist. Hence, in order to avoid the apparent
absurdity, some interpreters substitute *angels* for *gods;* this
meaning holds in some cases, though not in all. It ought not, however,
to seem harsh when he who is the one sole supreme being is called the
God of gods, inasmuch as he has no equal, standing forth conspicuous
above all other height, and so, by his glory, obscuring and annihilating
all names of deity which are celebrated in the world. Hence this mode of
speaking ought to be viewed with reference to the common sense of the
vulgar.

<span id="xxv.iii-p36"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p37"></span>**26.** *Therefore we said,* etc The gross
impiety of which they had been accused was now well refuted; and yet
they seem not to have been in every respect free from blame, because the
Law forbids the erection of any kind of statues. It is easy, however, to
excuse this by saying, that no kind of statues are condemned except
those which are intended to represent God. To erect a heap of stones as
a trophy, or in testimony of a miracle, or a memorial of some signal
favor of God, the Law has nowhere prohibited. (<span
id="xxv.iii-p37.1"></span>[Ex
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004.md)<span id="xxv.iii-p37.1"></span>;
<span id="xxv.iii-p37.2"></span>[Le
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001.md)<span id="xxv.iii-p37.2"></span>;
<span id="xxv.iii-p37.3"></span>[De
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#008)<span id="xxv.iii-p37.3"></span>.md)
Otherwise, Joshua and many holy judges and kings after him, would have
defiled themselves by profane innovation. But the only thing displeasing
to God was to see the minds of men drawn hither and thither, so as to
worship him in a gross and earthly manner. The children of Reuben, Gad,
and Manasseh do all that is required for their exculpation, when they
declare that they would use the altar only as a bond of brotherly union;
and add a sufficient reason, namely, the danger there was, lest, after a
long course of time, the ten tribes might exclude the others as
strangers, because they did not inhabit the same land. For as the
country beyond the Jordan was not at first comprehended in the covenant,
a difference of habitation might ultimately prove a cause of dissension.
They therefore consult timelessly for their posterity, that they may be
able by means of the altar as a kind of public document to defend their
right, that they may mutually recognize each other, and unite in common
in serving one God.

<span id="xxv.iii-p38"></span><span id="xxv.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p39"></span>**30.** *And when Phinehas the priest,*
etc Phinehas and the ambassadors rightly temper their zeal, when,
instead of harshly insisting and urging the prejudice which they had
conceived, they blandly and willingly admit the excuse. Many persons, if
once offended and exasperated by any matter, cannot be appeased by any
defense, and always find something maliciously and unjustly to carp at,
rather than seem to yield to reason. The example here is worthy of
observation. It teaches us that if at any time we conceive offence in
regard to a matter not sufficiently known, we must beware of obstinacy,
and be ready instantly to take an equitable view. Moreover, when the
children of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh are found free from crime,
Phinehas and the ambassadors ascribe it to the grace of God. For by the
words, We know that Jehovah is in the midst of us, they intimate that
God was propitious to them, and had taken care of their safety.

<span id="xxv.iii-p40"></span>This is to be carefully observed; for we
are able to infer from it that we never revolt from God, or fall off to
impiety unless he abandon us, and give us up when thus abandoned to a
reprobate mind. All idolatry, therefore, shows that God has previously
been alienated, and is about to punish us by inflicting judicial
blindness. Meanwhile, we must hold that we persevere in piety only in so
far as God is present to sustain us by his hand, and confirm us in
perseverance by the agency of his Spirit. Phinehas and the ambassadors
speak as if they had been delivered by the children of Reuben, Gad, and
Manasseh, because there was no longer any ground to fear the divine
vengeance, when all suspicion of criminality had been removed. At last
similar equity and humanity are displayed by the whole people, when
accepting the defense of their brethren they gave thanks to God for
having kept his people free from criminality.

<span id="xxv.iii-p41"></span>Though they had been suddenly inflamed,
they depart with calm minds. In like manner the two tribes and the half
tribe carefully exert themselves to perform their duty by giving a name
to the altar, which, by explaining its proper use, might draw off the
people from all superstition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc07024.htm#fr_177.md) <span
id="xxv.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p23"></span> Latin, “<span id="xxv.i-p23.1"></span>Cujus
sola possessio justum debuit bello imponere finem.” French, “<span
id="xxv.i-p23.2"></span>De laquelle il faloit qu’ils fussent paisibles
possesseurs avant qu’ils peussent avoir licence de se desparter, et
avant que finir la guerre;” “Of which it was necessary that they should
be peaceful possessors before they could have license to depart, and
before finishing the war.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc07024.htm#fr_178.md) <span
id="xxv.i-p23.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p24"></span> French, “<span id="xxv.i-p24.1"></span>Ou
pour mieux dire, s’ils n’eussent vilainement tourne le dos arriere,
quand il leur tendoit la main;” “Or, to speak more properly, if they had
not villanously turned their back when he stretched out his hand to
them.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc07024.htm#fr_179.md) <span
id="xxv.i-p24.2"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p25"></span> Jewish writers, founding on plausible
*data*, calculate that the auxiliary tribes who crossed the Jordan to
assist their brethren, had been absent from their homes for a period of
fourteen years. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc07024.htm#fr_180.md) <span
id="xxv.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.i-p30"></span> The Septuagint alters the tenor of the
whole passage by substituting the past tense for the imperative, and
making it read not as a part of Joshua’s address, but as the statement
of a fact, “They departed with much riches,” etc., and “they divided the
spoil of their enemies with their brethren.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc07024.htm#fr_181.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p27.4"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p28"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxv.ii-p28.1"></span>Pios animos.” French, “<span
id="xxv.ii-p28.2"></span>Les bonnes consciences;” “Good consciences.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc07024.htm#fr_182.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p32"></span> French, “<span
id="xxv.ii-p32.1"></span>S’il se trouve que les autres se soyent
revoltez de la religion;” “If it be found that the others have revolted
from religion.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc07024.htm#fr_183.md) <span
id="xxv.ii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.ii-p38"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxv.ii-p38.1"></span>Prava aemulatione.” French, “<span
id="xxv.ii-p38.2"></span>Abusant en mal de ce qu’ils ont veu faire aux
autres;” “Making a wicked abuse of what they have seen others do.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc07024.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="xxv.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p33"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxv.iii-p33.1"></span>Quod autem non tumultuantur.” French, “<span
id="xxv.iii-p33.2"></span>Et en ce qu’ils n’escarmouchent point;” “And
in not skirmishing.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc07024.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="xxv.iii-p33.3"></span>

<span id="xxv.iii-p34"></span> Several Romish writers endeavored to make
the most of this transaction, and think they find in the apparent
sanction which it gives to the erection of an altar similar to the one
on which sacrifices were offered though intended for a different
purpose, an authority for their endless forms of image worship. It is
scarcely possible to treat such an argument seriously, but it is surely
sufficient to answer, that while the Reubenites and their associates
justified the erection of their altar, by declaring in the most solemn
manner, that they never intended, and were firmly determined never to
employ it for religious service, the Romanists, on the other hand, erect
their images for the express purpose of so employing them, and are
continually extolling the imaginary benefits which this sacrilegious
employment of them confers. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 23](cc07025.md)
