[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc07017)  [Next](cc07019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 16

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
16:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the lot of the children of Joseph
fell from Jordan by Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to
the wilderness that goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel,

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Egressa est autem sors filiis Joseph a
Jordane Jericho, ad aquas Jericho ad orientem, ad desertum quod ascendit
a Jericho in montem Beth-el.

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** And goeth out from Bethel to Luz, and
passes along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Egrediturque a Beth-el in Luz, et hinc
pertransit ad terminum Archi-Atoroth.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** And goeth down westward to the coast
of Japhleti, unto the coast of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer: and
the goings out thereof are at the sea.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Postea ascendit ad mare, ad terminum
Japhleti usque ad terminum Beth-horon inferiorem et usque ad Gazer,
suntque exitus ejus ad mare.

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**4.** So the children of Joseph, Manasseh
and Ephraim, took their inheritance.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Itaque haereditatem acceperunt ilii
Joseph, Manasses et Ephraim.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>**5.** And the border of the children of
Ephraim according to their families was *thus*: even the border of their
inheritance on the east side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper;

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Fuit autem terminus filiorum Ephraim
per familias suas: fuitinquam, terminus haereditatis eorum ad orientem
ab Atroh-Addar, usque ad Beth-horon superiorem.

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**6.** And the border went out toward the
sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the border went about eastward
unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the east to Janohah;

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et exit terminus ille ad mare, ad
Michmethah ab aquilone: et circumit terminus ad orientem, ad
Thaanath-siloh, et transit illam ab oriente ad Janoah.

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span>**7.** And it went down from Janohah to
Ataroth, and to Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan.

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Et descendit a Janoah in Ataroth, et
Naarath, et pervenit in Jericho, egrediturque ad Jordanem.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**8.** The border went out from Tappuah
westward unto the river Kanah; and the goings out thereof were at the
sea. This *is* the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Ephraim
by their families.

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>**8.** A Thappuah pergit terminus ad mare ad
torrentem arundinis, suntque exitus ejus ad mare, haec est hereditas
tribus filiorum Ephraim per familias suas.

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the separate cities for the
children of Ephraim *were* among the inheritance of the children of
Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et urbes separatae filiis Ephraim in
medio haereditatis filiorum Manasse, omnes urbes, et villae earum.

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>**10.** And they drave not out the
Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but the Canaanites dwell among the
Ephraimites unto this day, and serve under tribute.

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Neque expulerunt Chananaeum
habitantem in Gazer. Itaque habitavit Chananaeus in medio Ephraim usque
ad diem hanc, et fuit tributo serviens.

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span><span id="xix.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span>**1.** *And the lot of the children of
Joseph fell,* etc The sacred writer first states what the lot was which
fell to the two children of Joseph, and then describes the lot of
Ephraim. It is strange, however, that when the half of the tribe of
Manasseh had already been settled beyond the Jordan, more words are
employed in describing the remaining half than in describing the whole
of the inheritance of the tribe of Ephraim, though the latter was the
more populous, and justly claimed for itself a larger territory. But the
longer detail given concerning the posterity of Manasseh is owing to
particular circumstances. First, the writer repeats how a settlement had
been given them without lot in the country of Basan. Secondly, he
mentions the ratification by Joshua of the command which Moses had given
by divine authority in regard to the daughters of Selophead. Seeing,
then, there was no doubt in regard to the boundaries of Ephraim, and
there was no danger of dispute, their allocation is only briefly glanced
at.

<span id="xix.i-p25"></span>But here a new question arises. When the
right of primogeniture had passed from Manasseh to Ephraim, how did the
posterity of that tribe which had precedence in rank obtain their cities
among the children of Manasseh? For theirs seems in this way to have
been the inferior condition. My explanation is this, When the portion of
Manasseh was too extensive in proportion to the amount of population, a
calculation was made, and certain cities were deducted to complete the
just share of the tribe of Ephraim; not that they were mixed up with the
children of Manasseh, to hold their dwellings among them by a precarious
tenure,  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) but their boundaries
were merely extended in the direction of the Manassites whom a narrower
possession might suffice.

<span id="xix.i-p27"></span>In the end of the chapter, Ephraim is
severely censured for his effeminacy in not having expelled the
Canaanites from Gezer. For had they proceeded in a manly and hearty
manner to make good their right to the land which had fallen to them by
lot, the victory was in their hands. There would have been no temerity
in the attempt, since the decision of the lot was as valid as if the
Lord himself had stretched forth his hand from heaven. But their
disgraceful sloth is more clearly expressed and their culpability
greatly heightened by the fact, that they made tributaries of those with
whom it was not lawful to enter into any kind of arrangement. Seeing,
then, God had distinctly forbidden his people to transact business of
any kind with those nations, and least of all to enter into pactions
with them, stipulating for their pardon and safety, the Ephraimites
sinned much more grievously in exacting tribute than if they had
tolerated them without paction.  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc07018.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="xix.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p26"></span> Latin, “<span id="xix.i-p26.1"></span>Quasi
precario.” French, “<span id="xix.i-p26.2"></span>Comme par emprunt ou
par prieres;” “As by loan or by entreaty.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc07018.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="xix.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p28"></span> A long clause is here added by the
Septuagint, to the effect that the Canaanite continued to dwell in
Ephraim till Pharaoh, king of Egypt, came up and took it, drove out the
Canaanites, Perizzites, and dwellers in Gezer, and gave it as a dowry to
his daughter, (who had married Solomon.) — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17](cc07019.md)
