[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc07019)  [Next](cc07021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 7: Joshua*, tr. by John King, \[1847-50\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxi"></span>

<span id="xxi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 18

<span id="xxi.i"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p1"></span><span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
18:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001)<span id="xxi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p2"></span>**1.** And the whole congregation of the
children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and set up the
tabernacle of the congregation there. And the land was subdued before
them.

<span id="xxi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Congregata est autem universa
multitudo filiorum Israel in Silo, et collocaverunt ibi tabernaculum
conventionis, postquam terra subjecta erat coram eis.

<span id="xxi.i-p4"></span>**2.** And there remained among the children
of Israel seven tribes, which had not yet received their inheritance.

<span id="xxi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Remanserunt autem e filiis Israel
quibus non diviserant haereditatem suam, septem tribus.

<span id="xxi.i-p6"></span>**3.** And Joshua said unto the children of
Israel, How long *are* you slack to go to possess the land, which the
LORD God of your fathers has given you?

<span id="xxi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Dixitque Josue ad filios Israel,
Usquequo cessatis ingredi, ut possideatis terram quam dedit vobis Jehova
Deus patrum vestrorum?

<span id="xxi.i-p8"></span>**4.** Give out from among you three men for
*each* tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through
the land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come *again* to me.

<span id="xxi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tradite ex vobis tres viros per
tribum, quos mittam: surgentque et ambulabunt per terram, describentque
eam juxta haereditatem suam, postea revertentur ad me.

<span id="xxi.i-p10"></span>**5.** And they shall divide it into seven
parts: Judah shall abide in their coast on the south, and the house of
Joseph shall abide in their coasts on the north.

<span id="xxi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et parientur eam in septem portiones:
Judas stabit in finibus suis a meridie: et familia Joseph stabunt in
finibus suis ab aquilone.

<span id="xxi.i-p12"></span>**6.** You shall therefore describe the land
*into* seven parts, and bring *the description* hither to me, that I may
cast lots for you here before the LORD our God.

<span id="xxi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Vosque describatis terram in septem
partes, et afferatis ad me huc: tum projiciam vobis sortem hic coram
Jehova Deo nostro.

<span id="xxi.i-p14"></span>**7.** But the Levites have no part among
you; for the priesthood of the LORD *is* their inheritance: and Gad, and
Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their inheritance
beyond Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the LORD gave
them.

<span id="xxi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Non est enim pars Levitis in medio
vestri, quia sacerdotium Jehovae est haereditas ejus: Gad autem et
Ruben, et dimidia tribus Manasse acceperunt haereditatem suam citra
Jordanem ad orientem, quam dedit ei Moses servus Jehovae.

<span id="xxi.i-p16"></span>**8.** And the men arose, and went away: and
Joshua charged them that went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk
through the land, and describe it, and come again to me, that I may here
cast lots for you before the LORD in Shiloh.

<span id="xxi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Surrexeruntque viri illi, atque
abierunt, praecepitque Josue istis qui ibant, ut describerent terram,
dicendo: Ite, et ambulate per terram, ac describite eam: postea
revertemini ad me, et hic projiciam vobis sortem coram Jehova in Silo.

<span id="xxi.i-p18"></span>**9.** And the men went and passed through
the land, and described it by cities into seven parts in a book, and
came *again* to Joshua to the host at Shiloh.

<span id="xxi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Abierunt itaque viri, et transierunt
per terram, atque descriperunt eam per urbes in septem partes, in libro:
reversique sunt ad Josuam ad castra in Silo.

<span id="xxi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Joshua cast lots for them in
Shiloh before the LORD: and there Joshua divided the land unto the
children of Israel according to their divisions.

<span id="xxi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Misit autem eis Josua sortem in Silo
coram Jehova: partitusque est ibi Josua terram filiis Israel secundum
partes eorum.

<span id="xxi.i-p22"></span> 

<span id="xxi.i-p23"></span><span id="xxi.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p24"></span>**1.** *And the whole congregation of the
children of Israel,* etc Here we have a narrative of the celebrated
convention held in Shiloh, where it was deliberated, as to the casting
of the remaining lots. For although with pious zeal they had attempted
the casting of lots, yet the proceeding had been interrupted, as if
victory behooved to precede the distribution which depended solely on
the mouth of God. They assemble, therefore, in Shiloh to determine what
was necessary to be done in future. And there is no doubt that Joshua
summoned this meeting in order to raise them from their lethargy. For
they do not come forward spontaneously with any proposal, but he begins
with upbraiding them with having been sluggish and remiss in entering on
the inheritance which God had bestowed upon them. It is easy to infer
from his speech that they had shown great alacrity at the outset, but
that there had been no perseverance.

<span id="xxi.i-p25"></span>And yet that obedience, which shortly after
grew languid, was honored with the approbation of the Holy Spirit. It is
to be observed that the people are blamed, not for neglecting to proceed
to the lot, but for not occupying the inheritance divinely offered to
them. And, certainly, as the distribution by lot was a sign of
confidence, so each district which fell out to each was a sure and
faithful pledge of future possession; for the Lord was by no means
deluding them in assigning to each his portion.

<span id="xxi.i-p26"></span>The word <span id="xxi.i-p26.1"></span>דפה,
which I have translated “to cease,” signifies also to be remiss or
feeble. He charges them, therefore, with base heartlessness, in that
while the full time for routing the enemy had arrived, they by their
delays retard and suspend the effect of the divine goodness. For had
they been contented with the bare lot, and faithfully embraced the
results which it gave, they would doubtless have been prompt and
expeditious in carrying on the war, nay, would have hastened like
conquerors to a triumph.

<span id="xxi.i-p27"></span>The ark is said to have been stationed at
Shiloh,  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) not only that the
consultation might be graver and more sacred, as held in the presence of
God, but because it was a completely subjugated place, and safe from all
external violence and injury. For it behooved to be their special care
to prevent its exposure to sudden assault. No doubt the hand of God
would have been stretched to ward off attacks of the enemy from any
quarter; still, however, though God dwelt among them, they were to be
regarded as its guardians and attendants.

<span id="xxi.i-p29"></span>But although a station for the ark was then
chosen, it was not a perpetual abode, but only a temporary lodging. For
it was not left to the will or suffrages of the people to fix the seat
where God should dwell, but they behooved to wait for the period so
often referred to in the Law, when he was to establish the memorial of
his name elsewhere. This was at length accomplished when Mount Zion was
set apart for the Temple. For this reason it is said in the Psalm,

<span id="xxi.i-p30"></span>“Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O
Jerusalem.”  
(<span id="xxi.i-p30.2"></span>[Ps
122:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#002)<span id="xxi.i-p30.2"></span>)

<span id="xxi.i-p31"></span>These words intimate that up to that time
the ark was pilgrimating. At last the ruin and devastation of Shiloh
showed that no rank or dignity can screen those who corrupt the
blessings of God from his vengeance. Up to the death of Eli, God allowed
his sacred name to be worshipped there; but when all religion was
polluted by the impiety of the priests, and almost abolished by the
ingratitude of the people, that spot became to posterity a signal
monument of punishment. Accordingly, Jeremiah tells the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, who were proudly boasting of their Temple, to turn their eyes
to that example. Speaking in the name of the Lord, he says,

<span id="xxi.i-p32"></span>“Go you now unto my place which was in
Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for
the wickedness of my people Israel.” (<span id="xxi.i-p32.1"></span>[Jer
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#012)<span id="xxi.i-p32.1"></span>)

<span id="xxi.i-p33"></span><span id="xxi.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p34"></span>**4.** *Give out from among you three men,*
etc Caleb and Joshua had already surveyed those regions, and the people
had learned much by inquiry: Joshua, however, wishes the land to be
divided as if according to actual survey  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) and orders three surveyors to be
appointed for each of the seven tribes, in order that by the mouth of
two or three persons every dispute may be settled. But nothing seems
more incongruous than to send twenty-one men, who were not only to pass
directly through a hostile country, but to trace it through all its
various windings and turnings, so as not to leave a single corner
unexamined, to calculate, its length and breadth, and even make due
allowance for its inequalities. Every person whom they happened to meet
must readily have suspected who they were, and for what reason they had
been employed on this expedition. In short, no free return lay open for
them except through a thousand deaths. Assuredly they would not have
encountered so much danger from blind and irrational impulse, nor would
Joshua have exposed them to such manifest danger had they not been aware
that all those nations, struck with terror from heaven, desired nothing
so much as peace. For although they hated the children of Israel, still,
having been subdued by so many overthrows, they did not dare to move a
finger against them, and thus the surveyors proceeded in safety as
through a peaceful territory, under the pretext either of trading, or at
least of making a harmless visit.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) It is also possible that they arranged
themselves in different parties, and thus made the journey more
secretly. It is certain, indeed, that there was only one source from
which they could have derived all this courage and confidence, from
trusting under the shadow of the wings of the Almighty, and thus having
no fear of blind and stupid men. Hence the praise here bestowed on their
ready will. For had they not been persuaded that the hands of those
nations were tied up by supernal power, they would have had a just and
honest cause for refusing.  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="xxi.i-p38"></span><span id="xxi.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p39"></span>**9.** *And the men went and passed,* etc
Here not only is praise bestowed on the ready obedience by which their
virtue shone forth conspicuous, but the Lord gives a signal
manifestation of his favor by deigning to bestow remarkable success on
pious Joshua and the zeal of the people. Had they crept along by
subterranean burrows, they could scarcely have escaped innumerable
dangers, but now, when they are taking notes of the cities and their
sites, of the fields, the varying features of the districts, and all the
coasts, and without meeting with any adverse occurrence, return in
safety to their countrymen, who can doubt that their life had been kept
safe among a thousand deaths by a wonderful exertion of divine power? It
is accordingly said emphatically, that they returned to celebrate the
grace of God, which is just equivalent to saying that they were brought
back by the hand of God. This made the people proceed more willingly to
the casting of lots. For their minds would not yet have been well purged
of fastidiousness had they not perceived in that journey a signal
display of divine favor, promising them that the final issue would be
according to their wish. Joshua is hence said to have divided according
to the inheritance of each, as if he were sending them to enter on a
quiet possession, though the effect depended on the divine presence,
because it ought to have been enough for them that the whole business
was carried on by the authority of God, who never deceives his people,
even when he seems to sport with them. In what sense the ark of the
covenant is called God, or the face of God, I have already explained in
many passages.

<span id="xxi.ii"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Joshua
18:11-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011)<span id="xxi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p2"></span>**11.** And the lot of the tribe of the
children of Benjamin came up according to their families: and the coast
of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and the children
of Joseph.

<span id="xxi.ii-p3"></span>**11.** Ascendit autem sors tribus filiorum
Benjamin per familias suas, et exivit terminus sortis eorum inter filios
Jehuda, et filios Joseph:

<span id="xxi.ii-p4"></span>**12.** And their border on the north side
was from Jordan; and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the
north side, and went up through the mountains westward; and the goings
out thereof were at the wilderness of Bethaven.

<span id="xxi.ii-p5"></span>**12.** Fuitque eis terminus ad latus
Aquilonis a Jordane: et ascendit terminus ad latus Jericho ab Aquilone,
ascenditque in montem ad mare, ac exitus ejus sunt ad desertum Bethaven.

<span id="xxi.ii-p6"></span>**13.** And the border went over from thence
toward Luz, to the side of Luz, which *is* Bethel, southward; and the
border descended to Atarothadar, near the hill that *lieth* on the south
side of the nether Bethhoron.

<span id="xxi.ii-p7"></span>**13.** Illinc autem pertransit terminus in
Luz ad latus Luz Australe, (ipsa est Beth-el) et descendit terminus in
Ateroth-Adar, juxta montem, qui est a meridie ipsi Bethhoron inferiori.

<span id="xxi.ii-p8"></span>**14.** And the border was drawn *thence*,
and compassed the corner of the sea southward, from the hill that
*lieth* before Bethhoron southward; and the goings out thereof were at
Kirjathbaal, which *is* Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah:
this *was* the west quarter.

<span id="xxi.ii-p9"></span>**14.** Et designatur terminus, circuitque
ad latus maris ad meridiem, a monte qui est e regione Bethhoron ad
meridiem: suntque exitus ejus ad Cirjath-Baal, (ipsa est
Cirjath-Jearim,) urbem filiorum Jehuda, hoc est latus maris.

<span id="xxi.ii-p10"></span>**15.** And the south quarter *was* from
the end of Kirjathjearim, and the border went out on the west, and went
out to the well of waters of Nephtoah:

<span id="xxi.ii-p11"></span>**15.** Latus autem ad meridiem, ab extremo
Cirjath-Jearim: itaque exit terminus ad mare, exit, inquam, ad fontem
aquarum Nephthoah.

<span id="xxi.ii-p12"></span>**16.** And the border came down to the end
of the mountain that *lieth* before the valley of the son of Hinnom,
*and* which *is* in the valley of the giants on the north, and descended
to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and
descended to Enrogel,

<span id="xxi.ii-p13"></span>**16.** Et descendit terminus ad extremum
montis, qui est e regione vallis Benhinnom, quique est in valle Rephaim
ad aquilonem, descenditque ad vallem Hinnom ad latus Jebusi, ad
meridiem, et illinc descendit ad Enrogel.

<span id="xxi.ii-p14"></span>**17.** And was drawn from the north, and
went forth to Enshemesh, and went forth toward Geliloth, which *is* over
against the going up of Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the
son of Reuben,

<span id="xxi.ii-p15"></span>**17.** Et circuit ab aquilone, et exit ad
En-semes, atque egreditur ad Geliloth, quae est e regione contra
ascensum Adummim: et descendit Eben Bohan filii Ruben.

<span id="xxi.ii-p16"></span>**18.** And passed along toward the side
over against Arabah northward, and went down unto Arabah:

<span id="xxi.ii-p17"></span>**18.** Illinc pertransit ad latus quod est
e regione planitiei ad aquilonem, et descendit in Arabah.

<span id="xxi.ii-p18"></span>**19.** And the border passed along to the
side of Bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at
the north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this *was* the
south coast.

<span id="xxi.ii-p19"></span>**19.** Inde pertransit terminus ad latus
Beth-hogla ad aquilonem: suntque exitus termini ad limitem maris salis
ad aquilonem, ad extremum Jordanis ad meridiem: iste est terminus
austri.

<span id="xxi.ii-p20"></span>**20.** And Jordan was the border of it on
the east side. This *was* the inheritance of the children of Benjamin,
by the coasts thereof round about, according to their families.

<span id="xxi.ii-p21"></span>**20.** Et Jordanes terminat eum ad latus
orientis. Ista est haereditas filiorum Benjamin per terminos suos in
circuitu per familias suas.

<span id="xxi.ii-p22"></span>**21.** Now the cities of the tribe of the
children of Benjamin according to their families were Jericho, and
Bethhoglah, and the valley of Keziz,

<span id="xxi.ii-p23"></span>**21.** Fueruntque urbes istae tribus
filiorum Benjamin per familias suas Jericho, et Beth-hoglah, et vallis
Cesis,

<span id="xxi.ii-p24"></span>**22.** And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and
Bethel,

<span id="xxi.ii-p25"></span>**22.** Et Beth-araba, et Semaraim, et
Beth-el,

<span id="xxi.ii-p26"></span>**23.** And Avim, and Parah, and Ophrah,

<span id="xxi.ii-p27"></span>**23.** Et Avim, et Parah, et Ophrah,

<span id="xxi.ii-p28"></span>**24.** And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni,
and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages:

<span id="xxi.ii-p29"></span>**24.** Et villa Haamonai, et Ophni, et
Gaba: civitates duodecim, et villae carum.

<span id="xxi.ii-p30"></span>**25.** Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,

<span id="xxi.ii-p31"></span>**25.** Gibon, et Ramah, et Beeroth,

<span id="xxi.ii-p32"></span>**26.** And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and
Mozah,

<span id="xxi.ii-p33"></span>**26.** Et Mispeh, et Chephirah, et Mosah,

<span id="xxi.ii-p34"></span>**27.** And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,

<span id="xxi.ii-p35"></span>**27.** Et Recem, et Irpeel, et Tharalah,

<span id="xxi.ii-p36"></span>**28.** And Zelah, Eleph, and Jebusi, which
*is* Jerusalem, Gibeath, *and* Kirjath; fourteen cities with their
villages. This *is* the inheritance of the children of Benjamin
according to their families.

<span id="xxi.ii-p37"></span>**28.** Et Sela, Eleph, et Jebusi (ipsa est
Jerusalem,) Gibath, Cirjath: civitates quatuordecim, et villae earum.
Ista est haereditas filiorum Benjamin per familias suas.

<span id="xxi.ii-p38"></span> 

<span id="xxi.ii-p39"></span><span id="xxi.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p40"></span>In the lot of Benjamin nothing occurs
particularly deserving of notice, unless that a small tribe takes
precedence of the others. I admit, indeed, that its limits were narrowed
in proportion to the fewness of its numbers, because it obtained only
twenty-six cities; but still an honor was bestowed upon it in the mere
circumstance of its receiving its inheritance before more distinguished
tribes. We may add, that in this way they were conjoined and made
neighbors to the other  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) children
of Joseph, with whom their relationship was more immediate. For they
were placed in the middle between the children of Ephraim and Manasseh
on the one side, and those of Judah on the other. They had also the
distinguished honor of including Jerusalem in their inheritance, though
they afterwards granted it by a kind of precarious tenure to the
children of Judah for a royal residence.  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165)

<span id="xxi.ii-p43"></span>It is strange, however, that having
obtained such a quiet locality, they did not live on peaceful and
friendly terms with their neighbors. But we possess the prophecy of
Jacob,

<span id="xxi.ii-p44"></span>“Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf; in the
morning he shall devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the
spoil.” (<span id="xxi.ii-p44.1"></span>[Ge
49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027)<span id="xxi.ii-p44.1"></span>)

<span id="xxi.ii-p45"></span>They must, therefore, have been by nature
of a covetous and turbulent disposition, or from some necessity not now
known to us, they must have been impelled to live upon plunder. In
regard to the city of Luz, the other name is added, (“the same is
Bethel,”) because then only did the name given by Jacob come into common
use. (<span id="xxi.ii-p45.1"></span>[Ge
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019)<span id="xxi.ii-p45.1"></span>)
It was at no great distance from Beth-Aven, whose name, as it was
opprobrious and infamous, was transferred to Bethel itself, after it was
corrupted and polluted by impious superstitions.  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) It is probable that Ciriath-Baal was
called Ciriath-Jeharim, to take away the name of the idol, which would
have been a stain on its true piety. For it certainly would have been
base and shameful that the lips of the people should have been polluted
by the name of a protector who was an enemy to the true God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc07020.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xxi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p28"></span> This place, which afterwards became so
celebrated as the fixed station of the ark and tabernacle during the
remainder of Joshua’s life and the rule of the Judges, down to the
tragical death of Eli, is described in <span
id="xxi.i-p28.1"></span>[Jud
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019)<span id="xxi.i-p28.1"></span>,
as “On the north side of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that
goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.” This
minute description corresponds with a place now called Seilun, which is
situated about twenty miles N.N.E. from Jerusalem, and has several ruins
indicative of an ancient site. If this was the place, it stood nearly in
the center of the country, and was thus the most convenient which could
have been selected. While its locality made it easily accessible from
all quarters, its site, in the heart of a basin completely enclosed by
hills except on the south, where a narrow valley opens into a plain,
admirably adapted it for the still and solemn performance of religious
services. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc07020.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xxi.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p35"></span> Latin, “<span id="xxi.i-p35.1"></span>Quasi
ex praesenti aspectu.” French, “<span id="xxi.i-p35.2"></span>Comme
s’ils eussent este presens sur le lieu;” “As if they had been present on
the spot.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc07020.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xxi.i-p35.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p36"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxi.i-p36.1"></span>Innoxii hospites.” French, “<span
id="xxi.i-p36.2"></span>Estrangers innocens qui passent leur chemin;”
“Innocent strangers passing on their way.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc07020.htm#fr_163) <span
id="xxi.i-p36.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.i-p37"></span> These observations are made on the
understanding that the survey made on this occasion was very minute,
embracing, as Calvin here expresses it, all the “various windings and
turnings,” so as not to leave a single corner unexamined, and extending
with the same minuteness, not only to the lands actually conquered, but
to those still in the undisputed possession of the original inhabitants.
Assuming this to be the fact, the dangers to be encountered by the
surveyors are certainly not exaggerated in the very graphical
description of them here given, and nothing but a series of miraculous
interposition’s could have saved them. It may be suggested, however,
that the object of the surveyors was only to obtain such a general
measurement as might suffice, in the manner already explained, for the
taking of the lot, and that such a measurement might possibly have been
made without much danger of awakening the suspicion, or rousing the
hostility of the actual inhabitants. That the survey was more cursory
than minute seems to be indicated by the description given of it in
<span id="xxi.i-p37.1"></span>[Jos
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009)<span id="xxi.i-p37.1"></span>,
“And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc07020.htm#fr_164) <span
id="xxi.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p41"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxi.ii-p41.1"></span>Reliquis filiis.” French, “<span
id="xxi.ii-p41.2"></span>Des autres enfans;” “The other children,” — an
apparent oversight, as if Benjamin had been a son and not a brother of
Joseph. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc07020.htm#fr_165) <span
id="xxi.ii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p42"></span> Latin, “<span
id="xxi.ii-p42.1"></span>Postea filiis Juda quasi precario sedem regiam
concederent.” French, “<span id="xxi.ii-p42.2"></span>Depuis ils la
baillerent aux enfans de Juda comme par emprunt, pour en faire le siege
royal;” “Afterwards they let it to the children of Judah as by loan, to
make it the royal residence.” These words seem to imply that at some
time or other a regular agreement to this effect had been made, but we
nowhere find any mention of such an agreement. It would rather seem from
<span id="xxi.ii-p42.3"></span>[Jos
15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063)<span id="xxi.ii-p42.3"></span>,
and <span id="xxi.ii-p42.4"></span>[Judg.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021)<span id="xxi.ii-p42.4"></span>,
that the inhabitants of Judah possessed Jerusalem in consequence of
their having wrested it from the Jebusites. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc07020.htm#fr_166) <span
id="xxi.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="xxi.ii-p46"></span> This refers to the setting up of the
golden calves by Jeroboam, and the idolatrous worship which thus
impiously originated by him was long practiced by his successors. See
<span id="xxi.ii-p46.1"></span>[1Ki
12:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028)<span
id="xxi.ii-p46.1"></span>; <span id="xxi.ii-p46.2"></span>[1Ki
13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#000)<span id="xxi.ii-p46.2"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p46.3"></span>[2Ki
10:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#029)<span
id="xxi.ii-p46.3"></span>; <span id="xxi.ii-p46.4"></span>[2Ki
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015)<span id="xxi.ii-p46.4"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p46.5"></span>[Am
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004)<span id="xxi.ii-p46.5"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p46.6"></span>[Am
5:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#004)<span id="xxi.ii-p46.6"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p46.7"></span>[Ho
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015)<span id="xxi.ii-p46.7"></span>;
<span id="xxi.ii-p46.8"></span>[Hos.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#008)<span id="xxi.ii-p46.8"></span>.
Bethel or “the house of God,” so called by Jacob the morning after he
had risen from his wonderful vision, having forfeited its name in
consequence of the abominations practiced at it, became afterwards known
by that of Bethaven, “the house of idols,” or of vanity and iniquity. —
*Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19](cc07021)
