<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](uljc14)  [Next](uljc16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002TX7KEA/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch \[1890\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### X.

1\. Issa went from one city to another,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

strengthening by the word of God the courage of the Israelites, who were
bear to succumbing under their weight of woe, and thousands of the
people followed him to hear his teachings.

2\. But the chiefs of the cities were afraid of him and they informed
the principal governor, residing in Jerusalem, that a man called Issa
had arrived in the country, who by his sermons had arrayed the people
against the authorities, and that multitudes, listening assiduously to
him, neglected their labor; and, they added, he said that in a short
time they would be free of their invader rulers.

3\. Then Pilate, the Governor of Jerusalem, gave orders that they should
lay hold of the preacher Issa and bring him before the judges. In order,
however, not to excite the

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

anger of the populace, Pilate directed that he should be judged by the
priests and scribes, the Hebrew elders, in their temple.

4\. Meanwhile, Issa, continuing his preachings, arrived at Jerusalem,
and the people, who already knew his fame, having learned of his coming,
went out to meet him.

5\. They greeted him respectfully and opened to him the doors of their
temple, to hear from his mouth what he had said in other cities of
Israel.

6\. And Issa said to them: "The human race perishes, because of the lack
of faith; for the darkness and the tempest have caused the flock to go
astray and they have lost their shepherds.

7\. "But the tempests do not rage forever and the darkness will not hide
the light eternally; soon the sky will become serene,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

the celestial light will again overspread the earth, and the strayed
flock will re-unite around their shepherd.

8\. "Wander not in the darkness, seeking the way, lest ye fall into the
ditch; but gather together, sustain one another, put your faith in your
God and wait for the first glimmer of light to re-appear.

9\. "He who sustains his neighbor, sustains himself; and he who protects
his family, protects all his people and his country.

10\. "For, be assured that the day is near when you will be delivered
from the darkness; you will be re-united into one family and your enemy
will tremble with fear, he who is ignorant of the favor of the great
God."

11\. The priests and the elders who heard him, filled with admiration
for his language,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

asked him if it was true that he had sought to raise the people against
the authorities of the country, as had been reported to the governor
Pilate.

12\. "Can one raise against estrayed men, to whom darkness has hidden
their road and their door?" answered Issa. "I have but forewarned the
unhappy, as I do here in this temple, that they should no longer advance
on the dark road, for an abyss opens before their feet.

13\. "The power of this earth is not of long duration and is subject to
numberless changes. It would be of no avail for a man to rise in
revolution against it, for one phase of it al ways succeeds another, and
it is thus that it will go on until the extinction of human life.

14\. "But do you not see that the powerful,

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

and the rich, sow among the children of Israel a spirit of rebellion
against the eternal power of Heaven?"

15\. Then the elders asked him: "Who art thou, and from what country
hast thou come to us? We have not formerly heard thee spoken of and do
not even know thy name!"

16\. "I am an Israelite," answered Issa; "and on the day of my birth
have seen the walls of Jerusalem, and have heard the sobs of my brothers
reduced to slavery, and the lamentations of my sisters carried away by
the Pagans;

17\. "And my soul was afflicted when I saw that my brethren had
forgotten the true God. When a child I left my father's house to go and
settle among other people.

18\. "But, having heard it said that my brethren suffered even greater
miseries now,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have come back
to the land of my fathers, to recall my brethren to the faith of their
ancestors, which teaches us patience upon earth in order to attain the
perfect and supreme bliss above."

19\. Then the wise old men put to him again this question: "We are told
that thou disownest the laws of Mossa, and that thou teachest the people
to forsake the temple of God?"

20\. Whereupon Issa: "One does not demolish that which has been given by
our Heavenly Father, and which has been destroyed by sinners. I have but
enjoined the people to purify the heart of all stains, for it is the
veritable temple of God.

21\. "As regards the laws of Mossa, I have endeavored to re-establish
them in the hearts of men; and I say unto you that ye ignore

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

their true meaning, for it is not vengeance but pardon which they teach.
Their sense has been perverted."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI](uljc16)

</div>
