<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](uljc13)  [Next](uljc15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002TX7KEA/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch \[1890\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IX.

1\. Issa--whom the Creator had selected to recall to the worship of the
true God, men

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

sunk in sin--was twenty-nine years old when he arrived in the land of
Israel.

2\. Since the departure therefrom of Issa, the Pagans had caused the
Israelites to endure more atrocious sufferings than before, and they
were filled with despair.

3\. Many among them had begun to neglect the laws of their God and those
of Mossa, in the hope of winning the favor of their brutal conquerors.

4\. But Issa, notwithstanding their unhappy condition, exhorted his
countrymen not to despair, because the day of their redemption from the
yoke of sin was near, and he himself, by his example, confirmed their
faith in the God of their fathers.

5\. "Children, yield not yourselves to despair," said the celestial
Father to them, through the mouth of Issa, "for I have heard

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

your lamentations, and your cries have reached my cars.

6\. "Weep not, oh, my beloved sons! for your griefs have touched the
heart of your Father and He has forgiven you, as He forgave your
ancestors.

7\. "Forsake not your families to plunge into debauchery; stain not the
nobility of your souls; adore not idols which cannot but remain deaf to
your supplications.

8\. "Fill my temple with your hope and your patience, and do not adjure
the religion of your forefathers, for I have guided them and bestowed
upon them of my beneficence.

9\. "Lift up those who are fallen; feed the hungry and help the sick,
that ye may be altogether pure and just in the day of the last judgment
which I prepare for you."

10\. The Israelites came in multitudes to

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

listen to Issa's words; and they asked him where they should thank their
Heavenly Father, since their enemies had demolished their temples and
robbed them of their sacred vessels.

11\. Issa told them that God cared not for temples erected by human
hands, but that human hearts were the true temples of God.

12\. "Enter into your temple, into your heart; illuminate it with good
thoughts, with patience and the unshakeable faith which you owe to your
Father.

13\. "And your sacred vessels! they are your hands and your eyes. Look
to do that which is agreeable to God, for in doing good to your
fellow-men, you perform a ceremony that embellishes the temple wherein
abideth Him who has created you.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

14\. "For God has created you in His own image, innocent, with pure
souls, and hearts' filled with kindness and not made for the planning of
evil, but to be the sanctuaries of love and justice.

15\. "Therefore, I say unto you, soil not your hearts with evil, for in
them the Eternal Being abides.

16\. "When ye do works of devotion and love, let them be with full
hearts, and see that the motives of your actions be not hopes of gain or
self-interest;

17\. For actions, so impelled, will not bring you nearer to salvation,
but lead to a state of moral degradation wherein theft, lying and murder
pass for generous deeds."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X](uljc15)

</div>
