<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](uljc08)  [Next](uljc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002TX7KEA/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
The Unknown Life of Jesus Christ, by Nicolas Notovitch \[1890\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV.

1\. At that time the moment had come for the compassionate Judge to
re-incarnate in a human form;

2\. And the eternal Spirit, resting in a state of complete inaction and
supreme bliss, awakened and separated from the eternal Being, for an
undetermined period,

3\. So that, in human form, He might teach man to identify himself with
the Divinity and attain to eternal felicity;

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

4\. And to show, by His example, how man can attain moral purity and
free his soul from the domination of the physical senses, so that it may
achieve the perfection necessary for it to enter the Kingdom of Heaven,
which is immutable and where bliss eternal reigns.

5\. Soon after, a marvellous child was born in the land of Israel. God
himself spoke, through the mouth of this child, of the miseries of the
body and the grandeur of the soul.

6, The parents of the infant were poor people, who belonged to a family
noted for great piety; who forgot the greatness of their ancestors in
celebrating the name of the Creator and giving thanks to Him for the
trials which He had sent upon them.

7\. To reward them for adhering to the

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

path of truth, God blessed the first-born of this family; chose him for
His elect, and sent him to sustain the fallen and comfort the afflicted.

8\. The divine child, to whom the name Issa was given, commenced in his
tender years to talk of the only and indivisible God, exhorting the
strayed souls to repent and purify themselves from the sins of which
they had become guilty.

9\. People came from all parts to hear him, and marvelled at the
discourses which came from his infantile mouth; and all Israel agreed
that the Spirit of the Eternal dwelt in this child.

10\. When Issa was thirteen years old, the age at which an Israelite is
expected to marry,

11\. The modest house of his industrious

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

parents became a meeting-place of the rich and illustrious, who were
anxious to have as a son-in-law the young Issa, who was already
celebrated for the edifying discourses he made in the name of the
All-Powerful.

12\. Then Issa secretly absented himself from his father's house; left
Jerusalem, and, in a train of merchants, journeyed toward the Sindh,

13\. With the object of perfecting himself in the knowledge of the word
of God and the study of the laws of the great Buddhas.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V](uljc10)

</div>
