[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cma01)  [Next](cma03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIWZ6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Creation Myths of Primitive America*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1898\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span> <span id="page_x">p. x</span> <span
id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

# INTRODUCTION

THE creation myths of America form a complete system; they give a
detailed and circumstantial account of the origin of this world and of
all things and creatures contained in it. In the course of the various
narratives which compose this myth system an earlier world is described
to us, with an order of existence and a method of conduct on which the
life of primitive man in America was patterned.

That earlier world had two periods of duration, one of complete and
perfect harmony; another of violence, collision, and conflict. The
result and outcome of the second period was the creation of all that is
animated on earth except man. Man, in the American scheme of creation,
stands apart and separate; he is quite alone, peculiar, and special.
Above all, he belongs to this continent. The white man was unknown to
American myth-makers, as were also men of every other race and of every
region outside of the Western Hemisphere.

Described briefly and by an Indian, the American myth system is as
follows: "There was a world before this one in which we are living at
present; that was the world of the first people, who were different

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

from us altogether. Those people were very numerous, so numerous that if
a count could be made of all the stars in the sky, all the feathers on
birds, all the hairs and fur on animals, all the hairs of our own heads,
they would not be so numerous as the first people."

These people lived very long in peace, in concord, in harmony, in
happiness. No man knows, no man can tell, how long they lived in that
way. At last the minds of all except a very small number were changed;
they fell into conflict,--one offended another consciously or
unconsciously, one injured another with or without intention, one wanted
some special thing, another wanted that very thing also. Conflict set
in, and because of this came a time of activity and struggle, to which
there was no end or stop till the great majority of the first
people--that is, all except a small number--were turned into the various
kinds of living creatures that are on earth now or have ever been on
earth, except man,--that is, all kinds of beasts, birds, reptiles, fish,
worms, and insects, as well as trees, plants, grasses, rocks, and some
mountains; they were turned into everything that we see on the earth or
in the sky.

That small number of the former people who did not quarrel, those great
first people of the old time who remained of one mind and harmonious,
"left the earth, sailed away westward, passed that line where the sky
comes down to the earth and touches it, sailed to places beyond; stayed
there or withdrew to upper regions and lived in them happily, lived in

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

agreement, live so to-day, and will live in the same way hereafter."

The American system, as we see, begins with an unknown great, indefinite
number of uncreated beings,--in other words, of self-existent personages
or divinities. Those divinities were everything at first; there was
nothing except them, nothing aside from them, nothing beyond them. They
existed unchanged through untold periods, or rather through a duration
which would be periods were there a measure by which to divide it. They
lived side by side in perfect concord, in the repose of a primeval chaos
of quiescent mind which presents a most remarkable analogy with the
attenuated, quiescent, undifferentiated matter which, according to the
nebular hypothesis, filled all points of space in the physical universe
before the first impulse of motion was given to it.

At last this long period is ended, there is mental difference among most
of the first people, character is evolved and has become evident;
rivalries, collisions, and conflicts begin.

The American creation myths, as far as we know them, form simply a
series of accounts of the conflicts, happenings, and various methods by
which the first world was changed into the world now existing. This
change was effected in various ways. In the myths of certain tribes or
nations, it is mainly by struggles between hostile personages. One god
of great power and character overcomes a vast number of opponents, and
changes each into some beast,

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

bird, plant, or insect; but always the resultant beast or other creature
corresponds in some power of mind or in some leading quality of
character with the god from whose position it has fallen. In certain
single cases opponents are closely matched, they are nearly equal in
combat; the struggle between them is long, uncertain, and difficult. At
last, when one side is triumphant, the victor says, "Hereafter you will
be nothing but a ----"; and he tells what the vanquished is to be. But
at this point the vanquished turns on the victor and sends his retort
like a Parthian arrow, "You will be nothing but a ----"; and he declares
what his enemy is to be. The metamorphosis takes place immediately on
both sides, and each departs in the form which the enemy seemed to
impose, but which really belonged to him.

There are cases in which the hero transforms numerous and mighty enemies
indirectly through a special wish which he possesses. For example, a
certain myth hero brings it about that a large company of the first
people are invited to a feast, and while all are eating with great
relish he slips out unnoted, walks around the house, and utters, as he
goes, the magic formula: "I wish the walls of this house to be flint,
the roof also." Next moment the whole house is flint-walled, the roof is
flint also. After that he says, "I wish this house to be red-hot." It is
red-hot immediately. His enemies inside are in a dreadful predicament;
they rush about wildly, they roar, they look for an opening;

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

there is none, they see no escape, they find no issue. Their heads burst
from heat. Out of one head springs an owl, and flies away through the
smoke-hole; out of another a buzzard, which escapes through the same
place; out of the third comes a hawk, which follows the other two; out
of a fourth some other bird. Thus the action continues till every head
in the flint house bursts open and lets out its occupant. All fly away,
and thus the whole company is metamorphosed. Each turns into that which
his qualities called for, which his nature demanded; he becomes
outwardly and visibly that which before he had been internally and in
secret.

The hero in the above case could not wish his opponents metamorphosed
directly, he could not wish this whenever he pleased or wherever he met
the great company; he had to induce them to enter the house, which he
turned by his wish into flint and then heated. When the moment of
terrible anguish came on them, the true nature of each of those people
grew evident; each head burst open, and out sprang the real person.

All those of the first people whose minds had been modified, who, so to
speak, had grown specialized internally, who were different from that
which they had been to start with, were forced to change also
externally, and could not escape or avoid that great power whose shadow
was approaching; their destiny was on them, and they felt it.

In the Wintu system, one of the two which are set forth in this volume,
nearly all changes were

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

effected by Olelbis; but there are examples of agents with other means.
Tulchuherris turns old Tichelis into a ground-squirrel at the climax of
his perfidy. He changes Hawt, the porter at the dangerous river, into a
lamprey eel, whose children are to be eaten by Indians in the future.
Old Sas, the false and vain chief in Saskewil, is beaten by his
son-in-law, and receives his present form of sun and moon at the end of
a long and bitter struggle, in which strength, wit, and keenness use the
very last of their resources.

There are cases in which some of the first people are so modified
mentally that they are conscious of what has happened within them. They
are ready for the change, they are willing to undergo it; but there is
no immediate occasion, no impending struggle in which an opponent could
have the chance to transform them. These people transform themselves by
the utterance of a wish, and produce their own metamorphoses. There are
still others who know, as do all, that a new race is coming, that they
will be changed when it comes unless they are changed some time earlier.
They know that they must be changed as soon as they see the new people
or a sign or a mark of their coming. These unchanged first people, few
in number comparatively, attempt to escape; but their attempts are vain,
their efforts are useless. In the distant east they see smoke from the
fires of the advancing new people, the Indians of America, or hear the
barking of the dogs of this people, and that instant they

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

receive the forms which are due them. Others escape for a season and
hide in dark places; but the Indians go everywhere, and the
metamorphoses continue till the career of the first people is ended.

I have in mind at this moment a representative picture of this last
group of persons who were unwilling to be metamorphosed and strove to
avoid the new race, the inevitable Indians. They had no desire to see
men, and they fled to all sorts of lonely retreats and remote forest
places. At a certain point on the Klamath is a rough mountain slope
which rises abruptly from the water; far up, well toward the ridge,
about seven-eighths of the way from the river to the summit, is a bulky
high stone which seen from a distance looks much like a statue. Close
behind is another stone, somewhat smaller, which leans forward in the
posture of a person hastening eagerly. Both are white and shining; they
have the appearance of quartz rock. These were two sisters hastening,
rushing away to escape the coming change. When they reached the points
where they are standing at present, the foremost sister looked toward
the east and saw smoke; the second did not look, but she heard the
distant barking of dogs which came from the place where the smoke was;
both were changed into stone that same instant.

With the transformation of the last of the first people or divinities,
which was finished only when the Indians or some sign of them appeared
in every remote nook and corner in which a remnant of the first people
had taken refuge, the present order of

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

things is established completely. There are now in the world
individualities of three distinct sets and orders. First, that small
number of the first people whose minds had never changed, those gods who
withdrew and who live in their original integrity and harmony, who
retired to places outside the sky or above it; second, the great
majority of the gods, who have become everything in the present world
save and except only Indians. This cycle finished, there is a new point
of departure, and we meet a second group of myths concerning the
existent world as it is now with its happenings,--myths containing
accounts of conflicts which are ever recurrent, which began before all
the first people were metamorphosed, conflicts which are going on at
present and which will go on forever; struggles between light and
darkness, heat and cold, summer and winter, struggles between winds
which blow in opposite directions,--in fact, accounts of various
phenomena and processes which attract the attention of savage men more
than others because savage men are living face to face with them always.

This second group contains a large number of myths, many of them
exceedingly beautiful and, so far as they are known, highly pleasing to
cultivated people. Unfortunately few of these myths have been given to
the world yet, for the sole and simple reason that comparatively few
have been collected from the Indians.

The first cycle of myths--that is, those which refer to creation. in
other words to the metamorphoses of

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

the first people or gods into everything which is in the world,
including the world itself--is succeeded by another in which are
described the various changes, phenomena, and processes observed
throughout nature.

In this second cycle, as I have just stated, light and darkness, heat
and cold, opposing winds, heavenly bodies appear as heroes and leading
actors. For ages the reverence, sympathy, and enthusiasm of primitive
men have been given to those heroes, and are given to them yet, by every
tribe which preserves its ancient beliefs and ideas.

In this cycle is one small group of myths which to the Indian is very
sacred, a group which in many tribes is revered beyond others. This
group associates the earth with the sky and sun considered as one
person, or the sky and sun considered as distinct from each other. To
these are added one, and sometimes two personages born of the earth. In
the simplest version of this myth the earth maiden through being looked
at by the sun becomes a mother, gives birth to a great hero, the chief
benefactor of Indians. This hero gives the race all gifts that support
existence, and it is through him that men live and prosper. Under
whatever name he appears this benefactor is really that warm light which
we see quivering, waving, and dancing above the earth in fine weather.
He is the son of the virgin earth, of that mother who has never known a
consort save the one who looked from the height of heaven on her.

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

The lives of the first people are described in creation myths, and
presented as models upon which faithful Indians are to fashion their
lives at all times and places. All institutions of primitive man in
America were patterned upon those of "the first people." Every act of an
Indian in peace or in war, as an individual or as a member of a tribe,
had its only sanction in the world of the first people, the American
divinities.

There was not on this continent one institution, observance) right, or
custom which was not god-given, theoretically. The Indians of America
always acted in a prescribed manner on a given occasion, because the
gods of the world which preceded this, had acted in the same manner in
similar conditions and circumstances.

No people could be more religious than those of this continent, for
there was no act of any kind in life during which they were free of
religious direction. The source of this religion is in the myths, and in
the explanations concerning them given by wise men,--in other words, by
sorcerers.

What shall we say of this Indian system, and what is its value?

The first to be said is that it is complete, and for every Indian
believer well-founded and symmetrically developed. In the primitive
religion of America there is no speculation, all is simple statement;
there are no abstractions, qualities are always connected with persons.

Indians believe that the whole immense body of

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

myths was delivered to them by the first people in one place or another.
Among the Iroquois there is a detailed account of how myths were told to
an ancient chief and an assembly of the people on a circular open space
in a deep forest. On this space was a large wheel-shaped stone. From
beneath this stone came a voice which told the tale of the former world,
told how the first people had become what they are at present.

Day after day the chief and the people came to the stone, sat, and
listened till the whole cycle of tales was narrated.

On the Lower Klamath is a very old, immense tree, which has given an
account of the first world and people. This tree itself is one of the
first people metamorphosed; no one knows what its age is. Sorcerers go
to it yearly, hold converse, put questions, receive answers. Each year a
small stone is added to a pile in which there are thousands of pebbles,
apparently. This pile stands near the tree; no one is permitted to count
the stones in it. The pile is sacred; once a stone is placed with the
others, it must stay there forever.

This sacred tree has told tales of the first world,--the tales known to
Weitspekan Indians and revered by them.

On the Upper Columbia is a great rock which resembles an elk somewhat.
This rock is also an oracle, one of the first people; like the round
stone of the Iroquois, it has told of the first world, and its tales all
belong to the Shahaptians.

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

The Indian system has its plain and clear revelation; for believers it
has tangible and undoubted, connection with the world which preceded the
present one. Its narratives explain how in one place, and another the
first people revealed the tale of the, world's transformation.

For the Indian this is all-satisfactory. He has a system which is
perfect, extensive, rich in details, full of interest,--a system which
gives proofs of its origin through testimony delivered by divinities. It
was revealed to the wise men, the worthies, the patriarchs of his race.
What more could he wish for? What more could he ask? Nothing. The wisdom
of his nation is more valid, more reliable, than the witness of his own
senses. His eyes and ears might be deceived by tricksters, but not by
the, truth delivered to great men among his own people, preserved by
them sacredly and passed down to others.

This is the position of the Indian. He believes. in his own system
fully. How are we to relate,. ourselves to that system and its contents?
What, should we think of it? How was it conceived, how developed?

We do not believe in an Indian first world nor a: previous people turned
into animals, plants, insects, birds, fish, and reptiles. We have no
ancestors who, founded that system; we possess no traditions that came
from it, no beliefs that are based on its teachings, no faith in its
sorcerers, no dread of their, workings. Any statement as to how the
Indian

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

system was conceived and how it was developed is very different in
character from a statement of what the Indian system is externally and
on the basis of its own story.

In presenting the system from the purely formal side we are dealing with
simple facts, which we collect and range in order. Once we possess these
ordered facts, we have the externals of everything Indian,--not only
religion, but medicine, politics, social life. We might stop there and
say, This is the system. But from our point of view we are forced to go
further, we must seek explanations. We form no part of the Indian
assembly of believers, we have no faith in their system except to show
us what the Indian mind is; hence we are forced to ask how the Indian
founded his religion and evolved it. we are forced to look for its
origin and meaning. We give no credence to his tale of revelation; we
are certain that he himself--that is, his race--began the system, that
it was developed from insignificant beginnings, and increased through
lengthy periods till it reached its present form and fulness. We have
not the details of how he acted, but we know where the myth-maker had to
begin, and we see what he has effected.

The physical universe was for myth-makers of the old time in America the
same in principle that it is for us to-day, the visible result and
expression of unseen power and qualities. The difference between us and
them is determined by the things that we see and the way in which we
apprehend them.

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

What did the ancient myth-makers say of this universe, and what interest
or value has their statement for us at this moment?

The primitive men of America saw before them forests, plains, deserts,
mountains, lakes, and rivers of various sizes, from the smallest to the
greatest; they lived in climates varying from the coldest and most
inclement to the hottest and most difficult of endurance. They saw
around them on all sides a world far more hostile than friendly,--a
world of savage beasts, wild creatures, poisonous reptiles, deadly
insects. Each creature, every plant had its own fixed and settled
character, its own aim and object. Whence came beasts good for food or
clothing; whence others dangerous to life, beasts to be slain or
avoided? Whence came trees and plants of various kinds and uses? Whence
came sweetness in the maple or bitterness and poison in another tree?
What is the origin of corn, and why do poisons grow to kill as corn does
to nourish? Whence came the rattlesnake, and whence the salmon? Because
of these questions myths appeared, and those myths gave answers which
received full faith and credence,--answers on which was built a theory
of how this world arose, and what the true and proper scheme of life
was.

The myth-maker looked at the universe around him, and saw throughout
every part of it individualities having qualities, desires, and passions
in varying degrees. He observed these individualities, and gave a
detailed account and history of how

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

this world arose. He gave this history by projecting existence into a
past which was remote and passionless. Out of that harmonious past he
evolved the present world and its order by describing in the past world
the play of all those passions, desires, and appetites which he saw at
work in life around him. Such was the method employed in producing the
American creation myths. The task required much time, long observation,
careful thought, and no small constructive power. These creation myths
with the next, which I have mentioned already and called action myths,
are the great result of mental toil and effort in the old time on this
continent. In these two sets of myths the Indian has told what he thinks
of the universe.

When Europeans came to this hemisphere, the American myth system was
unbroken and perfect. There was no second order of thought here. The
continent was untouched by foreign conquest or ideas. The inhabitants
had lived in mental isolation, in absolute freedom from every outside
influence. Human history has no second example of a single system of
thought developed over such a vast area. Inhabited America extended at
least nine thousand miles from north to south, more than one third of
the earth's circumference and considerably more than the earth's
diameter. This territory where broadest was at least three thousand
miles from east to west, both in North and South America. Over this
immense portion of the earth's surface with its endless variety of soil,
climate, scenery, and

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

conditions of existence, a single system of primitive philosophy was
developed with a fulness and a wealth of illustration which could find
no parallel in any other place. The result of all this is that we have
in America a monument of thought which is absolutely unequalled,
altogether unique in human experience. The special value of this thought
lies, moreover, in the fact that it is primitive, that it is the thought
of ages long anterior to those which we find recorded on the eastern
hemisphere, either in sacred books, histories, or literature, whether
preserved on baked brick, burnt cylinders, or papyrus.

The American system, which gives us a circumstantial account of the
beginning of all things, is as far reaching as the nebular hypothesis,
or as that theory which gives a common origin to man and all sentient
existences.

Primitive man in America stood at every step face to face with divinity
as he knew or understood it. He could never escape from the presence of
those powers which had constituted the first world, and which composed
all that there was in the present one. Man's chief means of sustenance
in most parts were on land or in the water. Game and fish of all sorts
were under direct divine supervision. Invisible powers might send forth
game or withdraw it very quickly. With fish the case was similar.
Connected with fishing and hunting was an elaborate ceremonial, a
variety of observances and prohibitions. Every man had a great many
things to observe as an individual,

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

a great many also as a member of his tribe or society.

The most important question of all in Indian life was communication with
divinity, intercourse with the spirits of divine personages. No man
could communicate with these unless the man to whom they chose to
manifest themselves. There were certain things which a man had to do to
obtain communication with divinity and receive a promise of assistance;
but it was only the elect, the right person, the fit one, who obtained
the desired favor. For instance, twenty men might go to the mountain
place, and observe every rule carefully, but only one man be favored
with a vision, only one become a seer. Twenty others might go to the
mountain place, and not one be accounted worthy to behold a spirit; a
third twenty might go, and two or three of them be chosen. No man could
tell beforehand what success or failure might await him. The general
method at present is the following, the same as in the old time:--

Soon after puberty, and in every case before marriage or acquaintance
with woman, the youth or young man who hopes to become a doctor goes to
a sacred mountain pond or spring, where he drinks water and bathes.
After he has bathed and dressed, he speaks to the spirits, he prays them
to come to him, to give him knowledge, to grant their assistance. The
young man takes no food, no nourishment of any sort, fasts, as he is
able, seven days and nights, sometimes longer. All this time he is

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

allowed no drink except water. He sleeps as little as possible. If
spirits come to him, he has visions, he receives power and favor. A
number of spirits may visit a man one after another, and promise him aid
and co-operation. The eagle spirit may come, the spirit of the elk or
the salmon,--any spirit that, likes the man. The spirit says in
substance, "Whenever you call my name I will come, I will give my power
to assist you." After one spirit has gone, another may appear, and
another. A man is not free to refuse the offers of spirits, he must
receive all those who come to him. As there are peculiar observances
connected with each spirit, the doctor who is assisted by many is
hampered much in his method of living. There are spirits which do not
like buckskin; the man to whom they come, must never wear buckskin. If a
man eats food repugnant to his spirit, the spirit will kill him. As each
spirit has its favorite food, and there are other kinds which to it are
distasteful, we can understand easily that the doctor who has ten
spirits or twenty, (and there are some who have thirty) to aid him is
limited in his manner of living. Greatness has its; price at all times,
power must be paid for in every, place. Those for whom the spirits have
no regard, and they are the majority, return home without visions or
hope of assistance; the spirits are able to look through all persons
directly, and straightway they see what a man is. They find most people,
unsuited to their purposes, unfit to be assisted.

This preparation to become seers or sorcerers

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

among Indians is of very deep interest. I have given a considerable
number of details on the subject in notes to "Kol Tibichi." The spirit
of any plant, any star, or other personage in creation may become a
man's attendant. In our popular phraseology, this is called his
"medicine."

In a Modoc myth the morning star is the attendant of the sun. According
to this myth the sun is destroyed every day physically, is consumed into
a heap of ashes; but as the sun has an immortal golden disk in his body,
a disk which contains his whole existence, he can never perish. This
disk remains always in the heap of ashes. There is a condition, however,
incident to the sun's resurrection: he must be called. Every morning
some one must rouse him, as a hireling is roused to his daily labor. The
morning star has that duty, and will never be freed from it. While the
sun exists, the morning star must call him. At the summons of the star
the golden disk springs from the pile of ashes, the sun is renewed
completely, and goes forth to run his race till consumed again in the
evening. Here we have the Phœnix rising from its ashes daily instead of
once in five centuries.

The system outlined in the myths contained in this volume is that of the
Wintus and Yanas, two stocks of Indians whom I shall describe somewhat
later.

The Wintu system is remarkable for the peculiar development of the chief
divinity, Olelbis, called also Nomhliĕstawa.

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

The word "Olelbis" is formed of three etymological elements: ol, up; el,
in; bis, dwelling or sitting,--dwelling on high. Nomhliĕstawa is formed
also of three elements: nom, west; hliĕs, to hurl; and tawa,
left-handed. Both names are epithets, and the Wintus have forgotten who
or what their chief divinity is; at least I have not been able to find a
man among them who could give information on this subject. Olelbis lives
in the highest part of the sky; with him are the best of the first
people. From his beautiful house, Olelpanti Hlut, he sees everything on
earth, and seems more real and familiar than any divinity connected with
other tribes. He is certainly more effective in management, more active
than any divinity of other Indian stocks, so far as I know.

Olelbis disposes of the first people, except in a few cases, and he
retains with himself whomsoever he likes. He sends to the earth and
transforms those whom he thinks more useful below than above, and gives
the example of a single ruling divinity which, without being
all-powerful or all-wise, is able, through the knowledge and services of
others, to bear rule over the world in all places and everywhere.

The two old women, the grandmothers, are interesting persons,
counsellors of the chief divinity, rainmakers, wise with a knowledge of
people of whom Olelbis is ignorant, at least professedly. These old
women have been turned into a stone which has a spongy appearance and
looks like the inside or porous portion of bones which are without
marrow.

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

The great majority of Wintu metamorphoses are effected by Olelbis. The
only exceptions are those of Sas, Hawt, and Tichelis, transformed by
Tulchuherris, and certain changes such as those of color produced at the
great musical contest given by Waida Dikit. When each played on a flute
at that contest till he had done his best, till he had lost breath, then
he changed color. Though the Wintu system differs much in detail from
others, it agrees perfectly with all bodies of mythology on the great
point, the main principle, metamorphosis. Through metamorphosis, all
things have become what they are; through revelation it was learned that
the metamorphoses took place, and in what way they took place. We must
not consider the final act as the whole; the change had been in process
for a long period, and the final words from opponents in conflict, the
commands of Olelbis, the decisions of personages who changed themselves
at the approach of Indians, or at signs of their coming, are but the
very last act, the final incident, the official ending, so to speak, of
an immensely long career in each case.

Of course there is no true information in the American ethnic religion
as to the real changes which affected the world around us; but there is
in it, as in all systems like it, true information regarding the history
of the human mind. Every ethnic religion gives us documentary evidence.
It gives us positive facts which, in their own sphere, are as true as
are facts of geology in the history of

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

the earth's crust and surface. They do not tell us what took place in
the world without, in the physical universe, they had no means of doing
so; but they do tell us what took place at certain periods in the world
of mind, in the interior of man.

The term "ethnic religion" needs some explanation, perhaps, before we go
further. An ethnic or primitive religion is one which belongs to people
of one blood and language, people who increased and developed together
with the beliefs of every sort which belong to them. Such a religion
includes every species of knowledge, every kind of custom, institution,
and art. Every aboriginal nation or human brood has its gods. All people
of one blood and origin are under the immediate care and supervision of
their gods, and preserve continual communication and converse with them.
According to their own beliefs, such people received from their gods all
that they have, all that they practise, all that they know. Such people,
while their blood is unmixed and their society unconquered, adhere to
their gods with the utmost fidelity.

The bonds which connect a nation with its gods, bonds of faith, and
those which connect the individuals of that nation with one another,
bonds of blood, are the strongest known to primitive man, and are the
only social bonds in prehistoric ages. This early stage was the one in
which even the most advanced group of Indians in America found
themselves when the continent was discovered.

On the Eastern hemisphere, where there were so

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

many races quite distinct and different from one another, the conquest
of one race by another, or the conquest of a number of races by one, was
frequent and had a great influence on thought and on religion. The
influence of one religion or system of thought on another was sometimes
considerable, as the intellectual influence of Egypt on Greece, and
sometimes great, as that of Greece on Rome.

The influence of the physical conquest of many by one was immense
politically and socially, as in the case of Rome, which subdued Greece
and, together with Greece, all that Alexander had conquered in Asia and
Egypt. With the ruin of Carthage, Rome destroyed the ancient thought of
Phoenicia, which was closely akin to the earliest Hebrew, and one of the
most important among Semitic nations. With the conquest and assimilation
of Transalpine and Cisalpine Gaul, the whole ancient fabric of Keltic
thought on the continent gave way, and its chief elements were lost soon
after.

The last of the ethnic religions of Europe, and one of the most
valuable, that of the Lithuanians, continued in perfect condition till
the fifteenth century, when it was ended through bloodshed and violence.
This last of the systems of primitive Aryan thought in Europe passed
away leaving slight traces. We know the names of some of its divinities;
we know that it resembled the Slav, but was more developed, that it had
sacred serpents and priestesses who guarded the holy, unquenchable fire;

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

but, to the great regret of men of science, we have only small fragments
of the system, brief and meagre accounts of it.

If we look closely into the religious history of the Eastern hemisphere,
we shall find the position to be approximately as follows,--

In the oldest of the inscriptional versions of the "Book of the Dead" on
the walls of pyramids, we find the religion of Egypt advanced far beyond
the first stages of development. Though animals, birds, reptiles, and
insects occupy a prominent position in Egyptian religion, it is not
evident why they occupy that position. There is no inscription or book
to inform us. The earliest stage of Egyptian religion is lost to us.
Egyptian priests, when reproached for the national worship rendered
various animals, birds, reptiles, and insects, creatures that were vile,
useful, clean, or unclean, as the case might be, were unable to give a
cause for the worship. They were unable for the reason that the
mythologic account was unknown to them, or had been lost or was
unconsidered; whatever the reason, neither papyrus nor inscription
explains it.

The chief gods of priestly Egypt answered exactly to the Indian
divinities of the second class of myths in America, those which I have
called action myths. Among these the sun and the earth were very
prominent. Of the earliest gods of Egypt, those which answered to the
"first people," or divinities in American creation myths, we find no
account thus far. If we had that account, it would

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

explain why there are animals, reptiles, and insects in Egyptian
religion.

In Greece those portions of the earliest mythology which were not lost
were obscured. The ancient creation myths were either misunderstood, or
were unknown to the educated at the period from which the first literary
monuments have come down to us. Hesiod arranged and shaped Greek
mythology to suit himself and his audience, so that it is quite
impossible to learn from that author what the primitive myths of Greece
were. If brought before him, he would doubtless have looked on them much
as a certain French Algonkin and Iroquois scholar of Canada looked on
the myths of America. The man had an extensive knowledge of Algonkin and
Iroquois words, but an utter contempt for Indian thought, and no real
knowledge of it whatever. When I mentioned Indian mythology, he
exclaimed: "Mais, Monsieur, c'est quelque chose d'absurde."

No doubt the earliest creation myths were well known throughout rural
Greece among the illiterate, but there was no philosopher of that day
who knew their value. There was no man to consider them.

Roman mythology, as well as Greek, suffered from literary treatment, and
it is only by collecting detached fragments and facts of primitive
thought throughout the whole field of classic literature that we are
able to get at something beyond the official religion of polished
society in Greece and Rome.

From the wreck of ancient Keltic and Teutonic thought much has been
saved on the two islands

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

of Ireland and Iceland. With this, together with the American system and
the mythologic inheritance of the Slav world in Eastern Europe, we shall
be able perhaps to obtain materials with which to explain the--earliest
epoch of Aryan thought, the epoch which corresponds in development with
the world of American creation myths. In that case we shall gain a
connected view of Aryan speculation and its methods from those early
beginnings when there was no passion or quality apart from a person,
when symbols, metaphors, and personifications were in the distant
future. The whole problem is to connect the thought of this continent
with that of the rest of mankind, but especially and above all with the
Aryan and Semitic divisions of it.

It is to be regretted that Semitic beliefs of the primitive period have
not come down to us more, numerously; for example, those of the
Phœnicians, the earliest Hebrews, and other kindred nations. Fortunately
the Arabs, the most poetic of the race, the knightly members of it, have
given us in their history one fact of great value. Just before the
establishment of the new religion by Mohammed there were n Mecca more
than three hundred Arabic divinities, animal, vegetable, and mineral. We
can hardly doubt that the pre-Mohammedan Arabic system of religion was
the one which on a time belonged to the whole Semitic race, different
among some divisions of it in details, of course, but substantially the
same everywhere. This statement of the Arabic condition contains a fact
of immense

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

significance. It points to a system exactly like the American. The
pre-Mohammedan Arabic was the most splendid and important survival of
primitive religion in any historic race on the Eastern Hemisphere.

It is proper here to explain the position of spirits in the Indian
systems. All the first people are conceived as having bodies as well as
spirits. When we speak of a spirit appearing to a sorcerer or doctor, it
is understood that that spirit has left its body temporarily and will
return to it. There are no spirits without bodies save an exceptional
few who at the time of the metamorphosis of the first people lost the
bodies which had belonged to them in their primal condition and received
no new bodies at their fall. This loss of bodies was inflicted as a
punishment. These desolate disembodied spirits wander about now in
mountains and lonely weird places. Uncanny in character, they are seen
rarely, and then only by sorcerers.

A good deal has been given to the world of late on mythology by able
writers who with good materials would attain good results; but as the
materials at their disposal are faulty, much of their work with all its
cleverness is mainly a persistent pouring of the empty into the void.

We have seen attempts made to show that real gods have been developed by
savage men from their own dead savage chiefs. Such a thing has never
been done since the human race began, and it could never have been
imagined by any man who knew

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

the ideas of primitive races from actual experience or from competent
testimony. The most striking thing in all savage belief is the low
estimate put on man when unaided by divine, uncreated power. In Indian
belief every object in the universe is divine except man. Divinities
have an immense range of power, there is an incalculable difference
between the greatest and the smallest of them,--some have inconceivable
strength and knowledge, while others are measurably weak and of limited
intelligence,--but all belong to one category, all are divine, all are
extra-human.

Vegetable gods, so called, have been scoffed at by writers on mythology.
The scoff is baseless, for the first people were turned, or turned
themselves, into trees and various plants as frequently as into beasts
and other creatures. Maize or Indian corn is a transformed god who gave
himself to be eaten to save man from hunger and death. When Spanish
priests saw little cakes of meal eaten ceremonially by Indians, and when
the latter informed them that they were eating their god, the good
priests thought this a diabolical mockery of the Holy Sacrament, and a
blasphemous trick of Satan to ruin poor ignorant Indians.

I have a myth in which the main character is a violent and cruel old
personage who is merciless and faith-breaking, who does no end of damage
till he is cornered at last by a good hero and turned into the wild
parsnip. Before transformation this old parsnip could travel swiftly,
but now he must

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

stay in one place, and of course kills people only when they eat him.

The treasure saved to science by the primitive race of America is unique
in value and high significance. The first result from it is to carry us
back through untold centuries to that epoch when man made the earliest
collective and consistent explanation of this universe and its origin.

Occupying this vantage-ground, we can now throw a flood of light on all
those mythologies and ethnic religions or systems of thought from which
are lost in part, great or small, the materials needed to prove the
foundation and beginnings of each of them. In this condition are all
ancient recorded religions, whether of Greece, Rome, Egypt, Chaldea,
Persia, or India.

Through amazing ability of primitive man on this continent to retain, or
perhaps through his inability to change or go forward, he has preserved
a system of thought already old at the time of the first cuneiform
letters and of the earliest statements on stone or papyrus. And the
discovery of this system of ours coincides almost with the moment when
America after a century and a quarter of free political activity, and of
intellectual labor unexampled in fruitfulness, takes her due place as a
World Power, and enters into intimate and searching relations, not with
Europe alone, or one section of mankind, but with the whole human race
wherever fixed or resident.

JEREMIAH CURTIN.

WASHINGTON, D. C, U. S. A,  
        October 11, 1898

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Olebis](cma03)
