[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
America](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cma32)  [Next](cma34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DYIWZ6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Creation Myths of Primitive America*, by Jeremiah Curtin, \[1898\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### NORWANCHAKUS AND KERIHA

THIS tale contains actions and a number of personages difficult to
identify, because their names are merely epithets. Eltuluma means "he
swims in," but who it is that swims in we know not. Keriha seems
connected with ducks, from the fact that he wore a duck-skin all his
life on earth, and, when he threw off this skin, all ducks were produced
from it.

Norwanchakus means the southern end of that staff or stick to which was
attached the net with which these two brothers dragged Pui Mem and
Bohema Mem, and named each place from the thing which came into the net
in front of it.

Nodal Monoko (the little man who ate so many salmon and sturgeons, and
carried so many away in his bag) means "sweet

<span id="page_509">p. 509</span>

in the south." He has another name, Nodal Wehlinmuk, which means "salt
in the south." At first he is hostile to grizzly bears, but later has
intimate relations with them and marries one. His acts point strongly
toward electricity or lightning. His bag, in which the whole world could
be put away, may well have been a cloud bag.

Norwinte means "seen in the south;" but, again, we have no knowledge of
the person seen. Pom Norwanen Pitchen, the full name of Norwan, is also
an epithet meaning "daughter of the land on the southern border," and
would convey no information if it stood alone; but as Norwan, in
addition to many other details, is also the dancing porcupine and the
food-producing woman, we know who she is.

The existence of Puriwa and Sanihas (darkness and daylight) before the
sun was in the world, is most interesting. This is one of many proofs
that every phenomenon was considered to be independent. Daylight is a
personage quite apart from the sun, who is merely that old Sas who
fought with Tulchuherris, and who travels through the sky every day from
east to west in utter loneliness. He carries that glowing torch which we
see as he moves on his way through the sky; but the light of day is a
separate personage. Similar considerations apply to Puriwa, darkness or
night, who is also a distinct and independent entity.

The struggle between Keriha and Hubit has much charm for Wintus; they
laugh heartily at the recital of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kele and Sedit](cma34)
