[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dlw01)  [Next](dlw03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406804029/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Divine Love and Wisdom*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1763\], tr. by John
C. Ager \[1890\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Divine Love and Wisdom

<span class="margnote"><span id="51.">51.</span></span>

But do not, I entreat you, confuse your ideas with time and with space,
for so far as time and space enter into your ideas when you read what
follows, you will not understand it; for the Divine is not in time and
space. This will be seen clearly in the progress of this work, and in
particular from what is said of eternity, infinity, and omnipresence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="52.">52.</span></span>

ALL THINGS IN THE UNIVERSE WERE CREATED FROM THE DIVINE LOVE AND THE
DIVINE WISDOM OF GOD-MAN. So full of Divine Love and Divine Wisdom is
the universe in greatest and least, and in first and last things, that
it may be said to be Divine Love and Divine Wisdom in an image. That
this is so is clearly evident from the correspondence of all things of
the universe with all things of man. There is such correspondence of
each and every thing that takes form in the created universe with each
and every thing of man, that man may be said to be a sort of universe.
There is a correspondence of his affections, and thence of his thoughts,
with all things of the animal kingdom; of his will, and thence of his
understanding, with all things of the vegetable kingdom; and of his
outmost life with all things of the mineral kingdom. That there is such
a correspondence is not apparent to any one in the natural world, but it
is apparent to every one who gives heed to it in the spiritual world. In
that world there are all things that take form in the natural world in
its three kingdoms, and they are correspondences of affections and
thoughts, that is, of affections from the will and of thoughts from the
understanding, also of the outmost things of the life, of those who are
in that world, around whom all these things are Visible, presenting an
appearance like that of the created universe, with the difference that
it is in lesser form. From this it is very evident to angels, that the
created universe is an image representative of God-Man, and that it is
His Love and Wisdom which are presented, in an image, in the universe.
Not that the created universe is God-Man, but that it is from Him; for
nothing whatever in the created universe is substance and form in
itself, or life in itself, or love and wisdom in itself, yea, neither is
man a man in himself, but all is from God, who is Man, Wisdom and Love,
also Form and Substance, in itself. That which has Being-in-itself is
uncreate and infinite; but whatever is from Very Being, since it
contains in it nothing of Being-in-itself, is created and finite, and
this exhibits an image of Him from whom it has being and has form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="53.">53.</span></span>

Of things created and finite Esse \[Being\] and Existere \[Taking Form\]
can be predicated, likewise substance and form, also life, and even love
and wisdom; but these are all created and finite. This can be said of
things created and finite, not because they possess anything Divine, but
because they are in the Divine, and the Divine is in them. For
everything that has been created is, in itself, inanimate and dead, but
all things are animated and made alive by this, that the Divine is in
them, and that they are in the Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="54.">54.</span></span>

The Divine is not in one subject differently from what it is in another,
but one created subject differs from another; for no two things can be
precisely alike, consequently each thing is a different containant. On
this account, the Divine as imaged forth presents a variety of
appearances. Its presence in opposites will be discussed hereafter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="55.">55.</span></span>

ALL THINGS IN THE CREATED UNIVERSE ARE RECIPIENTS OF THE DIVINE LOVE AND
THE DIVINE WISDOM OF GOD-MAN. It is well known that each and all things
of the universe were created by God; hence the universe, with each and
every thing pertaining to it, is called in the Word the work of the
hands of Jehovah. There are those who maintain that the world, with
everything it includes, was created out of nothing, and of that nothing
an idea of absolute nothingness is entertained. From absolute
nothingness, however, nothing is or can be made. This is an established
truth. The universe, therefore, which is God's image, and consequently
full of God, could be created only in God from God; for God is Esse
itself, and from Esse must be whatever is. To create what is, from
nothing which is not, is an utter contradiction. But still, that which
is created in God from God is not continuous from Him; for God is Esse
in itself, and in created things there is not any Esse in itself. If
there were in created things any Esse in itself, this would be
continuous from God, and that which is continuous from God is God. The
angelic idea of this is, that what is created in God from God, is like
that in man which has been derived from his life, but from which the
life has been withdrawn, which is of such a nature as to be in accord
with his life, and yet it is not his life. The angels confirm this by
many things which have existence in their heaven, where they say they
are in God, and God is in them, and still that they have, in their esse,
nothing of God which is God. Many things whereby they prove this will be
presented hereafter; let this serve for present information.

<span class="margnote"><span id="56.">56.</span></span>

Every created thing, by virtue of this origin, is such in its nature as
to be a recipient of God, not by continuity, but by contiguity. By the
latter and not the former comes its capacity for conjunction. For having
been created in God from God, it is adapted to conjunction; and because
it has been so created, it is an analogue, and through such conjunction
it is like an image of God in a mirror.

<span class="margnote"><span id="57.">57.</span></span>

From this it is that angels are angels, not from themselves, but by
virtue of this conjunction with God-Man; and this conjunction is
according to the reception of Divine Good and Divine Truth, which are
God, and which seem to proceed from Him, though really they are in Him.
This reception is according to their application to themselves of the
laws of order, which are Divine truths, in the exercise of that freedom
of thinking and willing according to reason, which they possess from the
Lord as if it were their own. By this they have a reception, as if from
themselves, of Divine Good and of Divine Truth, and by this there is a
reciprocation of love; for, as was said above, love is impossible unless
it is reciprocal. The same is true of men on the earth. From what has
been said it can now first be seen that all things of the created
universe are recipients of the Divine Love and the Divine Wisdom of
God-Man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="58.">58.</span></span>

It cannot yet be intelligibly explained how all other things of the
universe which are unlike angels and men, that is, the things below man
in the animal kingdom, and the things below these in the vegetable
kingdom, and the things still below these in the mineral kingdom, are
also recipients of the Divine Love and of the Divine Wisdom of God-Man;
for many things need to be said first about degrees of life, and degrees
of the recipients of life. Conjunction with these things is according to
their uses; for no good use has any other origin than through a like
conjunction with God, but yet different according to degrees. This
conjunction in its descent becomes successively such that nothing of
freedom is left therein, because nothing of reason, and therefore
nothing of the appearance of life; but still they are recipients.
Because they are recipients, they are also re-agents; and forasmuch as
they are re-agents, they are containants. Conjunction with uses which
are not good will be discussed when the origin of evil has been made
known.

<span class="margnote"><span id="59.">59.</span></span>

From the above it can be seen that the Divine is in each and every thing
of the created universe, and consequently that the created universe is
the work of the hands of Jehovah, as is said in the Word; that is, the
work of Divine Love and Divine Wisdom, for these are meant by the hands
of Jehovah. But though the Divine is in each and all things of the
created universe there is in their esse nothing of the Divine in itself;
for the created universe is not God, but is from God; and since it is
from God, there is in it an image of Him like the image of a man in a
mirror, wherein indeed the man appears, but still there is nothing of
the man in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="60.">60.</span></span>

I heard several about me in the spiritual world talking together, who
said that they were quite willing to acknowledge that the Divine is in
each and every thing of the universe, because they behold therein the
wonderful works of God, and these are the more wonderful the more
interiorly they are examined. And yet, when they were told that the
Divine is actually in each and every thing of the universe, they were
displeased; which is a proof that although they assert this they do not
believe it. They were therefore asked whether this cannot be seen simply
from the marvelous power which is in every seed, of producing its own
vegetable form in like order, even to new seeds; also because in every
seed an idea of the infinite and eternal is presented; since there is in
seeds an endeavor to multiply themselves and to fructify infinitely and
eternally? Is not this evident also in every living creature, even the
smallest? In that there are in it organs of sense, also brains, a heart,
lungs, and other parts; with arteries, veins, fibers, muscles, and the
activities proceeding therefrom; besides the surpassing marvels of
animal nature, about which whole volumes have been written. All these
wonderful things are from God; but the forms with which they are clothed
are from earthy matters, out of which come plants, and in their order,
men. Therefore it is said of man, That he was created out of the ground,
and that he is dust of the earth, and that the breath of lives was
breathed into him Genesis 2:7. From which it is plain that the Divine is
not man's own, but is adjoined to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="61.">61.</span></span>

ALL CREATED THINGS HAVE RELATION IN A KIND OF IMAGE TO MAN. This can be
seen from each and all things of the animal kingdom, from each and all
things of the vegetable kingdom, and from each and all things of the
mineral kingdom. A relation to man in each and all things of the animal
kingdom is evident from the following. Animals of every kind have limbs
by which they move, organs by which they feel, and viscera by which
these are exercised; these they have in common with man. They have also
appetites and affections similar to man's natural appetites and
affections; and they have inborn knowledges corresponding to their
affections, in some of which there appears a resemblance to what is
spiritual, which is more or less evident in beasts of the earth, and
birds of the air, and in bees, silk-worms, ants, etc. From this it is
that merely natural men consider the living creatures of this kingdom to
be like themselves, except in the matter of speech. A relation to man
arising out of each and all things of the vegetable kingdom is evident
from this: they spring forth from seed, and thereafter proceed step by
step through their periods of growth; they have something akin to
marriage, followed by prolification; their vegetative soul is use, and
they are forms thereof; besides many other particulars which have
relation to man. These also have been described by various authors. A
relation to man deducible from each and every thing of the mineral
kingdom is seen only in an endeavor to produce forms which exhibit such
a relation (which forms, as said above, are each and all things of the
vegetable kingdom), and in an endeavor to perform uses thereby. For when
first a seed falls into the bosom of the earth, she cherishes it, and
out of herself provides it with nourishment from every source, that it
may shoot up and present itself in a form representative of man. That
such an endeavor exists also in its solid parts is evident from corals
at the bottom of the seas and from flowers in mines, where they
originate from minerals, also from metals. This endeavor towards
vegetating, and performing uses thereby, is the outmost derivation from
the Divine in created things.

<span class="margnote"><span id="62.">62.</span></span>

As there is an endeavor of the minerals of the earth towards vegetation,
so there is an endeavor of the plants towards vivification: this
accounts for insects of various kinds corresponding to the odors
emanating from plants. This does not arise from the heat of this world's
sun, but from life operating through that heat according to the state of
its recipients (as will be seen in what follows).

<span class="margnote"><span id="63.">63.</span></span>

That there is a relation of all things of the created universe to man
may be known from the foregoing statements, yet it can be seen only
obscurely; whereas in the spiritual world this is seen clearly. In that
world, also, there are all things of the three kingdoms, and in the
midst of them the angel; he sees them about him, and also knows that
they are representations of himself; yea, when the inmost of his
understanding is opened he recognizes himself in them, and sees his
image in them, hardly otherwise than as in a mirror.

<span class="margnote"><span id="64.">64.</span></span>

From these and from many other concurring facts which there is not time
to adduce now, it may be known with certainty that God is a Man; and
that the created universe is an image of Him; for there is a general
relation of all things to Him, as well as a particular relation of all
things to man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="65.">65.</span></span>

THE USES OF ALL CREATED THINGS ASCEND BY DEGREES FROM LAST THINGS TO
MAN, AND THROUGH MAN TO GOD THE CREATOR, FROM WHOM THEY ARE. Last
things, as was said above, are each and all things of the mineral
kingdom, which are materials of various kinds, of a stony, saline, oily,
mineral, or metallic nature, covered over with soil formed of vegetable
and animal matters reduced to the finest dust. In these lie concealed
both the end and the beginning of all uses which are from life. The end
of all uses is the endeavor to produce uses, and the beginning is the
acting force from that endeavor. These pertain to the mineral kingdom.
Middle things are each and all things of the vegetable kingdom, such as
grasses and herbs of every kind, plants and shrubs of every kind, and
trees of every kind. The uses of these are for the service of each and
all things of the animal kingdom, both imperfect and perfect. These they
nourish, delight, and vivify; nourishing the bellies of animals with
their vegetable substances, delighting the animal senses with taste,
fragrance, and beauty, and vivifying their affections. The endeavor
towards this is in these also from life. First things are each and all
things of the animal kingdom. Those are lowest therein which are called
worms and insects, the middle are birds and beasts, and the highest,
men; for in each kingdom there are lowest, middle and highest things,
the lowest for the use of the middle, and the middle for the use of the
highest. Thus the uses of all created things ascend in order from
outmost things to man, who is first in order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="66.">66.</span></span>

In the natural world there are three degrees of ascent, and in the
spiritual world there are three degrees of ascent. All animals are
recipients of life. The more perfect are recipients of the life and the
three degrees of the natural world, the less perfect of the life of two
degrees of that world, and the imperfect of one of its degrees. But man
alone is a recipient of the life both of the three degrees of the
natural world and of the three degrees of the spiritual world. From this
it is that man can be elevated above nature, while the animal cannot.
Man can think analytically and rationally of the civil and moral things
that are within nature, also of the spiritual and celestial things that
are above nature, yea, he can be so elevated into wisdom as even to see
God. But the six degrees by which the uses of all created things ascend
in their order even to God the Creator, will be treated of in their
proper place. From this summary, however, it can be seen that there is
an ascent of all created things to the first, who alone is Life, and
that the uses of all things are the very recipients of life; and from
this are the forms of uses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="67.">67.</span></span>

It shall also be stated briefly how man ascends, that is, is elevated,
from the lowest degree to the first. He is born into the lowest degree
of the natural world; then, by means of knowledges, he is elevated into
the second degree; and as he perfects his understanding by knowledges he
is elevated into the third degree, and then becomes rational. The three
degrees of ascent in the spiritual world are in man above the three
natural degrees, and do not appear until he has put off the earthly
body. When this takes place the first spiritual degree is open to him,
afterwards the second, and finally the third; but this only with those
who become angels of the third heaven; these are they that see God.
Those become angels of the second heaven and of the last heaven in whom
the second degree and the last degree can be opened. Each spiritual
degree in man is opened according to his reception of Divine Love and
Divine Wisdom from the Lord. Those who receive something thereof come
into the first or lowest spiritual degree those who receive more into
the second or middle spiritual degree, those who receive much into the
third or highest degree. But those who receive nothing thereof remain in
the natural degrees, and derive from the spiritual degrees nothing more
than an ability to think and thence to speak, and to will and thence to
act, but not with intelligence.

<span class="margnote"><span id="68.">68.</span></span>

Of the elevation of the interiors of man, which belong to his mind, this
also should be known. In everything created by God there is reaction. In
Life alone there is action; reaction is caused by the action of Life.
Because reaction takes place when any created thing is acted upon, it
appears as if it belonged to what is created. Thus in man it appears as
if the reaction were his, because he has no other feeling than that life
is his, when yet man is only a recipient of life. From this cause it is
that man, by reason of his hereditary evil, reacts against God. But so
far as man believes that all his life is from God, and that all good of
life is from the action of God, and all evil of life from the reaction
of man, so far his reaction comes to be from \[God's\] action, and man
acts with God as if from himself. The equilibrium of all things is from
action and simultaneous reaction, and in equilibrium everything must be.
These things have been said lest man should believe that he himself
ascends toward God from himself, and not from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="69.">69.</span></span>

THE DIVINE, APART FROM SPACE, FILLS ALL SPACES OF THE UNIVERSE. There
are two things proper to nature - space and time. From these man in the
natural world forms the ideas of his thought, and thereby his
understanding. If he remains in these ideas, and does not raise his mind
above them, he is in no wise able to perceive things spiritual and
Divine, for these he involves in ideas drawn from space and time; and so
far as that is done the light \[lumen\] of his understanding becomes
merely natural. To think from this lumen in reasoning about spiritual
and Divine things, is like thinking from the thick darkness of night
about those things that appear only in the light of day. From this comes
naturalism. But he who knows how to raise his mind above ideas of
thought drawn from space and time, passes from thick darkness into
light, and has discernment in things spiritual and Divine, and finally
sees the things which are in and from what is spiritual and Divine; and
then from that light he dispels the thick darkness of the natural lumen,
and banishes its fallacies from the middle to the sides. Every man who
has understanding is able to transcend in thought these properties of
nature, and actually does so; and he then affirms and sees that the
Divine, because omnipresent, is not in space. He is also able to affirm
and to see the things that have been adduced above. But if he denies the
Divine Omnipresence, and ascribes all things to nature, then he has no
wish to be elevated, though he can be.

<span class="margnote"><span id="70.">70.</span></span>

All who die and become angels put off the two above- mentioned
properties of nature, namely, space and time; for they then enter into
spiritual light, in which objects of thought are truths, and objects of
sight are like those in the natural world, but are correspondent to
their thoughts. The objects of their thought which, as just said, are
truths, derive nothing at all from space and time; and though the
objects of their sight appear as if in space and in time, still the
angels do not think from space and time. The reason is, that spaces and
times there are not fixed, as in the natural world, but are changeable
according to the states of their life. In the ideas of their thought,
therefore, instead of space and time there are states of life, instead
of spaces such things as have reference to states of love, and instead
of times such things as have reference to states of wisdom. From this it
is that spiritual thought, and spiritual speech therefrom, differ so
much from natural thought and natural speech therefrom, as to have
nothing in common except as regards the interiors of things, which are
all spiritual. Of this difference more will be said elsewhere. Now,
because the thoughts of angels derive nothing from space and time, but
everything from states of life, when it is said that the Divine fills
spaces angels evidently cannot comprehend it, for they do not know what
spaces are; but when, apart from any idea of space, it is said that the
Divine fills all things, they clearly comprehend it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="71.">71.</span></span>

To make it clear that the merely natural man thinks of spiritual and
Divine things from space, and the spiritual man apart from space, let
the following serve for illustration. The merely natural man thinks by
means of ideas which he has acquired from objects of sight, in all of
which there is figure partaking of length, breadth, and height, and of
shape determined by these, either angular or circular. These
\[conceptions\] are manifestly present in the ideas of his thought
concerning things visible on earth; they are also in the ideas of his
thought concerning those not visible, such as civil and moral affairs.
This he is unconscious of; but they are nevertheless there, as
continuations. With a spiritual man it is different, especially with an
angel of heaven, whose thought has nothing in common with figure and
form that derives anything from spiritual length, breadth, and height,
but only with figure and form derived from the state of a thing
resulting from the state of its life. Consequently, instead of length of
space he thinks of the good of a thing from good of life; instead of
breadth of space, of the truth of a thing from truth of life; and
instead of height, of the degrees of these. Thus he thinks from the
correspondence there is between things spiritual and things natural.
From this correspondence it is that in the Word "length" signifies the
good of a thing, "breadth" the truth of a thing, and "height" the
degrees of these. From this it is evident that an angel of heaven, when
he thinks of the Divine Omnipresence, can by no means think otherwise
than that the Divine, apart from space, fills all things. And that which
an angel thinks is truth, because the light which enlightens his
understanding is Divine Wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="72.">72.</span></span>

This is the basis of thought concerning God; for without it, what is to
be said of the creation of the universe by God-Man, of His Providence,
Omnipotence, Omnipresence and Omniscience, even if understood, cannot be
kept in mind; since the merely natural man, even while he has these
things in his understanding, sinks back into his life's love, which is
that of his will; and that love dissipates these truths, and immerses
his thought in space, where his lumen, which he calls rational, abides,
not knowing that so far as he denies these things, he is irrational.
That this is so, may be confirmed by the idea entertained of this truth,
that GOD is a MAN. Read with attention, I pray you, what has been said
above (n. 11-13) and what follows after, and your understanding will
accept it. But when you let your thought down into the natural lumen
which derives from space, will not these things be seen as paradoxes?
and if you let it down far, will you not reject them? This is why it is
said that the Divine fills all spaces of the universe, and why it is not
said that God-Man fills them. For if this were said, the merely natural
lumen would not assent. But to the proposition that the Divine fills all
space, it does assent, because this agrees with the mode of speech of
the theologians, that God is omnipresent, and hears and knows all
things. (On this subject, more may be seen above, n. 7-10.).

<span class="margnote"><span id="73.">73.</span></span>

THE DIVINE IS IN ALL TIME, APART FROM TIME. As the Divine, apart from
space, is in all space, so also, apart from time, is it in all time. For
nothing which is proper to nature can be predicated of the Divine, and
space and time are proper to nature. Space in nature is measurable, and
so is time. This is measured by days, weeks, months, years, and
centuries; days are measured by hours; weeks and months by days; years
by the four seasons; and centuries by years. Nature derives this
measurement from the apparent revolution and annual motion of the sun of
the world. But in the spiritual world it is different. The progressions
of life in that world appear in like manner to be in time, for those
there live with one another as men in the world live with one another;
and this is not possible without the appearance of time. But time there
is not divided into periods as in the world, for their sun is constantly
in the east and is never moved away; for it is the Lord's Divine Love
that appears to them as a sun. Wherefore they have no days, weeks,
months, years, centuries, but in place of these there are states of
life, by which a distinction is made which cannot be called, however, a
distinction into periods, but into states. Consequently, the angels do
not know what time is, and when it is mentioned they perceive in place
of it state; and when state determines time, time is only an appearance.
For joyfulness of state makes time seem short, and joylessness of state
makes time seem long; from which it is evident that time in the
spiritual world is nothing but quality of state. It is from this that in
the Word, "hours," "days," "weeks," "months," and "years," signify
states and progressions of state in series and in the aggregate; and
when times are predicated of the church, by its "morning" is meant its
first state, by "mid-day" its fullness by "evening" its decline, and by
"night" its end. The four seasons of the year "spring," "summer,"
"autumn," and "winter," have a like meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="74.">74.</span></span>

From the above it can be seen that time makes one with thought from
affection; for from that is the quality of man's state. And with
progressions of time, in the spiritual world, distances in progress
through space coincide; as may be shown from many things. For instance,
in the spiritual world ways are actually shortened or are lengthened in
accordance with the longings that are of thought from affection. From
this, also, comes the expression, "spaces of time." Moreover, in cases
where thought does not join itself to its proper affection in man, as in
sleep, the lapse of time is not noticed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="75.">75.</span></span>

Now as times which are proper to nature in its world are in the
spiritual world pure states, which appear progressive because angels and
spirits are finite, it may be seen that in God they are not progressive
because He is Infinite, and infinite things in Him are one (as has been
shown above, n. 17-22). From this it follows that the Divine in all time
is apart from time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="76.">76.</span></span>

He who has no knowledge of God apart from time and is unable from any
perception to think of Him, is thus utterly unable to conceive of
eternity in any other way than as an eternity of time; in which case, in
thinking of God from eternity he must needs become bewildered; for he
thinks with regard to a beginning, and beginning has exclusive reference
to time. His bewilderment arises from the idea that God had existence
from Himself, from which he rushes headlong into an origin of nature
from herself; and from this idea he can be extricated only by a
spiritual or angelic idea of eternity, which is an idea apart from time;
and when time is separated, the Eternal and the Divine are the same, and
the Divine is the Divine in itself, not from itself. The angels declare
that while they can conceive of God from eternity, they can in no way
conceive of nature from eternity, still less of nature from herself and
not at all of nature as nature in herself. For that which is in itself
is the very Esse, from which all things are; Esse in itself is very
life, which is the Divine Love of Divine Wisdom and the Divine Wisdom of
Divine Love. For the angels this is the Eternal, an Eternal as removed
from time as the uncreated is from the created, or the infinite from the
finite, between which, in fact, there is no ratio.

<span class="margnote"><span id="77.">77.</span></span>

THE DIVINE IN THINGS GREATEST AND LEAST IS THE SAME. This follows from
the two preceding articles, that the Divine apart from space is in all
space, and apart from time is in all time. Moreover, there are spaces
greater and greatest, and lesser and least; and since spaces and times,
as said above, make one, it is the same with times. In these the Divine
is the same, because the Divine is not varying and changeable, as
everything is which belongs to nature, but is unvarying and
unchangeable, consequently the same everywhere and always.

<span class="margnote"><span id="78.">78.</span></span>

It seems as if the Divine were not the same in one person as in another;
as if, for instance, it were different in the wise and in the simple, or
in an old man and in a child. But this is a fallacy arising from
appearance; the man is different, but the Divine in him is not
different. Man is a recipient, and the recipient or receptacle is what
varies. A wise man is a recipient of Divine Love and Divine Wisdom more
adequately, and therefore more fully, than a simple man; and an old man
who is also wise, more than a little child or boy; yet the Divine is the
same in the one as in the other. It is in like manner a fallacy arising
from appearance, that the Divine is different with angels of heaven from
what it is with men on the earth, because the angels of heaven are in
wisdom ineffable, while men are not; but the seeming difference is not
in the Lord but in the subjects, according to the quality of their
reception of the Divine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="79.">79.</span></span>

That the Divine is the same in things greatest and least, may be shown
by means of heaven and by means of an angel there. The Divine in the
whole heaven and the Divine in an angel is the same; therefore even the
whole heaven may appear as one angel. So is it with the church, and with
a man of the church. The greatest form receptive of the Divine is the
whole heaven together with the whole church; the least is an angel of
heaven and a man of the church. Sometimes an entire society of heaven
has appeared to me as one angel-man; and it was told that it may appear
like a man as large as a giant, or like a man as small as an infant; and
this, because the Divine in things greatest and least is the same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="80.">80.</span></span>

The Divine is also the same in the greatest and in the least of all
created things that are not alive; for it is in all the good of their
use. These, moreover, are not alive for the reason that they are not
forms of life but forms of uses; and the form varies according to the
excellence of the use. But how the Divine is in these things will be
stated in what follows, where creation is treated of.

<span class="margnote"><span id="81.">81.</span></span>

Put away space, and deny the possibility of a vacuum, and then think of
Divine Love and of Divine Wisdom as being Essence itself, space having
been put away and a vacuum denied. Then think according to space; and
you will perceive that the Divine, in the greatest and in the least
things of space, is the same; for in essence abstracted from space there
is neither great nor small, but only the same.

<span class="margnote"><span id="82.">82.</span></span>

Something shall now be said about vacuum. I once heard angels talking
with Newton about vacuum, and saying that they could not tolerate the
idea of a vacuum as being nothing, for the reason that in their world
which is spiritual, and which is within or above the spaces and times of
the natural world, they equally feel, think, are affected, love, will,
breathe, yea, speak and act, which would be utterly impossible in a
vacuum which is nothing, since nothing is nothing, and of nothing not
anything can be affirmed. Newton said that he now knew that the Divine,
which is Being itself, fills all things, and that to him the idea of
nothing as applied to vacuum is horrible, because that idea is
destructive of all things; and he exhorts those who talk with him about
vacuum to guard against the idea of nothing, comparing it to a swoon,
because in nothing no real activity of mind is possible.

<span class="margnote"><span id="83.">83.</span></span>

PART SECOND. DIVINE LOVE AND DIVINE WISDOM APPEAR IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD
AS A SUN. There are two worlds, the spiritual and the natural. The
spiritual world does not draw anything from the natural, nor the natural
world from the spiritual. The two are totally distinct, and communicate
only by correspondences, the nature of which has been abundantly shown
elsewhere. To illustrate this by an example: heat in the natural world
corresponds to the good of charity in the spiritual world, and light in
the natural world corresponds to the truth of faith in the spiritual
world; and who does not see that heat and the good of charity, and that
light and the truth of faith, are wholly distinct? At first sight they
appear as distinct as two entirely different things. They so appear when
one inquires what the good of charity has in common with heat, or the
truth of faith with light; when in fact, spiritual heat is that good,
and spiritual light is that truth. Although these things are in
themselves so distinct, they make one by correspondence. They make one
in this way: when man reads, in the Word, of heat and light, the spirits
and angels who are with the man perceive charity instead of heat, and
faith instead of light. This example is adduced, in order that it may be
known that the two worlds, the spiritual and the natural, are so
distinct as to have nothing in common with each other; yet are so
created as to have communication, yea, conjunction by means of
correspondences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="84.">84.</span></span>

Since these two worlds are so distinct, it can be seen very clearly that
the spiritual world is under another sun than the natural world. For in
the spiritual world, must as in the natural, there is heat and light;
but the heat there, as well as the light, is spiritual; and spiritual
heat is the good of charity, and spiritual light is the truth of faith.
Now since heat and light can originate only in a sun, it is evident that
the spiritual world has a different sun from the natural world; and
further, that the sun of the spiritual world in its essence is such that
spiritual heat and light can come forth from it; whereas the sun of the
natural world in its essence is such that natural heat can come forth
from it. Everything spiritual has relation to good and truth, and can
spring from no other source than Divine Love and Divine Wisdom; for all
good is of love and all truth is of wisdom; that they have no other
origin any discerning man can see.

<span class="margnote"><span id="85.">85.</span></span>

That there is any other sun than that of the natural world has hitherto
been unknown. The reason is, that the spiritual of man has so far passed
over into his natural, that he does not know what the spiritual is, and
thus does not know that there is a spiritual world, the abode of spirits
and angels, other than and different from the natural world. Since the
spiritual world has lain so deeply hidden from the knowledge of those
who are in the natural world, it has pleased the Lord to open the sight
of my spirit, that I might see the things which are in that world, just
as I see those in the natural world, and might afterwards describe that
world; which has been done in the work Heaven and Hell, in one chapter
of which the sun of the spiritual world is treated of. For that sun has
been seen by me; and it appeared of the same size as the sun of the
natural world; also fiery like it, but more glowing. It has also been
made known to me that the whole angelic heaven is under that sun; and
that angels of the third heaven see it constantly, angels of the second
heaven very often, and angels of the first or outmost heaven sometimes.
That all their heat and all their light, as well as all things that are
manifest in that world, are from that sun will be seen in what follows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="86.">86.</span></span>

That sun is not the Lord Himself, but is from the Lord. It is the Divine
Love and the Divine Wisdom proceeding from Him that appear as a sun in
that world. And because Love and Wisdom in the Lord are one (as shown in
Part I.), that sun is said to be Divine Love; for Divine Wisdom is of
Divine Love, consequently is Love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="87.">87.</span></span>

Since love and fire mutually correspond, that sun appears before the
eyes of the angels as fiery; for angels cannot see love with their eyes,
but they see in the place of love what corresponds to it. For angels,
equally with men, have an internal and an external; it is their internal
that thinks and is wise, and that wills and loves; it is their external
that feels, sees, speaks and acts. All their externals are
correspondences of internals; but the correspondences are spiritual, not
natural. Moreover, Divine love is felt as fire by spiritual beings. For
this reason "fire," when mentioned in the Word, signifies love. In the
Israelitish Church, "holy fire" signified love; and this is why, in
prayers to God, it is customary to ask that "heavenly fire," that is
Divine Love, "may kindle the heart."

<span class="margnote"><span id="88.">88.</span></span>

With such a difference between the spiritual and the natural (as shown
above, n. 83), nothing from the sun of the natural world, that is,
nothing of its heat and light, nor anything pertaining to any earthly
object, can pass over into the spiritual world. To the spiritual world
the light of the natural world is thick darkness, and its heat is death.
Nevertheless, the heat of the world can be vivified by the influx of
heavenly heat, and the light of the world can be illumined by the influx
of heavenly light. Influx is effected by correspondences; and it cannot
be effected by continuity.

<span class="margnote"><span id="89.">89.</span></span>

OUT OF THE SUN THAT TAKES FORM \[existit\] FROM THE DIVINE LOVE AND THE
DIVINE WISDOM, HEAT AND LIGHT GO FORTH. In the spiritual world where
angels and spirits are there are heat and light, just as in the natural
world where men are; moreover in like manner as heat, the heat is felt
and the light is seen as light. Still the heat and light of the
spiritual world and of the natural world are (as said above) so entirely
different as to have nothing in common. They differ one from the other
as what is alive differs from what is dead. The heat of the spiritual
world in itself is alive; so is the light; but the heat of the natural
world in itself is dead; so is its light. For the heat and light of the
spiritual world go forth from a sun that is pure love, while the heat
and light of the natural world go forth from a sun that is pure fire;
and love is alive, and the Divine Love is Life itself; while fire is
dead, and solar fire is death itself, and may be so called because it
has nothing whatever of life in it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="90.">90.</span></span>

Since angels are spiritual they can live in no other than spiritual heat
and light, while men can live in no other than natural heat and light;
for what is spiritual accords with what is spiritual, and what is
natural with what is natural. If an angel were to derive the least
particle from natural heat and light he would perish; for it is totally
discordant with his life. As to the interiors of the mind every man is a
spirit. When he dies he withdraws entirely from the world of nature,
leaving behind him all its belongings, and enters a world where there is
nothing of nature. In that world he lives so separated from nature that
there is no communication whatever by continuity, that is, as between
what is purer and grosser, but only like that between what is prior and
posterior; and between such no communication is possible except by
correspondences. From this it can be seen that spiritual heat is not a
purer natural heat, or spiritual light a purer natural light, but that
they are altogether of a different essence; for spiritual heat and light
derive their essence from a sun which is pure Love, and this is Life
itself; while natural heat and light derive their essence from a sun
which is pure fire, in which (as said above) there is absolutely nothing
of life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="91.">91.</span></span>

Such being the difference between the heat and light of the two worlds,
it is very evident why those who are in the one world cannot see those
who are in the other world. For the eyes of man, who sees from natural
light, are of the substance of his world, and the eyes of an angel are
of the substance of his world; thus in both cases they are formed for
the proper reception of their own light. From all this it can be seen
from how much ignorance those think who, because they cannot see angels
and spirits with their eyes, are unwilling to believe them to be men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="92.">92.</span></span>

Hitherto it has not been known that angels and spirits are in a totally
different light and different heat from men. It has not been known even
that another light and another heat are possible. For man in his thought
has not penetrated beyond the interior or purer things of nature. And
for this reason many have placed the abodes of angels and spirits in the
ether, and some in the stars - thus within nature, and not above or
outside of it. But, in truth, angels and spirits are entirely above or
outside of nature, and are in their own world, which is under another
sun. And since in that world spaces are appearances (as was shown
above), angels and spirits cannot be said to be in the ether or in the
stars; in fact, they are present with man, conjoined to the affection
and thought of his spirit; since man is a spirit, and because of that
thinks and wills; consequently the spiritual world is wherever man is,
and in no wise away from him. In a word, every man as regards the
interiors of his mind is in that world, in the midst of spirits and
angels there; and he thinks from its light, and loves from its heat.

<span class="margnote"><span id="93.">93.</span></span>

THE SUN OF THE SPIRITUAL WORLD IS NOT GOD, BUT IS A PROCEEDING FROM THE
DIVINE LOVE AND DIVINE WISDOM OF GOD-MAN; SO ALSO ARE THE HEAT AND LIGHT
FROM THAT SUN. By that sun which is before the eyes of the angels, and
from which they have heat and light, is not meant the Lord Himself, but
the first proceeding from Him, which is the highest \[degree\] of
spiritual heat. The highest \[degree\] of spiritual heat is spiritual
fire, which is Divine Love and Divine Wisdom in their first
correspondence. On this account that sun appears fiery, and to the
angels is fiery, but not to men. Fire which is fire to men is not
spiritual, but natural; and between the two fires there is a difference
like the difference between what is alive and what is dead. Therefore
the spiritual sun by its heat vivifies spiritual beings and renews
spiritual objects. The natural sun does the same for natural beings and
natural objects; yet not from itself, but by means of an influx of
spiritual heat, to which it renders aid as a kind of substitute.

<span class="margnote"><span id="94.">94.</span></span>

This spiritual fire, in which also there is light in its origin, becomes
spiritual heat and light, which decrease in their going forth. This
decrease is effected by degrees, which will be treated of in what
follows. The ancients represented this by circles glowing with fire and
resplendent with light around the head of God, as is common also at the
present day in paintings representing God as a Man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="95.">95.</span></span>

That love begets heat, and wisdom light, is manifest from actual
experience. When man loves he grows warm, and when he thinks from wisdom
he sees things as it were in light. And from this it is evident that the
first proceeding of love is heat, and that the first proceeding of
wisdom is light. That they are also correspondences is obvious; for heat
takes place \[existit\] not in love itself, but from love in the will,
and thence in the body; and light takes place not in wisdom, but in the
thought of the understanding, and thence in the speech. Consequently
love and wisdom are the essence and life of heat and light. Heat and
light are what proceed, and because they are what proceed, they are also
correspondences.

<span class="margnote"><span id="96.">96.</span></span>

That spiritual light is altogether distinct from natural light, any one
may know if he observes the thoughts of his mind. For when the mind
thinks, it sees its objects in light, and they who think spiritually see
truths, and this at midnight just as well as in the daytime. For this
reason light is predicated of the understanding, and the understanding
is said to see; thus one sometimes declares of something which another
says that he sees (that is, understands) that it is so. The
understanding, because it is spiritual, cannot thus see by natural
light, for natural light does not inhere in man, but withdraws with the
sun. From this it is obvious that the understanding enjoys a light
different from that of the eye, and that this light is from a different
origin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="97.">97.</span></span>

Let every one beware of thinking that the sun of the spiritual world is
God Himself. God Himself is a Man. The first proceeding from His Love
and Wisdom is that fiery spiritual \[substance\] which appears before
the angels as a sun. When, therefore, the Lord manifests Himself to the
angels in person, He manifests Himself as a Man; and this sometimes in
the sun, sometimes outside of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="98.">98.</span></span>

It is from this correspondence that in the Lord the Lord is called not
only a "sun" but also "fire" and "light." And by the "sun" is meant
Himself as to Divine Love and Divine Wisdom together; by "fire" Himself
in respect to Divine Love, and by "light" Himself in respect to Divine
Wisdom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="99.">99.</span></span>

SPIRITUAL HEAT AND LIGHT IN PROCEEDING FROM THE LORD AS A SUN, MAKE ONE,
JUST AS HIS DIVINE LOVE AND DIVINE WISDOM MAKE ONE. How Divine Love and
Divine Wisdom in the Lord make one has been explained in Part I.; in
like manner heat and light make one, because they proceed from these,
and the things which proceed make one by virtue of their correspondence,
heat, corresponding to love, and light to wisdom. From this it follows
that as Divine Love is Divine Esse \[Being\] and Divine Wisdom is Divine
Existere \[Taking form\] (as shown above, n. 14-16), so spiritual heat
is thy Divine proceeding from Divine Esse, and spiritual light is the
Divine proceeding from Divine Existere. And as by that union Divine Love
is of Divine Wisdom, and Divine Wisdom is of Divine Love (as shown
above, n. 35-39), so spiritual heat is of spiritual light, and spiritual
light is of spiritual heat And because there is such a union it follows
that heat and light, in proceeding from the Lord as a sun, are one. It
will be seen, however, in what follows, that they are not received as
one by angels and men.

<span class="margnote"><span id="100.">100.</span></span>

The heat and light that proceed from the Lord as a sun are what in an
eminent sense are called the spiritual, and they are called the
spiritual in the singular number, because they are one; when, therefore,
the spiritual is mentioned in the following pages, it is meant both
these together. From that spiritual it is that the whole of that world
is called spiritual. Through that spiritual, all things of that world
derive their origin, and also their name. That heat and that light are
called the spiritual, because God is called Spirit, and God as Spirit is
the spiritual going forth. God, by virtue of His own very Essence, is
called Jehovah; but by means of that going forth He Vivifies and
enlightens angels of heaven and men of the church. Consequently,
vivification and enlightenment are said to be effected by the Spirit of
Jehovah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 101-150](dlw03)
