[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma108)  [Next](ma110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. IV.

OF UNCTIONS, PHILTERS, POTIONS, &C.--THEIR MAGICAL VIRTUES.

UNGUENTS, or unctions, collyries, philters, &c., conveying the virtues
of things natural to our spirits, do multiply, transform, transfigure,
and transmute it accordingly; they also transpose *those* virtues, which
are in *them*, into *it*, so that it not only acts upon its *own body*,
but also upon *that* which is *near it*, and affects that (by visible
rays, charms, and by touching it) with some agreeable quality like to
itself. For, because our spirit is the *pure, subtil, lucid, airy*, and
unctuous vapour of the blood, nothing, therefore, is better adapted for
collyriums than the like *vapour*, which are more suitable to our spirit
in substance; for then, by reason of their likeness, they do more stir
up, attract, and transform the spirit. The same virtue have other
ointments, and confections. Hence, by the touch, often plague, sickness,
faintings, poisoning, and love, is induced, either by the hands or
clothes being anointed; and often by kissing, things been held in the
mouth, love is likewise excited.

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

Now the sight, as it perceives more purely and clearer than the other
senses, seals in *us* the marks of things more acutely, and does, most
of all, and before all others, agree with our fantastic spirit; as is
apparent in dreams, when things seen do more often present themselves to
us than things heard, or any thin coming under the other senses.
Therefore, when collyriums transform the visual spirits, that spirit
easily affects the imagination, which, being affected with divers
species and forms, transmits the same, by the same spirit, unto the
outward sense of sight, by which there is formed in it a perception of
such species and forms, in that manner, as if it were moved by external
objects, that there appear to be seen terrible images, spirits, and the
like. There are some *collyriums* which make us see the of *images of
spirits of the air*, or elsewhere; which I can make of the *gall of a
man*, and the *eyes of a black cat*, and some other things. The same is
made, likewise, of the blood of a lapwing, bat, and a goat; and if a
smooth shining piece of steel be smeared over with the juice of mugwort,
and be made to fume, it causes invocated spirits to appear. There are
some perfumes, or suffumigations and unctions, which make men speak in
their sleep, walk, and do those things that are done by men that are
awake, and often what, when awake, they cannot, or dare not do; others,
again, make men hear horrid or delightful sounds, noises, and the like.

And, in some measure, this is the cause why *mad* and melancholy men
believe they hear and see things equally false and improbable, falling
into most gross and pitiful delusions, fearing where no fear is, and
angry where there is none to contend. Such passions as these we can
induce by *magical vapours, confections, perfumes, collyries, unguents,
potions, poisons, lamps, lights*, &c.; likewise by *mirrors, images,
enchantments, charms, sounds*, and *music*; also by *divers rites,
observations, ceremonies, religion*, &c.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[32:1](ma108.htm#fr_3.md)

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="779">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="77%" data-valign="TOP"><p>It is here to be particularly noticed by us, that, in forming of a charm, or amulet, it will be of no effect except the very soul of the operator is strongly and intensely exerted and impressed, as it were, and the image of the idea sealed on the charm, or amulet for, without this, in vain will be all the observation of times, hours and constellations therefore, this I have thought fit to mention, once for all, that it may be almost always uppermost in the mind of the operator, for, without this one thing being observed and noticed, many who form seals, &amp;c., do fall short of the wished for effect.</p></td>
<td width="23%" data-valign="TOP"><p>ABRACADABRA<br />
BRACADABRA<br />
RACADABRA<br />
ACADABRA<br />
CADABRA<br />
ADABRA<br />
DABRA<br />
ABRA<br />
BRA<br />
RA<br />
A</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Of Magical Suspensions And Alligations...](ma110.md)
