[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma110)  [Next](ma112.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. VI.

OF ANTIPATHIES.

IT is necessary, in this place, to speak of the *antipathies* of
*natural things*, seeing it is requisite, as we go on, to have a
thorough knowledge of that obstinate contrariety of Nature, where any
thing shuns its contrary, and drives it, as it were, out of its
presence. Such antipathy as this has the root rhubarb against choler;
treacle against poison; the *sapphire stone against hot biles*, feverish
heats, and diseases of the eyes; the *amethyst* against drunkenness; the
*jasper* against the bloody-flux and offensive imaginations; the
*emerald*, and *agnus castus* against lust; *achates or agates* against
poison; piony against the falling sickness; *coral* against the
ebullition of black choler, and pains of the stomach; the *topaz*
against spiritual heats, such as are covetousness, lust, and all manner
of love excesses. The same antipathy is there, also, of pismires against
the herb organ, and the wing of a bat, and the heart of a lapwing, from
the presence of which they fly. Also, the organ is contrary to a certain
poisonous fly which cannot resist the sun, and resists salamanders, and
loaths cabbage with such a deadly hatred that they cannot endure each
other.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

\[paragraph continues\] So they say cucumbers hate oil. And the gall of
a crow makes even men fearful, and drives them from the place wherein it
is placed. A *diamond* disagrees with a *loadstone*; that being present,
it suffers no iron to be drawn to it. Sheep avoid frog-parsley as a
deadly thing; and, what is more wonderful, Nature hath depictured the
sign of this antipathy upon the livers of sheep, in which the very
figure of frog-parsley doth naturally appear. Again, goats hate
garden-basil, as if there was nothing more pernicious. And, amongst
animals, mice and weasels disagree; so a lizard is of a contrary nature
to a scorpion, and induces great terror to the scorpion with its very
sight, and they are therefore killed with the oil of them; which oil
will likewise cure the wounds made by scorpions. There is a great enmity
between scorpions and mice; therefore if a mouse be applied to the bite
of a scorpion, he cures it. Nothing is so much an enemy to snakes as
crabs; and if swine be hurt by them, they are cured by crabs; the sun,
also being in Cancer, serpents are tormented. Also, the scorpion and
crocodile kill one another; and if the bird ibis does but touch a
crocodile with one of his feathers, he makes him unmoveable. The bird
called a bustard flies away at the sight of a horse; and a hart at the
sight of a ram, or a viper. An elephant trembles at the hearing of the
grunting of a hog; so doth a lion at the crowing of a cock; and a
panther will not touch them that are anointed with the fat of a hen,
especially if garlick has been put into it. There is also an enmity
between foxes and swans; bulls and jackdaws. And some birds are at a
perpetual variance, as daws and owls; kites and crows; turtle and
ring-tail; egepis and eagles; also, harts and dragons. Amongst water
animals, there is a great antipathy between dolphins and whirlpools; the
mullet and pike; lamprey and conger; pourcontrel and lobster, which
latter, but seeing the former, is nearly struck dead with fear; but the
lobster tears the conger. The civet-cat cannot resist the panther; and
if the skins of both be hung up against each other, the skin or hairs of
the panther will fall off. Apollo says, in his hieroglyphics, if any one
be girt about with the skin of a civet-cat, he may pass safe through his
enemies. The lamb flies from the wolf; and if the tall, skin, or head of
lupus be hung up in the sheeps'-cot, they cannot eat their meat for very
fear.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

\[paragraph continues\] And Pliny mentions the bird called the marlin,
that breaks the eggs of the crow, whose young are annoyed by the fox;
that she also will pinch the whelps of the fox, and the fox likewise,
which, when the crow sees, they help the fox against her as against a
common enemy. The linnet lives in, and cats thistles; yet she hates the
ass, because he cats the thistles and flowers of them. There is so great
an enmity between the little bird called esalon and the ass, that their
blood will not mix; and that, at the simple braying of the ass, both the
esalon's eggs and young perish together. There is, also, a total
antipathy of the olive-tree to the harlot; that, if she plant it, it
will neither thrive nor prosper, but wither. A lion fears lighted
torches, and is tamed by nothing sooner. The wolf fears not sword or
spear, but a stone; by the throwing of which a wound being made, worms
breed in the wolf. A horse fears a camel so much that he cannot endure
the picture of that beast. An elephant, when he rages, is quieted by
seeing a cock. A snake is afraid of a naked man, but pursues one
clothed. A mad bull is tamed by being tied to a fig-tree. Amber attracts
all things to it but garden-basil, and things smeared with oil, between
which there is a natural antipathy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Of The Occult Virtues Of Things...](ma112.md)
