[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma114)  [Next](ma116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. X.

OF THE ART OF FASCINATION, BINDING, SORCERIES, MAGICAL CONFECTIONS,
LIGHTS, CANDLES, LAMPS, &c. &c.; BEING THE CONCLUSION OF THE NATURAL
MAGIC. <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4)

WE have so far spoken concerning the great virtues, and wonderful
efficacy, of natural things; it remains now that we speak of a wonderful
power and faculty of fascination; Or, more properly, a magical and
occult binding of men into love or hatred, sickness or health;--also,
the binding of thieves, that they cannot steal in any place; or to bind
them that they cannot remove, from whence they may be detected;--the
binding of merchants, that they cannot buy nor sell;--the binding of an
army, that they cannot pass over any bounds;--the binding of ships, so
that no wind, though ever so strong, shall be able to carry them out of
that harbour;--the binding of a mill, that it cannot, by any means
whatsoever, be turned to work;--the binding of a cistern, or fountain,
that the water cannot be drawn up out of them;--the binding of the
ground, so that nothing will bring forth fruit, or flourish in it; also,
that nothing can be built upon it;--the binding of fire, that, though it
be ever so strong, it shall burn no combustible thing that is put to
it;--also, the binding of lightnings and tempests, that they shall do no
hurt;--the binding of dogs, that they cannot bark;--also, the binding of
birds and wild beasts, that they shall not be able to run or fly away;
and things familiar to

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

these, which are hardly creditable, yet known by experience. Now how it
is that these kind of bindings are made and brought to pass, we must
know. They are thus done: by sorceries, collyries, unguents, potions,
binding to and hanging up of talismans, by charms, incantations, strong
imaginations, affections, passions, images, characters, enchantments,
imprecations, lights, and by sounds, numbers, words, names, invocations,
swearings, conjurations, consecrations, and the like.

OF SORCERIES.

THE force of sorceries are, no doubt, very powerful; indeed, they are
able to confound, subvert, consume, and change all inferior things;
likewise there are sorceries by which we can suspend the faculties of
men and beasts. Now, as we have promised, we will shew what some of
these kind of sorceries are, that, by the example of these, there may be
a way opened for the whole subject of them. Of these, the first is
menstruous blood, which, how much power it has in sorcery, we will now
consider:--First, if it comes over new wine, it will turn it sour; and
if it does but touch a vine, it will spoil it for ever; and, by its very
touch, it renders all plants and trees barren, and those newly set, die;
it burns up all the herbs in the garden, and makes fruit fall from
trees; it makes dim the brightness of a looking-glass, dulls the edges
of knives and razors, dims the beauty of polished ivory, and makes iron
rusty; it likewise makes brass rusty, and to smell very strong; by the
taste, it makes dogs run mad, and, being thus mad, if they once bite any
one, that wound is incurable; it destroys whole hives of bees, and
drives them away, if it does but touch them; it makes linen black that
is boiled with it; it makes mares cast their foals by touching them with
it, and women miscarry; it makes asses barren if they cat of the corn
touched by it. The ashes of menstruous clothes cast upon purple
garments, that are to be washed, change their colour, and likewise take
away the colour of flowers. It also drives away tertian and quartan
agues, if it be put into the wool of a black ram, and tied up in a

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

silver bracelet; as also if the soles of the patient's feet be anointed
therewith, and especially if it be done by the woman herself, the
patient not knowing what she uses. It likewise cures the falling
sickness; but most especially it cures them that are afraid of water or
drink after they are bitten by a mad dog, if only a menstruous cloth be
put under the cup. Likewise, if a menstruous woman shall walk naked,
before sun-rise, in a field of standing corn, all hurtful things perish;
but if after sun-rise, the corn withers; also, they are able to expel
hail, rain, thunders, and lightnings; more of which Pliny mentions. Know
this, that if they happen at the decrease of the moon, they are a much
greater poison than in the increase, and yet much greater if they happen
between the decrease and change; but if they happen in the eclipse of
the sun or moon, they are a most incurable and violent poison. But they
are of the greatest force when they happen in the first years of the
virginity, for then if they but touch the door-posts of a house, no
mischief can take effect in it. And some say that the threads of any
garment touched therewith cannot be burnt, and if they are cast into a
fire, it will spread no farther. Also it is noted, that the root of
piony being given with castor, and smeared over with a menstruous cloth,
it certainly cureth the falling sickness.

Again, let the stomach of a hart be roasted, and to it be put a perfume
made with a menstruous cloth; it will make cross-bows useless for the
killing of any game. The hairs of a menstruous woman, put under dung,
breeds serpents; and if they are burnt, will drive away serpents with
the fume. So great and powerful a poison is in them, that they are a
poison to poisonous creatures.

We next come to speak of hippomanes, which, amongst sorceries, are not
accounted the least: and this is a little venemous piece of flesh, the
size of a fig, and black, which is in the forehead of a colt newly
foaled, which, unless the mare herself doth presently eat, she will
hardly ever love her foles, or let them suck; and this is a most
powerful philter to cause love, if it be powdered, and drank in a cup
with the blood of him that is in love: such a potion was given to Medea
by Jason.

There is another sorcery which is called hippomanes, *viz.* a venomous
liquor issuing out of the share of a mare at the time she lusts after
the horse. The

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

civet-cat, also, abounds with sorceries; for the posts of a door being
touched with her blood, the arts of jugglers and sorcerers are so
invalid that evil spirits can by no means be called up, or compelled to
talk with them:--This is Pliny's report. Also, those that are anointed
with the oil of her left foot, being boiled with the ashes of the ancle
bone of the same and the blood of a weasel, shall become odious to all.
The same, also, is to be done with the eye being decocted. If any one
hath a little of the strait-gut of this animal about him, and it is
bound to the left arm, it is a charm; that if he does but look upon a
woman, it will cause her to follow him at all opportunities; and the
skin of this animal's forehead withstands witchcraft.

We next come to speak of the blood of a basilisk, which magicians call
the blood of Saturn.--This procures (by its virtue) for him that carries
it about him, good success of petitions from great men; likewise makes
him amazingly successful in the cure of diseases, and the grant of any
privilege. They say, also, that a tike, if it be taken out of the left
car of a dog, and it be altogether black, if the sick person shall
answer him that brought it in, and who, standing at his feet, shall ask
him concerning his disease, there is certain hope of life; and that he
shall die if he make him no answer. They say, also, that a stone bitten
by a mad dog causes discord, if it be put into drinks; and if any one
shall put the tongue of a dog, dried, into his shoe, or some of the
powder, no dog is able to bark at him who hath it; and more powerful
this, if the herb hound's-tongue be put with it. And the membrane of the
secundine of a bitch does the same; likewise, dogs will not bark at him
who hath the heart of a dog in his pocket.

The red toad (Pliny says) living in briers and brambles, is full of
sorceries, and is capable of wonderful things: there is a little bone in
his left side, which being cast into cold water, makes it presently hot;
by which, also, the rage of dogs are restrained, and their love
procured, if it be put in their drink, making them faithful and
serviceable; if it be bound to a woman, it stirs up lust. On the
contrary, the bone which is on the right side makes hot water cold, and
it binds it so that no heat can make it hot while it there remains. It
is a certain cure for quartans, if it be bound to the sick in a snake's
skin; and like

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

wise cures all fevers, the St. Anthony's fire, and restrains love and
lust. And the spleen and heart are effectual antidotes against the
poisons of the said toad. Thus much Pliny writes.

Also it is said, that the sword with which a man is slain hath wonderful
power; for if the snaffle of a bridle, or bit, or spurs, be made of it,
with these a horse ever so wild is tamed, and made gentle and obedient.
They say, if we dip a sword, with which any one was beheaded, in wine,
that it cures the quartan, the sick being given to drink of it. There is
a liquor made, by which men are made as raging and furious as a bear,
imagining themselves in every respect to be changed into one; and this
is done by dissolving or boiling the brains and heart of that animal in
new wine, and giving any one to drink out of a skull, and, while the
force of the draught operates, he will fancy every living creature to be
a bear like to himself; neither can any thing divert or cure him till
the fumes and virtue of the liquor are entirely expended, no other
distemper being perceivable in him.

The most certain cure of a violent head-ache, is to take any herb
growing upon the top of the head of an image; the same being bound, or
hung about one with a red thread, it will soon allay the violent pain
thereof.

OF MAGICAL LIGHTS, CANDLES, LAMPS, &c.

THERE are made, artificially, some kinds of lamps, torches, candles, and
the like, of some certain and appropriate materials and liquors
opportunely gathered and collected for this purpose, which, when they
are lighted and shine alone, produce some wonderful effects. There is a
*poison* from mares, after copulation, which, being lighted in torches
composed of their fat and marrow, doth represent on the walls a
monstrous deformity of horses' heads, which thing is both easy and
pleasant to do: the like may be done of asses and flies. And the skin of
a serpent or snake, lighted in a green lamp, makes the images of the
same to appear; and grapes produce the same effect, if, when they are

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

in their flowers, you shall take a phial, and bind it to them, filled
with oil, and shall let them remain so till they are ripe, and then the
oil be lighted in a lamp, you shall see a prodigious quantity of grapes;
and the same in other fruits. If centaury be mixed with honey and the
blood of a lapwing, and be put in a lamp, they that stand about will be
of a gigantic stature; and if it be lighted in a clear evening, the
stars will seem scattered about.

The ink of the cuttle-fish being put into a lamp, makes Blackamoors
appear. So, also, a candle made of some saturnine things, such as man's
fat and marrow, the fat of a black cat, with the brains of a crow or
raven, which being extinguished in the mouth of a man lately dead, will
afterwards, as often as it shines alone, bring great horror and fear
upon the spectators about it.

Of such like *torches, candles, lamps*, &c., (of which we shall speak
further in our Book of *Magnetism and Mummies*) Hermes speaks largely
of; also Plato and Chyrannides; and, of the later writers, Albertus
Magnus makes particular mention of the truth and efficacy of these, in a
treatise on these particular things relative to lights, &c.

OF THE ART OF FASCINATION, OR BINDING BY THE LOOK OR. SIGHT.

WE call fascination a binding, because it is effected by a look, glance,
or observation, in which we take possession of the spirit, and overpower
the same, of those we mean to fascinate or suspend; for it comes through
the eyes, and the instrument by which we fascinate or bind is a certain,
pure, lucid, subtil spirit, generated out of the ferment of the purer
blood by the heat of the heart, and the firm, determined, and ardent
will of the soul which directs it to the object previously disposed to
be fascinated. This doth always send forth by the eyes rays or beams,
carrying with them a pure subtil spirit or vapour into the eye or blood
of him or her that is opposite. So the eye, being opened and intent upon
any one with a strong imagination, doth dart its beams, which are the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

vehicle of the spirit, into whatever we will affect or bind, which
spirit striking the eye of them who are fascinated, being stirred up in
the heart and soul of him that sends them forth, and possessing the
breast of them who are struck, wounds their hearts, infects their
spirits, and overpowers them.

Know, likewise, that in witches, those are most bewitched, who, with
often looking, direct the edge of their sight to the edge of the sight
of those who bewitch or fascinate them; whence arose the saying of "Evil
eyes, &c." For when their eyes are reciprocally bent one upon the other,
and are joined beams to beams, and lights to lights, then the spirit of
the one is joined to the spirit of the other, and then are strong
ligations made; and most violent love is stirred up, only with a sudden
looking on, as it were, with the darting a look, or piercing into the
very inmost of the heart, whence the spirit and amorous blood, being
thus wounded, are carried forth upon the lover, and enchanter; no
otherwise than the spirit and the blood of him that is murdered is upon
the murderer, who, if standing near the body killed, the blood flows
afresh, which thing has been tried by repeated experiments.

So great power is there in fascination that many uncommon and wonderful
things are thereby effected, especially when the vapours of the eyes are
subservient to the affection; therefore collyries, ointments,
alligations, &,c. are used to affect and corroborate the spirit in this
or that manner: to induce love, they use venereal collyriums, as
hippomanes, blood of doves, &c. To induce fear, they use martial
collyriums, as the eyes of wolves, bear's fat, and the civet-cat. To
procure misery, or sickness, they use saturnine, and so on.

Thus much we have thought proper to speak concerning Natural Magic, in
which we have, as it may be said, only opened the first chamber of
Nature's storehouse; *indeed we should have inserted many more things
here*, but as they fall more properly under the heads of *Magnetism,
Mummy*, &c., to which we refer the reader, we shall take our leave of
the reader for the present, that we may give him time to breathe,
likewise to digest what he has here feasted upon; and, while he is
preparing to enter the unlocked chambers

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

of Magic and Nature, we will procure him a rich service of most
delicious meats, fit for the hungry and thirsty traveller through the
vast labyrinths of wisdom and true science.

END OF THE NATURAL MAGIC.

THE Author having, under the title of Natural Magic, collected and
arranged every thing that was curious, scarce, and valuable, as well his
own experiments, as those in which he has been indefatigable in
gathering from the science and practice of Magical Authors, and those
the most ancient and abstruse, as may be seen in the list at the end of
the Book, where he has put down the names of the authors, from which he
has translated many things that were never yet published in the English
language, particularly *Hermes, Tritemius, Paracelsus, Bacon, Dee,
Porta, Agrippa*, &c. &c. &c.; from whom he has not been ashamed to
borrow what he thought and knew would be valuable and gratifying to the
sons of Wisdom, in addition to many other rare and uncommon experiments
relative to this art.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[43:1](ma115.htm#fr_4) The latter part of this
Chapter serves as a rule to be observed in the composition of all kinds
of mixed experiments; and it is as appropriate to the materials
collected for talismans, seals, &c. treated of in our Celestial Magic,
Book II.--*F. B*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](ma116)
