[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma123)  [Next](ma125.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. II.

OF THE PROPERTIES AND WONDERFUL NATURE OF FIRE AND EARTH.

THERE are two things, (says Hermes) *viz.* fire and earth, which are
sufficient for the operation of all wonderful things: the former is
active, and the latter passive. Fire, in all things, and through all
things, comes and goes away bright; it is in all things bright, and at
the same time occult, and unknown. When it is by itself (no other matter
coming to it, in which it should manifest its proper action) it is
boundless and invisible; of itself sufficient for every action that is
proper to it;--itself is one, and penetrates through all things; also
spread abroad in the heavens, and shining. But in the infernal place,
straitened, dark, and tormenting; and in the midway it partakes of both.
[It](errata.htm#0.md) is in stones, and is drawn out by the stroke of the
steel; it is in earth, and

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

causes it, after digging up, to smoke; it is in water, and heats springs
and wells; it is in the depths of the sea, and causes it, being tossed
with the winds, to be hot; it is in the air, and makes it (as we often
see) to burn. And all animals, and all living things whatsoever, as also
vegetables, are preserved by heat;--and every thing that lives, lives by
reason of the inclosed heat. The properties of the fire that is above,
are heat, making all things fruitful; and a celestial light, giving life
to all things. The properties of the infernal fire are a parching heat,
consuming all things; and darkness; making all things barren. The
celestial and bright fire drives away spirits of darkness;--also, this
our fire, made with wood, drives away the same, in as much as it hath an
analogy with, and is the *vehiculum* of, that superior light; as also of
him who saith, "I am the light of the world," which is true fire--the
Father of lights, from whom every good thing that is given
comes;--sending forth the light of his fire, and communicating it first
to the sun and the rest of the celestial bodies, and by these, as by
mediating instruments, conveying that light into our fire. As,
therefore, the spirits of darkness are stronger in the dark--so good
spirits, which are angels of lights, are augmented not only .by that
light (which is divine, of the sun, and celestial), but also by the
light of our common fire. Hence it was that the first and most wise
institutors of religions and ceremonies, ordained that prayers,
singings, and all manner of divine worships whatsoever, should not be
performed without lighted candles or torches: hence, also, was that
significant saying of Pythagoras--"Do not speak of God without a
light!"--And they commanded that, for the driving away of wicked
spirits, lights and fires should be kindled by the carcasses of the
dead, and that they should not be removed until the expiations were,
after a holy manner, performed, and then buried. And the great Jehovah
himself, in the old law, commanded that all his sacrifices should be
offered with fire and that fire should always be burning upon the altar,
which custom the Priests of the Altar did always observe and keep
amongst the Romans. Now the basis and foundation of all the elements is
the earth; for that is the object, subject, and receptacle of all
celestial rays and influences: in it are contained the seeds, and
seminal virtues of all things; and therefore, it is said to be

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

animal, vegetable, and mineral. It, being made fruitful by the other
elements and the heavens, brings forth all things of itself. It receives
the abundance of all things, and is, as it were, the first fountain from
whence all things spring;--it is the centre, foundation, and mother of
all things. Take as much of it as you please, separated, washed,
depurated, and subtilized, and if you let it lie in the open air a
little while, it will, being full and abounding with heavenly virtues,
of itself bring forth plants, worms, and other living things; also
stones, and bright sparks of *metals*. In it are great secrets: if, at
any time it shall be purified, by the help of fire, <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) and reduced into its simple nature by a
convenient washing, it is the first matter of our creation, and the
truest medicine that can restore and preserve us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[77:1](ma124.htm#fr_5.md) Agrippa here, speaking of
the element of earth being reduced to its utmost simplicity, by being
purified by fire and a convenient washing, means, that it is the first
and principal ingredient necessary to the production of the
Philosopher's stone, either of animals or metals.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Of The Water And Air](ma125.md)
