[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma126)  [Next](ma128.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. V.

THAT THE ELEMENTS ARE IN THE HEAVENS, IN THE STARS, IN DEVILS, ANGELS,
INTELLIGENCES, AND, LASTLY, IN GOD HIMSELF.

IN the original and exemplary world, all things are all in all; so also
in this corporeal world. And the elements are not only in these inferior
things; but are in the heavens, in stars, in devils, in angels, and
likewise in God himself, the maker and original example of all things.

Now it must be understood that in these inferior bodies the elements are
gross and corruptible; but in the heavens they are, with their natures
and virtues, after a celestial and more excellent manner than in
sublunary things: for the firmness of the celestial earth is there
without the grossness of water; and the agility of air without exceeding
its bounds; the heat of fire without burning, only shining, giving light
and life to all things by its celestial heat.--Now

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

amongst the stars, or planets, some are fiery, as Mars, and the
Sun--airy, as Jupiter, and Venus--watery, as Saturn, and Mercury--and
earthy, such as inhabit the eighth orb, and the Moon (which by many is
accounted watery), seeing that, as if it were earth, it attracts to
itself the celestial waters, with which being imbibed it does, on
account of its proximity to us, pour forth and communicate to our globe.

There are, likewise, amongst the signs, some fiery, some airy, some
watery, and some earthy. The elements rule *them*, also, in the heavens,
distributing to them these four threefold considerations of every
element, according to their triplicities, *viz.* the beginning, middle,
and end.

Likewise, devils are distinguished according to the elements: for some
are called earthy devils, others fiery, some airy, and others watery.
Hence, also, those four infernal rivers: fiery Phlegethon, airy Cocytus,
watery Styx, earthy Acheron. Also, in the Gospel, we read of comparisons
of the elements: as hell fire, and eternal fire, into which the cursed
shall be commanded to go;--and in Revelations, of a lake of fire:--and
Isaiah, speaking of the damned, says that the Lord will smite them with
corrupt air;--and in Job, they shall skip from the waters of the snow to
the extremity of heat; and, in the same, we read, that the earth is
dark, and covered with the darkness of death, and miserable darkness.

And these elements are placed in the angels of heaven, and the blessed
intelligences: there is in them a stability of their essence, which is
an earthy virtue, in which is the stedfast seat of God. By the Psalmist
they are called waters, where he says--"Who rulest the waters that are
higher than the heavens;"--also, in them their subtile breath is air,
and their love is shining fire; hence they are called in Scripture, the
wings of the wind; and, in another place, the Psalmist speaks of them
thus--"Who makest angels thy spirits, and thy ministers a flaming
fire!"--Also, according to the different orders of spirits or angels,
some are fiery, as seraphims, authorities, and powers--earthy, as
cherubim--watery, as thrones and archangels--airy, as dominions and
principalities.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

And do we not read of the original Maker of all things, that the earth
shall be opened and bring forth a Saviour?--Likewise it is spoken of the
same, that he shall be a fountain of living water, cleansing and
regenerating and the same spirit breathing the breath of life; and the
same, according to Moses' and Paul's testimony--*a consuming fire*.

That the elements are, therefore, to be found every where, and in all
things, after their manner, no man will dare to deny: first, in these
inferior bodies, feculent and gross; and in celestials, more pure and
clear; but in super-celestials, living, and in all respects blessed.
Elements, therefore, in the exemplary world, are ideas of things to be
produced; in intelligences, they are distributed powers; in the heavens,
they are virtues; and in inferior bodies, are gross forms.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: That The Wisdom Of God Works By The Medium Of Second
Causes...](ma128.md)
