[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma130)  [Next](ma132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. IX.

TREATING OF THE VIRTUE AND EFFICACY OF PERFUMES, OR SUFFUMIGATIONS, AND
VAPOURS; AND TO WHAT PLANETS THEY ARE PROPERLY AND RIGHTLY ATTRIBUTED.

IT is necessary, before we come to the operative or practical part of
Talismanic Magic, to show the compositions of fumes or vapours, that are
proper to the stars, and are of great force for the opportunely
receiving of celestial gifts, under the rays of the stars--inasmuch as
they strongly work upon the air and breath; for our breath is very much
changed by such kind of vapours, if both vapours be of the other like.
The air being also, through the said vapours, easily moved, or infected
with the qualities of inferiors, or celestial (daily quickly penetrating
our breast and vitals), does wonderfully reduce us to the like
qualities. Let no man wonder how great things suffumigations can do in
the air; especially when they shall, with Porphyry, consider that, by
certain vapours exhaled from proper suffumigations, ærial spirits are
raised; also thunder and lightnings, and the like: as the liver of a
cameleon being burnt on the house top, will raise showers and
lightnings; the same effect has the head and throat, if they are burnt
with oaken wood. There are some suffumigations under the influences of
the stars, that cause

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

images of spirits to appear in the air, or elsewhere: for if coriander,
smallage, henbane, and hemlock be made to fume, by invocations spirits
will soon come together, being attracted by the vapours which are most
congruous to their own natures; hence they are called the herbs of the
spirits. Also it is said, that if a fume be made of the root of the
reedy herb sagapen, with the juice of hemlock and henbane, and the herb
tapsus barbatus, red sanders, and black poppy, it will likewise make
strange shapes appear; but if a suffume be made of smallage, it chases
them away, and destroys their visions. Again, if a perfume is made of
calamint, piony, mint, and palma christi, it drives away all evil
spirits and vain imaginations. Likewise, by certain fumes, animals are
gathered together, and put to flight. Pliny mentions concerning the
stone liparis, that, with the fume thereof, all beasts are attracted
together. The bones in the upper part of the throat of a hart, being
burnt, bring serpents together; but the horn of the hart, being burnt,
chases away the same; likewise, a fume of peacock's feathers does the
same. Also, the lungs of an ass, being burnt, puts all poisonous things
to flight; and the fume of the burnt hoof of a horse drives away mice;
the same does the hoof a mule; and with the hoof of the left-foot flies
are driven away. And if a house, or ally place, be smoaked with the
*gall* of a *cuttle-fish*, made into a confection with red storax,
roses, and lignum aloes, and then there be some sea-water or blood cast
into that place, the whole house will seem to be full of water or blood.

Now such kind of vapours as these, we must conceive, do infect a body,
and infuse a virtue into it which continues long, even as the poisonous
vapour of the pestilence, being kept for two years in the walls of a
house, infects the inhabitants; and as the contagion of pest or leprosy
lying hid in a garment, will, long after, infect him that wears it.

Now there are certain suffumigations used to almost all our instruments
of magic (of which hereafter), such as images, rings, &c. For some of
the magicians say, that if any one shall hide gold, or silver, or any
other such like precious thing (the moon being in conjunction with the
sun), and shall perfume the place with *coriander, saffron, henbane*,
smallage, and black poppy, of each the same quantity, and bruised
together, and tempered with

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

the juice of hemlock, that thing which is so hid shall never be taken
away therefrom, but that spirit shall continually keep it; and if any
one shall endeavour to take it away by force, they shall be hurt, or
struck with a frenzy. And *Hermes* says, there is nothing like the fume
of spermaceti for the raising up of spirits; therefore if a fume be made
of that, lignum aloes, pepperwort, musk, saffron, and red storax,
tempered together with the blood of a lapwing or bat, it will quickly
gather airy spirits to the place where it is used; and if it be used
above the graves of the dead, it will attract spirits and ghosts
thither.

Now the use of suffumigations is this: that whenever we set about making
any talisman, image, or the like, under the rule or dominion of any star
or planet, we should by no means omit the making of a suffumigation
appropriate to that planet or constellation under which we desire to
work any effect or wonderful operation; as for instance:--when we direct
any work to the sun, we must suffume with solary things; if to the moon,
with lunary things; and so of the rest. And we must be careful to
observe, that as there is a contrariety, or antipathy, in the natures of
the stars and planets and their spirits, so there is also in
suffumigations: for there is an antipathy between lignum aloes and
sulphur frankincense and quicksilver; and spirits that are raised by the
fume of lignum aloes, are laid by the burning of sulphur. For the
learned Proclus gives an example of a spirit that appeared in the form
of a lion, furious and raging: by setting a white cock before the
apparition it soon vanished away; because there is so great a
contrariety between a cock and a lion;--and let this suffice for a
general observation in these kind of things. We shall proceed with
showing distinctly the composition of the several fumes appropriated to
the seven planets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Of The Composition Of Some Perfumes Appropriated To
The Seven Planets](ma132)
