[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma135)  [Next](ma137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

CHAP. XIV.

SHEWING THE NECESSITY OF MATHEMATICAL KNOWLEDGE, AND OF THE GREAT POWER
AND EFFICACY OF NUMBERS IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF TALISMANS, &c.

THE doctrines of mathematics are so necessary to and have such an
affinity with magic, that they who profess it without them are quite out
of the way, and labour in vain, and shall in no wise obtain their
desired effect. For whatsoever things are, and are done in these
inferior natural virtues, are all done and governed by *number, weight,
measure, harmony, motion*, and *light*: and all things which we see in
these inferiors have root and foundation in them; yet, nevertheless,
without natural virtues of mathematical doctrines, only works like to
naturals can be produced: as Plato saith--a thing not partaking of truth
or divinity, but certain images akin to them (as bodies going, or
speaking, which yet want the animal faculty), such as were those which,
amongst the ancients, were called Dedalus's images, and αυτοματα, of
which Aristotle makes mention, *viz.* the three-footed images of Vulcan
and Dedalus moving themselves; which, Homer saith, came out of their own
accord to the exercise; and which, we read, moved themselves at the
feast of Hiarba, the philosophical exerciser. So there are made glasses
(some concave, others of the form of a column) making the representation
of things in the air seem like shadows at a distance; of which sort
Apollonius and Vitellius, in their books, "De Prospectiva," and
"Speculis," taught the making and the use. And we read that Magnus
Pompeius brought a certain glass, amongst the spoils from the East, to
Rome, in which were seen armies of armed men. And there are made certain
transparent glasses, which (being dipped in some certain juices of
herbs, and irradiated with an artificial light) fill the whole air round
about with visions. And we know how to make reciprocal glasses, in which
the sun shining, all things which were illustrated by the rays thereof
are apparently seen many miles off. Hence a magician (expert in natural
philosophy and mathematics, and knowing the middle sciences, consisting
of both these, *viz.* arithmetic, music, geometry, optics, astronomy,
and such sciences that are of

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

weights, measures, proportions, articles, and joints; knowing, also,
mechanical arts resulting from these) may, without any wonder, if he
excel other men in the art and wit, do many wonderful things, which men
may much admire. There are some relics now extant of the antients,
*viz.* Hercules and Alexander's pillars; the gate of Caspia, made of
brass, and shut with iron beams, that it could by no art be broken; and
the pyramids of Julius Cæsar, erected at Rome, near the hill Vaticanus;
and mountains built by art in the middle of the sea; and towers, and
heaps of stones, such as I have seen in England, put together by
incredible art. But the vulgar seeing any wonderful sight, impute it to
the Devil as his work; or think that a miracle which, indeed, is a work
of natural or mathematical philosophy. But here it is convenient that
you know, that, as by natural virtues we collect natural virtues, so by
abstracted, mathematical, and celestial, we receive celestial virtues;
as motion, sense, life, speech, soothsaying, and divination even in
matter less disposed, as that which is not made by nature, but only by
art. And so images that speak, and foretel things to come, are said to
be made: as William of Paris relates of a brazen-head, made under the
rising of Saturn, which, they say, spake with a man's voice. But he that
will chuse a disposed matter, and most fit to receive, and a most
powerful agent, shall undoubtedly produce more powerful effects. For it
is a general opinion of the Pythagoreans, that, as mathematical are more
formal than natural, so also they are more efficacious; as they have
less dependance in their being, so also in their operation. But amongst
all mathematical things, *numbers*, as they have more of form in them,
so also are more efficacious, as well to affect what is good as what is
bad. All things, which were first made by the nature of things in its
first age, seem to be formed by the proportion of numbers; for this was
the principal pattern in the mind of the Creator. Hence is borrowed the
number of the elements--hence the courses of times--hence the motion of
the stars, and the revolution of the heavens, and the state of all
things subsist by the uniting together of numbers. Numbers, therefore,
are endowed with great and sublime virtues. For it is no wonder, seeing
there arc so many occult virtues in natural things, although of manifest
operations, that there should be in numbers

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

much greater and more occult, and also more wonderful and efficacious;
for as much as they are more formal, more perfect, and naturally in the
celestials, not mixed with separated substances; and, lastly, having the
greatest and most simple commixion with the ideas in the mind of God,
from which they receive their proper and most efficacious virtues;
wherefore they also are of most force, and conduce most to the obtaining
of spiritual and divine gifts--as, in natural things, elementary
qualities are powerful in the transmuting of any elementary thing.
Again, all things that are, and are made, subsist by and receive their
virtue from numbers:--for time consists of numbers--and all motion and
action, and all things which are subject to time and motion. Harmony,
also, and voices have their power by and consist of numbers and their
proportions; and the proportion arising from numbers do, by lines and
points, make characters and figures; and these are proper to magical
operations--the middle, which is betwixt both, being appropriated by
declining to the extremes, as in the use of letters. And lastly, all
species of natural things, and of those which are above Nature, are
joined together by certain numbers; which Pythagoras seeing, says, that
number is that by which all things subsist, and distributes each virtue
to each number. And Proclus says, number hath always a being: yet there
is one in voice--another in proportion of them--another in the soul and
reason--and another in divine things. But Themistius, Boetius, and
Averrois (the Babylonian), together with Plato, do so extol numbers,
that they think no man can be a true philosopher without them. By them
there is a way made for the searching out and understanding of all
things knowable;--by them the next access to natural prophecying is
had--and the Abbot Joachim proceeded no other way in his prophecies, but
by formal numbers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV: The Great Virtues Of Numbers, As Well In Natural
Things As In Supernatural](ma137)
