[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma132)  [Next](ma134.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XI.

OF THE COMPOSITION AND MAGIC VIRTUE OF RINGS.

RINGS, when they are opportunely made, impress their virtues upon us
insomuch that they affect the spirit of him that carries them with
gladness or sadness; and render him bold or fearful, courteous or
terrible, amiable or hateful; inasmuch, also as they fortify us
against <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) sickness, poisons, enemies,
evil spirits, and all manner of hurtful things; and often, where the law
has no effect, these little trifles greatly assist and corroborate the
troubled spirit of the wearer, and help him, in a wonderful manner, to
overcome his adversaries, while they do wonder how it is that they
cannot effect any hurtful undertaking against him. These things, I say,
are great helps against wrathful, vicious, worldly-minded men, inasmuch
as they do terrify, hurt, and render invalid the machinations of those
who would otherwise work our misery or destruction. All which we are
neither afraid nor ashamed to declare, well knowing that these things
will be hid from the wicked and profane, so as that they cannot draw the
same into

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

any abuse, or privy mischief toward their neighbour; we having reserved
some few things in this art to ourselves--not willing to throw pearls
before swine, And however simple and plain we may describe some certain
experiments and operations (so as that the great-mouthed school
philosophers may mutter or scoff thereat), yet there is nothing
delivered in this book but what may be, by an understanding thereof,
brought into effect, and, likewise, out of which some good may be
derived. But to proceed.

The manner of making of these rings is thus:--when any star ascends in
the horoscope (fortunately), with a fortunate aspect or conjunction of
the moon, we proceed to take a *stone* and herb, that is under that
star, and likewise make a ring of the metal that is corresponding to the
star; and in the ring under the stone, put the herb or root, not
forgetting to inscribe the *effect, image, name*, and *character*, as
also the proper suffume. But I shall speak more of these in another
place, where I speak of images and characters. Therefore, in making of
rings magical, these things are unerringly to be observed as we have
ordered;--if any one is willing to work any effect or experiment in
magic, he must by no means neglect the necessary circumstances which we
have so uniformly delivered. I have read, in Philostratus Jarchus, that
a Prince of the Indians bestowed seven rings, marked with the virtues
and names of the seven planets, to Appollonius, of which he wore one
every day, distinguishing according to the names of the days; by the
benefit of which he lived above one hundred and thirty years, as also
always retained the beauty of his youth. In like manner, Moses, the
Lawgiver and Ruler of the Hebrews, being skilled in the Egyptian Magic,
is said, by Josephus, to have made rings of love and oblivion. There was
also, as saith Aristotle, among the Cireneans, a ring of Battas, which
could procure love and honour. We read, also, that Eudamus, a certain
philosopher, made rings against the bites of serpents, bewitchings, and
evil spirits. The same doth Josephus relate of Solomon. Also we read, in
Plato, that Gygus, King of Lydia, had a ring of wonderful and strange
virtues; the seal of which, when he turned it toward the palm of his
hand, no body could see him, but he could see all things; by the
opportunity of which ring, he ravished the Queen, and slew

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the King his master, and killed whomsoever he thought stood in his way;
and in these villanies nobody could see him; and at length, by the
benefit of this ring, he became King of Lydia. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[94:1](ma133.htm#fr_7.md) The Author will engage to
teach any that are curious in those studies, the particular composition
of Talismanic Rings; whereby they may be enabled to judge themselves of
the effects that are to be produced by them.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[96:1](ma133.htm#fr_8.md) We have above shewn the
power and virtue of magical rings; but the particular characters,
inscriptions, and images to be made in, or upon them, we refer the
student to that chapter treating of "The Composition of various
Talismans" in which we have described exactly the express methods of
perfecting them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: That The Passions Of The Mind Are Assisted By
Celestials...](ma134.md)
