[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma154)  [Next](ma156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XXXIII.

OF THE TWENTY-EIGHT MANSIONS OF THE MOON, AND THEIR VIRTUES.

AND seeing the Moon measures the whole space of the Zodiac in the time
of twenty-eight days, hence it is that the wise men of the *Indians*,
and most of the antient astrologers have granted twenty-eight mansions
to the Moon, which, being fixed in the eighth sphere, do enjoy (as
*Alpharus* says) divers names and properties, from the various signs and
stars which are contained in them; through which, while the Moon
wanders, it obtains many other powers and virtues; but every one of
these mansions, according to the opinion of *Abraham*, contained twelve
degrees, and fifty-one minutes, and almost twenty

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

six seconds, whose names, and also their beginnings in the Zodiac, of
the eighth sphere, are these:--The first is called *Alnath*; that is,
the horns of Aries: his beginning is from the head of Aries, of the
eighth sphere: it causes discords and journies. The second is called
*Allothaim*, or *Albochan*; that is, the belly of Aries; and his
beginning is from the twelfth degree of the same sign, fifty-one
minutes, twenty-two seconds complete: it conduces to the finding of
treasures, and to the retaining captives. The third is called,
*Achaomazon*, or *Athoray*; that is, showering, or Pleiades: his
beginning is from the twenty-fifth degree of Aries complete, forty-two
minutes, and fifty-one seconds; it is profitable to sailors, huntsmen,
and alchymists. The fourth mansion is called *Aldebaram*, or
*Aldelamen*; that is, the eye or head of Taurus: his beginning is from
the eighth degree of Taurus, thirty-four minutes and seventeen seconds
of the same, Taurus being excluded: it causes the destruction and
hindrances of buildings, fountains, wells, gold mines, the flight of
creeping things, and begets discord. The fifth is called *Alchatay*, or
*Albachay*; the beginning of it is after the twenty-first degree of
Taurus, twenty-five minutes, forty seconds: it helps to the return from
a journey, to the instruction of scholars; it confirms edifices, it
gives health and good-will. The sixth is called *Athanna*, or *Alchaya*;
that is, the little star of great light: his beginning is after the
fourth degree of Gemini, seventeen minutes, and nine seconds; it
conduces to hunting and besieging towns, and revenge of princes: it
destroys harvest and fruits, and hinders the operation of the physician.
The seventh is called *Aldimiach*, or *Alarzach*; that is, the arm of
Gemini, and begins from the seventeenth degree of Gemini, eight minutes,
and thirty-four seconds, and lasts even to the end of the sign; it
confirms gain and friendship; it is profitable to lovers, and destroys
magistracies: and so is one quarter of the heaven completed in these
seven mansions, and in the like order and number of degrees, minutes,
and seconds the remaining mansions, in every quarter, have their several
beginnings namely, so that in the first sign of this quarter three
mansions take their beginnings; in the other two signs, two mansions in
each; therefore the seven following mansions begin with Cancer, whose
names are *Alnaza Anatrachya*; that is, misty or cloudy, *viz.* the
eighth

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

mansion; it causes love, friendship, and society of fellow travellers:
it drives away mice, and afflicts captives, confirming their
imprisonment. After this is the ninth, called *Archaam*, or *Arcaph*;
that is, the eye of the Lion: it hinders harvest and travellers, and
puts discord between men. The tenth is called *Algelioche*, or Albgebh;
that is, the neck or forehead of Leo: it strengthens buildings, promotes
love, benevolence, and help against enemies. The eleventh is called
*Azobra*, or *Ardaf*; that is, the hair of the lion's head: it is good
for voyages, and gain by merchandise, and for redemption of captives.
The twelfth is called *Alzarpha*, or *Azarpha*; that is the tail of Leo:
it gives prosperity to harvest and plantations, but hinders seamen; and
is good for the bettering of servants, captives, and companions. The
thirteenth is named *Alhaire*; that is, Dog stars, or the wings of
Virgo: it is prevalent for benevolence, gain, voyages, harvests, and
freedom of captives. The fourteenth is called *Achureth*, or *Arimet*;
by others, *Azimeth*, or *Athumech*, or *Alcheymech*; that is, the spike
of Virgo, or flying spike: it causes the love of married folks; it cures
the sick, is profitable to sailors, but hinders journies by land; and in
these the second quarter of the heaven is completed. The other seven
follow: the first of which begins in the head of Libra, *viz.* the
fifteenth mansion, and its name is *Agrapha*, or *Algrapha*; that is,
covered, or covered flying: it is profitable for extracting treasures,
for digging of pits, it assists divorce, discord, and destruction of
houses and enemies, and hinders travellers. The sixteenth is called
*Azubene*, or *Ahubene*; that is, the horns of Scorpio: it hinders
journies and wedlock, harvest and merchandise; it prevails for
redemption of captives. The [seventeenth](errata.htm#3.md) is called
*Alchil*; that is, the crown of Scorpio: it betters a bad fortune, makes
love durable, strengthens buildings, and helps seamen. The eighteenth is
called *Alchas*, or *Altob*; that is, the heart of Scorpio: it causes,
discord, sedition, conspiracy against princes and mighty ones, and
revenge from enemies; but it frees captives, and helps edifices. The
nineteenth is called *Allatha*, or *Achala*; by others, *Hycula*, or
*Axala*, that is, the tail of Scorpio: it helps in besieging of cities,
and taking of towns, and in the driving of men from their places, and
for the destruction of seamen and perdition of captives. The twentieth
is called *Abnahaya*; that is, a beam:

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

it helps for the taming of wild beasts, for strengthening of prisons; it
destroys the wealth of societies; it compels a man to come to a certain
place. The twenty-first is called *Abeda*, or *Albeldach*, which is a
desert: it is good for harvest, gain, buildings, and travellers, and
causes divorce; and in this is the third quarter of heaven completed.
There remains the seven last mansions completing the last quarter of
Heaven: the first of which, being in order to the twenty-second,
beginning from the head of Capricorn, called *Sadahacha*, or
*Zodeboluch*, or *Zandeldena*; that is, a pastor: it promotes the flight
of servants and captives, that they may escape; and helps the curing of
diseases. The twenty-third is called *Zabadola*, or *Zobrach*; that is,
swallowing: it is for divorce, liberty of captives and health to the
sick. The twenty-fourth is called *Sadabath*, or *Chadezoad*; that is,
the star of fortune: it is prevalent for the benevolence of married
people, for the victory of soldiers; it hurts the execution of
government, and prevents its being exercised. The twenty-fifth is called
*Sadalabra*, or *Sadalachia*; that is, a butterfly, or a spreading
forth: it favours besieging and revenge; it destroys enemies, and causes
divorce; confirms prisons and buildings, hastens messengers; it conduces
to spells against copulation, and so binds every member of man that it
cannot perform its duty. The twenty-sixth is called *Alpharg*, or
*Phragal Mocaden*; that is, the first drawing: it causes union, health
of captives, destroys building and prisons. The twenty-seventh is called
*Alchara Alyhalgalmoad*, or the second drawing: it increases harvests,
revenues, gain, and heals infirmities, but hinders buildings, prolongs
prisons, causes danger to seamen, and helps to infer mischiefs on whom
you shall please. The twenty-eighth and last is called *Albotham*, or
*Atchalcy*; that is, Pisces: it increases harvest and merchandise; it
secures travellers through dangerous places; it makes for the joy of
married people; but it strengthens prisons, and causes loss of
treasures. And in these twenty-eight mansions lie hid many secrets of
the wisdom of the antients, by which they wrought wonders on all things
which are under the circle of the Moon; and they attributed to every
mansion his resemblances, images, and seals, and his president
intelligences, and worked by the virtue of them after different manners.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV: How Some Artificial Things (As Images, Seals, And
Such Like) May Obtain Some Virtue From The Celestial Bodies.](ma156.md)
