[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma152)  [Next](ma154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

CHAP. XXXI.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE FIXED STARS, AND THEIR NAMES AND NATURES.

THERE is the like consideration to be had in all things concerning the
fixed stars. Know this, that all the fixed stars are of the
signification and nature of the seven planets; but some are of the
nature of one planet, and some of two. Hence, as often as any planet is
joined with any of the fixed stars of its own nature, the signification
of that star is made more powerful, and the nature of the planet
augmented; but if it be a star of two natures, the nature of that which
shall be the stronger with it, shall overcome in signification: as for
example, if it be of the nature of Mars and Venus, if Mars shall be the
stronger to with it, the nature of Mars shall overcome; but if Venus,
the nature of Venus shall overcome. Now the natures of fixed stars are
discovered by their colours, as they agree with certain planets, and are
ascribed to them. Now the colours of the planets are these:--of Saturn,
blue, and leaden, and shining with this; of Jupiter, citrine, near to a
paleness, and clear with this; of Mars, red and fiery; of the Sun,
yellow, and when it rises red, afterwards glittering; of Venus, white
and shining--white in the morning, and reddish in the evening; of
Mercury, glittering; of the Moon, fair. Know, also, that of the fixed
stars, by how much the greater, and brighter, and apparent they are, so
much the greater and stronger is the signification: such are those stars
called by the astrologers of the first and second magnitude. I will tell
thee some of these which are more potent to this faculty, *viz.* the
navel of Andromeda, in the twenty-second degree of Aries of the nature
of Venus and Mercury--some call it jovial and saturnine; the head of
Algol, in the eighteenth degree of Taurus, of the nature of Saturn and
Jupiter; the Pleiades are also in the twenty-second degree, a lunary
star by nature, and complexion martial; also Aldeboram, in the third
degree of Gemini, is of the nature of Mars, and complexion of Venus--but
Hermes places this in the twenty-fifth degree of Aries; the Goat star,
in the thirteenth degree of Gemini, is of the nature of Jupiter and
Saturn; the Great Dog star is in the seventh degree of Cancer and
Venereal;

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

the Little Dog star is in the seventeenth degree of the same, and is of
the nature of Mercury, and complexion of Mars; the King star, which is
called the Heart of the Lion, is in the twenty-first degree of Leo, and
of the nature of Jupiter and Mars; the tail of the Great Bear is in the
nineteenth degree of Virgo, and is venereal and lunary. The star which
is called the Right Wing of the Crow, is in the seventh degree of Libra;
and in the thirteenth degree of the same, is the left wing of the same,
and both of the nature of Saturn and Mars. The star called Spica, is in
the sixteenth degree of the same, and is venereal and mercurial. In the
seventeenth degree of the same is Alcameth, of the nature of Mars and
Jupiter; but of this, when the Sun's aspect is full towards it--of that,
when on the contrary. Elepheia, in the fourth degree of Scorpio, of the
nature of Venus and Mars. The heart of the Scorpion is in the third
degree of Sagittarius, of the nature of Mars and Jupiter. The falling
Vulture is in the seventh degree of Capricorn, temperate, mercurial, and
venereal. The tail of Capricorn is in the sixteenth degree of Aquarius,
of the nature of Saturn and Mercury. The star called the Shoulder of the
Horse, is in the third degree of Pisces, of the nature of Jupiter and
Mars.--And it shall be a general rule for you to expect the proper gifts
of the stars, whilst they rule--to be prevented of them, they being
unfortunate, as is above shewed; for celestial bodies, inasmuch as they
are affected fortunately or unfortunately, so much do they affect us,
our works, and those things which we use, fortunately or unhappily. And
although many effects proceed from the fixed stars, yet they are
attributed to the planets as because being more near to us, and more
distinct and known, so because they execute whatever the superior stars
communicate to them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXII: Of The Sun And Moon, And Their Magical
Considerations.](ma154)
