[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma207)  [Next](ma209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. VII.

OF THE VITAL SPIRIT, &c.

THE vital spirit in the flesh and blood performs the office of the soul;
that is, it is the same spirit in the outward man, which, in the seed,
forms the whole figure, that magnificent structure and perfect
delineation of man, and which hath known the ends of things to be done,
because it contains them; and the which as president accompanies the new
framed young, even unto the period of its life; and the which, although
it depart therewith, some smacks or small quantity, at least, thereof
remains in a carcass slain by, violence, being as it were most exactly
co-fermented with the same. But, from a dead carcass that was extinct of
its own accord, and from nature failing, as well the implanted as
inflowing spirit passed forth at once.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

For which reason, physicians divide this spirit into the implanted or
mummial, and inflowing or acquired spirit, which departs; to wit, with
the former life and this influxing spirit they afterwards subdivide into
the natural, vital, and animal spirit; but, we likewise, do here
comprehend them all at once in one single word.

The soul therefore being wholly a spirit could never move or stir up the
vital spirit, (being indeed corporeal), much less flesh and bones,
unless a certain natural power, yet magical and spiritual, did descend
from the soul into the spirit and body.

After what sort, I pray, could the corporeal spirit obey the commands of
the soul, unless there should be a command from her for moving of the
spirit, and afterwards the body?

But against this magical motive faculty thou will forthwith object, that
that power is limited within her composed body, and her own natural inn:
therefore although we call this soul a magicianness, yet it shall be
only a wresting and abuse of the name; for truly the true and
superstitious magic draws not its foundation from the soul; seeing this
same soul is not able to move, alter, or exite any thing out of its own
body.

I answer, that this power, and that natural magic of the soul which she
exerciseth not of herself, by virtue of the image of God, doth now lie
hid as obscure in man, and as it were lie asleep since the fall or
corruption of Adam, and stands in need or stirring up; all which
particulars we shall anon in their proper place prove; which same power,
how drowsy and as it were drunk soever, it otherwise remains daily in
us, yet it is sufficient to perform its offices in its own body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Of The Magical Power](ma209)
