[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma204)  [Next](ma206) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

CHAP. IV.

OF THE ARMARY UNGUENT, OR WEAPON SALVE, &c.

THE principal ingredient in this confection, is the moss of a dead man's
skull, which Van Helmont calls the excrescencies or superfluities of the
stars. Now the moss growing on the skull of a dead man, seeing it has
received its seed from the heavens, but its increase from the mummial
marrow of the skull of man, or tower of the microcosm, has obtained
excellent astral and magnetic powers beyond the common condition of
vegetables, although herbs, as they are herbs, want not their own
magnetism.

Now, the magnetism of this unguent draws out that strange disposition
from the wound (which otherwise, by a disunion of the parts that held
together, and by which, I say, strange disposition and foreign quality
is produced) from whence it slips, not being overburdened or oppressed
by any accident, suddenly grow together; and this is effected by the
armary unguent, or weapon salve. From this it appears that the unguent,
or weapon salve, its property is to heal suddenly and perfectly without
pain, costs, peril, or loss of strength; hence it is manifest that the
magnetical virtue is from God.

It is now seasonable to discover the immediate cause of magnetism in the
unguent.

First of all, by the consent of mystical divines, we divide man into the
external and internal man, assigning to both the powers of a certain
mind, or intelligence: for so there doth a will belong to flesh and
blood, which may not be either the will of man or the will of God; and
the heavenly Father also reveals some things unto the more inward man,
and some things flesh and blood reveals, that is, the outward and
sensitive, or animal man. For, how could the service of idols, envy, &c.
be rightly numbered among the works of the flesh, seeing they consist
only in the imagination, if the flesh had not also its own imagination
and elective will?

Furthermore, that there are miraculous ecstasies belonging to the more
inward man, is beyond dispute. That there are also ecstasies in the
animal man,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

by reason of an intense, or heightend imagination, is, without doubt.
Martin del Ris, an elder of the society of Jesus, in his Magical
Disquisitions or Enquiries, makes mention of a certain young man in the
city Insulis that was transported with so violent a desire of seeing his
mother, that through the same intense desire, as if being rapt up by an
ecstasy, he saw her perfectly, although many miles absent from thence;
and, returning again to himself, being mindful of all that he had seen,
gave many true signs of his true presence with his mother.

Now that desire arose from the more outward man, *viz.* from blood and
sense, or flesh, is certain; for, otherwise, the soul being once
dislodged, or loosened from the bonds of the body, cannot, except by
miracle, be reunited to it; there is therefore in the blood a certain
ecstatical or transporting power, which, if at any time shall be excited
or stirred up by an ardent desire and most strong imagination, it is
able to conduct the spirit of the more outward man even to some absent
and far distant object, but then that power lies hid in the more outward
man, as it were, in *potentia*, or by way of possibility; neither is it
brought into act, unless it be roused up by the imagination, inflamed
and agitated by a most fervent and violent desire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Of The Imaginative Power And The Magnetism Of The
Natural Spirits...](ma206)
