[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma206)  [Next](ma208) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

CHAP. VI.

OF WITCHCRAFT.

LET a witch therefore be granted, who can strongly torment an absent man
by an image of wax, by imprecation or cursing, by enchantment, or also
by a foregoing touch alone, (for here we speak nothing of Sorceries,
because they are those which kill only by poison, inasmuch as every
common apothecary can imitate those things) that this act is diabolical,
no man doubts: however, it is profitable to discern how much Satan and
how much the witch can contribute hereunto.

The First Supposition.

First of all, thou shalt take notice, that Satan is the sworn and
irreconcileable enemy of man, and to be so accounted by all, unless any
one had rather have him to be his friend; and therefore he most readily
procures whatsoever mischief he is able to cause or wish unto us, and
that without doubt and neglect.

The Second Supposition.

And then although he be an enemy to witches themselves, forasmuch as he
is also a most malicious enemy to all mankind in general; yet, in regard
they are his bond-slaves, and those of his kingdom, he never, unless
against his will betrays them, or discovers them to judges, &c.

From the former supposition I conclude, that if Satan were able of
himself to kill a man who is guilty of deadly sin, he would never delay
it; but he doth not kill him, therefore he cannot.

Notwithstanding, the witch doth oftentimes kill; hence also she can kill
the same man, no otherwise than as a privy murderer at the liberty of
his own will slays any one with a sword.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

There is therefore a certain power of the witch in this action, which
belongs not to Satan, and consequently Satan is not the principal
efficient and executor of that murder; for otherwise if he were the
executioner thereof, he would in nowise stand in need of the witch as
his assistant; but he alone had soon taken the greatest part of men out
of the way.

Surely most miserable were the conditions of mortals who should be
subject to such a tyrant, and stand liable to his commands; we have too
faithful a God, than that he should subject the work of his own hands to
the arbitrary dominion of Satan.

Therefore in this act, there is a certain power plainly proper and
natural to the witch which belongs not to Satan.

Moreover, of what nature, extent, and quality that power may be, we must
more exactly sift out.

In the first place, it is manifest that it is no corporeal strength of
the male sex; for neither doth there concur any strong touching of the
extreme parts of the body, and witches are for the most part feeble,
impotent, and malicious old women, therefore there must needs be some
other power, far superior to a corporeal attempt, yet natural to man.

This power therefore was to be seated in that part wherein we most
nearly resemble the image of God; and although all things do also, after
some sort, represent that venerable image, yet because man doth most
elegantly, properly, and nearly do that, therefore the image of God in
man doth far outshine, bear rifle over, and command the images of God in
all other creatures; for, peradventure, by this prerogative, all things
are put under his feet.

Wherefore if God act, *per nutum*, or by a beck, namely by his word, so
ought man to act some things only by his beck or will, if he ought to be
called his true image: for neither is that new, is that troublesome, is
that proper to God alone: for Satan, the most vile abject of creatures,
doth also locally move bodies *per nutum*, or by his beck alone, seeing
he hath not extremities or corporeal organs, whereby to touch, move, or
also to snatch a new body to himself

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

That privilege therefore ought no less to belong to the inward man, as
he is a spirit, if he ought to represent the image of God, and that
indeed not all idle one; if we call this faculty magical, and thou being
badly instructed, art terrified at this word, thou mayest, for me, call
it a spiritual strength or efficacy: for, truly, we are nothing
solicitous about names. I always, as immediately as I can, cast an eye
upon the thing itself.

That magical power, therefore, is in the inward man, whether thou, by
this etymology, or true word, understandest the soul or the vital spirit
thereof, it is now indifferent to us; since there is a certain
proportion of the internal man towards the external in all things,
glowing or growing after its own manner, which is an appropriated
disposition, and proportioned property.

Wherefore the power or faculty must needs be dispersed throughout the
whole man; in the soul, indeed, more vigorous, but in the flesh and
blood far more remiss.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: Of The Vital Spirit, &c.](ma208)
