[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma201)  [Next](ma203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. I.

 <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) THE MAGNETIC, OR ATTRACTIVE POWER OR
FACULTY.

AS concerning an action locally at a distance, wines do suggest a
demonstration unto us: for, every kind of wine, although it be bred out
of co-bordering provinces, and likewise more timely blossoming
elsewhere, yet it is troubled while our country vine flowereth; neither
doth such a disturbance cease as long as the flower shall not fall off
from our vine; which thing surely happens, either from a common
motive-cause of the vine and wine, or from a particular disposition of
the vine, the which indeed troubles the wine, and doth shake it up and
down with a confused tempest: or likewise, because the wine itself doth
thus trouble itself of its own free accord,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

by reason of the flowers of the vine: of both the which latter, if there
be a fore-touched conformity, consent, co-grieving, or congratulation;
at least, that cannot but be done by an action at a distance: to wit, if
the wine be troubled in a cellar under ground, whereunto no vine perhaps
is near for some miles, neither is there any discourse of the air under
the earth, with the flower of the absent vine; but, if they will accuse
a common cause for such an effect, they must either run back to the
stars, which cannot be controuled by our pleasures and liberties of
boldness; or, I say, we return to a confession of an action at a
distance: to wit, that some one and the same, and as yet unknown spirit,
the mover, doth govern the absent wine, and the vine which is at a far
distance, and makes them to talk and suffer together. But, as to what
concerns the power of the stars, I am unwilling, as neither dare I,
according to my own liberty, to extend the forces, powers, or bounds of
the stars beyond or besides the authority of the sacred text, which
faith (it being pronounced from a divine testimony) that the stars shall
be unto us for signs, seasons, days, and years: by which rule, a power
is never attributed to the stars, that wine bred in a foreign soil, and
brought unto us from far, doth disturb, move, or render itself confused:
for, the vine had at some time received a power of encreasing and
multiplying itself before the stars were born: and vegetables were
before the stars, and the imagined influx of these: wherefore also, they
cannot be things conjoined in essence, one whereof could consist without
the other. Yea, the vine in some places flowereth more timely; and, in
rainy, or the more cold years, our vine flowereth more slowly, whose
flower and stages of flourishing the wine doth, notwithstanding,
imitate; and so neither doth it respect the stars, that it should
disturb itself at their beck.

In the next place, neither doth the wine hearken unto the flourishing or
blossoming of any kind of capers, but of the wine alone: and therefore
we must not flee unto an universal cause, the general or universal
ruling air of worldly successive change; to wit, we may rather run back
unto impossibilities and absurdities, than unto the most near commerces
of resemblance and unity, although hitherto unpassable by the schools.

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

Moreover, that thing doth as yet far more manifestly appear in ale or
beer: when, in times past, our ancestors had seen that of barley, after
whatsoever manner it was boiled, nothing but an empty ptisana or
barley-broth, or also a pulp, was cooked; they meditated, that the
barley first ought to bud (which then they called malt) and next, they
nakedly boiled their ales, imitating wines: wherein, first of all, some
remarkable things do meet in one; to wit, there is stirred up in barley,
a vegetable bud, the which when the barley is dried, doth afterwards
die, and loseth the hope of growing, and so much the more by its
changing into meal, and afterwards by an after-boiling, it despairs of a
growing virtue; yet these things nothing hindering, it retains the winey
and intoxicating spirit of aqua vitæ, the which notwithstanding it doth
not yet actually possess: but at length, in number of days, it attaineth
it by virtue of a ferment: to wit, in the one only bosom of one grain
one only spirit is made famous with diverse powers, and one power is
gelded, another being left: which thing indeed, doth as yet more
wonderfully shine forth; when as the ale or beer of malt disturbs itself
while the barley flowereth, no otherwise than as wine is elsewhere wont
to do: and so a power at a far absent distance is from hence plain to be
seen: for truly there are cities from whom pleasant meadows do expel the
growing of barley for many miles, and by so much the more powerfully do
ales prove their agreement with the absent flowering barley; in as much
as the gelding of their power hath withdrawn the hopes of budding and
increasing: and at length the aqua vitae being detained and shut up
within the ale, hogshead, and prison of the cellar, cannot with the
safety of the ale or beer wandering for some leagues unto the flowering
ear of barley, that thereby, as a stormy retainer, it may trouble the
remaining ale with much confusion. Certainly there is a far more quiet
passage for a magnetical or attractive agreement among some agents at a
far distance from each other, than there is to dream an aqua vitæ
wandering out of the ale of a cellar, unto the flowering barley, and
from thence to return unto the former receptacles of its pen-case, and
ale: But the sign imprinted by the appetite of a woman great with child,
on her young, doth fitly, and alike clearly confirm a magnetism or
attractive faculty and its operation at a distance: to wit, let there be
a woman great with child,

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

which desires another cherry, let her but touch her forehead or any
other place with her finger; without doubt, the young is signed in its
forehead with the image of the cherry, which afterwards doth every year
wax green, white, yellow, and at length looks red, according to the
tenor of the trees: and it much more wonderfully expresses the same
successive alteration of maturities in Spain than in Germany: and so
hereby an *action at a distance* is not only confirmed, but also a
conformity or agreement of the essences of the cherry tree, in its
wooden and fleshly trunk; a consanguinity or near affinity of a *being*
impressed upon the part by on instantaneous imagination, and by a
successive course of the years of its kernel: surely the more learned
ought not to impute those things unto evil spirits, which, through their
own weakness, they are ignorant of; for these things do on all sides
occur in nature, the which, through our slenderness, we are not able to
unfold; for to refer whatsoever gifts of God are in nature (because our
dull capacity does not comprehend the same rightly) to the devil, shews
both ignorance and rashness, especially when, as all demonstration of
causes from a former thing or cause is banished from us, and especially
from Aristotle, who was ignorant of all nature, and deprived of the good
gifts which descends from the Father of Lights; unto whom be all honour
and glory.

Note. We may, by the aforesaid chapter, see the wonderful working power
of the attractive or universal spirit, which can by no other means be so
clearly demonstrated as by the sympathies in natural things, which are
inherent throughout all nature; and, upon this principle of sympathy and
antipathy, we say is founded that spiritual power which tends to things
and objects remote one from the other, *i. e.* a magnetic attraction,
which does actually exist, as we shall clearly prove by experiment,
where we fully shew the action and passion that is between natural
spirits, by which means wonderful effects are produced which have
ignorantly been attributed to divers superstitions, as *Sorcery,
Inchantment, Nigromancy*, or *the Black Art*, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:1](ma202.htm#fr_0.md) Van HELMONT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Of Sympathetic Medicines](ma203.md)
