[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma200)  [Next](ma202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

THE MAGUS,

CONTAINING

MAGNETISM,

AND

CABALISTICAL MAGIC.

TO WHICH IS ADDED

A TREATISE

ON

PROPHECY, PROPHETIC DREAMS AND INSPIRATION.

BOOK II. PART I.

MAGNETISM.

IN our following Treatise of Magnetism we have collected and arranged in
order some valuable and secret things out of the writings of that most
learned chemist and philosopher Paracelsus, who was the ornament of
Germany and the age he lived in. Likewise we have extracted the very
marrow of the science of Magnetism out of the copious and elaborate
works of that most celebrated philosopher (by fire) Van Helmont, who,
together with Paracelsus, industriously promulgated all kinds of
magnetic and sympathetic cures, which, through the drowsiness,
ignorance, unbelief, and obstinacy of

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the present age, have been so much and so totally neglected and
condemned; yet, however impudent in their assertions, and bigotted to
their own false opinions, some of our modern philosophers may be, yet we
have seen two or three individuals, who, by dint of perseverance, have
proved the truth and possibility of Magnetism, by repeated and public
experiments. Indeed the ingenious invention of the Magnetic Tractors
prove at once that science should never be impeded by public slander or
misrepresentation of facts that have proved to be of general utility.
And we do not doubt but that we shall be able to shew, by the theory and
practice delivered in the sequel, that many excellent cures may be
performed by a due consideration and attentive observance of the
principles upon which sympathy, antipathy, magnetic attraction, &c. are
founded; and which will be fully illustrated in the following
compendium:

We shall hasten to explain the first principles of Magnetism, by
examining the magnetic or attractive power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: The Magnetic, Or Attractive Power Or Faculty](ma202.md)
