[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma203)  [Next](ma205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. III.

OF THE MAGNETIC OR SYMPATHETIC UNGUENT, THE POWDER OF SYMPATHY, ARMARY
UNGUENT, CURING OF WOUNDS, ECSTASIES, [WITCHCRAFT](errata.htm#6),
MUMMIES, &C.

WE shall now show some remarkable operations that are effected by
magnetism, and founded upon natural sympathy and antipathy, likewise how
by these means some extraordinary cures may be performed.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

The goodness of the Creator every where extended, created every thing
for the use of ungrateful man; neither did he admit any of the
theologists, or divines, as assistants in council, how many or how great
virtues he should infuse into things natural. But there are those who
venture to measure the wonderful works of God by their own sharpened and
refined wit, whereby they deny God to have given such virtue to things;
as though man (a worm) was able, by his narrow and limited capacity, to
comprehend Omniscience; he therefore measures the minds of all men by
his own, who think that cannot be done, which they cannot understand.
*They* therefore can only develope the mysteries of nature, who being
versed in the art of Cabala, Fire, and Magic, examined the properties of
things, and draw, from darkness into light, the lurking powers of *Man,
Animals, Vegetables, Minerals*, and *Stones*, and, separating the
crudities, dregs, poisons, heterogenities, that are the thorns implanted
in virgin nature from the curse. For an observer of nature sees daily
she doth *distil, sublime, calcine, ferment, dissolve, coagulate, fix*,
&c. therefore we who are the ministers of nature do separate, &c.
finding out the causes and effects of every phenomena she produces.

Now, as magnetism is ordained for the use of man, and for the curing of
the various disorders incident to human nature, we shall first touch
upon the grand subject of magnetism, known to possess wonderful
properties, and which are not only evident to every eye, but shew us
sufficient grounds for our admitting the possibility and reality of
magnetism in general.

The loadstone possesses an eminent medicinal faculty, against many
violent and implacable disorders. Helmont says, that the back of the
loadstone, as it repulses iron, so also it removes gout, swellings,
rheum, &c. that is of the nature or quality of iron. The iron attracting
faculty, if it be joined to the mummy of a woman, and the back of the
loadstone be put within her thigh, and the belly of the loadstone on her
loins, it safely prevents a miscarriage, already threatened; but the
belly of the loadstone applied within the thigh and the back to her
loins, it doth wonderfully facilitate her delivery.

Likewise the wearing the loadstone cases and prevents the cramp, and
such like disorders and pains.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Uldericus Balk, a dominican friar, published a book at Frankfort in the
year 1611, concerning the lamp of life; in which we shall find (taken
from Paracelsus) the true magnetical cure of many diseases, *viz.* the
dropsy, gout, jaundice, &c. For if thou shalt enclose the warm blood of
the sick in the shell and white of an egg, which is exposed to a
nourishing warmth, and this blood, being mixed with a piece of flesh,
thou shalt give to a hungry dog, the disorder departs from thee into the
dog; no otherwise than the leprosy of Naaman passed over into Gehazi
through the execration of the prophet.

If women, weaning their infants, shall milk out their milk upon hot
burning coals, the breast soon dries.

If any one happens to commit nuisance at thy door, and thou wilt prevent
that beastly trick in future, take the poker red-hot, and put it into
the excrement, and, by magnetism, his posteriors shall become much
scorched and inflamed.

Make a small table of the lightest, whitest, and basest kind of lead;
and at one end put a piece of amber, and, three spans from it, lay a
piece of green vitriol; this vitriol will soon lose its colour and acid:
both which effects are found in the preparation of amber. The root of
the Caroline thistle being plucked up when full of juice and virtue, and
tempered with the mummy of a man, will exhaust the powers and natural
strength out of a man, on whose shadow thou shalt stand, into thyself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Of The Armary Unguent, Or Weapon Salve](ma205)
