[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma212)  [Next](ma214.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_3e">p. 3e</span>

CABALISTICAL MAGIC.

CHAP. I.

OF THE CABALA, &c.

WE shall now turn our pen to the explaining of the high and mysterious
secrets of the Cabala, by which only we can know the truth; and likewise
how to prepare our mind and spirit for the contemplation of the greatest
and best part of magic, which we call intellectual and divine, because
it chiefly takes God and the good spirits for its object; and as the
cabalistic art opens many and the chiefest mysteries and secrets of
ceremonial magic.

But in respect of explaining or publishing those few secrets in the
Cabala, which are amongst a few wise men, and communicated by word of
mouth only, I hope the student will pardon me if I pass over these in
silence, because we are not permitted to divulge some certain things;
but this we shall do; we will open all those secrets which are necessary
to be known; and by the close reading of which, you shall find out, of
your own head, to be both profitable and delightful.

Therefore, all we solicit is, that those who perceive those secrets
should keep them together as secrets, and not expose or babble them to
the unworthy; but reveal them only to faithful, discreet, and chosen
friends. And we would caution you in this beginning, that every magical
experiment flies from the public, seeking to be hid, is strengthened and
confirmed by silence, but is destroyed by publication; never does any
complete effect follow after: likewise all the virtue of thy works will
suffer detriment when poured into weak, prating, and incredulous minds;
therefore, if thou would be a magician,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

and gain fruit from this art, to be secret, and to manifest to none,
either thy *work*, or *place*, or *time*, nor thy *desire*, or *will*,
except it be to a master or partner, or companion, who should likewise
be faithful, discreet, silent, and dignified by nature and education;
seeing that even the prating of a companion, his unbelief, doubting,
questioning, and, lastly, unworthiness, hinders and disturbs the effect
in every operation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: What Dignity And Preparation Is Essentially Necessary
To Him Who Would Become A True Magician](ma214.md)
