[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma210)  [Next](ma212.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

CHAP. X.

OF THE MAGICAL VIRTUE OF THE SOUL, AND THE MEDIUMS BY WHICH IT ACTS.

SOMETHING more we will add, before we dismiss the present subject, which
is that if a nail, dart, knife, or sword, or any other iron instrument
be thrust into the heart of a horse, it will bind and withhold the
spirit of a witch, and conjoin it with the mummial spirit of the horse,
whereby they may be burnt in the fire together, and by that the witch is
tormented, as by a sting or burning, by which means she may be known so
that she who is offensive to God, and destructive to mortal men, may be
taken away from society according to the law of God "thou shalt not
suffer a witch to live;" for if the work be limited to any outward
object, that work the magical soul never attempts without a medium or
mean: therefore it makes use of the nail, or sword, or knife, or any
other thing as aforesaid.

Now this being proved, that man hath a power of acting, *per nutum*, or
by his nod, or of moving any object remotely placed; it has also been
sufficiently confirmed by the same natural example, that this efficacy
was also given unto man by God.

And as every magical faculty lies dormant, and has need of excitement,
or stirring up; which is always true, if the object whereon it is to act
is not nearly disposed, if its internal phantasy doth not wholly confirm
to the impression of the agent, or also if the patient be equal in
strength, or superior to the agent therein.

But, on the contrary, where the object is plainly and nearly disposed,
as steel is, for the receiving of magnetism, then the patient without
much stirring up, the alone phantasy of the more outward man being drawn
out to the work and bound up to any suitable mean, yields to the
magnetism.

Therefore we repeat, the magician must always make use of a medium for
then the words or forms of sacraments do always operate, because from

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the work performed. But the reason why exorcisms, conjurations, charms,
incantations, &c. do sometimes fail of their desired effect, is because
the unexcited mind, or spirit of the exorcist, renders the words dull or
ineffectual.

Therefore no man can be a happy or successful magician, but him who
knows how to stir up the magical virtue of his soul, or can do it
practically without science.

And there can be no nearer medium of magnetism, than human blood with
human blood.

And no sympathetic remedies, magnetical or attractive, but from the idea
or phantasy of the operator impressing upon it a virtue and efficacy
from the excited power in his own soul.

And now to bring our Magnetic Treatise to a total conclusion, we have to
say, that whoever, through ignorance or obstinacy, will say there is no
validity or reason, or reality in the science of magnetism, proves
himself unworthy the sacred name of philosopher, because he condemns
what he knows nothing at all about.

For those who will give themselves the leisure to examine the truth of
those things which we have taught, will not find their expectation
deceived, therefore will not condemn.

But whoever should be so superstitious as to attribute a natural effect
so created by God, and bestowed on the creature, unto the power and
craft of the devil, he filches the honour due to the Omnipotent Creator,
and reproachfully applies the same unto Satan; the which (under favour)
will be found to be express idolatry and blasphemy.

"There are three" (as says the Scripture) "who bear record in heaven;
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit; and these three are only
one."

There are three that bear record on earth; the *blood*, the *spirit*,
and the *water*; and these three are only *one*.

We therefore, who have the like humanity, contain blood and spirit of a
co-like unity; and the action of the blood is merely spiritual.
Therefore, in

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *Genesis*, it is not called by the etymology of
blood, but is made remarkable by the name of a *red spirit*.

Therefore, let those who would attain knowledge in these things, and be
perfect in what we have set before them, constantly meditate and desire
that the First Cause and Archetype of all things would graciously and
mercifully illuminate their minds; without which, they grope but in
darkness and uncertainty, and are subject to the delusions of impure
spirits and devils, who are only to be put to flight by putting on the
whole armour of God, in whom we all *live, move, breathe*, and have our
being.

END OF MAGNETISM.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: title page](ma212.md)
