[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma221)  [Next](ma223.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. X.

OF THE TONGUE OF ANGELS, AND OF THEIR SPEAKING AMONGST THEMSELVES AND
WITH US.

WE might doubt whether angels or demons, since they are pure spirits,
use any vocal speech or tongue among themselves or to us; but that Paul,
in some place says, "if I speak with the tongue of men or angels;"--but
what their speech or tongue is, is much doubted by many. For many think
that if they use any idiom, it is Hebrew, because that was first of all,
and came from heaven, and was before the confusion of languages in
Babylon, in which the law was given by God the Father, and the gospel
was preached by Christ the Son, and so many oracles were given to the
prophets by the Holy Ghost; and seeing all tongues have and do undergo
various mutations and corruptions, this alone does always continue
inviolated. Moreover, an evident sign of this opinion is, that though
this demon and intelligence do use the speech of those nations with whom
they do inhabit, yet, to them who understand it, they never speak in any
idiom but in this alone, *viz.* Hebrew. But now, how angels speak, it is
hid from us, as they themselves are. Now, to us, that we may speak, a
tongue is necessary with other instruments; as the jaws, palate, lips,
teeth, throat, lungs, the *aspera artertia*, and muscles of the breast,
which have the beginning of motion from the soul. But if I speak at a
distance to another, he

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

must use a louder voice; but, if near, he whispers in my ear, as if he
should be coupled to the hearer, without any noise, as an image in the
eye or glass. So souls going out of the body, so angels, so demons
speak; and what man does with a sensible voice, they do by impressing
the conception of the speech in those to whom they speak after a better
manner than if they should express it in an audible voice. So the
Platonist says, that Socrates perceived his demon by sense, indeed, but
not of this body, but by the sense of the *etherial body* concealed in
this; after which manner. *Avicen* believes the angels were wont to be
seen and heard by the prophets. That instrument, whatsoever the virtue
be, by which one spirit makes known to another spirit what things are in
his mind, is called by the *apostle Paul*, the *tongue of angels*. Yet
oftentimes they send forth an audible voice, as they that cried at the
ascension of the Lord, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye here gazing unto
the heaven? And in the old law they spake with divers of the fathers
with a sensible voice; but this never but when they assumed bodies. But
with what senses these spirits and demons hear our invocations and
prayers, and see our ceremonies, we are altogether ignorant.

For there is a *spiritual body*, of demons every where sensible by
nature, so that it touches, sees, hears without any medium, and nothing
can be an impediment to it; yet they do not perceive after the same
manner as we do, with different organs, but haply as sponges drink in
water, so do they all sensible things with their body or some other way
unknown to us; neither are all animals endowed with those organs, for we
know that many want ears, yet we know they perceive a sound, but after
what manner we know not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI: Of The Names Of Spirits, And Their Various
Imposition...](ma223.md)
