[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma222)  [Next](ma224) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

CHAP. XI.

OF THE NAMES OF SPIRITS, AND THEIR VARIOUS IMPOSITION, AND OF THE
SPIRITS THAT ARE SET OVER THE STARS, SIGNS, CORNERS OF THE HEAVEN, AND
THE ELEMENTS.

MANY and different are the names of good and bad spirits; but their
proper and true names, as those of the stars, are known to God alone,
who only numbers the multitude of stars, and calls them by their names,
whereof none can be known by us but by divine revelation; very few are
expressed to us in sacred writ. But the masters of the Hebrews think,
that the names of angels are imposed on them by Adam, according to that
which is written, "the Lord brought all things which he had made unto
Adam, that he should name them, and as he called any thing, so the name
of it was." Hence the Hebrew *Mecubals* think, together with Magicians
and Cabalists, that it is in the power of man, to impose names upon
spirits, but of such a man only who is dignified and elevated to this
virtue by some divine gift or sacred authority: but because a name that
may express the nature of divinity, or the whole virtue of angelical
essences, cannot be made by any human voice, therefore names for the
most part are put upon them from their works, signifying some certain
office or effect which is required by the quire of spirits; which name
then, and not otherwise, obtains efficacy and virtue to draw any
spiritual substance from above, or beneath, to make any desired effect.

I have seen and known some writing on virgin parchment the name and seal
of some spirit in the hour of the moon, which afterwards he gave to be
devoured by a water-frog, and had muttered over some verse; the frog
being let go into the water, rains and showers presently followed. I saw
also the same man inscribing the name of another spirit with the seal
thereof in the hour of Mars, which was given to a crow, who, being let
go, after a verse muttered over, there followed from that part of the
heaven whither it flew, lightnings, shaking, and horrible thunders, with
thick clouds; neither were

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

those names of spirits of an unknown tongue, neither did they signify
any thing else but their offices; of this kind are the names of those
angels, *Raziel, Gabriel, Michael, Raphael, Haniel*, which is as much as
to say the vision of God, the virtue of God, the strength of God, the
medicine of God, the glory of God. In like manner, in the offices of
evil demons are read their names, *viz.* *a player, a deceiver, a
dreamer, a fornicator*, and many such like. So we receive from many of
the ancient fathers of the Hebrews the names of angels set over the
planets and signs; over *Saturn*, *Zaphiel*; over *Jupiter*, *Zadkiel*;
over *Mars*, *Camael*; over the *Sun*, *Raphael*; over *Venus*,
*Haniel*; over *Mercury*, *Michael*; over the *Moon*, *Gabriel*. These
are those seven spirits which always stand before the face of God, to
whom is entrusted the disposing the whole celestial and terrene kingdoms
which are under the moon: for these (as the more curious theologians
say) govern all things by a certain vicissitude of hours, days, and
years; as the astrologers teach concerning the planets which they are
set over, which Mercurius Trismegistus calls the seven governors of the
world, who, by the heavens as by instruments, distribute the influences
of all the stars and signs upon their inferiors. There are some who
ascribe them to the stars by names somewhat differing, saying, that over
Saturn is set an intelligence called *Oriphael*, over Jupiter
*Zachariel*, over Mars *Zamael*, over the Sun *Michael*, over Venus
*Anael*, over Mercury *Raphael*, over the Moon *Gabriel*. And every one
of these governs the world 354 years and four months; and the government
begins from the intelligence of *Saturn*; afterwards, in order, the
intelligences of *Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, Mars*, the *Moon*, and the
*Sun* reign, and the government returns to the spirit of Saturn.

Tritemius writ to Maximilian Cæsar a special treatise concerning these,
which he that will thoroughly examine may from thence draw great
knowledge of future times.  <span id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)Over the
twelve signs are set these, *viz.* over *Aries*, *Malahidael*; over
*Taurus*, *Asmodel*; over *Gemini*, *Ambriel*; over *Cancer*, *Muriel*;
over *Leo*, *Verchiel*; over *Virgo*, *Hamaliel*; over *Libra*,
*Zuriel*; over *Scorpio*, *Barchiel*; over *Sagittarius*, *Advachiel*;
over *Capricorn*, *Hanael*; over *Aquarius*, *Cambiel*; over *Pisces*,
*Barchiel*. Of these spirits set over the planets and signs,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

signs, *John* made mention of in the Revelation, speaking of the former
in the beginning; and the seven spirits which are in the presence of the
throne of God, which I find are set over the seven planets, in the end
of the book, where he describes the platform of the heavenly city,
saying, that on the twelve orates thereof are twelve angels. There are
again twenty-eight angels, who rule in the twenty-eight mansions of the
moon, whose names are these; *Geniel, Enediel, Anixiel, Azariel,
Gabriel, Dirachiel, Scheliel, Amnediel, Barbiel, Ardefiel, Neciel,
Abdizuel, Jazeriel, Ergediel, Atliel, Azeruel, Adriel, Egibiel, Amutiel,
Kyriel, Bethnael, Geliel, Requiel, Abrinael, Agiel, Tagriel, Atheniel,
Amnixiel*. There are also four princes of the angels, which are set over
the four winds, and over the four parts of the world. Michael is placed
over the east-wind, Raphael over the west, Gabriel over the north,
Nariel, who by some is called Ariel, is over the south. There are also
assigned to the elements these, *viz.* to the air *Cherub*, to the water
*Tharsis*, to the earth *Ariel*, to the fire *Seraph*. Now every one of
these spirits is a great prince, and has much power and freedom in the
dominion of his own planets and signs, and in their times, years,
months, days and hours: and in their elements, and parts of the world,
and winds. And every one of them rules over many legions; and after the
same manner, among evil spirits, there are four, who, as most potent
kings, are set over the rest, according to the four parts of the world,
whose names are these, *viz*. *Urieus*, king of the east; *Amaymon*,
king of the south; *Paymon*, king of the west; *Egin*, king, of the
north; which the Hebrew doctors perhaps call more rightly thus, *Samuel,
Azazel, Azael, and Mahazuel*, under whom many others rule as princes of
legions and rulers. Likewise there are innumerable demons of private
offices. Moreover, the ancient *theologians* of the Greeks reckon up six
demons, which they call *Telchines*, others *Alastores*; which bearing
ill-will to men, take up water out of the river *Styx* with their hands,
sprinkle it upon the earth, whence follow calamities, plagues, and
famines; and these are said to be *Acteus, Megalezius, Ormenus, Lycus,
Nicon, Mimon*. But he that desires to know exactly the distinct names,
offices, places, and times of angels, and evil demons, let him inquire
into the book of *Rabbi Simon* of the Temples, and in his book of
Lights, and in his treatise of the Greatness of Stature,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

and in the treatise of the Temples of *Rabbi Ishmael*, and in almost all
the commentaries of his book of Formation, and he shall find it written
at large concerning them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[56:1](ma223.htm#fr_2) TRITEMIUS on Spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: The Cabalists Draw Forth The Sacred Names Of Angels
From Sacred Writ...](ma224)
