[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma228)  [Next](ma230.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XVII.

THERE IS ANOTHER KIND OF CHARACTERS, OR MARKS OF SPIRITS, WHICH ARE
RECEIVED ONLY BY REVELATION.

THERE is another kind of character received by revelation only, which
can be found out no other way; the virtue of which characters is from
the Deity revealing; of whom there are some secret works breathing out a
harmony of some divinity, or they are, as it were, some certain
agreements or compacts of a league between us and them. Of this kind
there was a sign shewed to *Constantine*, which was this, *in hoc
vince*; there was another revealed to *Antiochus* in the figure of a
Pentangle, which signifies health; for,

 

<span id="img_pl18"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl18.jpg.md)

 

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

being resolved into letters, it speaks the word ὑγίεια i. e. health: in
the faith and virtue of which signs, both kings obtained a great victory
against their enemies. So Judas, who by reason of that, was afterwards
surnamed Machabeus, being to fight with the Jews against *Antiochus
Eupator*, received from an angel a notable sign, מכבי in the virtue of
which they first slew 11,000, with an infinite number of elephants, then
again 35,000 of their enemies: for that sign did represent the name of
*Jehovah*, and was a memorable emblem of the name of seventy-two letters
by the equality of number; and the exposition thereof is מי בטיד באלי
מיהיח *i. e.* who is there among thee strong as *Jehovah*? See Plate,
fig. F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII: On The Bonds Of Spirits, And Their Adjurations,
And Castings Out](ma230.md)
