[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma233)  [Next](ma235) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Of MAGIC PENTACLES *and their* COMPOSITION.

WE now proceed to speak of the holy and sacred Pentacles and Seals. For
these pentacles are certain holy signs and characters, preserving us
from evil chances and events, helping and assisting us to bind,
exterminate, and drive away evil spirits, alluring the good spirits, and
reconciling them to us. These pentacles consist either of characters of
good spirits of the superior order, or of sacred pictures of holy
letters or revelations, with apt and proper versicles, which are
composed either of geometrical figures and holy names of God, according
to the course and manner of many of them, or they are compounded of all
of them, or many of them mixed. The characters which are useful for us
to constitute and make the pentacles are the characters of

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the good spirits, chiefly of the good spirits of the first and second
order, and sometimes of the third order. These kind of characters are
especially to be named holy.

Whatsoever characters of this kind are to be instituted, we must draw
about him a double circle, wherein we must write the name of his angel;
and if we will add some divine name congruent with his spirit and
office, it will be of greater force and efficacy; and if we draw about
him any angular figure, according to the manner of his numbers that is
lawful to be done. But the holy pictures which make the pentacles are
they which every where are delivered to us in the prophets and sacred
writings, both in the Old and New Testaments; even as the figure of the
serpent hanging on the cross, and such like; whereof many may be found
in the visions of the prophets, as in *Isaiah*, *Daniel*, *Esdras*, and
others, and likewise in the revelations of the *Apocalypse*. And we have
before spoken of them in our First Part, where we have made mention of
holy things, therefore where any picture is posited of any of these holy
images, let the circle be drawn round it on each side; wherein let there
be written some divine name that is apt and conformed to the effect of
that figure, or else there may be written around it some versicle taken
out of part of the body of holy Scripture, which may ascertain or
deprecate the desired effect.

If a pentacle were to be made to gain a victory, or revenge against
one's enemies, as well visible as invisible, the figure may be taken out
of the Second book of the *Maccabees*, that is to say, a hand holding a
golden sword drawn, about which let there be written the versicle there
contained, to wit, *take the holy sword, the gift of God, wherewith thou
shall slay the adversaries of my people Israel*. Or else there may be
written about a versicle of the fifth Psalm; *in this is the strength of
thy arm: before they face there is death*; or some other such like
versicle. But if you will write a divine name about the figure, then let
some name be taken that signifies fear; a sword, wrath, the revenge of
God, or some such like name congruent and agreeing with the effect
desired. And if there shall be written any angular figure, let it be
taken according to the rule of the numbers, as we have taught where we

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

have treated of numbers, and the like operations. And of this sort there
are two pentacles of sublime virtue and great power, very useful and
necessary to be used in the consecration of experiments and spirits; one
whereof is that in the first chapter of the Apocalypse, to wit, a figure
of the majesty of God sitting. upon a throne, having in his mouth a
two-edged sword, as there is described; about which let there be
written, "I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, which is, and
which was, and which is to come, the Almighty. I am the First and the
Last, who am living, and was dead, and behold I live for ever and ever;
and I have the keys of death and hell." Then there shall be written
about it these three versicles:

Munda Deus virtuti tuæ &c.--*Give commandment, O God, to thy strength;
confirm, O God, thy strength in us. Let them be as dust before the face
of the wind: and let the angel of the Lord scatter them. Let all their
ways be darkness and uncertain: and let the angel of the Lord persecute
them*.

Moreover, let there be written about it the ten general names, which are
*El, Elohim, Elohe, Zebaoth, Elion, Escerchie, Adonay, Jah,
Tetragrammaton, Saday*.

There is another pentacle, the figure whereof is like *a lamb slain,
having seven eyes and seven horns; and under his feet a book sealed with
seven seals*, as it is in the fifth chapter of the *Apocalypse*. Round
about let be written this versicle, *behold the lion hath overcome of
the tribe of Judah, the root of David. I will open the book and unloose
the seven seals thereof*. And another versicle, *I saw Satan like
lightning fall down from heaven. Behold I have given you power to tread
upon serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of your enemies, and
nothing shall be able to hurt you*. And let there be also written about
it the ten general names as aforesaid.

But those pentacles which are thus made of figures and names, let them
keep this order; for when any figure is posited, conformable to any
number, to produce any certain effect or virtue, there must be written
thereupon, in all the several angles, some divine name obtaining the
force and efficacy of the thing desired; yet so nevertheless, that the
name which is of this sort do consist of just so many letters as the
figure may constitute a number; or of so

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

many letters of a name, as, joined together among themselves, may make
the number of a figure; or by any number which may be divided without
any superfluity or diminution. Now such a name being found, whether it
be only one name or more, or divers names, it is to be written in all
the several angles in the figure; but in the middle of the figure let
the revolution of the name be wholly and totally placed, or at least
principally.

We likewise constitute pentacles by making the revolution of some kind
of name, in a square table, and by drawing about it a single or double
circle, and writing therein some holy versicle competent and befitting
this name, or from which that name is extracted. And this is the way of
making the pentacles, according to their several distinct forms and
fashions, which we may, if we please, either multiply or commix together
by course among themselves, to work the greater efficacy, extension and
enlargement of force and virtue.

As, if a deprecation would be made for the overthrow and destruction of
one's enemies, we are to mind, and call to remembrance how God destroyed
the face of the whole earth in the deluge of waters, and the destruction
of *Sodom* and *Gomorrah*, by raining down fire and brimstone; likewise,
how God overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea; and to call to
mind if any other malediction or curse be found in holy writ. And thus
in things of the like sort. So likewise in deprecating and praying
against perils and dangers of waters, we ought to call to remembrance
the saving of *Noah* in the deluge of waters, the passing of the
children of *Israel* through the Red Sea; and also we are to mind how
Christ walked on the waters, and how he saved the ship in danger from
being cast away by the tempest; and how he commanded the winds and the
waves, and they obeyed him; and also, that he drew *Peter* out of the
water, being in danger of drowning, and the like. And, lastly, with
these we invoke and call upon some certain holy names of God; to wit,
such as are significative to accomplish our desire and accommodated to
the desired effect; as if it be to overthrow enemies; we are to invoke
and call upon names of *wrath, revenge, fear, justice*, and *fortitude*
of God; and if we would avoid and

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

escape any evil or danger, we then call upon the names of mercy,
defence, salvation, fortitude, goodness, and such like names of God.
When likewise we pray to God that he would grant us our desires, we are
likewise to intermix therewith the name of some good spirit, whether one
only, or more, whose office it is to execute our desires; and sometimes
also we require some evil spirit to restrain or compel, whose name
likewise we intermingle, and that rightly, especially if it be to
execute any evil work; as *revenge, punishment*, or *destruction*.

Furthermore, if there be any versicle in the Psalms, or any other part
of the holy Scripture, that shall seem congruent and agreeable to our
desire, the same is to be mingled with our prayers. Now, after prayer
has been made to God, it is expedient afterwards to make an oration to
that executioner, whom, in our precedent prayer to God, we have desired
should administer to us, whether one or more, or whether he be an angel,
or star, or soul, or any of the noble angels. But this kind of oration
ought to be composed according to the rules which we have delivered in
the former part of our work, where we have treated of the manner of the
composition of enchantments, &c.

You may know farther, that these kind of bonds have a threefold
difference; for the first bond is when we conjure by natural things; the
second is compounded of religious mysteries, by sacraments, miracles,
and things of this sort; and the third is constituted by divine names
and holy seals. With these kind of bonds we may bind not only spirits,
but also other creatures whatsoever, as *animals, tempests, burnings,
floods of waters, the force and power of arms*. Also we use these bonds
aforesaid, not only by conjuration, but sometimes also using the means
of deprecation and benediction. Moreover it conduces much to this
purpose to join some sentence of holy Scripture, if any shall be found
convenient thereto, as in the conjuration of serpents, by commemorating
the curse of the serpent in the earthly paradise, and the setting up the
serpent in the wilderness; and further, adding that versicle, *thou
shall walk upon the asp and the basilisk*, &c. Superstition is also of
much prevelancy

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

herein, by the translation of some sacramental rites, to bind that which
we intend to hinder; as, the rites of excommunication, of sepulchres,
funerals, buryings, and the like sort.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of The Consecration Of All Magical Instruments And Materials
Which Are Used In This Art](ma235)
