[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma229)  [Next](ma231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

CHAP. XVIII.

ON THE BONDS OF SPIRITS, AND THEIR ADJURATIONS, AND CASTINGS OUT.

THE bond by which spirits are bound, besought, or cast out, are three;
some of them are taken from the elemental world, as when we adjure a
spirit by an inferior and natural thing of affinity with or adverse to
them; inasmuch as we would call up or cast them out, as by fumigations
of *flowers, herbs, animals, snow, ice*, or by *hell, fire*, and such
like; and these also are often mixt with. divine praises, and blessings,
and consecrations, as appears in the song of the Three Children, and in
the psalm, Praise ye the Lord from the heavens, and in the consecration
and blessing of the *paschal taper*. This bond works upon the spirits by
an apprehensive virtue, under the account of love or hatred, inasmuch as
the spirits are present with, or favour, or abhor any thing that is
natural or against nature, as these things themselves love or hate one
another. The second bond is taken from the celestial world, *viz*. when
we adjure them by their heaven, by the stars, by their motions, rays,
light, beauty, clearness, excellency, fortitude, influence and wonders,
and such like; and this bond works

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

upon spirits by way of admonition and example. It hath also some
command, especially upon the ministering spirits, and those who are of
the lowest orders. The third bond is from the intellectual and divine
world, which is perfected by religion; that is to say, when we swear by
the sacraments, miracles, divine names, sacred seals, and other
mysteries of religion; wherefore this bond is the highest of all and the
Strongest, working upon the spirits by command and power; but this is to
be observed, that as after the universal Providence there is a
particular one, and after the universal soul, particular souls; so, in
the first place, we invocate by the superior bonds, and by the names and
powers which rule the things, then by the inferior and the things
themselves. We must know further, that by these bonds, not only spirits,
but also all creatures are bound, as tempests, burnings, floods,
plagues, diseases, force of arms, and every animal, by assuming them,
either by adjuration or deprecation, or benediction, as in the charming
of serpents; besides the natural and celestial, by rehearsing out of the
mysteries and religion, the cure of the serpent in terrestrial paradise,
the lifting up of the serpent in the wilderness; likewise by assuming
that verse of the 91st Psalm, *thou shall walk upon the asp and the
basilisk, and shall tread upon the lion and the dragon*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX: By What Means Magicians And Necromancers Call Forth
The Souls Of The Dead](ma231)
