[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma234)  [Next](ma236.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Of the Consecration of all magical Instruments and Materials which are
used in this Art.

THE virtue of consecrations chiefly consists in two things, *viz.* the
power of the person consecrating, and the virtue of the prayer by which
the consecration is made.

For in the person consecrating, there is required firmness, constancy,
and holiness of life; and that the consecrator himself shall, with a
firm and undubitable faith, believe the virtue, Power, and effect
thereof.

Then in the prayer by which the consecration is made it derives its
virtue either from divine inspiration, or else by composing it from
sundry places in the holy Scriptures, in the commemoration of some of
the wonderful miracles of God, effects, promises, sacraments and
sacramental things, of which we have abundance in holy writ.

There must likewise be used the invocation of divine names, that are
significative of the work in hand; likewise a sanctifying and expiation
which s wrought by sprinkling with holy water, unctions with holy oil,
and odoriferous suffumigations. Therefore in every consecration there is
generally used a benediction and consecration of water, earth, oil,
fire, and suffumigations, &c. with consecrated wax-lights or lamps
burning; for without lights no consecration is duly performed. You must
therefore particularly observe this, that when any thing (which we call
prophane) is to be used, in which there is any defilement or pollution,
it must, first of all, be purified by an *Exorcism* composed solely for
that purpose, which ought to precede the consecration;

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

which things being so made pure are most apt to receive the influences
of the divine virtue. We must also observe that at the end of any
consecration after the prayer is rightly performed, as we have
mentioned, the operator ought to bless the thing consecrated, by
breathing out some sentence with divine virtue and power of the present
consecration, with a commemoration of his virtue and authority, that so
it may be the more duly performed, and with an earnest and attentive
mind. Now I shall mention here some examples, that, by these, a path may
be made to the whole perfection thereof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Consecration Of Water](ma236.md)
