[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma248)  [Next](ma250.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

THE

MAGIC AND PHILOSOPHY

OF

TRITHEMIUS OF SPANHEIM.

The Translator's LETTER *to a* FRIEND *of his, a young Student in these
occult Sciences*.

    MY FRIEND,

KNOWING thee to be a curious searcher after those sciences which are out
of the common track of study, (I mean the art of foretelling events,
magic, telismans, &c.) I am moved spiritually to give thee my thoughts
upon them, and by these ideas here written, to open to thine eye
(spiritual) as much information as it seems necessary for thee to know,
by. which thou mayest be led by the hand into the delectable field of
nature; and to give thee such documents as, guided by the supreme wisdom
of the Highest, thou mayest refresh thy soul with a delicious draught of
knowledge; so that after recreating thy spirit with the use of those
good gifts which may please God to bestow on thee, thou mayest be
wrapped up into the contemplation of the immense wisdom of that great
munificent Being who created thee.

Now, art thou a man, in whose soul the image of Divinity is sealed for
eternity, think first what is thy desire in the searching after these
mysteries! Is it wealth, honour, fame, power, might, aggrandizement, and
the like? Perhaps thy heart says, All! all these I would gladly crave!
If so, this is my answer,--seek first to know thyself thoroughly,
cleanse thy heart from all wicked, vain, and rapacious desires. Thinkest
thou, oh man! to attain power *to gratify thy lusts, to enrich thy
coffers, to build houses*, to raise thyself to the pinnacle of human
admiration; if these are thy hopes and desires, thou hast reason to
lament thy being born: all such desires are immediately from

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

the devil, I mean that Being whose engines (*i. e.* myriads of demons)
are continually in the act of placing sensual delights and luxuries
before the depraved minds and hearts of man, and whose chief business
and property it is to counteract the benevolent actions and inspirations
of those blessed spirits who are the instruments of God our Creator.

Fear God and love thy neighbour; use no deceit, swear not, neither lye;
let all thy actions be sincere. Here, O man! is the grand seal of all
earthly wisdom, the true talisman of human happiness. When thou shalt
accomplish this, behold nothing will be impossible unto thee as far as
God permits: then with all speed apply thy mind and heart to attain
knowledge and wisdom; with all humility throw thy dependence on God
alone, the author of all things that cannot die.

To know thyself is to know God, for it is a spiritual gift *from God*
that enables a man to know himself. This gift but very few possess, as
may be daily seen. How many are there tossed about to and fro' upon the
perilous sea of contending passions, and who are more light than
feathers! how many in this great city who place their chiefest *good* in
debauchery and letchery! See their *actions*, *manners*, and
*dispositions*; these poor, unfortunate, miserable wretches, such is
their fatal magical infatuation and ignorance, that they think those mad
who might even attempt to reason with them on the vanity and misery of
their situation. To make myself more intelligible, these are what the
world calls men of fashion, a phrase insignificant enough when we
consider that the universal fashion of this time is vice, and that so
glaring, that it needs no great intellect to discover what is daily open
to the view of the observer. But to you, my friend, I have addressed
these lines; therefore let it not be supposed that I am reprehending my
friend for vices which I cannot suppose him attached to: for I know thou
art a young man designed for the receiving of instruction, in much
higher and more glorious contemplations than those sons of earth are
capable of, therefore I have presented thee with this translation which
thou didst desire me to give thee.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

But beware of flattery, self-love, and covetousness, so wilt thou
thrive; and be diligent in thy occupation, so shall thy body be fed.
Idleness is offensive to the Deity, industry shall sweeten thy brown
bread, and the fruits of it shall warm thine heart, and inspire thy soul
with gratitude to him that blesses thee with *enough*: seek for no more,
for it will damn thee; pray for enough to feed and clothe thy body, but
ask no more, lest thou pine away in heart-rending poverty, and spend the
remainder of thy days in contumely and beggary. For know a thing most
necessary for thee to know, that if by thy study, by thy art, or any
other thing, thou couldst *command a million of spirits*, it should not
be lawful for thee to wish to gain riches suddenly, for the Wisdom
Eternal has put forth the fiat; and it has been said by him who never
spoke in vain, and who cannot lye, that *man shall get bread by the
sweat of his brow*; therefore let us not have in view the enriching of
ourselves in worldly goods, by supernatural means, or by a greedy
desiring of what we ought to look upon with eyes of contempt, draw upon
us the wrath of God. Rather let us cheerfully rely on, and follow in
very deed, spirit and truth, these words of the apostle, Seek ye first
the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you fear
not but that God shall make thy household as a flourishing tree, and thy
wife shall be as a fruitful vine. Farewell, remember my poor counsel,
and be happy. From thy true friend, F. B.

N. B. To enable thee the better to comprehend this Book, I have drawn
out the various figures, of which mention is made in this work, that
thou mayest see the very exact method of working; likewise the images of
seals, spirits, and various other rare, and curious instruments, which
are necessary for thee to know and see with the eye; therefore in the
construction of them thou canst not be liable to error.

Fig. I. The form of the crystal for invocating spirits, with the plate
of pure gold. in which the crystal must be fastened, with the divine
characters around.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

Fig 2. A magical circle (C D E F), of a simple construction, for the
operator to stand or sit in when he calleth the spirits.

Fig. 3. The crystal (A), two silver or other candlesticks (G G,) with
the wax tapers burning, and tripod or vessel for the oderiferous
suffumigation.

Fig 4. A wand of black ebony with golden characters. The characters are
explained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Caution To The Inexperienced In This Art, And A Word Of Advice
To Those Who Would Be Adepts](ma250.md)
