[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma240)  [Next](ma242.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Of the Invocation of EVIL SPIRITS, *and the binding, of, and
constraining of them to appear*.

NOW, if thou art desirous of binding any spirit to a ready obedience to
thee, we will shew you how a certain book may be made by which they may
be invoked; and this book is to be consecrated a book of Evil Spirits,
ceremoniously to be composed in their name and order, whereunto they
bind

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

with a certain holy oath, the ready and present obedience of the spirit.
This book is therefore to be made of the most pure and clean paper,
which is generally called virgin paper; and this book must be inscribed
after this manner, *viz.* let there be drawn on the left side of the
book the image of the spirit, and on the right side thereof his
character, with the oath above it, containing the name of the spirit,
his dignity and place, with his office and power. Yet many magicians do
compose this book otherwise, omitting the characters and images; but I
think that it is much more efficacious not to neglect any thing above
mentioned in the forms.

There is likewise to be observed the circumstances of places, times,
hours, according to the stars which these spirits are under, and are
seen to agree to; with their site, rite, and order, being applied.

Which book being so written, is to be well bound, adorned, garnished,
embellished and kept secure, with registers and seals, lest it should
happen after the consecration to open in some part not designed, and
endanger the operator. And, above all, let this book be kept as pure and
reverent as possible; for irreverance of mind causes it to lose its
virtue by pollution and prophanation.

Now this sacred book being thus composed according to the form and
manner we have delivered, we are to consecrate it after a two-fold way;
the first is, that all and singularly each of the spirits who are
written in the book be called to the circle, according to the rites
magical, which we have before taught, and place the book which is to be
consecrated in a triangle on the outside of the circle; then read, in
the presence of the spirits, all the oaths which are contained and
written in that book; then the book to be consecrated being already
placed without the circle in a triangle there drawn, compel all the
spirits to impose their hands where their images and characters are
drawn, and to confirm and consecrate the same with a special and common
oath. This being done, let the book be shut and preserved as we have
spoken before; then licence the spirits to depart according to due rite
and magical order.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

There is another method extant among us of consecrating a general book
of spirits which is more easy, and of as much efficacy to produce every
effect, except that in opening this book, the spirits do not always
appear visible. And this way is thus: let be made a book of spirits, as
we have before shewn, but in the end thereof write invocations, bonds,
and strong conjurations, wherewith every spirit may be bound; then bind
this book between two lamens or tables, and on the inside thereof draw
or let be drawn two holy pentacles of the divine Majesty, which we have
before set forth, out of the Apocalypse. Then let the first of them be
placed in the beginning, of the book, and the second at the end of the
same.

This book being thus perfected, let it be brought, in a clear and fair
night, to a circle prepared in a cross-way, according to the art which
we have before delivered; and there, in the first place, the book is to
be opened, and to be consecrated according to the rites and ways which
we have before delivered concerning consecration, which being done, let
all the spirits be called which are written in the book, in their own
order and place, conjuring them thrice by the bonds described in the
book that they come to that place within the space of three days, to
assure their obedience and confirm the same, to the book so to be
consecrated; then let the book be wrapped up in a clean linen cloth, and
bury it in the midst of the circle, and stop the hole so as it may not
be perceived or discovered: the circle being destroyed after you have
licensed the spirits, depart before sun-rise; and on the third day,
about the middle of the night, return and make the circle anew and on
thy knees make prayer unto God, and give thanks to him; and let a
precious perfume be made, open the hole in which you buried your book
and take it out, and so let it be kept, not opening the same. Then after
licensing the spirits in their, order and destroying the circle, depart
before sunrise. And this is the last rite and manner of consecrating,
profitable to whatever writings, experiments, &c. that direct the
spirits, placing the same between two holy lamens or pentacles, as is
before mentioned.

But when the operator would work by the book thus consecrated he should
do it in a fair and clear season, when the spirits are least troubled;
and let him

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

turn himself towards the region of the spirits; then let him open the
book under a due register, and likewise invoke the spirits by their
oaths there described and confirmed, and by the name of their character
and image, to whatever purpose you desire, and if there be need conjure
them by the bonds placed in the end of the book. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) And having attained thy desired effect
license them to depart.

And now we proceed to speak of the *Invocation of good as well as bad
Spirits*.

The good spirits may be invocated of us, or by us, divers ways, and they
in sundry shapes and manners offer themselves to us, for they openly
speak to those that watch, and do offer themselves to our sight, or do
inform us by dreams and by oracle of those things which we have a great
desire to know. Whoever therefore would call any good spirit to speak or
appear in sight, he must particularly observe two things; one whereof is
about the *disposition* of the invocant, the other concerning those
things which are outwardly to be adhibited to the invocation for the
conformity of the spirit to be called.

It is necessary therefore that the invocant religiously dispose himself
for the space of many days to such a mystery, and to conserve himself
during the time chaste, abstinent, and to abstract himself as much as he
can from all manner of foreign and secular business; likewise he should
observe fasting, as much as shall seem convenient to him, and let him
daily, between sun-rising and setting, being clothed in pure white
linen, seven times call upon God, and make a deprecation to the angels
to be called and invocated, according to the rule which we have before
taught. Now the number of days of fasting and preparation is commonly
one month, *i. e.* the time of a whole lunation. Now, in the Cabala, we
generally prepare ourselves forty days before.

Now concerning the place, it must be chosen clean, pure, close, quiet,
free from all manner of noise, and not subject to any stranger's sight.
This place must first of all be exorcised and consecrated; and let there
be a table or altar placed therein, covered with a clean white linen
cloth, and set towards the east: and on each side thereof place two
consecrated wax-lights burning, the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

flame thereof ought not to go out all these days. In the middle of the
altar let there be placed lamens, or the holy paper we have before
described, covered with fine linen, which is not to be opened until the
end of the days of consecration. You shall also have in readiness a
*precious perfume* and a *pure anointing oil*.--And let t Item both be
kept consecrated. Then set a sensor on the head of the altar, wherein
you shalt kindle the *holy fire*, and make a precious perfume every day
that you pray.

Now for your habit, you shall have a long garment of white linen, close
before and behind, which may come down quite over the feet, and gird
yourself about the loins with a girdle. You shall likewise have a veil
made of pure white linen on which must be wrote in a gilt lamen, the
name *Tetragrammaton*; all which things are to be consecrated and
sanctified in order. But you must not go into this holy place till it be
first washed and covered with a cloth new and clean, and then you may
enter, but with your feet naked and bare; and when you enter therein you
shall sprinkle with holy water, then make a perfume upon the altar; and
then on thy knees pray before the altar as we have directed.

Now when the time is expired, on the last day, you shall fast more
strictly; and fasting on the day following, at the rising of the sun,
enter the holy place, using the ceremonies before spoken of, first by
sprinkling thyself, then, making a perfume, you shall sign the cross
with holy oil in the forehead, and anoint your eyes, using prayer in all
these consecrations. Then, open the lamen and pray before the altar upon
your knees; and then ail invocation may be made as follows:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[92:1](ma241.htm#fr_3.md) I have given an example of
the book of spirits, by which you may see the method in which the
characters, &c. are placed as above described. See the Plate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: An Invocation Of The Good Spirits](ma242.md)
