[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma245)  [Next](ma247.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

OF THE

PARTICULAR COMPOSITION

OF THE

MAGICAL CIRCLE;

OF

EXORCISMS, BENEDICTIONS, AND THE CONJURATIONS OF EVERY DAY IN THE WEEK;

AND

THE MANNER OF WORKING DESCRIBED.

BOOK II. PART III.

THE following instructions are the principal and sum total of all we
have said, only we have brought it rather into a closer train of
experiment and practice than any of the rest; for here you may behold
the distinct functions of the spirits; likewise the whole perfection of
magical ceremonies is here described, syllable by syllable.

But as the greatest power is attributed to the circles, (for they are
certain fortresses,) we will now clearly explain, and shew the
composition and figure of a circle.

 

<span id="img_pl20"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl20.jpg.md)

 

The Composition of the CIRCLE.--(For the figure of the Circle see the
Plate.)

The forms of circles are not always one and the same, but are changed
according to the order of spirits that are to be called, their places,
times,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

days, and hours; for in making a circle it ought to be considered in
what time of the year, what day, and what hour, what spirits you would
call, and to what star or region they belong, and what functions they
have: therefore, to begin, let there be made three circles of the
latitude of nine feet, distant one from another about a hand's breadth.
First, write in the middle circle the *name of the hour* wherein you do
the work; in the second place, write *the name of the angel of the
hour*; in the third place, the seal of the angel of the hour; fourthly,
the name of the angel that rules the day in which you work, and the
names of his ministers; in the fifth place, the name of the present
time; sixthly, the name of the spirits ruling in that part of time, and
their *presidents*; seventhly, the name of the head of the sign ruling
in the time; eighthly, the name of the earth, according to the time of
working; ninthly, and for the compleating of the middle circle, write
the name of the sun and moon, according to the said rule of time: for as
the times are changed, so are the names: and in the outer circle let
there be drawn, in the four angles, the names of the great presidential
spirits of the air that day wherein you would do this work, *viz.* the
name of the king and his three ministers. Without the circle, in four
angles, let *pentagons* be made. In the inner circle write four divine
names, with four crosses interposed: in the middle of the circle, *viz.*
towards the east let be written Alpha; towards the west, Omega; and let
a cross divide the middle of the circle.

When the circle is thus finished, according to rule, you shall proceed
to consecrate and bless it, saying,

In the name of the holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, proceed we to
our work in these mysteries to accomplish that which we desire; we
therefore, in the names aforesaid, consecrate this piece of ground for
our defence, so that no spirit whatsoever shall be able to break these
boundaries, neither be able to cause injury nor detriment to any of us
here assembled; but that they may be compelled to stand before this
circle, and answer truly our demands, so far as it pleaseth Him who
liveth for ever and ever; and who says, I am Alpha and Omega, the
Beginning and the End, which is, and which was, and which is to come,
the Almighty; I am the First and the Last, who am living and was dead;
and behold I live

 

<span id="img_pl21"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/pl21.jpg.md)

 

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

for ever and ever; and I have the keys of death and hell. Bless, O Lord!
this creature of earth wherein we stand; confirm, O God! thy strength in
us, so that neither the adversary nor any evil thing may cause us to
fail, through the merits of Jesus Christ. Amen.

It is also to be known that the angels rule the hours in a successive
order, according to the course of the heavens and the planets to which
they are subject; so the same spirit which governeth the day rules also
the first hour of the day; the second from this governs the second hour,
and so on throughout; and when seven planets and hours have made their
revolution it returns again to the first which rules the day. Therefore
we shall first speak of the names of the hours, *viz*.

 

A TABLE *shewing the* MAGICAL NAMES *of the* HOURS, *both* DAY *and*
NIGHT.

|     |                            |     |                              |
|-----|----------------------------|-----|------------------------------|
|     | Names of Hours of the Day. |     | Names of Hours of the Night. |
| 1   | Yain                       | 1   | Beron                        |
| 2   | Janor                      | 2   | Barol                        |
| 3   | Nasnia                     | 3   | Thami                        |
| 4   | Salla                      | 4   | Athar                        |
| 5   | Sadedali                   | 5   | Methon                       |
| 6   | Thamur                     | 6   | Rana                         |
| 7   | Ourer                      | 7   | Netos                        |
| 8   | Thamic                     | 8   | Tafrac                       |
| 9   | Neron                      | 9   | Sassur                       |
| 10  | Jayon                      | 10  | Agle                         |
| 11  | Abai                       | 11  | Calerva                      |
| 12  | Natalon.                   | 12  | Salam                        |

 

Of the names of the angels and their seals it shall be spoken in their
proper places; but here we will shew the names of the times.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

A year therefore is four--fold, and is divided into spring, summer,
autumn, and winter; the names thereof are these: The spring, *Talvi*;
the summer, *Casmaran*; autumn, *Adarcel*; winter, *Farlas*.

The ANGELS *of the* SPRING--Caracasa, Core, Amatiel, Commissoros.  
The head of the sign in spring is called Spugliguel.  
The name of the earth in spring, Amadai.  
The names of the sun and moon in spring: sun, Abraym; moon, Agusita.

The ANGELS *of the* SUMMER--Gargatel, Tariel, Gaviel.  
The head of the sign of the summer, Tubiel.  
The name of the earth in summer, Festativi.  
The names of the sun and moon in summer: sun, Athemay; moon, Armatus.

The ANGELS *of the* AUTUMN--Tarquam, Guabarel.  
The head of the sign of autumn, Torquaret.  
The name of the earth in autumn, Rabinnara.  
The names of the sun and moon in autumn: the sun, Abragini, the moon,
Matasignais.

The ANGELS *of the* WINTER--Amabael, Cetarari.  
The head of the sign of winter, Attarib. The name of the earth in
winter, Geremiah.  
The names of the sun and moon in winter: the sun, Commutoff; the moon,
Affaterim.

These things being known, finish the consecration of the circle by
saying,

"Thou shalt purge me with hysop, O Lord, and I shall be clean: thou
shalt wash me and I shall be whiter than snow."

Then sprinkle the same with holy water, and proceed with the benediction
of the perfumes.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

BENEDICTION *of* PERFUMES.

THE God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, bless here the creatures
of these kinds, that they may fill up the power and virtue of their
odours; so that neither the enemy nor any false imagination may be able
to enter into them; through our Lord Jesus Christ, &c. Then sprinkle the
same with holy water.

The EXORCISM *of* FIRE *into which the* PERFUMES *are to be put*.

I EXORCISE thee, O thou creature of fire, by the only true God Jehovah,
Adonai, Tetragrammaton, that forthwith thou cast away every phantasm
from thee, that it shall do no hurt to any one. We beseech thee, O Lord,
to bless this creature of fire, and sanctify it, so that it may be
blessed to set forth the praise and glory of thy holy name, and that no
hurt may be permitted to come to the exorciser or spectators; through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Of the HABIT *of the* EXORCIST.

IT should be made, as we have before described, of fine white linen and
clean, and to come round the body loose, but close before and behind.

Of the PENTACLE *of* SOLOMON.--(For the fig. see the Plate.)

IT is always necessary to have this pentacle in readiness to bind with,
in case the spirits should refuse to be obedient, as they can have no
power over the exorcist while provided with and fortified by the
pentacle, the virtue of the holy names therein written presiding with
wonderful influence over the spirits.

It should be made in the day and hour of Mercury upon parchment made of
a kidskin, or virgin, or pure, clean, white paper; and the figures and

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

letters wrote in pure gold; and it ought to be consecrated and sprinkled
(as before often spoken) with holy water.

When the vesture is put on, it will be convenient to say the following
oration:

An ORATION *when the* HABIT *or* VESTURE *is put on*.

ANOOR, Amacor, Amides, Theodonias, Anitor; by the merits of the angels,
O Lord! I will put on the garment of salvation, that this which I desire
I may bring to effect, through thee, the most holy Adonai, whose kingdom
endureth for ever and ever. Amen.

The Manner of Working.

LET the moon be increasing and equal, if it can then be conveniently
done; but especially let her not be combust, or in Via Combusta, which
is between fourteen degrees of Libra and fourteen degrees of Scorpio.

The operator ought to be clean and purified for nine days before he does
the work. Let him have ready the perfume appropriated to the day wherein
he does the work; and he must be provided with holy water from a
clergyman, or he may make it holy himself, by reading over it the
consecration of water of baptism; he must have a new vessel of earth,
with fire, the vesture, and the pentacle; and let all these things be
rightly and duly consecrated and prepared. Let one of the companions
carry the vessel with fire, and the perfumes, and let another bear the
book, the garment, and pentacle; and let the operator himself carry the
sword, over which should be said a prayer of consecration: and on the
middle of the sword on one side let there be engraven Agla ✠, and on the
other side, ✠ On, ✠ Tetragrammaton ✠. And the place being fixed upon
where the circle is to be erected, let him draw the lines we have before
taught, and sprinkle the same with holy water, consecrating, &c. &c.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

The operator ought therefore to be prepared with fasting, chastity, and
abstinence, for the space of three days before the day of operation; and
on the day that he would do this work, being clothed with the
fore-mentioned vesture, and furnished with *pentacles, perfumes*, a
*sword*, *bible*, *paper*, *pen*, and *consecrated ink*, and *all things
necessary hereunto*, let him enter the circle, and call the angels from
the four parts of the world which do rule the seven planets, the seven
days of the week, colours, and metals, whose names you will see in their
places; and, with bended knees, first let him say the Paternoster or
Lord's Prayer, and then let him invocate the said angels, saying,

O angeli! supradicti estote adjutores mihi petitioni & in adjutorum
mihi, in meis rebus et petitionibus.

Then call the angels from the four parts of the world that rule the air
the same day in which he makes the experiment; and, having employed
especially all the names and spirits within the circle, say,

O vos omnes, adjutore atque contestor per sedem Adonai, per Hagios,
Theos, Ischyros, Athanatos, Paracletos, Alpha & Omega, & per hæc tria
nomina secreta, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, quod hodie debeatis adimplere
quod cupio.

These things being performed, let him read the conjuration assigned for
the day; but if they shall be pertinacious or refractory, and will not
yield themselves obedient, neither to the conjuration assigned for the
day, nor any of the prayers before made, then use the exorcism
following:

A GENERAL EXORCISM *of the* SPIRITS *of the* AIR.

WE being made after the image of God, endued with power from God and
made after his will, do exorcise you, by the most mighty and powerful
name of God, El, strong and wonderful, (*here name the spirit which is
to appear*,) and we command you by Him who spoke the word and it was
done, and by all the names of God, and by the name Adonai, El, Elohim,
Elohe, Zebaoth, Elion, Eserchie, Jah, Tetragrammaton, Sadai, Lord God
Most High: we exorcise you, and powerfully command you that you
forthwith appear unto us here before this circle in a fair human shape,
without any deformity

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

or tortuosity; come ye all such, because we command you by the name Yaw
and Vau, which Adam heard and spoke; and by the name of God, Agla, which
Lot heard, and was saved with his family; and by the name Joth, which
Jacob heard from the angel wrestling with him, and was delivered from
the hand of his brother Esau; and by the name Anaphexeton, which Aaron
heard and spoke, and was made wise; and by the name Zebaoth, which Moses
named, and all the rivers were turned into blood; and by the name
Eserchie Oriston, which Moses named, and all the rivers brought forth
frogs, and they ascended into the houses of the Egyptians, destroying
all things; and by the name Elion, which Moses named, and there was
great hail, such as had not been since the beginning of the world; and
by the name Adonai, which Moses named, and there came up locusts, which
appeared upon the whole land of Egypt, and devoured all which the hail
had left; and by the name Schema Amathia, which Joshua called upon, and
the sun stayed his course; and by the name Alpha and Omega, which Daniel
named, and destroyed Bel and slew the dragon; and in the name Emmanuel,
which the three children, Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego, sung in the
midst of the fiery furnace, and were delivered; and by the name Hagios;
and by the seal of Adonai; and by Ischyros, Athanatos, Paracletos; and
by these three secret names, Agla, On, Tetragrammaton, I do adjure and
contest you; and by these names, and by all the other names of the
living and true God, our Lord Almighty, I exorcise and command you, by
Him who spoke the word and it was done, to whom all creatures are
obedient; and by the dreadful judgment of God; and by the uncertain sea
of glass, which is before the divine *Majesty*, mighty and powerful; by
the four beasts before the throne, having eyes before and behind; and by
the fire round about his throne; and by the holy angels of heaven; by
the mighty wisdom of God, we do powerfully exorcise you, that you appear
here before this circle, to fulfil our will in all things which shall
seem good unto us; by the seal of Baldachia, and by this name
Primeumaton, which *Moses* named, and the earth opened and swallowed up
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: and in the power of that name Primeumaton,
commanding the whole host of heaven, we curse you, and deprive you of
your

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

office, joy, and place, and do bind you in the depth of the bottomless
pit, there to remain until the dreadful day of the last judgment; and we
bind you into eternal fire, and into the lake of fire and brimstone,
unless you forthwith appear before this circle to do our will therefore,
come ye, by these names, Adonai, Zebaoth, Adonai, Amioram; come ye, come
ye, come ye, Adonai commandeth; Saday, the most mighty King of Kings,
whose power no creature is able to resist, be unto you most dreadful,
unless ye obey, and forthwith affably appear before this circle, let
miserable ruin and fire unquenchable remain with you; therefore come ye,
in the name of Adonai, Zebaoth, Adonai, Amioram; come, come, why stay
you? hasten! Adonai, Sadai, the King of Kings commands you: El, Aty,
Titcip, Azia, Hin, Jen, Minosel, Achadan, Vay, Vaah, Ey, Exe, A, El, El,
El, A, Hy, Hau, Hau, Hau, Vau, Vau, Vau, Vau.

A PRAYER to GOD, *to be said in the four Parts of the* WORLD *in the*
CIRCLE.

AMORULE, Taneha, Latisten, Rabur, Teneba, Latisten, Escha, Aladia, Alpha
and Omega, Leyste, Orision, Adonai; O most merciful heavenly Father!
have mercy upon me, although a sinner; make appear the arm of thy power
in me this day against these obstinate spirits, that 1, by thy will, may
be made a contemplator of thy divine works, and may be illustrated with
all wisdom, to the honour and glory of thy holy name. I humbly beseech
thee, that these spirits which I call by thy judgment may be bound and
constrained to come and give true and perfect answers to those things
which I shall ask of them; and that they may do and declare those things
unto us, which by me may be commanded of them, not hurting any creature,
neither injuring or terrifying me or my fellows, nor hurting any other
creature, and affrighting no man; and let them be obedient to those
things which are required of them.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

Then, standing in the middle of the circle, stretch out thy hand towards
the pentacle, saying, *By the pentacle of Solomon I have called you;
give me a true answer*.

Then follows this ORATION.

BERALANENSIS, Baldachiensis, Paumachia, and Apologia Sedes, by the most
mighty kings and powers, and the most powerful princes, genii, Liachidæ,
ministers of the Tartarean seat, chief prince of the seat of Apologia,
in the ninth legion, I invoke you, and by invocating, conjure you; and
being armed with power from the supreme Majesty, I strongly command you,
by Him who spoke and it was done, and to whom all creatures are
obedient; and by this ineffable name, Tetragrammaton Jehovah, which
being beard the elements are overthrown, the air is shaken, the sea
runneth back, the fire is quenched, the earth trembles, and all the host
of the celestials, and terrestrials, and infernals do tremble together,
and are troubled and confounded: wherefore, forthwith and without delay,
do you come from all parts of the world, and make rational answers unto
all things I shall ask of you; and come ye peaceably, visibly and
affably now, without delay, manifesting what we desire, being conjured
by the name of the living and true God, Helioren, and fulfil our
commands, and persist unto the end, and according to our intentions,
visibly and affably speaking unto us with a clear voice, intelligible,
and without any ambiguity.

Of the APPEARANCE *of the* SPIRITS.

THESE things being duly performed, there will appear infinite visions,
apparitions, phantasms, &c. beating of drums, and the sound of all kinds
of musical instruments; which is done by the spirits, that with the
terror they might force some of the companions out of the circle,
because they can effect nothing against the exorcist himself: after this
you shall see an infinite company

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

of archers, with a great multitude of horrible beasts, which will
arrange themselves as if they would devour the companions; nevertheless,
fear nothing.

Then the exorcist, holding the pentacle in his hand, let him say, Avoid
hence these iniquities, by virtue of the banner of God. Then will the
spirits be compelled to obey the exorcist, and the company shall see
them no more.

Then let the exorcist, stretching out his hand with the pentacle, say,
Behold the pentacle of *Solomon*, which I have brought into your
presence; behold the person of the exorcist in the middle of the
exorcism, who is armed by God, without fear, and well provided, who
potently invocateth and calleth you by exorcising; come, therefore, with
speed, by the virtue of these names; Aye Saraye, Aye Saraye; defer not
to come, by the eternal names of the living and true God, Eloy, Archima,
Rabur, and by the pentacle of Solomon here present, which powerfully
reigns over you; and by the virtue of the celestial spirits, your lords;
and by the person of the exorcist, in the middle of the exorcism: being
conjured, make haste and come, and yield obedience to your master, who
is called Octinomos. This being performed, immediately there will be
hissings in the four parts of the world, and then immediately you shall
see great motions; which when you see, say, Why stay you? Wherefore do
you delay? What do you? Prepare yourselves to be obedient to your master
in the name of the Lord, Bathat or Vachat rushing upon Abrac, Abeor
coming upon Aberer.

Then they will immediately come in their proper forms; and when you see
them before the circle, shew them the pentacle covered with fine linen;
uncover it, and say, Behold your confusion if you refuse to be obedient;
and suddenly they will appear in a peaceable form, and will say, Ask
what you will, for we are prepared to fulfil all your commands, for the
Lord hath subjected us hereunto.

Then let the exorcist say, Welcome spirits, or most noble princes,
because I have called you through Him to whom every knee doth bow, both
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; in

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

whose hands are all the kingdoms of kings, neither is there any able to
contradict his Majesty. Wherefore, I bind you, that you remain affable
and visible before this circle, so long and so constant; neither shall
you depart without my licence, until you have truly and without any
fallacy performed my will, by virtue of his power who hath set the sea
her bounds, beyond which it cannot pass, nor go beyond the law of his
providence, *viz.* of the Most High God, Lord, and King, who hath
created all things. *Amen*.

Then let the exorcist mention what he would have done.

After which say, In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, go in peace unto your places; peace be between us and you;
be ye ready to come when you are called. (For the figures of the circle,
pentacle, and other instruments, see the Plate.)

Now, that you may have an idea of the manner of composing the circle, we
have given the scheme of one for the first hour of the Lord's day, in
spring.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Considerations And Conjurations For Every Day In The Week](ma247.md)
