[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma246)  [Next](ma248.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here follow the CONSIDERATIONS *and* CONJURATIONS

for every Day in the Week; and first of

The CONSIDERATIONS, *&c. of* SUNDAY.

(For the figure of the *seals, planets, signs*, names of the angels of
the several days, and names of the fourth heaven, with the characters
and magic book, see the Plate.)

THE angels of the Lord's day--*Michael, Dardiel, Huratapel*.

The angels of the air ruling on the Lord's day, *Varcan*, king;--his
ministers, *Tus, Andas, Cynabal*.

The wind which the angels of the air are said to rule, is the north
wind.

The angels of the fourth heaven ruling on the Lord's day, which should
be called from the four parts of the world, are,--east, *Samael, Baciel,
Abel*,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

Gabriel, *Vionatraba*;--from the west, *Anael, Pabel, Ustael, Burchat,
Suceratos, Capabili*;--from the north, *Aiel, Ariel, vel Aquiel,
Masgabriel, Saphiel, Matuyel*,--at the south, *Haludiel, Machasiel,
Charsiel, Uriel, Naromiel*.

The perfume of Sunday is *Red Sanders*.

The CONJURATION *for* SUNDAY.

I CONJURE and confirm upon you, ye strong and holy angels of God, in the
name *Adonai, Eye, Eye, Eya*, which is he who was, and is, and is to
come, *Eye, Abray*; and in the name *Saday, Cados, Cados*, sitting on
high upon the *cherubim*; and by the great name of God himself, strong
and powerful, who is exalted above all the heavens; *Eye, Saraye*, who
created the world, the heavens, the earth, the sea, and all that in them
is, in the first day, and scaled them with his holy name Phaa; and by
the name of the angels who rule in the *fourth heaven*, and serve before
the most mighty *Salamia*, an angel great and honourable; and by the
name of his star, which is Sol, and by his sign, and by the immense name
of the living *God*, and by all the names aforesaid, I conjure thee,
Michael, O great angel! who art chief ruler of this day; and by the name
Adonai, the God of Israel, I conjure thee, O Michael! that thou labour
for me, and fulfil all my petitions according to my will and desire in
my cause and business.

The spirits of the air of the Lord's day are under the north wind; their
nature is to procure gold, gems, carbuncles, diamonds, and rubies, and
to cause one to obtain favour and benevolence, to dissolve enmities
amongst men, to raise to honours, and to take away infirmities. *They
appear*, for the most part, in a large, full and great body, sanguine
and cross, in a gold colour, with the tincture of blood. Their motion is
like the lighting of heaven; the sign of their becoming visible is that
they move the person to sweat that calls them; but their particular
forms are as follows; *viz*.

A king, having a scepter, riding on a lion.

A king crowned; a queen with a scepter.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

A bird; a lion; a cock.

A yellow garment.

A scepter.

CONSIDERATIONS, *&c. of* MONDAY.

(For the angel of Monday, his sigil, planet, sign of the planet, and
name of the first heaven, see the Plate.)

THE angels of Monday--*Gabriel, Michael, Samael*.

The angels of the air ruling Monday, *Arcan*, king;--his ministers,
*Bilet, Missabu, Abuhaza*. The wind which these are subject to is the
west wind.

The angels of the first heaven, ruling on Monday, to be called from the
four parts of the world. From the east, Gabriel, Madiel, Deamiel,
Janak;--from the west, *Sachiel, Zaniel, Habiel, Bachanæ,
Corobael*;--from the north, *Mael, Uvael, Valnum, Baliel, Balay,
Humastraw*;--from the south,--*Curaniel, Dabriel, Darquiel, Hanun,
Vetuel*.

The perfume of Monday--*Aloes*.

The CONJURATION *of* MONDAY.

I CONJURE and confirm upon you, ye strong and good angels, in the name
*Adonai, Adonai, Adonai, Adonai, Eye, Eye, Eye; Cados, Cados, Cados,
Achim, Achim, Ja, Ja*, strong *Ja*, who appeared in mount Sinai with the
glorification of king *Adonai, Sadai*, Zebaoth, Anathay, Ya, Ya, Ya,
Maranata, Abim, Jeia, who created the sea, and all lakes and waters, in
the second day, which are above the heavens and in the earth, and scaled
the sea in his high name, and gave it its bounds beyond which it cannot
pass; and by the names of the angels who rule in the *first legion*, and
who serve *Orphaniel*, a great, precious, and honourable angel, and by
the name of his star which is Luna, and by all the names aforesaid, I
conjure thee, *Gabriel*, who art chief ruler of Monday, the second day,
that for me thou labour and fulfil, &c.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

The spirits of the air of Monday are subject to the west wind, which is
the wind of the moon; their nature is to give silver and to convey
things from place to place; to make horses swift, and to disclose the
secrets of persons both present and future.

Their familiar Forms are as follow:

They appear generally of a great and full stature, soft and phlegmatic,
of colour like a black, obscure cloud, having a swoln countenance, with
eyes red and full of water, a bald head, and teeth like a wild boar;
their motion is like an exceeding great tempest of the sea. For their
sign there will appear an exceeding great rain,. and their particular
shapes are,

A king, like an archer, riding upon a doe.

A little boy.

A woman-hunter with a bow and arrows.

A cow; a little doe; a goose.

A green, or silver-coloured garment.

An arrow; a creature with many feet.

CONSIDERATIONS *of* TUESDAY.

(For the angel of Tuesday, his sigil, planet, sign governing the planet,
and name of the fifth heaven, see the Plate.)

THE angels of the air on Tuesday--*Samael, Satael, Amabiel*.

The angels of the air ruling on Tuesday, *Samax*, king; his Ministers,
*Carmax, Ismoli, Paffran*.

The wind to which the said angels are subject is the east wind.

The angels of the fifth heaven ruling on Tuesday.-At the east, *Guel,
Damael, Calzas, Arragon*;--the west, *Lama, Astagna, Lobquin, Soneas,
Jazel, Isiael, Irel*;--the north, *Rhaumel, Hyniel, Rayel, Seraphiel,
Fraciel Maithiel*;--the south, *Sacriel, Janiel, Galdel, Osael, Vianuel,
Zaliel*.

The perfume of Tuesday--*Pepper*.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

The CONJURATION *of* TUESDAY.

I CONJURE and call upon you, ye strong and good angels, in the names Ya,
Ya, Ya; He, He, He; Va, Hy, Hy, Ha, Ha, Ha; Va, Va, Va; An, An, An; Aia,
Aia, Aia; El, Ay, Elibra, Elohim, Elohim; and by the names of the high
God, who hath made the sea and dry land, and by his word hath made the
earth, and produced trees, and hath set his seal upon the planets, with
his precious, honoured, revered and holy name; and by the name of the
angels governing in the fifth house, who are subservient to the great
angel Acimoy, who is strong, powerful, and honoured, and by the name of
his star which is called *Mars*, I call upon thee, *Samael*, by the
names above mentioned, thou great angel! who presides over the day of
Mars, and by the name Adonai, the living and true God, that you assist
me in accomplishing my labours, &c. (*as in the conjuration of
Sunday*.).

The spirits of the air on Tuesday are under the east wind; their nature
is to bring or cause war, mortality, death, combustions, and to give
two-thousand soldiers at a time; to bring death, infirmity or health.

Familiar Forms of the SPIRITS *of* MARS.

THEY appear in a tall body and choleric, a filthy countenance, of colour
brown, swarthy, or red, having horns like harts, and griffins claws, and
bellowing like wild bulls. Their motion is like fire burning: their sign
thunder and lightning round about the circle.

Their particular shapes are, a king armed, riding on a wolf; a man
armed.

A woman with a buckler on her thigh.

A she-goat; a horse; a stag.

A red garment; a piece of wool; a cowslip.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

CONSIDERATIONS *of* WEDNESDAY.

(For the angel of Wednesday his sigil, &c. &c. see the Plate.)

THE angels of Wednesday--*Raphael, Meil, Seraphiel*.

The angels of the air ruling on Wednesday, *Mediat*, king; Ministers,
*Suquinos, Sallales*; the said angels of the air are subject to the
*south-west wind*.

The angels of the second heaven, governing Wednesday, that are to be
called, &c. At the east--*Mathlai, Tarmiel, Baraborat*--at the west,
*Jeruscue, Merattron*;--at the north, *Thiel, Rael, Jarihael, Venahel,
Velel, Abuiori, Ucirmiel*--at the south, *Milliel, Nelapa, Calvel, vel
Laquel*.

The perfume of Wednesday--*Mastic*.

The CONJURATION *of* WEDNESDAY.

I CONJURE and call upon you, ye strong and holy angels, good and
powerful, in a strong name of fear and praise, Ja, Adonay, Elohim,
Saday, Saday, Saday; Eie, Eie, Eie; Asamie, Asamie; and in the name of
Adonay, the God of Israel, who hath made the two great lights, and
distinguished day from night for the benefit of his creatures; and by
the names of all the discerning angels, governing openly in the second
house before the great angel, *Tetra*, strong and powerful; and by the
name of his star which is *Mercury*; and by the name of his seal, which
is that of a powerful and honoured God; and I call upon thee, Raphael,
and by the names above mentioned, thou great angel who presidest over
the fourth day: and by the holy name which is written in the front of
Aaron, created the most high priest, and by the names of all the angels
who are constant in the grace of Christ, and by the name and place of
Ammaluim, that you assist me in my labours, &c. &c.

The spirits of the air, on Wednesday are subject to the south-west wind;
their nature is to give all sorts of metals, to reveal all earthly
things past, present,

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

and to come; to pacify judges, to give victory in war, to teach
experiments and all sciences decayed, and to change bodies mixt of
elements, conditionally, out of one thing into another; to give health
or infirmities, to raise the poor and cast down the rich, to bind or
loose spirits, to open locks or bolts.

Such kinds of spirits have the operations of others, but not in their
perfect power, but in virtue or knowledge.

Forms of the SPIRITS *of* MERCURY.

THE spirits of Mercury appear in a body of a middle stature, cold,
liquid and moist, fair and of an affable speech in a human shape and
form, like a knight armed, of colour clear and bright. The motion of
them is like silver coloured' clouds: for their sign they cause horror
and fear to him that calls them.

Their particular shapes are, a king riding upon a bear.

A fair youth; a woman holding a distaff.

A dog, a she-bear, and a magpye.

A garment of various changeable colours.

A rod, a little staff.

CONSIDERATIONS *of* THURSDAY.

(For the angel of Thursday, his sigil, &c. see the Plate.)

THE angels of Thursday--*Sachiel, Cassiel, Asasiel*.

The angels of the air of Thursday, *Suth*, king; Ministers, *Maguth,
Gutrix*.

The angels of the air are under the south-wind.--(But because there are
no angels of the air to be found above the fifth heaven, therefore, on
Thursday, say the prayers following in the four parts of the world: )

At the east--*O Deus magne et excelse et honorate, per infinita secula*;
or, O great and most high God, honoured be thy name, world without end.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

At the west--O wise, pure, and just God, of divine clemency, I beseech
thee, most holy Father, that this day I may perfectly understand and
accomplish my petition, work, and labour; for the honour and glory of
thy holy name, who livest and reignest, world without end. *Amen*.

At the north--O God, strong, mighty, and wonderfuly from everlasting to
everlasting, grant that this day I bring to effect that which I desire,
through our blessed Lord. *Amen*.

At the south--O mighty and most merciful God, hear my prayers and grant
my petition.

The perfume of Thursday--*Saffron*.

The CONJURATION *of* THURSDAY.

I CO NJ U RE and confirm upon you, ye strong and holy angels, by the
names Cados, Cados, Cados, Eschercie, Escherei, Eschercie, Hatim, Ya,
strong founder of the worlds; Cantine, Jaym, Janic, Anic, Calbot,
Sabbac, Berisay, Alnaym; and by the name Adonai, who created fishes and
creeping things in the waters, and birds upon the face of the earth,
flying towards heaven, in the fifth day; and by the names of the angels
serving in the sixth host before Pastor, a holy angel, and a great and
powerful prince and by the name of his star, which is Jupiter, and by
the name of his seal, and by the name of Adonai, the great God, Creator
of all things, and by the name of all the stars, and by their power and
virtue, and by all the names aforesaid, I conjure thee, Sachiel, a great
Angel, who art chief ruler of Thursday, that for me thou labour, &c.

The spirits of the air of Thursday are subject to the south wind; their
nature is to procure the love of women, to cause men to be merry and
joyful, to pacify strifes and contentions, to appease, enemies, to heal
the diseased, and to disease the whole, and procure losses, or restore
things lost.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

The familiar Forms of the SPIRITS *of* JUPITER.

They appear with a body sanguine and choleric, of a middle stature, with
a horrible, fearful motion, but with a mild countenance, and a gentle
speech, and of the colour of iron: the motion of them is flashings of
lightning, and thunder. For their sign there will appear about the
circle men who shall seem to be devoured by lions. Their forms are,

A king, with a sword drawn, riding on a stag.

A man, wearing a mitre, with long raiment.

A maid, with a laurel crown, adorned with flowers.

A bull; a stag; a peacock.

An azure garment; a sword; a box-tree,

CONSIDERATIONS *of* FRIDAY.

(For the seal planet, and sign governing the planet, and name of the
third heaven, see the Plate.)

THE angels of Friday--*Anael, Rachiel, Sachiel*.

The angels of the air ruling on Friday, *Sarabotes*, king; Ministers,
*Amahiel, Aba, Abalidoth, Blaef*. The wind which the angels of the air
are subject to is the west wind.

Angels of the third heaven, which are to be called from the four parts
of the world, are

At the east, *Setchiel, Chedusilaniel, Corat, Tamuel, Tenaciel*;--at the
west, *Turiel, Coniel, Babiel, Kadie, Maltiel, Huphaltiel*;--at the
north, *Peniel, Penael, Penat, Raphael, Ranie, Doremiel*;--at the south,
*Porosa, Sachiel, Chermiel, Samael, Santanael, Famiel*.

The perfume of Friday--*Pepperwort*.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

The CONJURATION *of* FRIDAY.

I CONJURE and confirm upon you, ye strong and holy angels, by the names
*On, Hey, Heya, Ja, Je, Saday, Adonai*, and in the name *Sadai*, who
created four-footed beasts, and creeping things, and man, in the sixth
day, and gave to Adam. power over all creatures; wherefore blessed be
the name of the Creator in his place; and by the name of the angels
serving in the third host, before Dagiel, a great angel, and a strong
and powerful prince, and by the name of his star, which is Venus, and by
his seal which is holy; and by all the names aforesaid, I conjure upon
thee, Anael, who art the chief ruler this day, that thou labour for me,
&c.

The spirits of the air on Friday are subject to the west wind: their
nature is to give silver, to incite men, and incline them to luxury, to
cause marriages, to allure men to love women, to cause or take away
infirmities, and to do all things which have motion.

Their familiar Shapes.

They appear with a fair body, of middle stature, with an amiable and
pleasant countenance, of colour white or green, their upper parts
golden; the motion of them is like a clear star. For their sign there
will appear naked virgins round the circle, which will strive to allure
the invocator to dalliance with them: but

Their particular Shapes are,

A king, with a scepter, riding on a camel.

A naked girl; a she-goat.

A camel; a dove.

A white or green garment.

Flowers; the herb savine.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

The CONSIDERATIONS *of* SATURDAY.

(For seal, &c. &c. see the Plate.)

THE angels of Saturday--*Cassiel, Machatan, Uriel*.

The angels of the air ruling this day, *Maymon*, king; *Ministers,
Abumalith, Assaibi, Balidet*. The wind they are subject to, the *south
wind*.

The fumigation of Saturday is *sulphur*.

There are no angels ruling in the air on Saturday above the fifth
heaven, therefore in the four corners of the world, in the circle, use
those orations which are applied to Thursday.

The CONJURATION *of* SATURDAY.

I CONJURE and confirm upon you, Caphriel, or Cassiel, Machator, and
Seraquiel, strong and powerful angels; and by the name Adonai, Adonai,
Adonai; Eie, Eie, Eie; Acim, Acim, Acim; Cados, Cados; Ima, Ima, Ima;
Salay, Ja, Sar, Lord and Maker of the World, who rested on the seventh
day; and by him who of his good pleasure gave the same to be observed by
the children of Israel throughout their generations, that they should
keep and sanctify the same, to have thereby a good reward in the world
to conic; and by the names of the *angels* serving in the seventh host,
before Booel, a great angel, and powerful prince; and by the name of his
star, which is Saturn; and by his holy seal, and by the names before
spoken, I conjure upon thee, Caphriel, who art chief ruler of the
seventh day, which is the Sabbath, that for me thou labour, &c. &c.

The spirits of the air on Saturday are subject to the south-west wind:
the nature of them is to sow discords, hatred, evil thoughts and
cogitations, to give leave to kill and murder, and to lame or maim every
member.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

Their familiar Shapes.

THEY generally appear with a tall, lean, slender body, with an angry
countenance, having four faces, one on the back of the head, one in the
front, and one on each side, nosed or beaked, likewise there appears a
face on each knee of a black shining colour; their motion is the moving
of the wind, with a kind of earthquake; their sign is white earth,
whiter than snow.

Their particular Shapes are,

 <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) A king, bearded, riding on a dragon.

An old man with a beard.

An old woman leaning on a crutch.

A hog; a dragon; an owl.

A black garment; a hook or sickle.

A juniper tree.

Those are the figures that these spirits usually assume, which are
generally, terrible at the first coming on of the visions, but as they
have only a limited power, beyond which they cannot pass, so the
invocator need be under no apprehensions of danger, provided he is well
fortified with those things we have directed to be used for his defence,
and above all, to have a firm and constant faith in the mercy, wisdom,
and goodness of God.

END OF THE THIRD PART, AND OF CABALISTICAL AND CEREMONIAL MAGIC.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[127:1](ma247.htm#fr_5.md) Those spirits who appear
in a kingly form, have a much higher dignity than them who take an
inferior shape; and those who appear in a human shape, exceed in
authority and power them that come as animals; and again, these latter
surpass in dignity them who appear as trees or instruments, and the
like: so that you are to judge of the power, government, and authority
of spirits by their assuming a more noble and dignified apparition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](ma248.md)
