[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma244)  [Next](ma246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Of the Method of raising EVIL *or* FAMILIAR SPIRITS *by a* CIRCLE;
*likewise the Souls and Shadows of the Dead*.

IT is here convenient that we say something about the means used by
exorcists to raise up what are usually termed evil spirits to the
circle, and, the methods of calling up the ghosts or souls of those who
have died a violent or premature death.

Now, if any one would call any evil spirit to the circle, he must first
consider and know his nature, and to which of the planets it agrees, and
what offices are distributed unto him from the planet. This being known,
let there be sought out a place fit and convenient, and proper for his
invocation, according to the nature of the planet and the quality of the
offices of the same spirit, as near as it can be done; as if their power
be over the sea, rivers or floods, then let the place be the sea-shore,
and so of the rest. Then chuse a convenient time both for the quality of
the air (being serene, quiet, clear and fitting for the spirits to
assume bodies); as also of the quality of and nature of the planet and
the spirit, as on his day and time in which he rules; he may be
fortunate or unfortunate sometimes of the day, and sometimes of the
night, as the stars and spirits do require.

These things being judiciously considered, let the circle be made at the
place elected, as well for the defence of the invocant as the
confirmation of the spirit. And in the circle write the divine general
names, and all those things which do yield defence to us; and, with
them, those divine names which do rule his planet, and the offices of
the spirit himself; likewise write therein the names of the good spirits
which bear rule in the time you do this, and are able to bind and
constrain that spirit which we intend to call. And if we will further
strengthen and fortify our circle, we may add characters and pentacles
agreeing to the work; then also, if we will, we may either, within or
without the circle, frame an angular figure with the inscription of such
convenient numbers as are congruent amongst themselves to our work,
which

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

are to be known according to the manner of numbers and figures delivered
in our first Book.

Further we are to be provided with *lights*, perfumes, unguents, and
medicines, compounded according to the nature of the spirit and planet
which agree with the spirit by reason of their natural and celestial
virtue.

Then we are to be furnished with holy and consecrated things necessary,
not only for the defence of the invocant and his companions, but also
serving for bonds to bind and constrain the spirits; such as holy
papers, lamens, pictures, pentacles, swords, scepters, garments of
convenient colour and matter.

Then, with all these things provided, let the exorcist and his
companions go into the circle. In the first place, let him consecrate
the circle and every thing he uses; which being done in a solemn and
firm manner, with convenient gesture and countenance, let him begin to
pray with a loud voice after the manner following. First, by making an
oration or prayer to God, and then intreating the good spirits; but we
should read some prayer, or psalm, or gospel, for our defence in the
first place. After those prayers and orations are said, let him begin to
invocate the spirit which he desireth, with a gentle and loving
enchantment to all the coasts of the world, with a commemoration of his
own authority and power. Then rest and look round to see if any spirit
does appear; which if he delays, then let him repeat his invocation, as
above said, until he hath done it three times; and if the spirit is
obstinate and will not appear, then let the invocator begin to *conjure*
him with divine power; but so that all his conjurations and
commemorations do agree with the nature and office of the spirit, and
reiterate the same three times, from stronger to stronger, using
contumelies, cursings, punishments, suspension from his power and
office, and the like.

And after these courses are finished, cease; and if the spirit shall
appear, let the invocant turn himself towards the spirit, and
courteously receive him, and, earnestly entreating him, let him ask his
name, which write down on your holy paper, and then proceed by asking
him whatsoever you will; and if in any

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

thing the spirit shall appear to be *obstinate*, *ambiguous*, or
*lying*, let him be bound by convenient conjurations; and if you doubt
any thing, make, without the circle with the consecrated sword, the
figure of a triangle or pentagon, and compel the spirit to enter into
it; and if you receive any promise which you would have confirmed with
an oath, stretch the sword out of the circle, and swear the spirit by
laying his hand on the sword. Then having obtained of the spirit that
which you desire, or are otherwise contented, license him to depart with
courteous words, giving command that he do no hurt; and if he will not
depart, compel him by powerful conjurations; and if need require expel
him by exorcisms and by making contrary suffumigations. And when he is
departed, go not out of the circle, but make a stay, and use some prayer
giving thanks to God and the good angels; and also praying for your
future defence and conservation, which being orderly performed you may
depart.

But if your hopes are frustrated, and no spirit will appear, yet for
this you need not despair; but leaving the circle after licensing to
depart (*which must never be omitted whether a spirit appears or
not* <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4),) return at other times, doing as
before. And if you think that you have erred in any thing, then you
shall amend by adding or diminishing; for the constancy of repetition
encreases your authority and power, and strikes a terror into the
spirits, and compels them to obey.

And often the spirits do come although they appear not visible (to cause
terror to him who calls them,) either in the thing which he uses, or
else in the operation itself. But this kind of licensing is not given
*simply*, but by a kind of dispensation, with suspension, until they
shall render themselves obedient: also, without a circle, these spirits
may be called to appear, by the way we have delivered in the
consecration of a book. But when we intend to execute any effect where
an apparition is not needful, then that is to be done, by making and
forming that which is to be to us an instrument; as whether it be an
image, ring, character, table, writing, candle, sacrifice, or

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

any thing else; then the name of the spirit is to be written therein
with his character, according to the exigency of the experiment, either
by writing it with blood, or otherwise using a perfume agreeable to the
spirit. Likewise we are often to make orations and prayers to God and
the good angels before we invocate any evil spirit, conjuring him by
divine power.

In some former parts of our work we have taught how and by what means
the soul is joined to the body.

We will in this place inform thee farther, that those souls do still
love their relinquished bodies after death, a certain affinity alluring
them as it were. Such are the souls of noxious men who have violently
relinquished their bodies, and souls wanting a due burial, which still
wander in a liquid and turbulent spirit about their dead carcasses; but
these souls, by the known means by which they were joined to their
bodies, by the like vapours, liquors, and savours, are easily drawn into
them.

Hence it is that the souls of the dead are not to be called up without
blood or by the application of some part of their relict body.

In the raising therefore of these shadows, we are to perfume with new
blood the bones of the dead, and with flesh, eggs, milk, honey, and oil,
which furnish the soul with a medium apt to receive its body.

It is likewise to be understood, those who are desirous to raise any
souls of the dead, ought to select those places wherein these kind of
souls are most known to be conversant; or by some alliance alluring the
souls into their forsaken bodies, or by some kind of affection in times
past impressed in them in their life, drawing the souls to certain
places, things, or persons; or by the forcible nature of some place
fitted and prepared to purge or punish these souls: which places for the
most part, are to be known by the appearance of visions, nightly
incursions, and apparitions.

Therefore the places most fitting for these things are church-yards. And
better than them are those places devoted to the executions of criminal
judgements; and better than these are those places where, of late years,
there have been so great and so many public slaughters of men; and that
place is still better than those where some dead carcass that came by
violent death is

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

not yet expiated, nor was lately buried; for the expiation of those
places is likewise a holy rite duly to be adhibited to the burial of the
bodies, and often prohibits the soul returning to its body, and expels
the same afar off to the place of judgment.

And from hence it is that the souls of the dead are not easy to be
raised up, except it be the souls of them whom we know to be evil, or to
have perished by a violent death, and whose bodies do want the rite of
due burial.

Now although we have spoken concerning such places of this kind, it will
not be safe or commodious to go unto them; but it is requisite for us to
take to whatsoever place is to be chosen some principal relict of the
body, and therewith make a perfume in due manner, and to perform other
competent rites.

It is also to be known, that because the souls are certain spiritual
lights, therefore artificial lights framed out of certain competent
things, compounded according to a true rule, with congruent inscriptions
of names and seals, do very much avail to the raising up of departed
souls. But those things which are now spoken of are not always
sufficient to raise up souls, because of an extra-natural portion of
understanding and reason, which is above and known only to the heavenly
destinies and their powers.

We should therefore allure the said souls by supernatural and celestial
powers duly administered, even by those things which do move the very
harmony of the soul, as well imaginative as rational and intellectual,
such as voices, Songs, sounds, enchantments; and religious things, as
Prayers, conjurations, exorcisms, and other holy rites, which may
commodiously be administered hereunto.

END OF PART SECOND.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[101:1](ma245.htm#fr_4) They who neglect
licensing the spirits are in very great danger, because instances have
been known of the operator experiencing sudden death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exorcism, Benedictions and Conjurations](ma246)
