[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma243)  [Next](ma245) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Of ORACLES *by* DREAMS.

BUT natural things and their own commixtures do likewise belong unto
magicians, and we often use such to receive oracles from a spirit by a
dream; which are either by perfumes, unctions, meats, drinks, seals,
rings, &c.

Now those who are desirous to receive oracles in or through a dream, let
him make himself a ring of the sun or Saturn for this purpose. There are
likewise images of dreams, which, being put under the head when he goes
to sleep, doth effectually give true dreams of whatever the mind hath
before determined or consulted upon, the practice of which is as
follows:

Thou shalt make an image of the sun, the figure whereof must be, a man
sleeping upon the bosom of an angel, which thou shalt make when Leo
ascends, the sun being in the ninth house in Aries; thou shalt write
upon the figure the name of the effect desired, and in the hand of the
angel the name of the intelligence of the sun. Let the same image be
made in Virgo ascending, Mercury being fortunate in Aries in the ninth;
or Gemini ascending, Mercury being fortunate in the ninth house in
Aquarius; and let

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

it be received with Saturn with a fortunate aspect, and let the name of
the spirit be written upon it. Let the same likewise be made in Libra
ascending, Venus being received from Mercury in Gemini in the ninth
house, and write upon it the angel of Venus. Again, you may make the
same image Aquarius ascending, Saturn fortunately possessing the ninth
in his exaltation, which is Libra; and let there be written upon it the
angel of Saturn. The same may be made Cancer ascending, the moon being
received by Jupiter and Venus in Pisces, and being fortunately placed in
the ninth house, and write upon it the spirit of the moon.

There are likewise made rings of dreams of wonderful efficacy; and there
are rings of the sun and Saturn; and the constellation of them is when
the sun or Saturn ascend in their exaltations in the ninth, and when the
moon is joined to Saturn in the ninth, and in that sign which was the
ninth house of the nativity; and write and engrave upon the rings the
name of the spirit of the sun or Saturn; and by these rules you may know
how and by what means to constitute more of thyself: but know this, that
such images work nothing (as they are simply images) unless they are
vivified by a spiritual and celestial virtue, and chiefly by the ardent
desire and firm intent of the soul of the operator. But who can give a
soul to an image, or make a stone, or metal, or clay, or wood, or wax,
or paper to live? certainly no man; (for this arcanum doth not enter
into an artist of a stiff neck,) he only hath it who transcends the
progress of angels, and comes to the very architype himself.

The tables of numbers likewise confer to the receiving of oracles, being
duly formed under their own constellations. Holy tables and papers
likewise serve to this effect, being especially composed and
consecrated; such as the *Almutel of Solomon*, and the Table of the
Revolution of the name *Tetragrammaton*; and those things which are of
this kind, and written to produce these effects, out of various figures,
numbers, holy Scriptures, and pictures, with inscriptions of the divine
names of God and names of holy angels; the composition whereof is taken
out of diverse places of the holy Scriptures, Psalms, and versicles, and
other certain promises out of the divine revelations and prophecies.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

To the same effect do conduce, likewise, holy prayers and deprecations
as well to God as to the blessed angels; the deprecations of which
prayers are to be composed, as we have before shewn, according to some
religious similitude, making mention of those things which we intend to
do; as out of the Old Testament of the dream of Jacob, Joseph, Pharaoh,
Daniel, and Nebuchadnezzar: if out of the New Testament, of the dream of
Joseph; of the three wise men, or magi, of John the evangelist sleeping
upon the breast of our Lord; and whatever of the like kind can be found
in religion, miracles, and revelation. According to which the
deprecation may be composed; if when he goes to sleep it be with a firm
intention, and then, without doubt, they will afford a wonderful effect.

Therefore he who is desirous of receiving true oracles by dreams, let
him abstain from supper, from drink, and be otherwise well disposed, so
his brain will be free from turbulent vapours; let him also have his
bed-chamber fair and clean, *exorcised* and *consecrated* if he will;
then let him perfume the same with some convenient fumigation, and let
him anoint his temples with some unguent efficacious hereunto, and put a
ring of dreams upon his finger; then let him take one of the images we
have spoken of, or some holy table, or paper, and place the same under
his head; then, having made a devout prayer, let him address himself to
sleep, meditating upon that thing which he desires to know; so shall he
receive a most certain and undoubted oracle by a dream, when the moon
goes through that sign which was in the ninth house of his nativity, and
also when she goes through the sign of the ninth of the revolution of
his nativity, and when she is in the ninth sign from the sign of
perfection.

This is the way whereby we may obtain all sciences and arts whatsoever,
whether alchemy, magic, or else, suddenly and perfectly with a true
illumination of our intellect; although all inferior familiar spirits
whatsoever conduce to this effect, and sometimes also evil spirits
sensibly inform us intrinsically and extrinsically.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of The Method Of Raising Evil Or Familiar Spirits...](ma245)
