[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma253)  [Next](ma255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

BIOGRAPHIA ANTIQUA.

ZOROASTER, THE SON OF OROMASIUS,

FIRST INSTITUTOR OF PHILOSOPHY BY FIRE, AND MAGIC.

ZOROASTER, the son of Oromasius, flourished in the reign of Darius, the
successor of Cambyses. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) All authors are
full of variations in their accounts of this famous person, some making
him of a much later date than others; however, we shall give what we
have collected from those who appear most authentic, not omitting the
traditional history extant amongst the Magi, with which our readers may
compare the several stories of biographers, and accept that account
which shall seem to them the most rational. Zoroaster, king of the
Bactrians, was vanquished by Ninus, and passed for the inventor of
magic <span id="fr_8"></span>[2](#fn_8). Eusebius places this victory of
Ninus in the seventh year of Abraham:

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

Abraham; now several authors make Zoroaster appear much earlier. It has
been reported that Zoroaster laughed on the same day he was born, and
that

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

he was the only one to whom this happened, and that the palpitation of
his brain was so strong as to repulse the hand, it being laid to his
head, which they say was a presage of his future knowledge and wisdom.
It is added, that he passed twenty years in the deserts, and there eat
nothing but a sort of cheese which was never the worse for age; that the
love of wisdom and justice obliged him to retire from the world to a
mountain, where he lived in solitude; but when he come down from thence
there fell a celestial fire upon it, which perpetually burned; that the
king of Persia, accompanied with the greatest lords of his court,
approached it for the purpose of putting up prayers to God; that
Zoroaster came out from these flames unhurt; that he comforted and
encouraged the Persians, and offered sacrifices for them to God; that,
afterwards, he did not live indifferently with all sorts of men, but
only those who were born for truth, and who were capable of the true
knowledge of God, which kind of people are called among the Persians,
Magi; that he desired his end might be this, *viz.* to be struck with
thunder, and consumed by celestial fire; and that he requested the
Persians to collect his ashes, after he was consumed in this manner, and
to preserve and venerate them as a pledge of the preservation of their
monarchy; that they for a length of time paid great veneration to the
relics of Zoroaster, but at length, neglecting them, their monarchy fell
to ruin and decay <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9). The Chronicle of
Alexandria adds, that having held this discourse

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

discourse with them he invoked Orion, and was consumed by celestial
fire. Many will have it that Ham was the Zoroaster of the eastern
nations, and the inventor of magic. Mr. Bochart refutes this falsity.
Cedrenus observes that Zoroaster, who became so famous for wisdom among
the Persians, was descended from Belus: this imports that he was
descended from Nimrod. Some authors have taken him for Nimrod; others
for Assur or Japhet. The ancient Persians believe that Zoroaster was
before Moses <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10). Some maintain he was
the prophet Ezekiel, and it cannot be denied that they ground their
opinions on the agreement of numerous particulars which belong to the
one, and are related of the other. George Hornius foolishly imagines
that he was the false prophet Balaam. Huetius shews that he was the
Moses of the Jews, and mentions an infinite number of particulars in
which the accounts we have of Moses agree with the stories related of
Zoroaster.--How near all or any of these come to the probability of
truth will appear in the sequel, where we have given the most probable
and rational account of him, as far as we have been able to trace, from
the tradition of the Magi, which we prefer before the confused and
partial accounts vulgarly extant. They who believe that Zoroaster
professed

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

and taught a diabolical magic <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) are
certainly in the wrong; the magic he taught (of which we shall speak
more anon) was only the study of the divine nature, and of religious
worship. Some have presumed that Zoroaster was the promulgator of a
doctrine of two principles <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12), or two
co-eternal causes, one of good

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

good, the other of evil things. of this doctrine Plutarch takes notice:
he says, "that Zoroaster the magician, who is said to have lived five
thousand years" before the Trojan war, called the good God, Oromazes,
and the evil, Arimanius, &c. &c." See *Plut. de Iside & Osiride, page*
369.

Dr. Hyde, in his excellent treatise on the religion of the ancient
Persians, cites some authors who clear him on this head. We shall
examine whether they deserve credit. It is affirmed that he was no
idolater, either with respect to the worship of fire, or that of
Mithra <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13). What appears least
uncertain,

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

amongst so many things that are related of him is, that he was the
introducer of a new religion into Persia, and that he did it about the
reign of Darius the successor of Cambyses: he is still in great
veneration among those Persians who are not of the Mahometan religion,
but still retain the ancient worship of their country. They call him
Zardhust, and several believe that he came from China, and relate many
miraculous things on that head. Several authors affirm, that all the
books published hitherto under Zoroaster's name, some of which are yet
extant, are supposititious. Dr. Hyde dissents from this opinion. Suidas
affirms, that there were extant four books of Zoroaster: the first, "Of
Nature," a book of the Virtues of precious Stones, called de Gemmis; and
five books of Astrology and Astronomy, "Prædictiones ex. Inspectione
Stellarum." It is very likely that what Pliny relates, as quoted from
Zoroaster, was taken from those books, *Plin*. lib. xviii, cap. 24.
Eusebius recites a passage which contains a magnificent description of
God, and gives it as the very words of Zoroaster in his sacred
commentary on the Persian rites. Clemens Alexandrinus says, that the
followers of Prodicus boasted of having the secrets or secret books of
Zoroaster. But most likely he meant that they boasted of having the
secret books of Pythagoras. They were printed, together with the verses
of the Sybils at Amsterdam, in the year 1689, according to Opsopæus's
edition, Oracula Magica Zoroastris, cum Scholiis Plethonis & Pselli.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[143:1](ma254.htm#fr_7) The Author regrets, that,
notwithstanding his laborious researches to obtain an authentic and
satisfactory account of Zoroaster to present to his readers that a few
generals, and not particulars, can only be given: indeed, the most
serious and respectable historians differ so widely in their accounts of
him that nothing certain can from thence be deduced however, we have
above recited several authorities to which we have annexed various notes
and commentations.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[143:2](ma254.htm#fr_8) *Passed for the inventor
of magic*. It is to be noted that he was the inventor of it, and the
first of the magi. Justin informs us that this victory was the last of
Ninus; that Zoroaster philosophized most judiciously upon the nature and
influences of the stars, and on the principles of the universe. Thomas
Stanleius, Hist. of Philos. Orientalis, lib. I. cap. iii. informs us
that Zoroaster, according to Eusebius, was cotemporary with Semiramis;
but it is certain, according to Eusebius, that he was vanquished by king
Ninus. Arnobius, lib. I. pa. m. 5. says, "Anciently the Assyrians and
Bactrians, the former under the conduct of Ninus, and the latter under
Zoroaster, fought against each other, not only with men and weapons, but
also by the help of magic, and the secret discipline of the Chaldeans."
Hermippus, who has wrote cautiously on every thing relative to magic,
and explained twenty thousand verses composed by Zoroaster, relates,
that one Azonaces initiated <span id="page_144">p. 144</span> him into
this art, and that he lived 5,000 years before the Trojan war. St.
Augustin and Orosius have followed the tradition mentioned by Justin.
Apuleius, in his Catalogue of all the most famous Magicians of
Antiquity, with great justice places Zoroaster in the first rank, and
proves him the most ancient of all: "*Magicarum artium fuisse perhibeter
inventor Zoroastres*." Augustin. de Civitat. Dei, lib. 21. cap. xiv.
Eudoxus, who esteemed the art of magic to be accounted the noblest and
most useful of all worldly knowledge, relates that Zoroaster lived six
thousand years before the death of Plato. Note, that the same thing is
affirmed by Aristotle. Agathias, who lived in the reign of Justinian,
informs us, that, according to the Persians of that time, Zoroaster and
Hystaspes were cotemporary; but they do not say whether this Hystaspes
was father to Darius or any other. Sir John Marsham positively decides
that he was the father of Darius; and grounds his opinion on this, that
one of the elogies engraven on the tomb makes him the instructor of the
Magi; and that the same historian who makes Hystaspes excel in magic,
calls him the father of Darius. Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 23, pag. m.
324. says, "After the time of Zoroaster, reigned Hystaspes, a very
prudent king, and the father of Darius. This prince, having boldly
penetrated into the remotest parts of the Upper India, came at length to
a solitary forest, where there dwelt, in awful and silent tranquility,
the Brachmans. In this peaceful solitude they instructed him in the
knowledge of the earth's motion, likewise of the stars; and from them he
learned the pure and sacred rites of religion. Part of this knowledge he
communicated to the Magi, which, together with the art of predicting
future events, they delivered down to posterity, each in his own family.
The great number of men who have descended from these families, ever
since that age down to the present, have all been set apart for
cultivating the knowledge of the Gods." But Ammianus Mercellinus was
wrong in saying, that this father of Darius was a king; and no doubt he
committed this blunder by having read in general that one king Hystaspes
was a great magician, and thought there was no other Hystaspes than the
father of Darius. But it is beyond dispute, that one Hystaspes, older
than the foundation of Rome, and a great prophet, is mentioned by
authors. "Hystaspes also, the most ancient king of the Medes, and from
whom the river Hystaspes derives its name, is the most admirable of them
all; for under the interpretation of the prophecy of a boy, he informed
posterity that the Roman empire, nay, even the Roman name, should be
utterly destroyed; and this he predicted a long time before the
establishment of that colony of Trojans," Lactant. lib. VII. cap. xv.
pag. in. 492. Justin Martyr informs us, that he predicted the general
conflagration of all perishable things, Justin Apolog. ii. pag. 66. It
is affirmed that Pythagoras was Zoroaster's disciple, under the reign of
Cambyses, the son of Cyrus: the words of Apuleius inform us of the fact.
Some say that Pythagoras having been made a slave in Egypt, was
transported into Persia; others will have transported him into Babylon,
and there instructed by Zoroaster the Babylonian, whom they distinguish
from the Persian. We find no less than five Zoroasters mentioned in
history: to these five may be added a sixth, mentioned by Apuleius. This
Zoroaster lived in Babylon at the time Pythagoras was brought thither by
Cambyses. The same writer calls him "the chief interpreter of all divine
mysteries," and says that Pythagoras was chiefly instructed by him. He
appears to be the same <span id="page_145">p. 145</span> with Zabratus,
by whom Diogenes affirms Pythagoras was purged from all his former
filth, and instructed in what is essentially necessary for good men to
know, *viz.* God, nature, and philosophy: he is also the same with
Nazaratus, the Assyrian, whom Alexander, in his book of the Pythagorical
symbols, affirms to have taught Pythagoras. The same person Suidas calls
*Zares*, Cyrillus, *Zaranes*, and Plutarch, *Zarates*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[145:1](ma254.htm#fr_9) According to the
tradition of the Magi, we shall explain this fabulous and figurative
description of Zoroaster's end. The truth is, he enjoined the Persians
rigidly to persevere in the laws he had framed, and the doctrine he had
been at the labour to establish, which was, to live in the practice of
moral virtue, to avoid all species of luxury, to promote the liberal
sciences, to govern all their actions with prudence and integrity, and
to meet misfortune with resolution, and to encounter it with philosophy,
and to endure the unavoidable calamities of life with fortitude: these,
his disciplines, he left as a precious relic among them; which while
they strictly adhered to, they need be under no apprehension of tyranny
and <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> oppression:--these they collected,
and for some space of time religiously followed the precepts of this
great philosopher: at length, human frailty and vice, corrupting their
manners, caused them to relax from their duties, upon which their empire
fell into ruin and decay. The idolatry falsely imputed to this wise man,
*viz.* his instituting the worshipping of fire, is thus to be
interpreted.--Under the celestial symbol of fire was meant truth:--truth
he ascribed purely as the great and wonderful attribute of the Godhead,
which he acknowledged and worshipped, to wit, one only God, the eternal
fire of wisdom and everlasting truth, justice, and mercy!--His magic was
the study of the religious worship of that Eternal Being. After
Zoroaster, there were four persons chosen to educate the successor of
the king of Persia. They chose the wisest, the most just, the most
temperate, and the bravest man that could be found. The wisest man
(*viz.* one of the Magi), instructed him in Zoroaster's magic, the just
in government, the brave in war, and the temperate in social virtue and
temperance. Now observe, that Zoroaster is called the son of Oromasius,
and that Oromasius is the name given by Zoroaster and his disciples to
the good God, and this title was really bestowed upon him by the
Persians; therefore, according to Plato, this Persian Magus, on account
of his uncommon learning, religion, and wisdom, was, in an allegorical
or figurative manner, called the son of God, or the son of wisdom,
truth, &.c.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[146:1](ma254.htm#fr_10) Some Magi affirm that
he is the same with Abraham, and frequently call him Ibrahim Zerdascht,
which is Abraham the friend of fire.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[147:1](ma254.htm#fr_11) The preceding note
fully explains those erroneous relations of the wisdom of the Magi.
Those who desire to see a great many passages which testify that the
magic of the Persians, instituted by Zoroaster, was the study of
religion, virtue, and wisdom, let them refer to *Brissonius de Regno
Persarum*, lib. ii. p. 178, &. seq. edit. Commel. 1595; likewise Jul.
Cæsar, Bullengerus Eclog. ad Arnobium, p. 346, &. seq. Nor are we
ignorant that Gabriel Naude hath most learnedly and solidly justified
our Zoroaster against the ignorant imputations of necromancy, black art,
&c.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[147:2](ma254.htm#fr_12) It has been much
contended by philosophers whether Zoroaster was the first suggester of
this doctrine of the two principles: the one called by the Magi,
Oromases the *good*, and Arimanius the *evil* principle. It is certain
Zoroaster asserted the one, *viz.* that of the good, or an essential
uncreated self-existent principle, the cause of all good, called by him
Oromasus, meaning a good God, &c. In respect of the other principle,
Arimanius, we must, before we decide either for or against Zoroaster,
consider the nature of the thing in its most impartial sense.

Those who ever read Mr. Bernard's journal (*Nouvelles de la Republique
des Lettres*, *Feb*. 1701, *and March* 1701, *Art. iii. l. i.*) needs
not be informed that the Historia Religionis veterum Persarum, published
by Dr. Hyde (professor of the oriental languages in the university of
Oxford) at Oxford, in the year 1700, 4to, is one of the most excellent
pieces that could possibly be written on such a subject. The idea which
the learned journalist hath given of this performance is sufficient to
convince us that it contains a very curious erudition, and profound
discussions, which discover many rare and uncommon particulars of a
country which we scarce knew any thing of before. But to come to the
point: Dr. Hyde affirms, that the ancient Persians acknowledge no more
than one uncreated principle, which was the good principle, or, in one
word, God: and that they looked upon the evil principle as a created
being. One of the names, or attributes, which they gave to God, was
Hormizda; and they called the evil principle, Ahariman; and this is the
original of the two Greek words, Ώρομάσδες and Απειμανιος one of which
was the name of the good, and the other of the evil, principle, as we
have seen above, in a passage of Plutarch. The Persians affirmed that
Abraham was the first founder of their religion. Zoroaster afterwards
made some alterations in it; but it is said he made no manner of change
with relation to the doctrine of one sole uncreated principle, but that
the only innovation in this particular was the giving the name of Light
to the good principle, and that of Darkness to the evil one.

From a misconstruction put upon the doctrine of the Magi, some
considerable misreports of their tenets have been propagated: I think
none more curious than the following--"That a war arose betwixt the army
of light and that of darkness, which at last ended in an accommodation,
of which the angels were mediators, and the conditions were that the
inferior world should be wholly left to the government of Arimanius for
the space of 7000 years, after which it should be restored to light.
Before the peace, Arimanius had exterminated all the inhabitants of the
world. Light had called men to its assistance while <span
id="page_148">p. 148</span> they were yet but spirits; which it did,
either to draw them out of Arimanius' territories, or in order to give
them bodies to engage against this enemy. They accepted the bodies and
the fight, on condition they should be assisted by the light, and should
at last overcome Arimanius. The resurrection shall come when he shall be
vanquished. This they conclude was the cause of the mixture, and shall
be the cause of the deliverance. The Greeks were not ignorant that
Zoroaster taught a future resurrection.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[148:1](ma254.htm#fr_13) The ancient Persian
Magi never did divine honours to the sun or any of the stars. They
maintain they do not adore the sun, but direct themselves towards it
when they pray to God. It has been found amongst Zoroaster's secret
precepts, that we ought to salute the sun, but not that we should adore
him with religious worship. He proves that their ceremonies might very
justly pass for civil honours, and to this purpose he makes some
exceeding curious observations. He applies to the fire what he says of
the sun. The bowings and prostrations of the Persians before the holy
fire were not a religious observation, but only a civil one. The same
thing must be attributed to their reported worship of fire, which, as I
have said above, they kept in their *Pyrea* in imitation of the Jews.
For though they paid a certain reverence to the fire, and that by
prostration, yet this was not a religious, only a civil, worship; as it
is from the force of custom that the eastern people prostrate themselves
before any great man; (so they might with as much propriety be said to
adore or worship him.) Believe me we ought to be the last to censure the
eastern people with such gross idolatry as has been represented. The
Persians, who have always been devoted to the highest study of wisdom,
performed their duties in life for the honour of their God; and,
although unenlightened and Barbarians, lived as men, and not as
irrational creatures: whereas we, who know our duty so well, yet
practise it so ill: for I may truly say, that notwithstanding. the great
benefits we derive from the divine precepts of Christianity, yet I
believe it will be found an incontrovertible fact that man to man is a
serpent, a few individuals excepted. But to return to our subject: It
was the ancient custom to fall prostrate to angels, as being the
messengers and representatives of God. Besides, there are many examples
of this kind of worship, not only in the Old, but New Testament, where
the women who had been converted to the true faith, upon seeing the
angels at the sepulchre of Christ, fell with their faces to the ground
and worshipped. Yet they well knew that it was not God they saw, but his
angels, as appears from their own confession--"we have seen a vision of
angels." Therefore they are wrongfully called *Idolaters* and
worshippers of fire, for Zoroaster was the instrument of their
continuation in the true faith. He was a man who had the knowledge of
the true God, whom he <span id="page_149">p. 149</span> peculiarly
worshipped in a natural cave, in which he placed several symbols
representing the world; Mithra, representing the sun, filled the
master's place. But it was not Mithra, but the true God, that he adored:
and, lastly, as he was a true philosopher, a profound alchemist, greatly
informed in all the arts of the mathematics, strict and austere in his
religion, he struck the Persians with an admiration of him, and by these
means made them attentive to his doctrine. The sum of all is, that he
lived in a cave, dedicated to the service of God, and the study of all
natural and supernatural knowledge; that he was divinely illuminated,
knew the courses of the stars, and the occult and common properties of
all compounded and earthly things; that by fire and Geometry (*i. e.* by
Chemistry and the Mathematics) he investigated, proved, and
demonstrated, the truth and purity, or else the fugacity and vileness,
of all things knowable in this mortal state of humanity. So that the
fame, sagacity, wisdom, and virtue of Zoroaster induced some certain men
wickedly and fraudulently to impose upon the unwary some false magical
oracles, and diabolical inventions, written in Greek and Latin, &c. as
the genuine works of the divine and illustrious Zoroaster.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hermes Trismegistus](ma255)
