[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma251)  [Next](ma253) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ADVERTISEMENT.

THE Author of this Work respectfully informs those who are curious in
the studies of Art and Nature, especially of Natural and Occult
Philosophy, Chemistry, Astrology, &c. &c. that, having been
indefatigable in his researches into those sublime Sciences, of which he
has treated at large in this Book, that he gives private instructions
and lectures upon any of the above mentioned Sciences; in the course of
which he will discover many curious and rare experiments. Those who
become Students will be initiated into the choicest operations of
Natural Philosophy, Natural Magic, the Cabala, Chemistry, the Talismanic
Art, Hermetic Philosophy, Astrology, Physiognomy, &c. &c. Likewise they
will acquire the knowledge of the Rites, Mysteries, Ceremonies*, and*
Principles *of the ancient Philosophers, Magi, Cabalists, Adepts,
&c.--The purpose of this School (which will consist of no greater number
than Twelve Students) being to investigate the hidden treasures of
Nature; to bring the Mind to a Contemplation of the* Eternal Wisdom*; to
promote the discovery of whatever may conduce to the perfection of Man,.
the alleviating the miseries and calamities of this life, both in
respect of ourselves and others; the study of morality and religion
here, in order to secure to ourselves felicity hereafter; and, finally,
the Promulgation of whatever may conduce to the general happiness and
welfare of mankind.--Those who feel themselves thoroughly disposed to
enter upon such a course of studies, as is above recited, with the same
principles of philanthropy with which the Author invites the lovers of
Philosophy and wisdom, to incorporate themselves in so select,
permanent, and desirable a society, may speak with the Author upon the
subject, tit any time between the hours of Eleven and Two o'clock, at*
99 Norton Street, Mary-le-Bonne

.

Letters (post paid) upon any subject treated of in this Book, will be
duly answered, with the necessary information.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Title Page](ma253)
