[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma258)  [Next](ma260) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

ARISTOTLE,

THE PERIPATETIC.

ARISTOTLE, commonly called the Prince of Philosophers, or the
Philosopher, by way of excellence, was the founder of a sect which
surpassed, and at length even swallowed up all the rest. Not but that it
has had reverse of fortune in its turn; especially in the seventeenth
century, in which it has been violently shaken, though the Catholic
divines on the one side, and the Protestant on the other, have run (as
to the quenching of fire) to its relief, and fortified themselves so
strongly, by the secular arm, against the New Philosophy, that it is not
like to lose its dominion. Mr. *Moreri* met with so many good materials
in a work of father Rapin, that he has given a very large article of
Aristotle, enough to dispense with any assistance. Accordingly, I design
not to enlarge upon it as far as the subject might allow, but shall
content myself with observing some of the errors which I have collected
concerning this philosopher. It is not certain that *Aristotle*
practised pharmacy in *Athens* while he was a disciple of *Plato*, nor
is it more certain that he did not. Very little credit ought to be given
to a current tradition that he learnt several things of a *Jew*, and
much less to a story of his pretended conversion to *Judaism*. They who
pretend that he was born a *Jew*, are much more grossly mistaken: the
wrong pointing of a certain passage occasioned this mistake. They are
deceived who say that he was a disciple of *Socrates* for three years,
for *Socrates* died 15 years before *Aristotle* was born. *Aristotle*'s
behaviour towards his master *Plato* is variously related: some will
have it that, through prodigious vanity and ingratitude, he set up altar
against altar: that is, he erected a school in *Athens* during *Plato's*
life, and in opposition to him: others say that he did not set up for a
professor till after his master's death. We are

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

told some things concerning his amours which are not altogether to his
advantage. It was pretended that his conjugal affection was idolatrous,
and that, if he had not retired from *Athens*, the process for
irreligion, which the priests had commenced against him, would have been
attended with the same consequences as that against *Socrates*. Though
he deserved very, great praise, yet it is certain that most of the
errors concerning him are to be found in the extravagant commendations
which have been heaped upon him: as, for example, is it not a downright
falsehood to say, *that if Aristotle spoke in his natural philosophy
like a man, he spoke in his moral philosophy like a God; and that it is
a question in his moral philosophy whether he partakes more of the
lawyer than of the priest; more of the priest than the prophet; more of
the prophet than of the God*? Cardinal *Pallavinci* scrupled not in some
measure to affirm that, if it had not been for *Aristotle*, the church
would have wanted some of its articles of faith. The Christians are not
the only people who have authorized his philosophy; the *Mahometans* are
little less prejudiced in its favour; and we are told, that to this day,
notwithstanding the ignorance which reigns among them, they have schools
for this sect. It will be an everlasting subject of wonder, to persons
who know what philosophy is, to find that *Aristotle's* authority was so
much respected in the schools, for several ages, that when a disputant
quoted a passage from this philosopher, he who maintained the *thesis*
durst nor say *transeat*, but must either deny the passage, or explain
it in his own way. It is in this manner we treat the Holy Scriptures in
the divinity schools. The parliaments which have proscribed all other
philosophy but that of *Aristotle*, are more excusable than the doctors:
for whether the members of parliament were really persuaded that this
philosophy was the best of any, or was not, the public good might induce
them to prohibit new opinions, lest the academical divisions should
extend their malignant influence to the disturbance of the tranquillity
of the state. What is most astonishing to wise men is, that the
professors should be so strongly prejudiced in favour of *Aristotle's
philosophy*. Had this prepossession been confined to his poetry and
rhetoric, it had been less wonderful: but they were fond of the weakest

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

of his works; I mean his Logic, and Natural Philosophy <span
id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21). This justice, however, must be done to
the blindest of his followers, that they have deserted him where he
clashes with Christianity; and this he did in points of the greatest
consequence, since he maintained the eternity of the world, and did not
believe that providence extended itself to sublunary beings. As to the
immortality of the soul, it is not certainly known whether he
acknowledged it or not <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22). In the year
1647, the famous capuchin, *Valerian Magni*, published a work concerning
the Atheism of *Aristotle*. About one hundred and thirty years before,
*Marc Antony Venerius* published a system of philosophy, in which he
discovered several inconsistencies between *Aristotle's* doctrine, and
the truths of religion. Campanella maintained the same in his book *de
Reductione ad Religionem*, which was approved at *Rome* in the year
1630. It was not long since maintained in *Holland*, in the prefaces to
some books, that the doctrine of this philosopher differed but little
from Spinozism. In the mean time, if some Peripatetics may be believed,
he was not ignorant of the mystery of the Trinity. He made a very good
end, and enjoys eternal happiness. He composed a great number of books;
a great part of which is come down to us. It is true some critics raise
a thousand scruples about them. He was extremely honoured in his own
city, and there were not wanting heretics who worshipped his image with
that of *Christ*. There is extant some book which mentions, that, before
the Reformation, there were churches in *Germany* in

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

which *Aristotle's* Ethics were read every Sunday morning to the people
instead of the Gospel. There are but few instances of zeal for religion
which have not been shewn for the *Peripatetic* philosophy. *Paul de
Foix*, famous for his embassies and his learning, would not see *Francis
Patricius at Ferrara*, because he was informed that that learned man
taught a philosophy different from the *Peripatetic*. This was treating
the enemies of *Aristotle* as *zealots* treat *heretics*. After all, it
is no wonder that the *Peripatetic* philosophy, as it has been taught
for several centuries, found so many protectors; or that the interests
of it are believed to be inseparable from those of theology: for it
accustoms the mind to acquiesce without evidence. This union of
interests may be esteemed as a pledge to the *Peripatetics* of the
immortality of their sect, and an argument to abate the hopes of the new
philosophers.--Considering, withal, that there are some doctrines of
Aristotle which the moderns have rejected, and which must, sooner or
later, be adopted again. The Protestant divines have very much altered
their conduct, if it is true, as we are told, that the first reformers
clamoured so loud against the *Peripatetic* philosophy. The kind of
death,. which in some respects does much honour to the memory of
*Aristotle*, is, that which some have reported, *viz.* that his vexation
at not being able to discover the cause of the flux and reflux of the
*Eurippus* occasioned the distemper of which he died. Some say, that
being retired into the island of *Eubæa*, to avoid a process against him
for irreligion, he poisoned himself: but why should he quit *Athens* to
free himself from persecution this way? HESYCHIUS affirms, not only that
sentence of death was pronounced against him for an hymn which he made
in honour of his father-in-law, but also that he swallowed aconite in
execution of this sentence. If this were true, it would have been
mentioned by more authors.

The number of ancient and modern writers who have exercised their pens
on *Aristotle*, either in commenting on, or translating, him, is
endless. A catalogue of them is to be met with in some of the editions
of his works, but not a complete one. See a treatise of father Labbé,
entitled *Aristotelis & Platonis Græcorum Interpretum, typis hactenus
editorum brevis conspectus*; A short view of the Greek interpreters of
Aristotle and Plato *hitherto published*;

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

printed at *Paris* in the year 1657, in 4to. Mr. Teissier names four
authors who have composed the life of *Aristotle*; *Ammonius, Guarini of
Verona,* *John James Beurerus*, and *Leonard Aretin*. He forgot *Jerome
Gemusæus*, physician and professor of philosophy at *Bazil*, author of a
book, *De Vitæ Aristotelis, et eus Operum Censura.--The Life of
Aristotle, and a Critique on his Works*.

PETER BAYLE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[164:1](ma259.htm#fr_21) To be convinced of the
weakness of these works, we need only read Gassendus in his
*Exercitationes Paradoxicæ adversos Aristoteleos*. He says enough there
against *Aristotle's* philosophy in general, to convince every
unprejudiced reader that it is very defective; but he particularly ruins
this philosopher's Logic. He was preparing, likewise, a criticism on his
Natural Philosophy, his Metaphysics, and Ethics, in the same way; when,
being alarmed at the formidable indignation of the *peripatetic* party
against him, be chose rather to drop his work, than expose himself to
their vexatious persecutions. In *Aristotle's* Logic and Natural
Philosophy, there are many things which discover the elevation and
profundity of his genius.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[164:2](ma259.htm#fr_22) *Pomponatius* and
*Niphus* had a great quarrel on this subject. The first maintained, that
the immortality of the soul was inconsistent with Aristotle's
principles: the latter undertook to defend the contrary. See the
discourse of la *Mothe le Vayer* on the Immortality of the Soul, and
*Bodin*, in page 15 of Pref. to *Dæmonomania*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Artemidorus Of Ephesus](ma260)
