[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma255)  [Next](ma257.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

APPOLLONIUS OF TYANA,

WITH SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS

REMARKABLE MIRACLES, PROPHECIES, VISIONS, RELATIONS, &c. &c,

APPOLLONIUS Tyanæus, was one of the most extraordinary persons that ever
appeared in the world. He was born at Tyana in Cappadocia, towards the
beginning of the first century. At sixteen years of age he became a
rigid disciple of Pythagoras, renouncing *wine, flesh*, and *women*,
wearing no shoes, and letting his hair and beard grow long, and
cloathing himself only in linen: soon after he became a reformer, and
fixed his abode in a temple of Æsculapius, where many sick persons
resorted to be cured by him. Being come to age, he gave part of his
estate to his eldest brother, and distributed another part to his poor
relations, and kept back only a very small share to himself. He lived
six years without speaking a word, notwithstanding during this silence
he quelled several seditions in Cecilia and Pamphilia; that which he put
a stop to at *Aspenda* was the most difficult of all to appease, because
the business was to make those hearken to reason whom famine had driven
to revolt: the cause of this commotion was, some rich men having
monopolized all the corn, occasioned an extraordinary scarcity in the
city; *Appollonius* stopped this popular commotion, without speaking a
word to the enraged multitude: Appollonius had no occasion for words;
his Pythagoric silence did all that the finest figures of oratory could
effect. He travelled much, professed himself a legislator; understood
all languages, without having learned them: he had the surprising
faculty of knowing what was transacted at an immense distance, and at
the time the Emperor Domitian was stabbed, Appollonius being at a vast
distance, and standing in the market-place of the city, exclaimed,
"Strike! strike!--'tis done, the tyrant

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

is no more." He understood the language of birds; he condemned dancing,
and other diversions of that sort; he recommended charity and piety; he
travelled almost over all the countries of the world; and he died at a
very great age. His life has been fully related by Philostratus; but it
contains so many fabulous relations that we do not pretend to introduce
them in this place. There are many who have very readily opposed the
miracles of this man to those of Christ, and drew a parallel between
them. It cannot be denied that this philosopher received very great
honours, both during his life and after his death; and that his
reputation continued long after paganism. He wrote four books of
judicial Astrology, and a Treatise on Sacrifices, shewing what was to be
offered to the Deity.

We must not omit a circumstance which tends to the honour of this
venerable person. It is related that *Aurelius* had come to a
resolution, and had publikly declared his intentions, to demolish the
city of *Tyana*; but that *Appollonius of Tyana*, an ancient
philosopher, of great renown and authority, a true friend of the gods,
and himself honoured as a deity, appeared to him in his usual form as he
retired into his tent, and addressed him thus:--"*Aurelian*, if you
desire to be victorious, think no more of the destruction of my
fellow-citizens!--*Aurelian*, if you desire to rule, abstain from the
blood of the innocent!--*Aurelian*, if you will conquer, be merciful!"
Aurelian being acquainted with the features of this ancient philosopher,
having seen his image in several temples, he vowed to erect a temple and
statues to him; and therefore altered his resolution of sacking Tyana.
This account we have from men of credit, and have met with it in books
in the Olpian library; and we are the more inclined to believe it on
account of the dignity of *Apollonius*; for was there ever any thing
among men more holy, venerable, noble, and divine than *Apollonius*? He
restored life to the dead, he did and spoke many things beyond human
reach; which whoever would be informed of, may meet with many accounts
of them in the Greek histories of his life.' See *Vopiscus in Aurelian*,
cap. 24.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

Lastly, the inhabitants of *Tyana* built a temple to their *Appollonius*
after his death; his statue was erected in several temples: the Emperor
*Adrian* collected as many of his writings as he possibly could, and
kept them very select, in his superb palace at *Antium*, with a rare but
small book of this philosopher's, concerning the *Oracle of Trophonius*.
This little book was to be seen at *Antium* during the life of
Philostratus; nor did any curiosity whatever render this small town so
famous as did this rare and extraordinary book of Appollonius.

It is reported that a wise prince of the Indians, well skilled in magic,
made seven rings of the seven planets, which he bestowed upon
Appollonius, one of which he wore every day; by which he always
maintained the health and vigour of his youth, and lived to a very
advanced age. His life was translated from the Greek of *Philostratus*
into French, by *Blaise de Vigners*, with a very ample commentary by
*Artus Thomas*, Lord of *Embry*, a *Parisian*; and some time since there
has been made an English translation of his life, which was condemned,
prohibited, and anathematized without reason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Petrus de Abano](ma257.md)
