[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma256)  [Next](ma258) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

PETRUS DE ABANO, OR PETER OF APONA,

DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY AND PHYSIC, &c. &c. &c.

PETRUS APONENSIS, or APONUS, one of the most famous philosophers and
physicians of his time, was born A. D. 1250, in a village, situated four
miles from *Padua*. He studied a long time at *Paris*, where he was
promoted to the degrees of Doctor in philosophy and physic, in the
practice of which he was very successful, but his fees remarkably high.
*Gabriel Naude*, in his *Antiquitate Scholæ Medicæ Parisiensis*, gives
the following account of him: "Let us next produce Peter de Apona, or
Peter de Abano, called the Reconciler, on account of the famous book
which he published during his residence in your university <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)."--It is certain that physic lay buried in
Italy, scarce known to any one, uncultivated and unadorned, till its
tutelar genius, a villager of *Apona*, destined to free Italy from its
barbarism and ignorance, as Camillus once freed *Rome* from the siege of
the *Gauls*, made diligent enquiry in what part of the world polite
literature was most happily cultivated, philosophy most subtilly
handled, and physic taught with the greatest solidity and purity; and
being assured that *Paris* alone laid claim to this honour, thither he
presently flies; giving himself up wholly to her tutelage, he applied
himself diligently to the mysteries of philosophy and medicine; obtained
a degree and the laurel in both; and afterwards taught them both with
great applause: and after a stay of many years, loaden with the wealth
acquired among you, arid, after having become the most famous
philosopher, astrologer, physician, and mathematician of his time,
returns to his own country, where,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

in the opinion of the judicious *Scardeon*, he was the first restorer of
true philosophy and physic. Gratitude, therefore, calls upon you to
acknowledge your obligations due to *Michæl Angelus Blondus*, a
physician of Rome, who in the last century undertaking to publish the
*Conciliationes Physiognomicæ* of your *Aponensian* doctor, and finding
they had been composed at *Paris*, and in your university, chose to
publish them in the name, and under the patronage, of your society."
'Tis said, that he was suspected of magic <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17),

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

and persecuted on that account by the Inquisition: and it is probable
that, if he had lived to the end of his trial, he would have suffered in
person what he was sentenced to suffer in effigy after his death. His
apologists observe, that his body, being privately taken out of his
grave by his friends, escaped the vigilance of the Inquisitors, who
would have condemned it to be burnt. He was removed from place to place,
and at last deposited in *St. Augustin's Church*, without Epitaph, or
any other mark of honour. His accusers ascribed inconsistent opinions to
him; they charged him with being a magician, and yet with denying the
existence of spirits. He had such an antipathy to milk, that the very
seeing any one take it made him vomit. He died in the year 1316 <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) in the sixty-sixth year of his age. One of
his principal books was the Conciliator, already mentioned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[155:1](ma257.htm#fr_16) *Naude* takes notice of
this in a speech in which he extols the ancient glory of the university
of *Paris*. We have, above, recited his words at length, because they
incidentally inform us, that Peter de Abano composed that great work at
Paris which procured him the appellation of the *Reconciler*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[156:1](ma257.htm#fr_17) Naude, in his *Apology
for great Men accused of Magic*, says, "The general opinion of almost
all authors is, that he was the greatest magician of his time; that by
means of seven spirits, familiar, which he kept inclosed in chrystal, he
had acquired the knowledge of the seven liberal arts, and that he had
the art of causing the money he had made use of to return again into his
pocket. He was accused of magic in the eightieth year of his age, and
that dying in the year 1305, before his trial was over, he was condemned
(as *Castellan* reports) to the fire; and that a bundle of straw, or
osier, representing his person, was publicly burnt at Padua; that by so
rigorous an example, and by the fear of incurring a like penalty, they
might suppress the reading of three books which he had composed on this
subject: the first of which is the noted *Heptameron*, or *Magical
Elements of Peter de Abano, Philosopher*, now extant, and printed at the
end of *Agrippa's* works; the second, that which Trithemius calls
*Elucidarium Necromanticum Petri de Abano*; and a third, called by the
same author *Liber experimentorum mirabilium de Annulis secundem*, 28
*Mansiom Lunæ*." Now it is to be noted, that Naude lays no stress upon
these seeming strong proofs; he refutes them by immediately after
affirming, that *Peter of Apona* was a man of prodigious penetration and
learning, living in an age of darkness which caused everything out of
the vulgar track to be suspected as diabolical, especially as he was
very much given to study, and acquainted with the harmony of the
celestial bodies and the proportions of nature, and addicted to curious
and divinatory science. "He was one (says he) who appeared as a prodigy
of learning amidst the ignorance of that age, and who, besides his skill
in languages and physic, had carried his enquiries so far into the
occult sciences of abstruse and hidden nature, that, after having given
most ample proofs, by his writings concerning physiognomy, geomancy, and
chiromancy, what he was able to perform in each of these, he quitted
them all together with his youthful curiosity to addict himself wholly
to the study of philosophy, physic, and astrology; which studies proved
so advantageous to him, that, not to speak of the two first, which
introduced him to all the popes and sovereign pontiffs of his time, and
acquired him the reputation which at present he enjoys among learned
men, it is certain that he was a great master in the latter, which
appears not only by the astronomical figures which he caused to be
painted in the great hall of the palace at *Padua*, and the translations
he made of the books of the most learned *Rabbi Abraham Aben Ezra*,
added to those which he himself composed on *critical days*, and the
improvement of astronomy, but by the testimony of the renowned
mathematician *Regio Montanus*, who made a fine panegyric on him, in
quality of an astrologer, in the oration which he delivered publicly at
*Padua* when he explained there the book of *Alfraganus*." Now, many
respectable authors are of opinion that it was not on the score of magic
that the Inquisition sentenced <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> him to
death, but because he endeavoured to account for the wonderful effects
in nature by the *influences of the celestial bodies*, not attributing
them to *angels* or *dæmons*; so that heresy, instead of magic, seems to
have been the ground of his falling under the tyranny of the sage
fathers of the Roman Catholic faith, as being one who *opposed* the
doctrine of spiritual beings.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[157:1](ma257.htm#fr_18) If this be true as we
read in Tomasini, in *Elog. Vilor. Illustr. p*. 22, *Naude* must be
mistaken where he says, that "Peter Aponus being accused at the age of
80 years, died A. D.1305." *Freherus* affirms the same upon the
authority of *Bernardin Scardeon*. *Gesner* is mistaken in making Peter
Aponus flourish in the year 1320. Konig has copied this error. But
Father Rapin is much more grossly mistaken than any of them when he
places him in the sixteenth century, saying, "*Peter of Apona*, a
physician of *Padua*, who flourished under Clement VII, debauched his
imagination so far by reading the *Arabian* philosophers, and by too
much studying the astrology of Alfraganus, that he was put into the
Inquisition upon the suspicion of magic, &c." See *Rapin Reflex. sur la
Philosophiæ*, *n*. 28. *p*. 360. *Vossius* has followed *Gesner*, and
makes an observation worthy to be considered. He says, that *Peter of
Apona* sent his book, *De Medicina Omnimoda*, to Pope *John* XXII, who
was elected in the year 1316, and held the *Pontifical Chair* seventeen
years. By this we know the age of this physician. But if the year 1316
was that of his death, the conclusion is unjust; neither does it clear
*Vossius* of an error.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Apuleius](ma258)
