[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma259)  [Next](ma261.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ARTEMIDORUS OF EPHESUS,

THE

SOMNABULIST, OR DREAMER.

ARTEMIDORUS (who wrote so largely upon Dreams) was a native of
*Ephesus*. He lived under *Antonius Pius*, as he informs us himself,
where he says, he knew an Athlete, who having dreamt that he had lost
his sight, obtained the prize in the games which that Emperor ordered to
be celebrated. No author has ever taken more pains upon so useful a
subject than Artemidorus has done. He bought up all that had been
written upon the subject of dreams, which amounted to several volumes,
but he spent many years in travelling to collect them, as well as the
different opinions of all the learned who were then living. He kept a
continual correspondence with those in the towns and assemblies of
Greece, in Italy, and in the most populous islands; and he collected
every where all the dreams he could hear of, and the events they had. He
despised the censure of those grave and supercilious persons, who treat
all pretenders to predictions as sharpers, or impostors, and without
regarding the censures of these *Catos*, he frequented those diviners
many years. In a word, he devoted all his time and thoughts to the
science of dreams. He

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

thought that his great labour in making so many collections, &c. had
enabled him to warrant his interpretations by reason and experience, but
unfortunately he ever fixed upon the most trifling and frivolous
subjects, such as almost every one is dreaming of: there is no dream
which *Artemidorus* has explained, but will bear a quite different
interpretation, with the same probability and with at least as natural
resemblances, as those on which that interpreter proceeds. I say nothing
of the injury done to *intelligences*, to whose direction we must
necessarily impute our dreams if we expect to find in them any presage
of futurity <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md). *Artemidorus* took
great pains to instruct his son in the same science, as appears by the
two books which he dedicated to him. So eager a pursuit after these
studies is the less to be wondered at, when we consider that he believed
himself under the inspiration of *Apollo*. He dedicated his three first

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

books to one *Cassius Maximus*, and the other two to his son.--They were
printed in *Greek* at *Venice* in the year 1518. In the year 1603
Rigaultius published them at Paris in *Greek* and *Latin*, with notes.
The Latin translation he made use of was that published by *John
Cornarius* at *Bazil*, in the year 1539. *Artemidorus* wrote a treatise
of *augury*, and another upon *chiromancy*; but we have no remains of
them. *Tertullian* has not taken notice of him in that passage, where he
quotes several *onirocritic* authors; but *Lucian* does not forget him,
though he names but two writers of this class.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[167:1](ma260.htm#fr_23.md) We find in Artemidorus
some of the most trifling incidents in dreams noted by him to presage
very extraordinary things; such, as if any one dreams of his nose, or
his teeth, or such like trifling subjects, such particular events they
must denote.--Now, as we cannot attribute a true and significant dream
to any other cause than the celestial *intelligences*, or an *evil
dæmon*, or else to the soul itself (which possesses an inherent
prophetic virtue, as we have fully treated of in our *Second Book of
Magic, where we have spoken of prophetic dreams*),--I say, from which of
these causes a dream proceeds, we must ascribe but a very deficient
portion of knowledge to either of them, if we do not allow them capable
of giving better and plainer information respecting any calamity or
change of fortune or circumstances, than by dreaming of one's nose
itching, or a tooth falling out, and a hundred other toys like these--I
say, such modes of dictating to us a fore-knowledge of events to happen,
cannot but be unworthy of their Wisdom, subtilty, or power, and if they
cannot instruct us by better signs, how great is their ignorance, and if
they will not, how great is their malice? therefore, all such trifling
dreams are to be altogether rejected as vain and insignificant, for we
must remember that "*a dream comes through the multitude of business*,"
and often otherwise; but such dreams as we are to notice, and draw
predictions of future accidents and events, are those where the dream is
altogether consistent, not depending upon any prior discourse,
accidents, or other like circumstances; likewise that the person who
would wish to dream true dreams, should so dispose himself as to become
a fit recipient of the heavenly powers, but this is only to be done by a
temperate and frugal diet, a mind bent on sublime contemplation, a
religious desire of being informed of any misfortune, accident, or
event, which might introduce misery, poverty, or distraction of mind; so
as when we know it, to deprecate the same by prayer to the divine
wisdom, that he would be pleased to divert the evil impending, or to
enable us to meet the same with fortitude, and endure it with patience
till the will of the Deity is accomplished. These are the things which
we ought to be desirous to receive information of by *dream, vision*, or
the like, and of which many are often truly forewarned, and thereby
foretell things to come, also presage of the death of certain friends;
all which I know by experience to be true and probable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Babylonians](ma261.md)
