[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma264)  [Next](ma266.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

RAYMOND LULLY,

A FAMOUS ALCHYMIST.

RAYMOND LULLY, or *Raymon Lull*, comes the next in order. He was born in
the island of Majorca, in the year 1225, of a family of the first
distinction, though he did not assume his chymical character till
towards the latter part of his life.

Upon his applying himself to chymistry, he soon began to preach another
sort of doctrine; insomuch that, speaking of that art, he says it is
only to be acquired by dint of experiment and practice, and cannot be
conveyed to the understanding by idle words and sounds. He is the first
author I can find, who considers alchymy expressly with a view to the
universal medicine: but after him it became a popular pursuit, and the
libraries were full of writings in that vein.

Lully, himself, beside what he wrote in the scholastic way, has a good
many volumes wrote after his conversion: 'tis difficult to say how many;
for it was a common practice with his disciples and followers to usher
in their performances under their master's name. "I have perused (*says
Boerhaave*) the best part of his works, and find them, beyond
expectation, excellent: insomuch, that I have been almost tempted to
doubt whether they could be the work of that age, so full are they of
the experiments and observations which occur in our later writers, that
either the books must be supposititious, or else

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

the ancient chymists must have been acquainted with a world of things
which pass for the discoveries of modern practice. He gives very plain
intimations of phosphorus, which he calls the *Vestal Fire*, the *Offa
Helmontii*, &c. and yet it is certain he wrote 200 years before either
*Helmont*, or my Lord *Bacon*."

He travelled into *Mauritania*, where he is supposed to have first met
with chymistry, and to have imbibed the principles of his art from the
writings of *Geber*: which opinion is countenanced by the conformity
observable between the two. The *Spanish* authors ascribe the occasion
of his journey to an amour: he had fallen in love, it seems, with a
maiden of that country, who obstinately refused his addresses. Upon
enquiring into the reason, she shewed him a cancered breast. *Lully*,
like a generous gallant, immediately resolved on a voyage to
*Mauritania*, where *Geber* had lived, to seek some relief for his
mistress. He ended his days in *Africa*; where, after having taken up
the quality of missionary, and preaching the gospel among the infidels,
he was stoned to death <span id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[185:1](ma265.htm#fr_33.md) The history of this
eminent adept is very confused. *Mutius*, an author, is express, that
that good man, being wholly intent upon religion, never applied himself
either to chymistry or the philosopher's-stone: and yet we have various
accounts of his making gold. Among a variety of authors, *Gregory* of
*Thoulouse* asserts that "*Lully offered* EDWARD III*, king of England,
a supply of six millions to make war against the Infidels*." Besides
manuscripts, the following printed pieces bear Lully's name, *viz*. *The
Theory of the Philosopher's Stone: The Practise: The Transmutation of
Metals: The Codicil: The Vade-Mecum: The Book of Experiments: The
Explanation of his Testament: The Abridgements, or Accusations: and The
Power of Riches*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: George Ripley](ma266.md)
