[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma262)  [Next](ma264) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

ALBERTUS MAGNUS.

ALBERTUS MAGNUS, a *Dominican*, bishop of *Ratisbon*, and one of the
most famous doctors of the XIII century, was born at *Lawingen*, on the
*Danube*, in *Suabia*, in the year 1193, or 1205. *Moreri's* dictionary
gives us an account of the several employs which were conferred upon
him, and the success of his lectures in several towns. It is likewise
said, that he practised midwifery, and that he was in search of the
*Philosopher's Stone*: that he was a famous *Magician*, and that he had
formed a machine in the shape of a man, which served him for an oracle,
and explained all the difficulties which he proposed to it. I can easily
be induced to believe that, as he understood the mathematics, &c. he
made a head, which, by the help of some spirits, might certain
articulate sounds. Though he was well qualified to be the inventor of
artillery, there is reason to believe, that they who ascribed the
invention of it to him are mistaken. It is said that he had naturally a
very dull wit, and that he was upon the point of leaving the cloister,
because he despaired of attaining what his friar's habit required of
him, but that the Holy Virgin appeared to him, and asked him in which he
would chuse to excel, in philosophy or divinity; that he made choice of
philosophy, and that the Holy Virgin told him he should surpass all men
of his time in that science, but that, as a punishment for not chusing
divinity, he should before his death, relapse into his former stupidity.
They add, that, after this apparition, he shewed a prodigious deal of
sense, and so improved in all the sciences, that he quickly surpassed
his preceptors; but that, three years before his death, he forgot in an
instant all that he knew: and that, being at a stand in the middle of a
lecture on divinity at *Cologne*, and endeavouring in vain to recal his
ideas, he

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

was sensible that it was the accomplishment of the prediction. Whence
arose the saying, that he was miraculously converted from an ass into a
philosopher, and, afterwards, from a philosopher into an ass. Our
Albertus was a very little man <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31), and,
after living eighty-seven years, died in the year of our redemption,
1280, at *Cologne*, on the 15th of November; his body was laid in the
middle quire of the convent of the *Dominicans*, and his entrails were
carried to *Ratisbon*; his body was yet entire in the time of the
*Emperor Charles V*. and was taken up by his command, and afterwards
replaced in its first monument. He wrote such a vast number of books,
that they amount to twenty-one volumes in folio, in the edition of
*Lyons*, 1651.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[181:1](ma263.htm#fr_31) When he came before the
Pope, after standing some time in his presence, his Holiness desired him
to rise, thinking he had been kneeling.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Roger Bacon](ma264)
