[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ma261)  [Next](ma263) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

THE LIFE

OF

HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA, KNIGHT,

DOCTOR OF BOTH LAWS, COUNSELLOR TO CHARLES V. EMPEROR OF GERMANY, AND
JUDGE OF THE PREROGATIVE COURT.

HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA, a very learned man and a magician <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26), flourished in the sixteenth century. He
was born at *Cologne* on the 14th of *September*, 1486. He descended
from a noble and ancient family of Nettesheim. in Belgia; desiring to
walk in the steps of his ancestors, who for many generations had been
employed by the princes of the house of *Austria*, he entered early into
the service of the Emperor *Maximilian*. He had at first the employ of
Secretary; but as he was equally qualified for the *sword* as the *pen*,
he afterwards turned soldier, and served the Emperor seven years in his
*Italian* army. He signalized himself on several occasions, and as a
reward of his brave actions he was created *knight* in the field. He
wished to add the academical honours to the military, he therefore
commenced doctor of laws and physic. He was a man possessed of a very
wonderful genius, and from his youth applied his mind to learning, and
by his great natural talents he obtained great knowledge in almost all
arts and sciences. He was a diligent searcher into the mysteries of
nature, and was early in search of the philosopher's stone; and it
appears that he had been recommended to some princes

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

as master of the art of alchymy <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27), and
very fit for the grand projection. He had a very extensive knowledge of
things in general, as likewise in the learned languages. He was pupil to
*Trithemius*, who wrote upon the nature, ministry, and offices of
intelligences and spirits. He was of an unsettled temper, and often
changed his situation, and was so unfortunate as to draw upon himself
the indignation of the Popish clergy by his writings. We find by his
letters that he had been in *France* before the year 1507, that he
travelled into *Spain* in the year 1508, and was at *Dole* in the year
1509. He read public lectures there, which engaged him in a contest with
the *Cordelier Catilinet*. The monks in those times suspected whatever
they did not understand, of heresy and error; how then could they suffer
*Agrippa* to explain the mysterious works of *Reuchlinus de Verbo
Mirifico* with impunity? It was the subject of the lectures which he
read at *Dole* in 1509 with great reputation. To ingratiate himself the
better with *Margaret of Austria*, governess of the *Austrian
Netherlands*, he composed at that time a treatise on the excellency of
women; but the persecution he suffered from the monks prevented him from
publishing it; he gave up the cause, and came into *England*, where he
wrote on *St. Paul's* Epistles, although he had another very private
affair upon his bands. Being returned to *Cologne*, he read public
lectures there on the questions of the divinity, which are called
*Quodlibetales*; after which he went to the Emperor *Maximilian's* army
in *Italy*, and continued there till *Cardinal de Sainte Croix* sent for
him to *Pisa*. *Agrippa* would have displayed his abilities there in
quality of theologist of the council, if that assembly had continued.
This would not have been the way to please the Court of *Rome*, or to
deserve the obliging letter he received from *Leo X*, and from whence we
may conclude, that he altered his opinion. From that time he taught
divinity publicly at *Pavia*, and at *Turin*. He likewise read lectures
on *Mercurius Trismegistus* at *Pavia*, in the year 1515. He had a wife
who was

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

handsome and accomplished, by whom he had one son; he lost her in 1521;
he married again an accomplished lady at Geneva in the year 1522, of
whom he gives a very good character; by this wife he had three children,
two sons and one daughter, who died. It appears by the second book of
his letters, that his friends endeavoured in several places to procure
him some honourable settlement, either at *Grenoble, Geneva, Avignon*,
or *Metz*. He preferred the post which was offered him in this last
city; and I find that in the year 1518 he was chosen by the lords of
Metz to be their advocate, syndic, and orator. The persecutions which
the monks raised against him, as well on account of his having refuted
the common opinion concerning the three husbands of *St. Anne*, as
because he had protected a country-woman, who was accused of witchcraft,
made him leave the city of *Metz*. The story is as follows:--A
country-woman, who was accused of witchcraft, was proposed (by the
*Dominican, Nicholas Savini*, Inquisitor of the Faith at *Metz*) to be
put to the torture, upon a mere prejudice, grounded on her being the
daughter of a witch, who had been burnt. Agrippa immediately took up the
cudgels, and did what he could to prevent so irregular a proceeding, but
could not prevent the woman from being put to the *question*; however,
he was the instrument of proving her innocence. Her accusers were
condemned in a fine. The penalty was too mild, and far from a
retaliation. This country-woman was of *Vapey*, a town situated near the
gates of *Metz*, and belonging to the chapter of the cathedral. There
appeared in *Messin*, who was the principal accuser of this woman, such
sordid passions, and such a total ignorance of literature and
philosophy, that *Agrippa*, in his letter of June 2, 1519, treats the
town of Metz as--"*The stepmother of learning and virtue*." This
satyrical reflexion of Agrippa's might give rise to the
proverb--"*Metz*, the covetous, and step-mother of arts and
sciences."--What induced him to treat of the monogamy of *St. Anne* was
his seeing, that *James Faber Stapulensis*, his friend, was pulled to
pieces by the preachers of *Metz*, for having maintained that opinion.
*Agrippa* retired to *Cologne*, his native city, in the year 1520,
willingly forsaking a city, which the seditious inquisitors had made an
enemy to learning and true merit. It is indeed the fate of all cities
where such persons grow powerful of whatsoever

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

religion they are of. He again left his own city in the year 1521, and
went to *Geneva*, but his fortunes did not much improve there, for he
complained that he was not rich enough to make a journey to *Chamberi*
to solicit the pension which he was led to expect from the Duke of
*Savoy*. This expectation came to nothing, upon which *Agrippa* went
from *Geneva* to *Fribourg* in *Switzerland* in the year 1523, to
practise physic there as he had done at *Geneva*. The year following he
went to *Lyons*, and obtained a pension from *Francis I*. He was in the
service of that prince's mother in quality of her physician, but made no
great improvement of his fortune there; neither did he follow that
princess when she departed from *Lyons* in the month of *August*, 1525,
to conduct her daughter to the frontiers of *Spain*. He danced
attendance at *Lyons* for some time to employ the interest of his
friends in vain, to obtain the payment of his pension; and before he
received it he had the vexation to be informed that he was struck out of
the list. The cause of this disgrace was, that having received orders
from his mistress to enquire by the rules of astrology what turn the
affairs of *France* would take, he expressed his disapprobation too
freely, that the princess should employ him in such a vain curiosity,
instead of making use of his abilities in more important affairs. The
lady took this lesson very in, but she was highly incensed when she
heard that *Agrippa* had, by the *Rules of Astrology*, the *Cabala*, or
some other art, predicted new triumphs to the constable of
*Bourbon*. <span id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28)--*Agrippa* finding

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

himself discarded, murmured, stormed, threatened, and wrote; but,
however, he was obliged to look out for another settlement. He cast his
eyes on the *Netherlands*, and having after long waiting obtained the
necessary passes, he arrived at *Antwerp* in the month of *July*, 1528.
One of the causes of these delays was the rough proceeding of the Duke
of *Vendôme*, who instead of signing the pass for *Agrippa* tore it up,
saying, that "he would not sign any passport for a conjuror." In the
year 1529 the King of *England* sent *Agrippa* a kind invitation to come
into his territories, and at the same time he was invited by the
Emperor's chancellor, by an *Italian* marquiss, and by *Margaret* of
*Austria*, governess of the *Netherlands*. He accepted the offers of the
latter, and was made historiographer to the Emperor, a post procured him
by that princess. He published by way of prelude, *The History of the
Government of Charles V.* and soon after he was obliged to compose that
princess's funeral oration, whose death was in some manner the life of
our *Agrippa*; for she had been strangely prejudiced against him: the
same ill office was done him with his Imperial Majesty. His treatise of
*the Vanity of the Sciences*, which he caused to be printed in 1530,
terribly exasperated his enemies. That which he published soon after at
*Antwerp*, viz. *of the Occult Philosophy*, afforded them a still
farther pretence to defame him. It was fortunate for him that Cardinal
*Campegius*, the Pope's legate, and Cardinal *De la Mark*, Bishop of
*Liege*, were his advocates; but, however, their good offices could not
procure him his pension as historiographer, nor prevent his being
imprisoned at *Brussels*, in the year 1531, but he was soon released.
The following year he made a visit to the Archbishop of Cologne, to whom
he had dedicated his *Occult Philosophy*, and from whom he had received
a very obliging letter. The fear of his creditors, with whom he was much
embarrassed on account of his salary being stopped, made him stay longer
in the country of *Cologne* than he desired. He strenuously opposed the
inquisitors, who had put a stop to the printing of his *Occult
Philosophy*,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

when he was publishing a new edition of it corrected, and augmented at
Cologne.--See the xxvith, and the following Letters of the viith Book.
In spite of them the impression was finished, which is that of the year
1533. He continued at *Bonn* till the year 1535, and was then desirous
of returning to *Lyons*. He was imprisoned in *France* for something he
had said against the mother of Francis I. but was released at the
request of certain persons, and went to *Grenoble*, where he died the
same year, 1535. Some say that he died in the hospital (but this is mere
malice, for his enemies reported every thing that envy could suggest to
depreciate his worth and character). *He died at the house of the
Receiver General of the province of* Dauphiny*, whose son was first
president of Grenoble.* Mr*. Allard, at* p. 4*, of the Bibliotheque of
Dauphiné, says,* that *Agrippa* died at Grenoble*, in the house which
belonged to the family of* Ferrand *in Clerk's Street, and was then in
the possession of the president* Vachon*; and that he was buried in the
convent of the* Dominicans. He lived always in the Roman communion,
therefore it ought not to have been said that he was a Lutheran <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29). Burnet in his history of the Reformation
asserts, that *Agrippa* wrote in favour of the divorce of King Henry
VIII. But if we look into *Agrippa's* letters we shall find that he was
against it, as well in them as likewise in his declamation on the vanity
of the sciences, where he says--"I am informed there is a certain king,
at this time o'day, who thinks it lawful for him to divorce a wife to
whom he has been married these twenty years, and to espouse an harlot."
In respect of the charge of magic diabolical being preferred against him
by *Martin del Rio* and others who confidently asserted, that *Agrippa*
paid his way at inns, &c. with pieces of horn, casting an illusion over
the senses, whereby those who received them took them for real money;
together with the story of the boarder at *Louvain*, who, in *Agrippa's*
absence, raised the devil in his study, and thereby lost his life; and
*Agrippa's* coming home, and seeing the spirits dancing at the top of
the house, his commanding one of them into the dead body, and sending it
to drop down at the market-place: all these stories, asserted

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

by *Martin del Rio*, are too ridiculous to be believed by men of sense
or science, they being no way probable even if he had dealt in the Black
Art.--As to magic, in the sense it is understood by us, there is no
doubt of his being a proficient in it, witness his three books of Occult
Philosophy; to say nothing here of the fourth, which we have good
authority to say was never wrote by *Agrippa*, as we shall shew
presently, where we shall treat of the history of his *Occult
Philosophy*.--In a word, to sum up the character of Agrippa we must do
him the justice to acknowledge, that notwithstanding his impetuous
temper which occasioned him many broils, yet from the letters which he
wrote to several of his most intimate friends, without any apparent
design of printing them, he was a man used to religious reflexions, and
the practice of Christianity; that he was well versed in many of the
chiefest and most secret operations of nature, *viz.* the sciences of
natural and celestial magic; that he certainly performed strange things
(in the vulgar eye) by the application of *actives* to *passives*, as
which of us cannot? that he was an expert *astrologer*, *physician*, and
*mathematician*, by which, as well as by magic, he foretold many
uncommon things, and performed many admirable operations. *John Wierus*,
who was his domestic, has given several curious and interesting
anecdotes which throw great light upon the mysterious character of
*Agrippa*, and serve to free him from the scandalous imputation of his
being a professor of the BLACK ART. Now, because *Agrippa* continued
whole weeks in his study, and yet was acquainted with almost every
transaction in several countries of the world, many silly people gave
out, that a black dog which *Agrippa* kept was an evil spirit, by whose
means he had all this information, and which communicated the *enemies'
posts, number, designs*, &c. to his master; this is Paul Jovius's
account, by which you may see on what sort of reports he founded his
opinions of this great man. We wonder that *Gabriel Naudé* had not the
precaution to object to the accusers of *Agrippa*, the great number of
historical falsehoods of which they (his accusers) stand convicted.
*Naudé* supposes that the monks and others of the ecclesiastical order
did not think of crying down the *Occult Philosophy* till a long time
after it was published; he affirms that they exclaimed against that
work, only in revenge for the injuries

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

they believed they had received in that of the *Vanity of the Sciences*.
'Tis true, this latter book gave great offence to many. The monks, the
members of the universities, the preachers, and the divines, saw
themselves drawn to the life in it. *Agrippa* was of too warm a
complexion. "*The least taste of his book* (of the Vanity of the
Sciences) *convinced me that he was an author of a fiery genius,
extensive reading, and great memory; but sometimes more copious than
choice in his subject, and writing in a disturbed, rather than in a
composed, style*." He lashes vice, and commends virtue, everywhere, and
in every person: but there are some with whom nothing but panegyric will
go down. See ERASMI Epist. *lib*. xxvii. *p*. 1083.

Let us now, in a few words, and for the conclusion of this article,
describe the history of the *Occult Philosophy*. *Agrippa* composed this
work in his younger days, and shewed it to the Abbot *Trithemius*, whose
pupil he had been. Trithemius was charmed with it, as appears by the
letter which he wrote to him on the 8th of *April*, 1510; but he advises
him to communicate it only to those whom he could confide in. However,
several manuscript copies of it were dispersed almost all over *Europe*.
It is not necessary to observe that most of them were faulty, which
never fails to happen in the like cases. They were preparing to print it
from one of these bad copies; which made the author resolve to publish
it himself, with the additions and alterations with which he had
embellished it, after having shewed it to the Abbot *Trithemius*.
*Melchior Adam* was mistaken in asserting that *Agrippa*, in his more
advanced years, having corrected and enlarged this work, shewed it to
the Abbot *Trithemius*. He had refuted his *Occult Philosophy* in his
*Vanity of the Sciences*, and yet he published it to prevent others from
printing a faulty and mutilated edition. He obtained the approbation of
the doctors of divinity, and some other persons, whom the Emperor's
council appointed to examine it.

"*This book has been lately examined and approved by certain prelates of
the church, and doctors, thoroughly versed both in sacred and profane
literature, and by commissaries particularly deputed for that purpose
by* CÆSAR'S

council: after which, it was admitted by the whole council, and licensed
by the authentic

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

diploma of his Imperial Majesty, and the stamp of the CÆSAREAN *EAGLE in
red wax; and was afterwards publicly printed and sold at* ANTWERP*, and
then, at* PARIS*, without any opposition*."

After the death of Agrippa a *Fourth Book* was added to it by another
hand. *Jo. Wierus de Magis*, cap. 5. p. 108, says, "*To these (books of
Magic) may very justly be added, a work lately published, and ascribed
to my late honoured host and preceptor,* HENRY CORNELIUS AGRIPPA*, who
has been dead more than forty years; whence I conclude it is unjustly
inscribed to his manes, under the title of* THE FOURTH BOOK OF THE
OCCULT PHILOSOPHY, OR OF MAGICAL CEREMONIES*, which pretends likewise to
be a Key to the three former books of the* OCCULT PHILOSOPHY*, and all
kinds of Magical Operations*." Thus John Wierus expresses himself; There
is an edition in folio of the *Occult Philosophy*, in 1533, without the
place where it was printed. The privilege of *Charles V.* is prefixed to
it, dated from *Mechlin*, the 12th of *January*, 1529. We have already
mentioned the chief works of Agrippa. It will be sufficient to add, that
he wrote *A Commentary on the Art of Raimundus Lullius* and *A
Dissertation on the Original of Sin*, wherein he teaches that the fall
of our first parents proceeded from their unchaste love. He promised a
work against the *Dominicans*, which would have pleased many persons
both within and without the pale of the church of *Rome* <span
id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30). He held some uncommon opinions, and never
any Protestant spoke more forcibly against the impudence of the
Legendaries, than he did. We must riot forget the Key of his *Occult
Philosophy*, which he kept only for his friends of the first rank, and
explained it in a manner, which differs but little from the speculations
of our Quietists. Now many suppose that the 4th book of the *Occult
Philosophy* is the Key which Agrippa mentions in his letters to have
reserved to himself; but it may be answered, with great shew of
probability, that he amused the

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

world with this Key to cause himself to be courted by the curious.
*James Gohory* and *Vigenere* say, that he pretended to be master of the
Practice of the Mirror of *Pythagoras*, and the secret of extracting the
spirit of gold from its body, in order to convert silver and copper into
fine gold. But he explains what he means by this Key, where he says, in
the Epist. 19. lib. v. "*This is that true and occult philosophy of the
wonders of nature. The key thereof is the understanding: for the higher
we carry our knowledge, the more sublime are our attainments in virtue,
and we perform the greatest things with more ease and effect*." Agrippa
makes mention of this Key in two letters which he wrote to a religious
who addicted himself to the study of the *Occult Sciences*, *viz*.
*Aurelius de Aqualpendente Austin*, friar, where he says, "*What
surprising, accounts we meet with, and how great writings there are made
of the invincible power of the* Magic Art*, of the prodigious images of*
Astrologers*, of the amazing transmutations of* Alchymists*, and of that
blessed stone by which,* MIDAS*-like, all metals are transmuted into
gold: all which are found to be vain, fictitious, and false, as often as
they are practised literally*." Yet he says, "Such things it are
delivered and writ by great and grave philosophers, whose traditions who
dare say are false? Nay, it were impious to think them lies: only there
is another meaning than what is writ with the bare letters. We must not,
he adds, look for the principle of these grand operations without
ourselves: it is an internal spirit within us, which can very well
perform whatsoever the monstrous *Mathematicians*, the prodigious
*Magicians*, the wonderful *Alchymists*, and the bewitching
*Necromancers*, can effect."

Nos habitat, non tartara; sed nec sidera cœli,  
Spiritus in nobis qui viget, illa facit.  
                                  *See* AGRIPPA *Epist. dat. Lyons*,
*Sept*. 24, 1727.

Note. Agrippa's three books of Magic, with the fourth, were translated
into English, and published in London in the year 1651. But they are now
become so scarce, as very rarely to be met with, and are sold at a very
high price by the booksellers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[170:1](ma262.htm#fr_26) As he himself asserts
in his preface to his three books of Occult Philosophy and Magic, where
he says, "who am indeed a magician," applying the word magic to sublime
and good sciences, not to prophane and devilish arts. *Paul Jovius,
Thevet*, and *Martin del Rio*, accuse him not of *magic*, (*because we
cannot apply that to necromantic arts*) but the *black art*; but we
shall shew in some of the following notes, their grounds on which this
accusation of *Agrippa* is founded, and examine how far their
information will justify their calumny against this author.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[171:1](ma262.htm#fr_27) We have no authority to
say, that ever he was in possession of the *great secret* of
transmutation, neither can we gather any such information from his
writings; the only circumstance relative to this is what himself says in
occult philosophy, *that he had made gold, but no more than that out of
which the soul was extracted*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[173:1](ma262.htm#fr_28) See Agrippa's words in
his 29th Epist. lib. iv. p. 854, which are as follow:--"I wrote to the
*Senechal*, desiring him to advise her not to misapply my abilities any
longer in so unworthy an art; that I might for the future avoid these
follies, since I had it in my power to be of service to her by much
happier studies." But the greatest misfortune was, that "*this unworthy
art*," and "these follies," as he called them, predicted success to the
opposite party, as you may judge by his own words.--"I remember I told
the *Seneschal* in a letter, that in casting the constable of
*Bourbon's* nativity, I plainly discovered that he would this year
likewise gain the victory over your armies."--They who are acquainted
with the history of these times, must see plainly that Agrippa could not
pay his court worse to Francis 1. than by promising good success to the
constable. From that time Agrippa was looked upon as a *Bourbonist*: to
silence this reproach he represented the service he had done to
*France*, by dissuading 4000 foot soldiers from following the Emperor's
party, and by engaging them in the service of *Francis I*. He alledged
the refusal of the great advantages which were promised him when he left
*Fribourg*, if he would enter into the constable's service. It appears
by the 4th and 6th Letter of Book V. that he held <span id="page_174">p.
174</span> a strict correspondence with that prince in 1527. He advised
and counselled, yet refused to go and join him, and promised him
victory. He assured him that the walls of Rome would fall down upon the
first attack; yet he omitted informing him of one point, and that was,
that the constable would be killed there.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[175:1](ma262.htm#fr_29) *Agrippa, in his
Apolog. cap*. 19, speaks in lofty terms of *Luther*, and with such
contempt of the adversaries of that reformer that it is plain from hence
*Sixtus Sienensis* affirmed that *Agrippa* was a Lutheran.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[178:1](ma262.htm#fr_30) "In the treatise I am
composing of the vices and erroneous opinions of the *Dominicus*, in
which I shall expose to the whole world their vicious practices, such as
the sacrament often infected with poison--numberless pretended
miracles--kings and princes taken off with poison--cities and states
betrayed--the populace seduced--heresies avowed--and the rest of the
deeds of these heroes and their enormous crimes." See AGRIPPA *Opera*,
T. ii. p. 1037.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Albertus Magnus](ma263)
