[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bit04)  [Next](bit06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

### GRADUAL RISE AND PRESENT AREA OF THE BUDDHIST RELIGION

DEVELOPEMENT {*sic*} AND DECLINE IN INDIA.--EXTENSION OVER VARIOUS PARTS
OF ASIA.--COMPARISON OF THE NUMBER OF BUDDHISTS WITH THAT OF CHRISTIANS.

SCARCELY had Sâkyamuni begun to teach his new religion in India, when he
obtained a great many followers. His system had an extraordinary success
both on account of its simplicity and of the abolition of castes; the
Buddha admits to the blessings of which he is the dispenser the highest
classes of man (Brahmans) as well as the lowest. Already at his death
the number of Buddhists seems to have been very considerable; and about
the middle of the third century B.C., during the reign of Asoka,
Buddhism began to spread all over India. It then continued to flourish
for eight hundred years (till the fifth century of our era), when a
series of violent persecutions was commenced (instituted by Brahmanical
sectaries, particularly by the adherents to the

{p. 10}

worship of Siva) which almost caused the extirpation of Buddhism. Hiuen
Thsang, a Chinese pilgrim who had passed much of his life in India
during extensive travels between the years 629 and 645 A.D., mentions
numerous Buddhist temples, monasteries, and monuments, which in his time
were already deserted, and even fallen into ruins--buildings which, two
centuries before, Fa Hian, another Chinese traveller, had found in the
most prosperous condition. Nevertheless, in many parts of India,
Buddhists were still in existence, and in Benáres, now again a centre of
Brahmanism, they are reported to have been the prevalent sect until the
eleventh century, and in the northern parts of Gujrát even as late as,
the twelth {*sic*}. After that period, Buddhism ceased to exist in
India, by reason of a combination of circumstances, amongst which the
jealousy of the various schools and the invasion of the Mussalmáns are
to be mentioned as perhaps the most important.\[1\]

As present the area of Buddhism includes vast territories, from Ceylon
and the Indian Archipelago in the south to the Baikal Lake in Central
Asia, and from the Caucasus eastward to Japan; and the number of its
adherents may be considered as being at least equal to, if it does not
exceed, that of the followers of the Christian religion, as will be seen
from the following data.\[2\]

\[1. Compare Mountstuart Elphinstone's "History of India," Vol. I., p.
212. Lassen, "Ind. Alterthumskunde," Vol. IV., p. 707.

2\. Prof. Neumann of Munich has computed the number of Buddhists in
China, Tibet, the Indo-Chinese countries, and Tartary at 369 millions.
Ungewitter, "Neueste Erdbeschreibung," Vol. I., p. 51, estimates the
total of {footnote p. 11} Buddhists at 325 millions. Colonel Sykes,
whose accuracy in every branch of science, especially, however, in
statistics, is so well known, also considers it certain that the
Buddhists out-number the followers of any other creed: see his essay "On
Indian Characters." London 1859.\]

{p. 11}

The late Professor Dieterici, in his well-known compilation of the
census of the globe,\[1\] estimates the population of *China* at four
hundred millions, of *Japan* at thirty-five; and for the *Indo-Chinese
Peninsula* he gives fifteen millions as the number of inhabitants in the
independent territories. The data for the Indian dependencies in the
peninsula are of great variety. Thornton's "Gazeteer" gives for Arrakán,
Pégu, and Tenásserim a population of about one million; but in a note
contained in Allens Indian Mail, 1861, the inhabitants of Pégu alone are
calculated to amount to one million. An average of two millions for
these three provinces is, perhaps, most in accordance with their area
when compared with the remainder of the peninsula.\[3\] The inhabitants
of the *Indo-Chinese Archipelago* are set down by Dieterici at eighty
millions, of which twenty belong to the Dutch and Spanish possessions.
The population of Ceylon, which is all Buddhist, exceeds, according to
M<sup>c</sup>Carthey, two millions.\[3\] In *India Proper* there are
scarcely any Buddhists at all.

For these regions of Asia we obtain, therefore, according

\[1. "Die Bevölkerung der Erde," in Petermann's "Geographische
Mittheilungen," 1859, p. 1.

2\. Thornton's "Gazeteer." Allen's Indian Mail, 1861, p. 802.

3\. Report of the Proceedings of the fourth Session of the International
Statistical Congress; London, 1861, p. 84. Compare Hardy, "Eastern
Monachism," p. 310.\]

{p. 12}

to these calculations an approximate total of 534 millions of
inhabitants. At least two-thirds of this population may be considered to
be Buddhists; the remainder includes the followers of Confucius and
Lao-tse, the adherents of religions prevalent among the inhabitants of
China Proper,\[1\] the Mussalmáns (numerous in Chinese Tartary), and the
Pagan tribes of the Chinese peninsula and the Archipelago; the numbers
of the latter are comparatively small, since in their districts the
population is very thin. We may therefore estimate *the total of
Buddhists* to amount to 340 millions.

The contribution to this number from other parts of the globe is
comparatively small, but nevertheless it seems to amount to more than a
million. The eastern provinces of the *Russian Empire* contain some
400,000 Buddhists, viz. 82,000 Kirghises and 119,162 Kalmuks inhabiting
Europe,\[2\] and the Buriats (to the number of about 190,000 souls)
living in Sibiria, these are almost all followers of Buddhism.\[3\]
There are still to be added for the Himálaya and Western Tibet,
independant of China, the inhabitants of *Bhután*, to the number of
145,200, the whole of them, according to Pemberton,

\[1. For China, Gützlaff states the Buddhists to be "the most popular
and numerous sect," adding "that their religious establishments may be
estimated at two-thirds of the whole of the religious edifices
throughout China." R. As. Soc., Vol. XVI., p. 89. Schott, "Buddhaismus,"
p. 23, was of the opinion (in 1844) that the Buddhists were the
minority.

2\. Notices taken from P. v. Köppen's memoir "Ueber die Anfertigung der
ethnographischen Karte des europäischen Russlands." Bulletin hist.-phil.
de l'Académie de St. Pétersbourg, Vol. IX., Table to face p. 336.

3\. Latham, "Descriptive Ethnology," Vol. I., p. .306. The same was told
me by Gombojew, a Buriat of Selenginsk.\]

{p. 13}

belonging to the Buddhist faith.\[1\] The population of *Síkkim*,
together with the Buddhist inhabitants of *Nepál*, which chiefly include
those of Tibetan origin, I estimate at 500,000 to 550,000.' The Buddhist
province of *Spíti*, under English protection, was found, according to
the census made by Major Hay in the year 1849, to have a population of
1,607.\[3\] Ladák, now a province of the kingdom of Kashmir, is reported
by Cunningham to be inhabited by 178,000 souls; the native population is
exclusively Buddhist, but since the annexation to Kashmir some Hindu
members of the administration and some Mussalmán merchants have settled
there.

The total of this group would amount even to one million and a
quarter.\[4\]

For the sake of comparison I add that Prof. Dieterici found the total
number of Christians spread over

\[1. Report on Bhután, p. 151. A recent estimate by Hughes, quoted by
the *Allgemeine Zeitung*, Jan. 1862, gives 1,500,000 inhabitants, a
number which appears to be somewhat too large.

2\. Hughes estimates Nepál to contain 1,940,000 inhabitants, of which
500,000 Buddhists. This number will not appear too high, if we remember
that the actual professed Buddhists in Nepál are divided into four
sects, and that Buddhist doctrines have passed to a great extent into
the primitive creed of the various tribes of Tibetan origin inhabiting
this kingdom. See Hamilton, as quoted by Ritter. "Asien," Vol. III., pp.
120, 123, 125, 129; Hodgson, "Languages," &c.; As. Res., Vol. XVI., p.
435; the same on the Aborigines of the Sub-Himalayan in "Records of the
Govt of Bengal," p. 129.

3\. Report on the valley of Spíti, in Journ. As. Soc. Beng., Vol. XIX.,
p. 437.

4\. Buddhism had also become known in Mexico by Chinese priests in the
fifth century A.D., and had followers in that country until the
thirteenth century; but the victorious Azteks, who took possession of
Mexico in the beginning of that century, put an end to Buddhism. See
Lassen, "Ind. Alterth.," Vol. IV., pp. 749 *et seq.*\]

{p. 14}

the globe to be 335 millions, of which 170 millions are Roman Catholics,
89 millions Protestants, and 76 millions belong to the Greek church;
their numerical strength appears therefore to be five millions less than
the average estimate of Buddhists given above.

{p. 15}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Religious System of Sakyamuni](bit06)
