[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt106)  [Next](pt108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

# III.

### THE TALE OF THE HOODIE.

From Ann MacGilvray, Islay.--April 1859.

THERE was ere now a farmer, and he had three daughters. They were
waulking <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) clothes at a river. A
hoodie <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17) came round and he said to the
eldest one, ’M-POS-U-MI, "Wilt thou wed me, farmer's daughter?" "I won't
wed thee, thou ugly brute. An ugly brute is the hoodie," said she. He
came to the second one on the morrow, and he said to her, "M-POS-U-MI,
wilt thou wed me?" "Not I, indeed," said she; "an ugly brute is the
hoodie." The third day he said to the youngest, M-POS-U-MI, "Wilt thou
wed me, farmer's daughter?," "I will wed thee," said she; "a pretty
creature is the hoodie," and on the morrow they married.

The hoodie said to her, "Whether wouldst thou rather that I should be a
hoodie by day, and a man at night; or be a hoodie at night, and a man by
day?" "I would rather that thou wert a man by day, and a hoodie at
night," says she. After this he was a splendid fellow by day, and a
hoodie at night. A few days after they married he took her with him to
his own house.

At the end of three quarters they had a son. In

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

the night there came the very finest music that ever was heard about the
house. Every man slept, and the child was taken away. Her father came to
the door in the morning, and he asked how were all there. He was very
sorrowful that the child should be taken away, for fear that he should
be blamed for it himself.

At the end of three quarters again they had another son. A watch was set
on the house. The finest of music came, as it came before, about the
house; every man slept, and the child was taken away. Her father came to
the door in the morning. He asked if every thing was safe; but the child
was taken away, and he did not know what to do for sorrow.

Again, at the end of three quarters they had another son. A watch was
set on the house as usual. Music came about the house as it came before;
every one slept, and the child was taken away. When they rose on the
morrow they went to another place of rest that they had, himself and his
wife, and his sister-in-law. He said to them by the way, "See that you
have not forgotten any thing." The wife said, "I FORGOT MY COARSE COMB."
The coach in which they were fell a withered faggot, and he went away as
a hoodie.

Her two sisters returned home, and she followed after him. When he would
be on a hill top, she would follow to try and catch him; and when she
would reach the top of a hill, he would be in the hollow on the other
side. When night came, and she was tired, she had no place of rest or
dwelling; she saw a little house of light far from her, and though far
from her she was not long in reaching it.

When she reached the house she stood deserted at the door. She saw a
little laddie about the house, and she yearned to him exceedingly. The
housewife

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

told her to come up, that she knew her cheer and travel. She laid down,
and no sooner did the day come than she rose. She went out, and when she
was out, she was going from hill to hill to try if she could see a
hoodie. She saw a hoodie on a hill, and when she would get on the hill
the hoodie would be in the hollow, when she would go to the hollow, the
hoodie would be on another hill. When the night came she had no place of
rest or dwelling. She saw a little house of light far from her, and if
far from her she, was not long reaching it. She went to the door. She
saw a laddie on the floor to whom she yearned right much. The, housewife
laid her to rest. No earlier came the day than she took out as she used.
She passed this day as the other days. When the night came she reached a
house. The housewife told her to come up, that she knew her cheer and
travel, that her man had but left the house a little while, that she
should be clever, that this was the last night she would see him, and
not to sleep, but to strive to seize him. She slept, he came where she
was, and he let fall a ring on her right hand. Now when she awoke she
tried to catch hold of him, and she caught a feather of his wing. He
left the feather with her, and he went away. When she rose in the
morning she did not know what she should do. The housewife said that he
had gone over a hill of poison over which she could not go without
horseshoes on her hands and feet. She gave her man's clothes, and she
told her to go to learn smithying till she should be able to make horse
shoes for herself.

She learned smithying so well that she made horseshoes for her hands and
feet. She went over the hill of poison. That same day after she had gone
over the

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

hill of poison, her man was to be married to the daughter of a great
gentleman that was in the town.

There was a race in the town that day, and every one was to be at the
race but the stranger that had come over to poison hill. The cook came
to her, and he said to her, Would she go in his place to make the
wedding meal, and that he might get to the race.

She said she would go. She was always watching where the bridegroom
would be sitting.

She let fall the ring and the feather in the broth that was before him.
With the first spoon he took up the ring, with the next he took up the
feather. When the minister came to the fore to make the marriage, he
would not marry till he should find out who had made ready the meal.
They brought up the cook of the gentleman, and he said that *this* was
not the cook who made ready the meal.

They brought up now the one who had made ready the meal. He said, "That
now was his married wife." The spells went off him. They turned back
over the hill of poison, she throwing the horse shoes behind her to him,
as she went a little bit forward, and he following her. When they came,
back over the hill, they went to the three houses in which she had been.
These were the houses of his sisters, and they took with them the three
sons, and they came home to their own house, and they were happy.

Written down by Hector Maclean, schoolmaster at Ballygrant, in Islay,
from the recitation of "Ann MacGilvray, a Cowal woman, married to a
farmer at Kilmeny, one Angus Macgeachy from Campbelltown." Sent April
14, 1859.

The Gaelic of this tale is the plain everyday Gaelic of Islay and the
West Highlands. Several words are variously spelt, but they are
variously pronounced--falbh, folbh, tigh, taighe, taighean.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

There is one word, Tapaidh, which has no English equivalent; it is like
*Tapper* in Swedish.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

...

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

...

HECTOR MACLEAN.

2\. I have a great many versions of this tale in Gaelic; for example,
one from Cowal, written from memory by a labourer, John Dewar. These are
generally wilder and longer than the version here given.

This has some resemblance to an infinity of other stories. For
example--Orpheus, Cupid and Psyche, Cinderella's Coach, The Lassie and
her Godmother (Norse tales), East o' the Sun and West o' the Moon
(ditto), The Master Maid (ditto), Katie Wooden Cloak (ditto), The Iron
Stove (Grimm), The Woodcutter's Child (ditto), and a tale by the
Countess d'Aulnoy, Prince Cherie.

If this be history, it is the story of a wife taken from an inferior but
civilized race. The farmer's daughter married to the Flayer "FEANNAG,"
deserted by her husband for another in some distant, mythical land,
beyond far away mountains, and bringing him back by steady, fearless,
persevering fidelity and industry.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

If it be mythology, the hoodie may be the raven again, and a transformed
divinity. If it relates to races, the superior race again had
horses--for there was to be a race in the town, and every one was to be
at it, but the stranger who came over the hill; and when they travelled
it was in a coach, which was sufficiently wonderful to be magical, and
here again the comb is mixed up with the spells.

There is a stone at Dunrobin Castle, in Sutherland, on which a comb is
carved with other curious devices, which have never been explained.
Within a few hundred yards in an old grave composed of great slabs of
stone, accidentally discovered on a bank of gravel, a man's skeleton was
found with teeth worn down, though perfectly sound, exactly like those
of an old horse. It is supposed that the man must have ground his teeth
on dried peas and beans--perhaps on meal, prepared in sandstone querns.
Here, at least, is the COMB near to the grave of the farmer. The comb
which is so often found with querns in the old dwellings of some
pre-historic race of Britons; the comb which is a civilized instrument,
and which in these stories is always a coveted object worth great
exertions, and often magical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[64:1](pt107.htm#fr_16) *Postadh*. A method of
washing clothes practised in the Highlands--viz., by dancing on them
barefoot in a tub of water.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[64:2](pt107.htm#fr_17) Hoodie--the Royston
crow--a very common bird in the Highlands; a sly, familiar, knowing
bird, which plays a great part in these stories. He is common in most
parts of Europe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Sea-Maiden](pt108)
