[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt108)  [Next](pt110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

# V.

### CONALL CRA BHUIDHE.

From James Wilson, blind fiddler, Islay.

CONALL CRA BHUIDHE was a sturdy tenant in Eirinn: he had four sons.
There was at that time a king over every fifth of Eirinn. It fell out
for the children of the king that was near Conall, that they themselves
and the children of Conall came to blows. The children of Conall got the
upper hand, and they killed the king's big son. The king sent a message
for Conall, and he said to him--"Oh, Conall! what made thy sons go to
spring on my sons till my big son was killed by thy children? but I see
that though I follow thee revengefully, I shall not be much the better
for it, and I will now set a thing before thee, and if thou wilt do it,
I will not follow thee with revenge. If thou thyself, and thy sons, will
get for me the brown horse of the king of Lochlann, thou shalt get the
souls of thy sons." "Why," said Conall, "should not I do the pleasure of
the king, though there should be no souls of my sons in dread at all.
Hard is the matter thou requirest of me, but I will lose my own life,
and the life of my sons, or else I will do the pleasure of the king."

After these words Conall left the king, and he went home: when he got
home he was under much trouble and perplexity. When he went to lie down
he told his wife the thing the king had set before him. His wife took
much sorrow that he was obliged to part from herself,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

while she knew not if she should see him more. "Oh, Conall," said. she,
"why didst not thou let the king do his own pleasure to thy sons, rather
than be going now, while I know not if ever I shall see thee more?" When
he rose on the morrow, he set himself and his four sons in order, and
they took their journey towards Lochlann, and they made no stop but
(were) tearing ocean till they reached it. When they reached Lochlann
they did not know what they should do. Said the old man to his
sons--"stop ye, and we will seek out the house of the king's miller."

When they went into the house of the king's miller, the man asked them
to stop there for the night. Conall told the miller that his own
children and the children of the king had fallen out, and that his
children had killed the king's son, and there was nothing that would
please the king but that he should get the brown horse of the king of
Lochlann. "If thou wilt do me a kindness, and wilt put me in a way to
get him, for certain I will pay thee for it." "The thing is silly that
thou art come to seek," said the miller; "for the king has laid his mind
on him so greatly that thou wilt not get him in any way unless thou
steal him; but if thou thyself canst make out a way, I will hide thy
secret." "This, I am thinking," said Conall, "since thou art working
every day for the king, that thou and thy gillies should put myself and
my sons into five sacks of bran." "The plan that came into thy head is
not bad," said the miller. The miller spoke to his gillies, and he said
to them to do this, and they put them in five sacks. The king's gillies
came to seek the bran, and they took the five sacks with them, and they
emptied them before the horses. The servants locked the door, and they
went away.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

When they rose to lay hand on the brown horse, said Conall, "You shall
not do that. It is hard to get out of this; let us make for ourselves
five hiding holes, so that if they perceive us we may go in hiding."
They made the holes, then they laid hands on the horse. The horse was
pretty well unbroken, and he set to making a terrible noise through the
stable. The king perceived him. He heard the noise. "It must be that
that was my brown horse," said he to his gillies; "try what is wrong
with him."

The servants went out, and when Conall and his sons perceived them
coming they went into the hiding holes. The servants looked amongst the
horses, and they did not find anything wrong; and they returned and they
told this to the king, and the king said to them that if nothing was
wrong that they should go to their places of rest. When the gillies had
time to be gone, Conall and his sons laid the next hand on the horse. If
the noise was great that he made before, the noise he made now was seven
times greater. The king sent a message for his gillies again, and said
for certain there was something troubling the brown horse. "Go and look
well about him." The servants went out, and they went to their hiding
holes. The servants rummaged well, and did not find a thing. They
returned and they told this. "That is marvellous for me," said the king:
"go you to lie down again, and if I perceive it again I will go out
myself." When Conall and his sons perceived that the gillies were gone,
they laid hands again on the horse, and one of them caught him, and if
the noise that the horse made on the two former times was great, he made
more this time.

"Be this from me," said the king; "it must be that some one is troubling
my brown horse." He sounded the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

bell hastily, and when his waiting man came to him, he said to him to
set the stable gillies on foot that something was wrong with the horse.
The gillies came, and the king went with them. When Conall and his sons
perceived the following coming they went to the hiding holes. The king
was a wary man, and he saw where the horses were making a noise. "Be
clever," said the king, "there are men within the stable, and let us get
them somehow." The king followed the tracks of the men, and he found
them. Every man was acquainted with Conall, for he was a valued tenant
by the king of Eirinn, and when the king brought them up out of the
holes he said, "Oh, Conall art thou here?" "I am, O king, without
question, and necessity made me come. I am under thy pardon, and under
thine honour, and under thy grace." He told how it happened to him, and
that he had to get the brown horse for the king of Eirinn, or that his
son was to be put to death. "I knew that I should not get him by asking,
and I was going to steal him." "Yes, Conall, it is well enough, but come
in," said the king. He desired his look-out men to set a watch on the
sons of Conall, and to give them meat. And a double watch was set that
night on the sons of Conall. "Now, O Conall," said the king, "wert thou
ever in a harder place than to be seeing thy lot of sons hanged
to-morrow? But thou didst set it to my goodness and to my grace, and
that it was necessity brought it on thee, and I must not hang thee. Tell
me any case in which thou wert as hard as this, and if thou tellest
that, thou shalt get the soul of thy youngest son with thee." "I will
tell a case as hard in which I was," said Conall.

"I was a young lad, and my father had much land, and he had parks of
year-old cows, and one of

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

them had just calved, and my father told me to bring her home. I took
with me a laddie, and we found the cow, and we took her with us. There
fell a shower of snow. We went into the herd's bothy, and we took the
cow and the calf in with us, and we were letting the shower (pass) from
us. What came in but one cat and ten, and one great one-eyed
fox-coloured cat as head bard <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) over
them. When they came in, in very deed I myself had no liking for their
company. 'Strike up with you,' said the head bard, I why should we be
still? and sing a cronan to Conall Cra-Bhui.' I was amazed that my name
was known to the cats themselves. When they had sung the cronan, said
the head bard, 'Now, O Conall, pay the reward of the cronan that the
cats have sung to thee.' 'Well then,' said I myself, 'I have no reward
whatsoever for you, unless you should go down and take that calf.' No
sooner said I the word than the two cats and ten went down to attack the
calf, and, in very deed, he did not last them long. 'Play up with you,
why should you be silent? Make a cronan to Conall Cra-Bhui,' said the
head bard. Certainly I had no liking at all for the cronan, but up came
the one cat and ten, and if they did not sing me a cronan then and
there! 'Pay them now their reward,' said the great fox-coloured cat. 'I
am tired myself of yourselves and your rewards,' said I. 'I have no
reward for you unless you take that cow down there.' They betook
themselves to the cow, and indeed she did not stand them out for long.

"'Why will you be silent? Go up and sing a cronan to Conall Cra-Bhui,'
said the head bard. And surely,

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

oh, king, I had no care for them or for their cronan, for I began to see
that they were not good comrades. When they had sung me the cronan. they
betook themselves down where the head bard was. 'Pay now their reward,'
said the head bard; and for sure, oh, king, I had no reward for them;
and I said to them, 'I have no reward for you, unless you will take
that, laddie with you and make use of him.' When the boy heard this he
took himself out, and the cats after him. And surely, oh, king, there
was "striongan" and catterwauling between them. When they took
themselves out, I took out at a turf window that was at the back of the
house. I took myself off as hard as I might into the wood. I was swift
enough and strong at that time; and when I felt the rustling 'toirm' of
the cats after me I climbed into as high a tree as I saw in the place,
and (one) that was close in the top; and I hid myself as well as I
might. The cats began to search for me through the wood, and they were
not finding me; and when they were tired, each one said to the other
that they would turn back. 'But,' said the one-eyed fox-coloured cat
that was commander-in-chief over them, 'you saw him not with your two
eyes, and though I have but one eye, there's the rascal up in the top of
the tree.' When he had said that, one of them went up in the tree, and
as he was coming where I was, I drew a weapon that I had and I killed
him. 'Be this from me!' said the one-eyed one--'I must not be losing my
company thus; gather round the root of the tree and dig about it, and
let down that extortioner to earth.' On this they gathered about her
(the tree), and they dug about her root, and the first branching root
that they cut, she gave a shiver to fall, and I myself gave a shout, and
it was not to be

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

wondered at. There was in the neighbourhood of the wood a priest, and he
had ten men with him delving, and he said, 'There is a shout of
extremity and I must not be without replying to it.' And the wisest of
the men said, 'Let it alone till we hear it again.' The cats began, and
they began wildly, and they broke the next root; and I myself gave the
next shout, and in very deed it was not weak. 'Certainly,' said the
priest, 'it is a man in extremity--let us move.' They were setting
themselves in order for moving. And the cats arose on the tree, and they
broke the third root, and the tree fell on her elbow. I gave the third
shout. The stalwart men hasted, and when they saw how the cats served
the tree, they began at them with the spades; and they themselves and
the cats began at each other, till they were killed altogether--the men
and the cats. And surely, oh king, I did not move till I saw the last
one of them falling. I came home. And there's for thee the hardest case
in which I ever was; and it seems to me that tearing by the cats were
harder than hanging to-morrow by the king of Lochlann.

"Oh! Conall," said the king, "thou art full of words. Thou hast freed
the soul of thy son with thy tale; and if thou tellest me a harder case
than thy three sons to be hanged to-morrow, thou wilt get thy second
youngest son with thee, and then thou wilt have two sons."

"Well then," said Conall, "on condition that thou dost that, I was in a
harder case than to be in thy power in prison to-night." Let's hear,"
said the king.--"I was there," said Conall, "as a young lad, and I went
out hunting, and my father's land was beside the sea, and it was rough
with rocks, caves, and geos. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) When I
was

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

going on the top of the shore, I saw as if there were a smoke coming up
between two rocks, and I began to look what might be the meaning of the
smoke coming up there. When I was looking, what should I do but fall;
and the place was so full of manure, that neither bone nor skin was
broken. I knew not how I should get out of this. I was not looking
before me, but I was looking over head the way I came--and the day will
never come that I could get up there. It was terrible for me to be there
till I should die. I heard a great clattering 'tuarneileis' coming, and
what was there but a great giant and two dozen of goats with him, and a
buck at their head. And when the giant had tied the goats, he came up
and he said to me, 'Hao O! Conall, it's long since my knife is rusting
in my pouch waiting for thy tender flesh.' 'Och!' said I, 'it's not much
thou wilt be bettered by me, though thou should'st tear me asunder; I
will make but one meal for thee. But I see that thou art one-eyed. I am
a good leech, and I will give thee the sight of the other eye.' The
giant went and he drew the great caldron on the site of the fire. I
myself was telling him how he should heat the water, so that I should
give its sight to the other eye. I got heather and I made a rubber of
it, and I set him upright in the caldron. I began at the eye that was
well, pretending to him that I would give its sight to the other one,
till I left them as bad as each other; and surely it was easier to spoil
the one that was well than to give sight to the other.

"When he 'saw' that he could not see a glimpse, and when I myself said
to him that I would get out in spite of him, he gave that spring out of
the water, and he stood in the mouth of the cave, and he said that he
would have revenge for the sight of his eye. I had

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

but to stay there crouched the length of the night, holding in my breath
in such a way that he might not feel where I was.

"When he felt the birds calling in the morning, and knew that the day
was, he said--'Art thou sleeping? Awake and let out my lot of goats." I
killed the buck. He cried, 'I will not believe that thou art not killing
my buck.' 'I am not,' said I, 'but the ropes are so tight that I take
long to loose them.' I let out one of the goats, and he was caressing
her, and he said to her, 'There thou art thou shaggy, hairy white goat,
and thou seest me, but I see thee not.' I was letting them out by the
way of one and one, as I flayed the buck, and before the last one was
out I had him flayed *bag wise*. Then I went and I put my legs in place
of his legs, and my hands in place of his fore legs, and my head in
place of his head, and the horns on top of my head, so that the brute
might think that it was the buck. I went out. When I was going out the
giant laid his hand on me, and he said, 'There thou art thou pretty
buck; thou seest me, but I see thee not.' When I myself got out, and I
saw the world about me, surely, oh, king! joy was on me. When I was out
and had shaken the skin off me, I said to the brute, 'I am out now in
spite of thee.' 'Aha!' said he, 'hast thou done this to me. Since thou
were so stalwart that thou hast got out, I will give thee a ring that I
have here, and keep the ring, and it will do thee good.' 'I will not
take the ring from thee,' said I, 'but throw it, and I will take it with
me.' He threw the ring on the flat ground, I went myself and I lifted
the ring, and I put it on my finger. When he said me then. 'Is the ring
fitting thee?' I said to him, 'It is.' He said, 'Where art thou ring?'
And the ring said, 'I am here.' The brute went and he betook himself
towards

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

where the ring was speaking, and now I saw that I was in a harder case
than ever I was. I drew a dirk. I cut the finger off from me, and I
threw it from me as far as I could out on the loch, and there was a
great depth in the place. He shouted, 'Where art thou, ring?' And the
ring said, 'I am here,' though it was on the ground of ocean. He gave a
spring after the ring, and out he went in the sea. And I was as pleased
here when I saw him drowning, as though thou shouldst let my own life
and the life of my two sons with me, and not lay any more trouble on me.

"When the giant was drowned I went in, and I took with me all he had of
gold and silver, and I went home, and surely great joy was on my people
when I arrived. And as a sign for thee, look thou, the finger is off
me."

"Yes, indeed, Conall, thou art wordy and wise," said the king. "I see
thy finger is off. Thou hast freed thy two sons, but tell me a case in
which thou ever wert that is harder than to be looking on thy two sons
being hanged to-morrow, and thou wilt get the soul of thy second eldest
son with thee."

"Then went my father," said Conall, "and he got me a wife, and I was
married. I went to hunt. I was going beside the sea, and I saw an island
over in the midst of the loch, and I came there where a boat was with a
rope before her and a rope behind her, and many precious things within
her. I looked myself on the boat to see how I might get part of them. I
put in the one foot, and the other foot was on the ground, and when I
raised my head what was it but the boat over in the middle of the loch,
and she never stopped till she reached the island. When I went out of
the boat the boat returned where she was before. I did not know now what
I should do. The place was

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

without meat or clothing, without the appearance of a house on it. I
raised out on the top of a hill. I came to a glen; I saw in it, at the
bottom of a chasm, a woman who had got a child, and the child was naked
on her knee, and a knife in her hand. She would attempt to put the knife
in the throat of the babe, and the babe would begin to laugh in her
face, and she would begin to cry, and she would throw the knife behind
her. I thought to myself that I was near my foe and far from my friends,
and I called to the woman, 'What art thou doing here?' And she said to
me, 'What brought thee here?' I told her myself word upon word how I
came. 'Well then,' said she, 'it was so I came also.' She showed me to
the place where I should come in where she was. I went in, and I said to
her, 'What was in fault that thou wert putting the knife on the neck of
the child.' 'It is that he must be cooked for the giant who is here, or
else no more of my world will be before me.' I went up steps of stairs,
and I saw a chamber full of stripped corpses. I took a lump out of the
corpse that was whitest, and I tied a string to the child's foot, and a
string to the lump, and I put the lump in his mouth, and when it went in
his throat he would give a stretch to his leg, and he would take it out
of his throat, but with the length of the thread he could not take it
out of his mouth. I cast the child into a basket of down, and I asked
her to cook the corpse for the giant in place of the child. 'How can I
do that?' said she, 'when he has count of the corpses.' 'Do thou as I
ask thee, and I will strip myself, and I will go amongst the corpses,
and then he will have the same count,' said I. She did as I asked her.
We put the corpse in the great caldron, but we could not put on the lid.
When he was coming home I stripped

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

myself, and I went amongst the corpses. He came home, and she served up
the corpse on a great platter, and when he ate it he was complaining
that he found it too tough for a child.

"'I did as thou asked me,' said she. 'Thou hadst count of the corpses
thyself, and go up now and count them.' He counted them and he had them.
'I see one of a white body there,' said he. 'I will lie down a while and
I will have him when I wake.'

When he rose he went up and gripped me, and I never was in such a case
as when he was hauling me down the stair with my head after me. He threw
me into the caldron, and he lifted the lid and he put the lid into the
caldron. And now I was sure I would scald before I could get out of
that. As fortune favoured me, the brute slept beside the caldron. There
I was scalded by the bottom of the caldron. When she perceived that he
was asleep, she set her mouth quietly to the hole that was in the lid,
and she said to me 'was I alive.' I said I was. I put up my head, and
the brute's forefinger was so large, that my head went through easily.
Everything was coming easily with me till I began to bring up my hips. I
left the skin of my hips about the mouth of the hole, and I came out.
When I got out of the caldron I knew not what to do; and she said to me
that there was no weapon that would kill him but his own weapon. I began
to draw his spear, and every breath that he would draw I would think I
would be down his throat, and when his breath came out I was back again
just as far. But with every ill that befell me I got the spear loosed
from him. Then I was as one under a bundle of straw in a great wind, for
I could not manage the spear. And it was fearful to look on the brute,
who had but one eye

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

in the midst of his face; and it was not agreeable for the like of me to
attack him. I drew the dart as best I could, and I set it in his eye.
When he felt this he gave his head a lift, and he struck the other end
of the dart on the top of the cave, and it went through to the back of
his head. And he fell cold dead where he was; and thou mayest be sure,
oh king, that joy was on me. I myself and the woman went out on clear
ground, and we passed the night there. I went and got the boat with
which I came, and she was no way lightened, and took the woman and the
child over on dry land; and I returned home."

The king's mother was putting on a fire at this time, and listening to
Conall telling the tale about the child. "Is it thou," said she, "that
were there?" "Well then," said he, "’twas I." "Och! och!" said she,
"’twas I that was there, and the king is the child whose life thou didst
save; and it is to thee that life thanks might be given." Then they took
great joy.

The king said, "Oh Conall, thou camest through great hardships. And now
the brown horse is thine, and his sack full of the most precious things
that are in my treasury."

They lay down that night, and if it was early that Conall rose, it was
earlier than that that the queen was on foot making ready. He got the
brown horse and his sack full of gold and silver and stones of great
price, and then Conall and his four sons went away, and they returned
home to the Erin realm of gladness. He left the gold and silver in his
house, and he went with the horse to the king. They were good friends
evermore. He returned home to his wife, and they set in order a feast;
and that was the feast, oh son and brother!

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

This story, told by a blind man, is a good instance of the way in which
a popular tale adapts itself to the mind of everybody. The blinding of
the giant and his subsequent address to his yet goat--"There thou art,
thou shaggy, hairy, white goat: thou seest me, but I see thee
not"--comes from the heart of the narrator. It is the ornament which his
mind hangs on the frame of the story.

"James Wilson learnt it from John MacLachlan, an old man at Kilsleven,
upwards of forty years ago. The old man would be about eighty years of
age at the time."

CRA-BHUIDHE is probably a corruption of some proper name.

CRAG is a paw, a palm. BUIDHE, yellow.

(Gaelic omitted)

...

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

...

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

...

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

...

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

...

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

...

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

...

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

...

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

...

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[109:1](pt109.htm#fr_20) Or commander-in-chief.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[111:1](pt109.htm#fr_21) Rifts or chasms, where
the sea enters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Tale of Conal Crovi](pt110)
