[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](pt103)  [Next](pt105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xcix">p. xcix</span>

### POSTSCRIPT.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

September 1860.       

THE stories marked XVII.*a*, XVII.*b*, XVII.*c*, XVII.*d*, in the first
volume were intended for the second, but it has been found more
convenient to place them in Vol. I. Those which were to have been given
as specimens of tales probably derived from the "Arabian Nights," have
been left out to make room for others.

In August and September 1860 I again visited the Western Highlands,
carrying with me nearly the whole of these two volumes in print. I have
repeatedly made the men who told the stories to my collectors repeat
them to me, while I compared their words with the book. In two instances
I have made men repeat stories which I had myself written down in
English from their Gaelic, and I have found no important variation in
any instance. I find that the story is generally much longer as told,
but that it is lengthened by dialogue, which has often little to do with
the incidents, though sometimes worth preservation. I have now seen most
of the men whose names are mentioned, and I have myself heard versions
of nearly every story in the book repeated, either by those from whom
they were got, or by people who live far from them,--for instance, John
Mackinnon, stableman at Broadford, in Skye, told me in September a
version of No. 18, which

<span id="page_cxxx">p. cxxx</span>

contains nearly all the incidents which I had before got from Islay, and
several which were new to me.

Including those which are printed, I have more than two hundred stories
written down in Gaelic. I have about an equal number written in English
from Gaelic, and I have heard a great many more, while Mr. Hector
MacLean, Mr. Dewar, Mr. Carmichael, Mr. Torrie, Mr. Fraser, and others,
are still writing down for me, in the Long Island, in Argyllshire, and
elsewhere.

If I have time and opportunity, I hope hereafter to arrange these
materials; to place the incidents in each story according to the
majority of versions, and so strive to get the old form of the legends;
for I am convinced that much is to be learned from this despised old
rubbish, though it must be sifted before it can be turned to proper use.

In conclusion, I would tender my thanks once more to all those who have
given me their assistance. In particular, I wish to express my sense of
obligation to the Rev. Thomas Maclauchlan, Free Church Gaelic minister
in Edinburgh, who has contributed many stories, written down by himself
from the dictation of one of his parishioners, and who has himself
published a volume of Celtic gleanings.

I am also much indebted to the Rev. Mr. Beatson, minister of Barra, who
aided Mr. MacLean in his search for legends, and who showed much
kindness to myself; and I have received assistance from other clergymen
of various persuasions, including the Rev. Thomas Pattison in Islay. I
am happy to have it in my power to mention such names; for the strange
idea possesses the people in many districts, that to repeat the most
harmless sgeulachd is a grievous sin, and that fables, and poems,

<span id="page_cxxxi">p. cxxxi</span>

and novels of every sort ought to be put down and exterminated, because
they are fictions. That spirit, if strong enough and put in action,
would sweep away much of the literature of ancient and modern times; and
it seems strange to have to remonstrate against it now-a-days. Still,
strange as it may seem, the spirit exists, and I am grateful for the
support of enlightened liberal men. Surely the best treatment for
"Superstition," if this be superstition, is to drag it into light, the
very worst to dignify it by persecution, and strive, to hide it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. The Young King Of Easaidh Ruadh](pt105)
