[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mog01)  [Next](mog03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Mysteries of Genesis*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1936\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  

THE BOOK OF GENESIS is the key to the Bible. In the New Testament it is
quoted twenty-seven times literally and thirty-eight times
substantially. It tells in a very few words how God first imaged man and
the universe and then turned the development over to Jehovah, who has
been in a process of manifestation for ages and aeons.

The "Five Books of Moses," of which Genesis is the first, have always
been credited to Moses, but that he was the author seems doubtful in the
face of the many stories of creation found in the legends and
hieroglyphs of ancient Egypt, Chaldea, and other nations that are almost
identical with those of Genesis. It would thus seem that Moses edited
the legends of the ages and compiled them into an allegorical history of
creation.

As printed in English translations there is little to reconcile Genesis
with creation as revealed by modern geology. It is said that Hugh
Miller, the brilliant Scottish geologist, went insane in his efforts to
reconcile Genesis with the geological record. However more accurate
translations of the Hebrew show that the literal reading of the English
is often not warranted by the original text. For example, the English
Bible reads, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth."
Fentons translation renders it thus: "By periods God created that which
produced the Suns; then that which produced the Earth." When we realize
that God is mind (Spirit-mind), we see that this latter rendition is
correct. God creates the ideas that form the things. Here we have the
key that unlocks not only the mysteries

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of Genesis but the whole Bible. God's creations are always spiritual.
This includes the spiritual man, called Jehovah, through whom all
things, including personal man, Adam, are brought into manifestation.

We ask our readers to dwell on this initial proposition until its truth
is established in consciousness, because it is repeated over and over in
both the Old and the New Testament. Jesus said, "I speak not from
myself: but the Father abiding in me doeth his works." Jesus was here
referring both to His personality, the external I, and to the inner
spiritual entity that He named the Father, in Genesis called Jehovah.

Hebrew words are composite; they contain a variety of meanings, to be
determined by the context. For example the Hebrew word yom, translated
"day" in the English Bible, means "to be hot"; that is, with reference
to the heat of the day as compared with the cool of the night. The word
yom was also used to represent a period of time, an age.

It will readily be seen that the translator had a rich field of ideas
from which to choose and that he could make his text historical or
symbolical according to his consciousness. If he thought the original
story was a statement of facts his translation would be to that end. The
Pharisees of Jesus' time were condemned by Him for teaching the letter
of the Scriptures and neglecting the spirit. The same charge can be
brought today against those who study the Bible as history rather than
as parable and idealistic illustration of the spiritual unfoldment of
man.

The Bible veils in its history the march of man from innocence and
ignorance to a measure of sophistication and understanding. Over all
hovers the divine

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

idea of man, the perfect-man pattern, the Lord, who is a perpetual
source of inspiration and power for every man. Those who seek to know
this Lord and His manifestation, Jesus Christ, receive a certain
spiritual quickening that opens the inner eye of the soul and they see
beyond the land of shadows into the world of Spirit.

The truths in this book will be revealed to you through your own
spiritual unfoldment. Spiritual things are spiritually discerned. The
spiritual revelations that you seem to get from books and teachers
already existed as submerged experiences in your own soul. The essential
truths have been worked out in this or previous incarnations, and when
you were reminded of the buried idea it blazed forth as a light from
without. So all that you are or ever will be must come from your own
spiritual achievements.

"Seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you."

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](mog03)
