[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Australia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](peck22)  [Next](peck24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE SALT LAKES

The power that the aborigines possessed of bringing about their own
deaths by an effort of will is generally looked upon by white people as
one peculiar to what are mostly termed "Native Races." Just what is
meant by "native races" is hard to define. But it seems to embrace those
peoples of colour whose social status is looked upon as being less or on
a lower plane than that of ours, and not on the level of brown people.
Certain it is that our autocthonous predecessors in occupany of
Australia had it and exercised it. No one of them had to jump over a Gap
or sever a windpipe. Nor yet take a dose of poison. All he had to do was
"go bush," hidden from all, and bring his spirit from his body by
compelling it to come. The operation was accompanied by great sullenness
and determined, self-engendered, depression.

In the same category, it is considered, is "Boning." Provided a person
knew what marks to make in clay on the face, and what incantations to
indulge in, he could kill by pointing a bone. Circumstances and
surroundings had to be propitious. It had to be done in secret. When the
envious mother decided to rid herself of the beautiful Krubi, as told in
the story, "How the Waratah got its Honey," she prepared a bone and
awaited the chance, as you have read. Had there been no interference and
the plan had not miscarried in any particular, Krubi would have died.

There is the tale of the very tall man who was feared by his tribe
simply because of his unusual height. If my conjecture be right, based
as it is upon the description brought down by a third generation and the
last a white, then this man of unheard-of growth must have been fully
eight feet high. His father, said to have been thirteen stone weight,
reached but to his waist. He wielded more power than the chief, and
quite as much as the medicine man.

He was a "boner." There had been several mysterious deaths, and a
polished bone was one of the secret possessions of the tall man. Several
men had seen it. He took a violent dislike to the chief because he had
been instructed to prepare himself for participation in a corroboree,
and he did not like the part he was to play. He, because of his height,
was considered to be the best to show the young men how to climb a tree.
He had to stride just as if he were climbing a winding stair, He had to
portray just how to hold the trunk, just how to place the big toe in the
bark, or just how to cut the notch in the side if the bark were not
thick nor rough enough.

He failed to appear. Drums made by digging small round holes and
stretching skins across them and pegging them down were fashioned and
beaten. This always signified that someone was neglecting a duty.

The tall blackfellow took no notice. He remained just out of sight, and
the corroboree had to proceed without him.

This could not happen many times. All the tribe talked of it. The chief
knew that either he or the challenger had to go, and he decided that he
would meet the defiance with cunning.

He ordered a war. Some time before river blacks had sent an insult in
the shape of the chief totem mark of this tribe wrapped in feathers and
tied to a spear, and this was thrown to an old woman. There was no
disgrace in ignoring it, and that was done. But now he wanted an excuse
to kill the boner and he made up his mind to fight the river blacks and
if the boner was not killed at it be would be on the way back. The boner
knew all that was passing in the chief's mind, and he laid plans too. He
put a beautiful polish on his bone and determined that if he once saw
the chief alone he would finish him with it, even if he were a chief.

To try his power with the bone he called his wife to him, and leading
her out of sight of the rest he pointed the bone in her face. The
unfortunate woman was seized with an ague and she did as all others did
under like circumstances. She walked away through the ferns, through the
scrub of myrtle and vines that made dense the bank of the creek, and
then, crawling under there where it was hollowed and hidden by a mass of
old dark roots and a fallen log, she lay down and died. Her tracks were
followed by her sister, and her bones must be lying there still, for no
one who died of boning was ever buried. They were left just where and as
they lay.

So the bone was good.

A corroboree was held, and at it the young men who were not yet taught
the arts of war were shown all about it. At that time the tall man was a
teacher and he went to it as such because he thought he might get a
chance to carry out what was in his mind.

The day of war dawned. Shields had been fashioned, spear-heads were
tested, and nullahs were swung to try their weight. A move was made up
over the hill and into the mosses of the gully at the head of a creek
that fell away to a flat and then rushed over boulders and amongst
stones to where it joined a river. It was night before the river blacks
were sighted. They were not unprepared. They had plenty of weapons and
their women had for some days been hiding away on the timbered slope of
another hill.

With fierce yells the bush blacks came on. They formed a few lines, and
when the most advanced one was held up they got into open order and the
second one came through. It was quite an organised affray, but the bush
blacks were beaten. The river men had prepared too well. Many of the
others were taken prisoner and the boner was amongst them.

The chief escaped. He had lost most of his ablest men and he was very
downhearted. He knew nothing of magic nor the craft of the spirit. He
had never drawn the mystic lines of clay about his body, and his chief
sorcerer, in the person of the boner, was in the camp of the enemy and
probably, he thought, killed. For it was not the custom of the blacks to
take prisoners.

The chief decided to redeem the boner if possible, and if he were really
still alive. If he rescued him he would not be under his displeasure,
surely, and the feud would be abandoned. So he caused several maidens to
be taken over to the river, but this was not enough. The men who took
them there returned with the message that more than half their land was
to be given up, and the boner was to stay. All the rest were to go back,
but the tall man could not. This was not, of course, what the chief
desired, but he had no choice. He sent a present of about twenty
wallabies, and he took the cloaks of about twenty women and sent them
all over. He also sent a message saying that he wished to speak to the
tall sorcerer alone for a few minutes, and after that the river people
could have the coveted territory, and he and his tribe would trouble
them no more.

All this was conveyed by means of a messenger and a message stick, and
the river chief went in person to give the answer, though he pretended
that he had not read the message. This deceit made the bush chief very
angry, and the reception he accorded the other was far from friendly. He
insisted that he must have the tall man returned to him, but it was
firmly refused.

When the river chief returned he visited the boner in the gunyah that
had been made for him, and asked why his chief was so anxious to have
him back.

The boner produced the bone. The very sight of it struck terror into the
heart of the river chief. He snatched it, and running down to the river
he flung it in. Immediately a thin streak of coloured water was seen
flowing from where the bone fell.

It was of a pinkish tinge, and it soon stretched on down the stream and
the end of it was out of sight.

This river did not reach the sea. It was either lost in the flat country
far on or it flowed into a lake.

Years afterwards two blacks from away there came up the river. Their
people had lived for thousands of years around and about this lake.
Nearly all their food they got from it, they said. But now it was
changed. It had gone a strange pink colour, and the water was unfit to
drink.

All wild fowl left it. The weeds with succulent roots died. Other
growths took their place, but they were not fit to eat. Even the fish
and the yabbies died, and so these young men determined to follow the
river up to find the cause. They were provided with the proper message
stick and they had the signs to any tribes whose territory they might
pass through that they were on a very friendly mission.

They heard the story of the bone and they found that the river at the
point where it had been thrown in was salt.

Ever since the lakes have been salty, and all salt lakes are fed from a
river into which some sorcerer has thrown the bone with which he
achieved the deaths of all he wished to secretly destroy, if he were a
boner.

NOTE.--Some people who have been on most intimate terms with the blacks
aver that "boning" is more than simply pointing. They say that the
expression "to point" is the only one the natives had when they wished
to convey something like "to shoot." They did not mean that the bone was
only "pointed." They actually pierced. And first they charred the end of
a green bone. This is said to produce prussic acid, and that, when
inserted into a human being causes active and rapid blood poisoning.

Of this the writer heard nothing from, the blacks themselves, but as
some of his information is from white men, perhaps he should take this
as truth.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Shooting Stars](peck24)
