[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smog05)  [Next](smog07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P3SA6/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Smoky God*, by Willis George Emerson, \[1908\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

### PART FIVE

### AMONG THE ICE PACKS

<span class="smallcaps">For</span> the next forty-five days our time was
employed in dodging icebergs and hunting channels; indeed, had we not
been favored with a strong south wind and a small boat, I doubt if this
story could have ever been given to the world.

At last, there came a morning when my father said: "My son, I think we
are to see home. We are almost through the ice. See! the open water lies
before us."

However, there were a few icebergs

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

that had floated far northward into the open water still ahead of us on
either side, stretching away for many miles. Directly in front of us,
and by the compass, which had now righted itself, due north, there was
an open sea.

"What a wonderful story we have to tell to the people of Stockholm,"
continued my father, while a look of pardonable elation lighted up his
honest face. "And think of the gold nuggets stowed away in the hold!"

I spoke kind words of praise to my father, not alone for his fortitude
and endurance, but also for his courageous daring as a discoverer, and
for having made the voyage that now promised a successful end. I was
grateful, too, that he had gathered

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

the wealth of gold we were carrying home.

While congratulating ourselves on the goodly supply of provisions and
water we still had on hand, and on the dangers we had escaped, we were
startled by hearing a most terrific explosion, caused by the tearing
apart of a huge mountain of ice. It was a deafening roar like the firing
of a thousand cannon. We were sailing at the time with great speed, and
happened to be near a monstrous iceberg which to all appearances was as
immovable as a rockbound island. It seemed, however, that the iceberg
had split and was breaking apart, whereupon the balance of the monster
along which we were sailing was destroyed, and it began dipping from us.
My

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

father quickly anticipated the danger before I realized its awful
possibilities. The iceberg extended down into the water many hundreds of
feet, and, as it tipped over, the portion coming up out of the water
caught our fishing-craft like a lever on a fulcrum, and threw it into
the air as if it had been a foot-ball.

Our boat fell back on the iceberg, that by this time had changed the
side next to us for the top. My father was still in the boat, having
become entangled in the rigging, while I was thrown some twenty feet
away.

I quickly scrambled to my feet and shouted to my father, who answered:
"All is well." Just then a realization dawned upon me. Horror upon
horror! The blood froze in my veins.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

The iceberg was still in motion, and its great weight and force in
toppling over would cause it to submerge temporarily. I fully realized
what a sucking maelstrom it would produce amid the worlds of water on
every side. They would rush into the depression in all their fury, like
white-fanged wolves eager for human prey.

In this supreme moment of mental anguish, I remember glancing at our
boat, which was lying on its side, and wondering if it could possibly
right itself, and if my father could escape. Was this the end of our
struggles and adventures? Was this death? All these questions flashed
through my mind in the fraction of a second, and a moment later I was
engaged in a life and death struggle. The ponderous

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

monolith of ice sank below the surface, and the frigid waters gurgled
around me in frenzied anger. I was in a saucer, with the waters pouring
in on every side. A moment more and I lost consciousness.

When I partially recovered my senses, and roused from the swoon of a
half-drowned man, I found myself wet, stiff, and almost frozen, lying on
the iceberg. But there was no sign of my father or of our little fishing
sloop. The monster berg had recovered itself, and, with its new balance,
lifted its head perhaps fifty feet above the waves. The top of this
island of ice was a plateau perhaps half an acre in extent.

I loved my father well, and was grief-stricken at the awfulness of his

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

death. I railed at fate, that I, too, had not been permitted to sleep
with him in the depths of the ocean. Finally, I climbed to my feet and
looked about me. The purple-domed sky above, the shoreless green ocean
beneath, and only an occasional iceberg discernible! My heart sank in
hopeless despair. I cautiously picked my way across the berg toward the
other side, hoping that our fishing craft had righted itself.

Dared I think it possible that my father still lived? It was but a ray
of hope that flamed up in my heart. But the anticipation warmed my blood
in my veins and started it rushing like some rare stimulant through
every fiber of my body.

I crept close to the precipitous side

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

of the iceberg, and peered far down, hoping, still hoping. Then I made a
circle of the berg, scanning every foot of the way, and thus I kept
going around and around. One part of my brain was certainly becoming
maniacal, while the other part, I believe, and do to this day, was
perfectly rational.

I was conscious of having made the circuit a dozen times, and while one
part of my intelligence knew, in all reason, there was not a vestige of
hope, yet some strange fascinating aberration bewitched and compelled me
still to beguile myself with expectation. The other part of my brain
seemed to tell me that while there was no possibility of my father being
alive, yet, if I quit making the circuitous

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

pilgrimage, if I paused for a single moment, it would be acknowledgment
of defeat, and, should I do this, I felt that I should go mad. Thus,
hour after hour I walked around and around, afraid to stop and rest, yet
physically powerless to continue much longer. Oh! horror of horrors! to
be cast away in this wide expanse of waters without food or drink, and
only a treacherous iceberg for an abiding place. My heart sank within
me, and all semblance of hope was fading into black despair.

Then the hand of the Deliverer was extended, and the death-like
stillness of a solitude rapidly becoming unbearable was suddenly broken
by the firing of a signal-gun. I looked up in startled amazement, when,
I saw, less

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

than a half-mile away, a whaling-vessel bearing down toward me with her
sail full set.

Evidently my continued activity on the iceberg had attracted their
attention. On drawing near, they put out a boat, and, descending
cautiously to the water's edge, I was rescued, and a little later lifted
on board the whaling-ship.

I found it was a Scotch whaler, "The Arlington." She had cleared from
Dundee in September, and started immediately for the Antarctic, in
search of whales. The captain, Angus MacPherson, seemed kindly disposed,
but in matters of discipline, as I soon learned, possessed of an iron
will. When I attempted to tell him that I had come from the "inside" of

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span id="img_16500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“Less than a half
mile away was a whaling vessel.”](tn/16500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16500.jpg)  
“Less than a half mile away was a whaling vessel.”  
</span>

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

the earth, the captain and mate looked at each other, shook their heads,
and insisted on my being put in a bunk under strict surveillance of the
ship's physician.

I was very weak for want of food, and had not slept for many hours.
However, after a few days’ rest, I got up one morning and dressed myself
without asking permission of the physician or anyone else, and told them
that I was as sane as anyone.

The captain sent for me and again questioned me concerning where I had
come from, and how I came to be alone on an iceberg in the far off
Antarctic Ocean. I replied that I had just come from the "inside" of the
earth, and proceeded to tell him how my father and myself had gone in by

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

way of Spitzbergen, and come out by way of the South Pole country,
whereupon I was put in irons. I afterward heard the captain tell the
mate that I was as crazy as a March hare, and that I must remain in
confinement until I was rational enough to give a truthful account of
myself.

Finally, after much pleading and many promises, I was released from
irons. I then and there decided to invent some story that would satisfy
the captain, and never again refer to my trip to the land of "The Smoky
God," at least until I was safe among friends.

Within a fortnight I was permitted to go about and take my place as one
of the seamen. A little later the captain asked me for an explanation. I

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

<span id="img_16900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![“Whereupon I was
put in irons.”](tn/16900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16900.jpg)  
“Whereupon I was put in irons.”  
</span>

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

told him that my experience had been so horrible that I was fearful of
my memory, and begged him to permit me to leave the question unanswered
until some time in the future. "I think you are recovering
considerably," he said, "but you are not sane yet by a good deal."
"Permit me to do such work as you may assign," I replied, "and if it
does not compensate you sufficiently, I will pay you immediately after I
reach Stockholm—to the last penny." Thus the matter rested.

On finally reaching Stockholm, as I have already related, I found that
my good mother had gone to her reward more than a year before. I have
also told how, later, the treachery of a relative landed me in a
mad-house,

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

where I remained for twenty-eight years—seemingly unending years—and,
still later, after my release, how I returned to the life of a
fisherman, following it sedulously for twenty-seven years, then how I
came to America, and finally to Los Angeles, California. But all this
can be of little interest to the reader. Indeed, it seems to me the
climax of my wonderful travels and strange adventures was reached when
the Scotch sailing-vessel took me from an iceberg on the Antarctic
Ocean.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part Six: Conclusion](smog07)
