<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](toa10)  [Next](toa12) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Treasure of Atlantis*, by J. Allan Dunn, \[1916\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER IX—THE INITIATION

Morse was the new idol of the populace. Whenever he appeared, crowds
made way for him with cries of admiration; while the maidens, who
perpetually wore wreaths of heavy-scented blossoms, cast them before him
so that his existence out of doors was almost a continued triumphal
procession. And since the games, Rana had increased her attentions. She
showered him with gifts and invitations, and all but openly declared
herself willing to accept him as lover and husband.

Morse could admire her from a distance for she was unquestionably a
beautiful woman. But his fascination for her was gone; she held no spell
for him now. And he avoided her as much as possible. Finally, as the
month drew to its close, he spoke to Laidlaw.

"Look," he said. "I can't take much more of this. I have to work at
avoiding her. How soon are you going to be ready to leave?"

Laidlaw looked at him in bewildered surprise. "Leave! I haven't even
begun my work here. Next

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

week is the start of the month of Pasiphae; the month of Demeter
follows. I must observe the festivals and their ritual. They may be
close to those of three thousand years ago. This is an expedition into
the past; you can't be serious about leaving at this time. I have six
months’ work in front of me—a year's."

So enamored was Laidlaw of his subject that he forgot Morse's appeal.
"The only thing that bothers me is the lack of film for the camera. We
should have brought a motion picture outfit, Morse. Think of it—tangible
proof, the scientific value. Why didn't we bring one?"

"I don't want to interrupt your researches," said Morse in a tone that
secured the scientist's wandering attention, "but we may have to get
away from here in a [hurry](errata.htm#8). You know what Rana's attitude
is. I don't think I can be diplomatic toward her much longer without
insulting her. Our affairs are going to come to a crisis some day soon,
and when I break with her there's going to be trouble.

"I dodged her last week by staying across the lake, and at that she sent
me a letter each day and a jewel which she claims is a vital part of my
costume. Rana is as clever as she is beautiful, Laidlaw. Ambitious, too,
but she holds nothing for me. She spins a web of circumstance that puts
us together, and she may want to make me her consort. But somewhere
along the line she's going to try and do away with Kiron, and if this
happens Ru is going to be right there. He's either going to control her,
or failing that he's going to eliminate her just as she intends to
eliminate Kiron."

Laidlaw nodded gravely, his work forgotten for the moment.

"You may be right. If Ru can [assert](errata.htm#9) himself while we're
still here, we're going to find ourselves out on the ledge with the
vultures some morning, and there won't be any rescue party."

The scientist went on slowly. "I've often wondered how genuine her
interest in you really is. In the beginning I thought it was
feigned—completely so; that she and Ru were working hand in hand against
Kiron and against us as well. Now, I'm not so sure about Rana. You're
too strong of mind for her, and you baffle her. She's still power-hungry
beyond belief, but she can't

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

conquer you and I believe that this fascinates her.

"You know Kiron has been anxious to honor us by giving us the full
citizenship he promised when we rescued him. Now, I think Rana has come
over to this idea as well, while Ru has been quietly working against it
all along. You see, if they initiate us to the level of nobles as Kiron
intends, it would afford us a little more protection against anything
that the old priest might have planned for us. Anyway, I think we have
some sort of a conflict growing between Rana and Ru, and you may very
well be the cause of it."

"Laidlaw, if you can see that much, you can see the problems facing us
if we stay here."

Laidlaw nodded his head sadly. "You're right, of course. But I've got to
have a month for my work. Somehow, you've got to smooth things over for
that long. Morse, I implore you…"

Morse had to laugh at the other's seriousness. "All right, then. One
month. It's not going to be easy. And don't say anything about our
intention to depart. We'll have to fly at the last moment—with Kiron's
aid if we can get it."

 

As the days passed, Rana took up the cause to ennoble Morse and Laidlaw.
Since the former had defeated Aulus in the arena, her interest was—as
Laidlaw sensed—more genuine. And when she finally, in a public speech,
championed the honor due the visitors, Ruts powerful opposition fell
silently away with the applause of the populace.

Morse was to receive the second degree of epoptae, and Laidlaw, by
reason of his dwarfed and misshapen legs, was to receive the slightly
lesser degree of mystae. (Morse wondered how much was due to his
companion's imperfections and how much was due to Rana's interest in
him.)

The initiation took place in the underground chambers of the Temple of
the Double Ax, dedicated to the sun and moon gods, Minos and Pasiphae.
It was midnight on the last day of the month of Minos when Morse and
Laidlaw, clad in ceremonial robes, blindfolded, their ears muffled by a
light bandage, another across their mouth and nostrils, were escorted by
winding ways to

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the council chamber. Thirty silent forms wearing long-sleeved robes of
gray that fell over their feet were grouped about a central figure
occupying a throne carved from the rock wall. Oil lamps cast a
flickering light upon the mute assembly. The silent figures all wore
masks representing jaguars, human skulls, and the heads of great beaked
birds.

The man on the throne was distinguished by a headgear representing a
bull. Frescoes dimly showed upon the walls. In the semicircle formed by
the initiates stood a glowing brazier supported upon upreared and
intertwisting snakes. Incense rose from the green flames of a burning
liquid. Morse and Laidlaw were led to a point directly behind it.

"Neophytes!" The voice, despite its resonance, had a strident quality
that assured the Americans that Ru was speaking through a megaphone-like
object in his mask. "You have been instructed in your behavior. Courage
conquers all things. Fear breeds. weakness. This is the wedding night of
Minos, son of Zeus, and god of the sun, and Pasiphae, the all-shining,
goddess of the moon, deities of the double ax, founders of Atlantis."

As he spoke the altar flame changed first to orange, then to a vivid
blue at the mention of the honored names.

"May you be found worthy in their sight to become as their children.
Your sight—" (the bandages were removed from their eyes) "—your hearing
and your speech—" (the other mufflings followed) "—have been taken from
you to be restored as the trials shall prove you fit. Through darkness,
danger, and through death the way shall lead back to light and life. Do
not step from the trail or those who lurk close by will seize and
destroy you."

The light in the brazier died down as the words ceased, flickering to a'
creeping silver flame that suddenly leaped up and vanished, leaving the
chamber in stygian darkness. By its last lambent effort the Americans
could see that the chamber had emptied itself of other occupants in some
mysterious fashion. The frescoes wavered on the solid walls as if they
shook with the passing of the initiates. They caught a glimpse of the
vacant throne before blackness enveloped them.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

A liquid substance began to drip—spat, spat—upon the pavement with a
regularity that timed their pulses to its beat. The darkness thickened;
the air grew oppressive with a salty tang—half scent, half flavor; the
subtle essence of newly-spilled blood. There were whisperings about
them, inarticulate chuckles, grotesque cacklings, and cold blasts of
wind passed over them with the beat of invisible wings.

Suddenly eyes appeared in the darkness. They glowed weirdly, green and
crimson, moved about them at various heights, and finally settled in two
immovable rows, baleful and hypnotic. More ghoulish chuckling and
laughter, and the eyes began to whirl. Finally, with an animal chorus of
gnashing of teeth, scraping of claws, and fearful howls, silence came to
the chamber.

"If we could work anything like that in the States," whispered Morse in
English, "we'd have the Psychological Research Society at our feet."

"They've been working at it for thousands of years," replied Laidlaw.
"Damned effective."

The dark slowly became less intense, the air laden with the delicate
fragrance of spring blossoms. Black turned into purple, and purple
became gray, and finally they could see the walls in front of them
dissolving in whirls of mist.

Upon a couch lay the exquisite form of a sleeping woman, rounded breasts
lifting with her gentle breathing, skin rosy with youth and health. As
they gazed, a subtle change occurred. The curves lost their roundness,
the flesh shriveled and became blue, the air grew rank with the smell of
death.

Before their eyes the infinitely fair creature was falling away,
disintegrating. The face became a skull as the flesh withered. The hair,
bleached white, fell out in huge chunks; ribs and pelvis bones stood out
in horrible distinction; the chamber reeked with the stench of a house.
The bones fell away and crumbled, leaving only a little pile of dust
from which a snake writhed away.

The wall resumed shape behind the gray veil, and a dazzling light
enveloped them. From its center a voice sounded:

"The Eye of Minos witnesses and approves. Behind them another took up
the ritual:

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

"It is recorded. Turn and enter."

A narrow opening appeared to their vision. They crossed the threshold
and a door clanged violently behind them. The room was filled with a
tremulous blue radiance. At the farther end stood a statue of a woman
wearing a helmet crested with the new moon. Hands were raised above its
finely carved head, a twisted snake in each. About the statue's body was
entwined the scaly coils of an enormous serpent, with its head resting
upon the shoulder. Dull eyes gleamed like uncut emeralds. A sound of
chanting came from beyond the walls:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"To thee, All-Shining One  
 Goddess divine!  
 Unto thy votaries  
 Vouchsafe a sign.  
 Let thy snakes twining  
 Show us thou livest,  
 Show us that Pasiphae  
 Still mercy givest  
 Shine on thy votaries  
 Goddess benign."

</div>

"Serpents?" said Morse, a question in his voice.

"Pasiphae in her chthonian representation as 'Goddess of the
Underworld,'" came the reply.

The light brightened with a brilliance that came in waves like the rays
of the aurora borealis. In its shimmer the carven snakes seemed to
quiver and the eyes of the great serpent grew brighter.

"Look out, Laidlaw!" cried Morse suddenly. "The brute's alive!"

The head of the ophidian raised from the shoulder of the statue and
disappeared, to glide out from beneath the arm in a swift undulation,
its jaws open, its tongue vibrating. A whisper of movement was heard as
scales scraped over pavement.

The blood of the initiates ran cold as they waited for the reptile's
attack. The obscene slithering was the only sound to be heard in the
chamber, and they could only guess at its position.

"Ru!" snarled Morse.

Laidlaw kept silent. He had thought from the first

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

glance that the snake was alive, but he believed it had been coiled
about the statue in a sluggish state of coma. There was no question of
its identity. More than thirty feet in length, it was the most powerful
and ill-tempered of all the big serpents, the anaconda.

Suddenly Morse felt a coil encircle his lower leg in a lightning loop
and mount to the thigh, compressing it until it seemed that the bone
must break. He set his hands on the writhing, clammy body, trying to
reach the head, but encountered only a continually thickening coil. He
let out an exclamation and it was echoed by Laidlaw. The anaconda had
attacked both Americans at the same time, using Morse as a support on
which to base the leverage of its constriction.

The firm, unyielding body of the snake offered no hold. The coil about
Morse's waist was as thick as his thigh, hard as a hempen cable,
resistless, inexorable. His case was desperate, and both men were
without weapons. A choking cry came from Laidlaw as Morse strove again
to loosen the deadly twist that was slowly squeezing his leg into jelly,
at the same time holding him powerless from moving.

"Laidlaw!" he cried.

The choking sound changed to a great sob of relief.

"Ah!" sounded Laidlaw, strength emanating from his voice. "I've got him!
He had me about the waist. Now then!"

The long length of the snake whipped into wild action. Morse was thrown
violently to the ground, and he felt Laidlaw close beside him. Between
them, the infuriated reptile writhed and thrashed, dragging them over
the hard stone floor. Laidlaw's breath came in great gasps as he exerted
all his strength. Morse felt the coil about his thigh relax, and dragged
at it until he freed himself. He tried to rise, but his leg refused to
carry his weight. He half crawled toward Laidlaw.

"How can I help you?" he cried.

A grunt answered him. The snake's body lay across that of his friend,
writhing more and more feebly. Laidlaw rolled over on top of it.

"I've choked the hellish thing," he gasped. "I think it's dead, but I
don't dare let go of it."

A series of dull thuds came to their ears from outside

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

the chamber. The chanting was taken up again:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Hear us, O Shining One  
 Grant our desire.  
 Pasiphae! Pasiphae!  
 Dread we thy ire  
 One to the other  
 O Bountiful Mother  
 Accept the gifts we bring  
 As at thy feet we cling,  
 Pasiphae! Pasiphae!  
 All-Shining One."

</div>

"I think we were intended to be the gifts," said Laidlaw. "That could
well have been our funeral ode."

The flickering radiance was gradually returning, and Morse, now with his
own weight on the lower half of the anaconda, saw Laidlaw battering its
head, already a shapeless bloody stump, against the stone floor. One
loose coil was about his middle, and Morse tugged until it came limply
away. The two sat up and looked at each other as Laidlaw flung away the
battered head, and Morse kicked at the convulsively twitching mass with
his sound leg while he tried to rub the other back to sensibility.

"Cheerful little trick," he said angrily. "The snake of the goddess
resenting the intrusion of strangers. That would have been the verdict,
I suppose. Ru full of regrets and the snake full of us. Ugh! How did you
manage to get hold of its neck?"

"Good luck! The devil has ruined my digestion forever, though."

Morse started to laugh, and Laidlaw found himself echoing him. In the
reaction to their danger, they laughed half-hysterically until they
could force themselves to their feet. The scientist rubbed his stomach.
My [diaphragm](errata.htm#10) is jellied. How's your leg?"

Morse prodded it and winced. "It's sound, but it's sore as the devil."

"Well, if Ru planned this," said Laidlaw, "he did a good job. He had an
alibi ready."

The mystic voice broke into the chamber:

"Advance, O neophytes!"

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

A section of the wall slid downward and they passed through the opening
into natural light, leaving the dying snake behind. At a junction of the
low corridor, a gray and shapeless figure with a skull mask stood
beckoning to them. Had this proved to be Ru, Morse felt that he could
have done away with him then and there. But the voice of this sentinel
quickly betrayed the presence as Kiron.

"The mystae to the right," he said, "your test has ended. Yours,
epoptae, to the left," adding in a lower tone: "And courage, brother,
even in darkness."

Laidlaw held back a moment, but Morse urged him on.

"If they plan to do us harm we can't escape it," he said, and took the
left-hand passage. It ended almost before it had begun in another gloomy
chamber that grew totally dark when the door closed behind his entrance.
A voice like that of a ventriloquist, its source indeterminate, accosted
him.

"Now comes the final choice, epoptae. Perhaps it lies with you. Who
knows? Perhaps the gods direct. Yet it is on your action that the issue
hangs. Gaze and ponder before your body answers to your settled will."

With a clang, a door slid back, and a gush of heat surged into the room.
A fire glared in a passage beyond the door, pulsing with swift plays of
molten orange and vermilion. The portal closed, and a second door
revealed four leaping, maneless cat-creatures. Large as full-grown
lions, they were skin-clad in ebony velvet, with topaz eyes, crimson
mouths, and sabered ivory fangs. The beasts sprang at him and roared in
frenzy as a barred gate rose up before them.

A third exit lifted, and a breath of night air, mingled with flower
perfume and the clean smell of the lake, stole into his nostrils. The
way lay open up a slight incline to a point where silver moonlight
bathed an open causeway. As this was shut out, the voice came to him:

"Commend the prompting of your will unto the gods. As they judge you, so
shall you go scatheless or to your doom."

The floor beneath him started to revolve slowly, not enough to disturb
his balance, but acquiring speed enough to wipe out any lingering idea
he might hold of

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

the location of the respective doors.

Morse had entered the ordeal in the belief that the initiation was
calculated to break the nerves of a superstitious man. The fight with
the snake had disturbed his confidence; but his wrath, somewhat calmed
by Kiron's friendly message, was still dominant enough to wish to put a
swift end to what he still believed to be a combination of masquerade
and optical illusion.

Without hesitation, he moved to the wall. One hand encountered a
projection; the other, sliding over the vertical surface, passed from
coolness to heat, slight but distinctly noticeable. He moved along the
contour of the chamber until he felt a second knob, and bent, listening
intently. Did he hear the faint sound of muffled growls? Morse wondered
if the tests might hold real quality.

Swiftly he sought the third latch, found it, clutched and pulled. It
resisted, but then slid readily before a side thrust. Before him rose
the incline to the moonlit causeway, and pure air met him as he ran up
the rise.

Gulping the sweet air into his lungs, he reached the causeway. Behind
him the egress had closed, and the carven facade of the temple showed in
gray and purple silence. Morse crossed the causeway to a balustrade and
leaned upon it. The crescent moon faintly outlined the temple on the
isle of Sele. Here was the realm of Leola, sister of Rana, and her
Dianae.

A breeze blew off the lake, and suddenly Morse wondered if this
beautiful Leola could hold any of the magical enchantment that her
island did, there in the moonlight. Below him, a galley with oars
supplementing a silvered sail reached silently for a wharf. He
straightened from his thoughts, his arms folded on the wide baluster
rail, then turned reluctantly to move away. A soft, thudding rush of
feet sounded behind him. A cloth was thrown over his head, and the
gathered folds pinned his arms to his sides.

Morse fought against the arms that sought to hold him and lift him from
his feet. Coarse oaths came to his ears, sounding dimly through the
muffling linen. Then, still struggling, he was lifted from his feet and
borne away.

A voice rang out. It was high pitched and as sweetly

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

clear as the sound of a silver trumpet. His captors paused and set him
down.

"Who are you who dare to profane the bridal night of Pasiphae? Stand,
before I turn you into stone!"

Morse heard the mumbling apologies of the men who had attacked him. The
cloth was hastily removed, and he faced his rescuer.

It was a woman. She was slender and tall, clothed in garments that
glittered, one arm raised [forcibly](errata.htm#11). There was something
strangely familiar about her face. It was clean-carven, imperious, set
like a flower upon a neck that was as round and smooth as a column.
Hair, piled high, glinted pale gold in the moonlight. Two eyes burned
like azure stars.

The woman stood on the causeway. Behind her were a score of her fair
sex, clad in white garments with ornaments that gleamed as they moved.

"Who are you?" she asked. "And why does this rabble molest you?"

The men who had seized him slunk away as Morse answered.

"I am one of the strangers to Atlantis." And as he spoke he knew that
this was Leola. Her likeness to Rana could not be mistaken. But here was
a refinement of feature, a majesty that the queen could not approach.

"I have no idea who these are who have attacked me," he continued,
"though I might make a guess. The night has not been altogether
fortunate for me—until now."

She surveyed him with a disdain that was tempered by a half-concealed
curiosity.

"You are the one who conquered Aulus," she said, "and tonight you became
an epoptae. Are you so enamored of Atlantis that you would forsake your
own land?"

"I have never been enamored—until this moment," he answered truthfully,
his eyes upon hers. Did her eyes waver?

"Your words are idle," she said.

"Yet I would thank you for my rescue."

"I would not willingly see even a man harmed," came the reply.

"Even a man!" Morse repeated the words out loud and smiled. "Still I
thank you. And I thank the gods,

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Leola, that I am a
man—and that you are a woman." Again her eyes seemed to waver.

"I do not read the meaning of your words," she said, and some of her
assurance was gone.

"They are not hard to understand," he answered. "But the key lies not in
the mind, but in the heart."

A knot of men was hurrying toward them, and a voice called his name. It
was Laidlaw.

"Here are my friends," said Morse. "Again I thank you, Leola. We will
meet again."

She made no answer save for an uptilt of that haughty head, and stepped
backward, still facing him, until her women surrounded her. Only then
did Morse turn to greet his friends.

"Le-o-la!" he said, just above his breath, testing the liquid syllables.
"Le-o-la! The name fits her. It is like the murmur of moonlit ripples
upon a silver beach."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X—The Isle of Sele](toa12)

</div>
