[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050065)  [Next](0050067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XLI.<sup>[1](footnote/fn54.htm#P5427_1656265)</sup>

To Cornelius, About Cyprian's Approval of His Ordination, and Concerning
Felicissimus.

1\. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. As was fitting for God's
servants, and especially for upright and peaceable priests, dearest
brother, we recently sent our colleagues Caldonius and Fortunatus, that
they might, not only by the persuasion of our letters, but by their
presence and the advice of all of you, strive and labour with all their
power to bring the members of the divided body into the unity of the
Catholic Church, and associate them into the bond of Christian charity.
But since the obstinate and inflexible pertinacity of the adverse party
has not only rejected the bosom and the embrace of its root and Mother,
but even, with a discord spreading and reviving itself worse and worse,
has appointed a bishop for itself, and, contrary to the sacrament once
delivered of the divine appointment and of Catholic Unity, has made an
adulterous and opposed head outside the Church; having received your
letters as well as those of our colleagues, at the coining also of our
colleagues Pompeius and Stephanus, good men and very dear to us, by whom
all these things were undoubtedly alleged and proved to us with general
gladness,<sup>[2](footnote/fn54.htm#P5432_1658001)</sup> in conformity
with the requirements alike of the sanctity and the truth of the divine
tradition and ecclesiastical institution, we have directed our letters
to you. Moreover, bringing these same things trader the notice of our
several colleagues throughout the province, we have bidden also that our
brethren, with letters from them, be directed to you.

2\. *This has been done*, although our mind and intention had been
already plainly declared to the brethren, and to the whole of the people
in this place, when, having received letters lately from both parties,
we read your letters, and intimated your ordination to the episcopate,
in the ears of every one. Moreover, remembering the common honour, and
having respect for the sacerdotal gravity and sanctity, we repudiated
those things which from the other party had been heaped together with
bitter virulence into a document transmitted to us; alike considering
and weighing, that in so great and so religious an assembly of brethren,
in which God's priests were sitting together, and His altar was set,
they ought neither to be read nor to be heard. For those things should
not easily be put forward, nor carelessly and rudely published, which
may move a scandal by means of a quarrelsome pen in the minds of the
hearers, and confuse brethren, who are placed far apart and dwelling
across the sea, with uncertain opinions. Let those beware, who, obeying
either their own rage or lust, and unmindful of the divine law and
holiness, rejoice to throw abroad in the meantime things which they
cannot prove; and although they may not be successful in destroying and
ruining innocence, are satisfied with scattering stains upon it with
lying reports and false rumours. Assuredly, we should exert ourselves,
as it is fitting for prelates and priests to do, that such things, when
they are written by any, should be repudiated as far as we are
concerned. For otherwise, what will become of that which we learn and
which we declare to be laid down in Scripture: "Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips from speaking guile?
"<sup>[3](footnote/fn54.htm#P5434_1660167)</sup> And elsewhere: "Thy
mouth abounded in malice, and thy tongue embraced deceit. Thou satest
and spakest against thy brother, and slanderedst thine own mother's
son."<sup>[4](footnote/fn54.htm#P5435_1660349)</sup> Also whist the
apostle says: "Let no corrupt communication proceed from thy mouth, but
that which is good to the edifying of faith, that it may minister grace
unto the hearers."<sup>[5](footnote/fn54.htm#P5436_1660545)</sup>
Further, we show what the right course of conduct to pursue
is,<sup>[6](footnote/fn54.htm#P5437_1660625)</sup> if, when such things
are written by the calumnious temerity of some, we do not allow them to
be read among us: and therefore, dearest brother, when such letters came
to me against you, even though they were the letters of your
co-presbyter sitting with
you,<sup>[7](footnote/fn54.htm#P5438_1660930)</sup> as they breathed a
tone of religious simplicity, and did not echo with any barkings of
curses and revilings, I ordered them to be read to the clergy and the
people.

3\. But in desiring letters from our
colleagues,<sup>[8](footnote/fn54.htm#P5440_1661457)</sup> who were
present at your ordination at that place, we did not forget the ancient
usage, nor did we seek for any novelty. For it was sufficient for you to
announce yourself by
letters<sup>[9](footnote/fn54.htm#P5441_1661736)</sup> to have been made
bishop, unless there had been a dissenting faction on the other side,
who by their slanderous and calumnious fabrications disturbed the minds
and perplexed the hearts of our colleagues, as well as of several of the
brethren. To set this matter at rest, we judged it necessary to obtain
thence the strong and decided authority of our colleagues who wrote to
us; and they, declaring the testimony of their letters to be fully
deserved by your character, and life, and teaching, have deprived even
your rivals, and those who delight either in novelty or evil, of every
scruple of doubt or of difference; and, according to our advice weighed
in wholesome reason, the minds of the brethren tossing about in this sea
have sincerely and decidedly approved your priesthood. For this, my
brother, we especially both labour after, and ought to labour after, to
be careful to maintain as much as we can the unity delivered by the
Lord, and through His apostles to us their successors, and, as far as in
us lies, to gather into the Church the dispersed and wandering sheep
which the wilful faction and heretical temptation of some is separating
from their Mother; those only being left outside, who by their obstinacy
and madness have persisted, and have been unwilling to return to us; who
themselves will have to give an account to the Lord of the dissension
and separation made by them, and of the Church that they have forsaken.

4\. Bill, so far as pertains to the cause of certain presbyters here,
and of Felicissimus, that you may know what has been done here, our
colleagues have sent you letters subscribed by their own hand, that you
may learn, when you have heard the parties, from their letters what they
have thought and what they have pronounced. But you will do
better,<sup>[10](footnote/fn54.htm#P5443_1663575)</sup> brother, if you
will also bid copies of the letters which I had sent lately by our
colleagues Caldonius and Fortunatus to you, to he read for the common
satisfaction, which I had written concerning the same Felicissimus and
his presbytery to the clergy there, and also to the people, to be read
to the brethren there; declaring your ordination, and the course of the
whole transaction, that so as well there as here the brotherhood may be
informed of all things by us. Moreover, I have here transmitted also
copies of the same by Mettius the sub-deacon, sent by me, and by
Nicephorus the acolyte. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily
farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLII.](0050067)
