[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050071)  [Next](0050073.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XLVII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn55.htm#P5512_1681606.md)</sup>

Cornelius to Cyprian, Concerning the Faction of Novatian with His Party.

Cornelius to Cyprian his brother, greeting. That nothing might be
wanting to the future punishment of this wretched man, when cast down by
the powers of God, (on the expulsion by you of Maximus, and Longinus,
and Machaeus;) he has risen again; and, as I intimated in my former
letter which I sent to you by Augendus the confessor, I think that
Nicostratus, and Novatus, and Evaristus, and Primus, and Dionysius, have
already come thither. Therefore let care be taken that it be made known
to all our co-bishops and brethren, that Nicostratus is accused of many
crimes, and that not only has he committed frauds and plunders on his
secular patroness, whose affairs he managed; but, moreover (which is
reserved to him for a perpetual punishment), he has abstracted no small
deposits of the Church; that Evaristus has been the author of a schism;
and that Zetus has been appointed bishop in his room, and his successor
to the people over whom he had previously presided. But he contrived
greater and worse things by his malice and insatiable wickedness than
those which he was then always practising among his own people; so that
you may know what kind of leaders and protectors that schismatic and
heretic constantly had joined to his side. I bid you, dearest brother,
ever heartily fare well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLVIII.](0050073.md)
