[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050017)  [Next](0050019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Part II.-Dogmatical and Historical.

1\. As it was your desire, my beloved brother
Theophilus,<sup>[2](footnote/fn34.htm#P3420_1067588)</sup> to be
thoroughly informed on those topics which I put summarily before you, I
have thought it right to set these matters of inquiry clearly forth to
your view, drawing largely from the Holy Scriptures themselves as from a
holy fountain, in order that you may not only have the pleasure of
hearing them on the testimony of
men,<sup>[3](footnote/fn34.htm#P3421_1068157)</sup> but may also be
able, by surveying them in the light of (divine) authority, to glorify
God in all. For this will be as a sure supply furnished you by us for
your journey in this present life, so that by ready argument applying
things ill understood and apprehended by most, you may sow them in the
ground of your heart, as in a rich and clean
soil.<sup>[4](footnote/fn34.htm#P3422_1068706)</sup> By these, too, you
will be able to silence those who oppose and gainsay the word of
salvation. Only see that you do not give these things over to
unbelieving and blasphemous tongues, for that is no common danger. But
impart them to pious and faithful men, who desire to live holily and
righteously with fear. For it is not to no purpose that the blessed
apostle exhorts Timothy, and says, "O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain babblings, and
oppositions of science falsely so called; which some professing have
erred concerning the
faith."<sup>[5](footnote/fn34.htm#P3423_1069507)</sup> And again, "Thou
therefore, my son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus. And
the things that thou hast heard of me in many exhortations, the same
commit thou to faithful
men,<sup>[6](footnote/fn34.htm#P3424_1069716)</sup> who shall be able to
teach others also."<sup>[7](footnote/fn34.htm#P3425_1069936)</sup> If,
then, the blessed (apostle) delivered these things with a pious caution,
which could be easily known by all, as he perceived in the spirit that
"all men have not faith,"<sup>[8](footnote/fn34.htm#P3426_1070131)</sup>
how much greater will be our danger, if, rashly and without thought, we
commit the revelations of God to profane and unworthy men?

2\. For as the blessed prophets were made, so to speak, eyes for us,
they foresaw through faith the mysteries of the word, and became
ministers of these<sup>[9](footnote/fn34.htm#P3428_1070434)</sup> things
also to succeeding generations, not only reporting the past, but also
announcing I the present and the future, so that the prophet might not
appear to be one only for the time being, but might also predict the
future for all generations, and so be reckoned a (true) prophet. For
these fathers were furnished with the Spirit, and largely honoured by
the Word Himself; and just as it is with instruments of music. so had
they the Word always, like the
plectrum,<sup>[10](footnote/fn34.htm#P3429_1070964)</sup> in union with
them, and when moved by Him the prophets announced what God willed. For
they spake not of their own
power<sup>[11](footnote/fn34.htm#P3430_1071269)</sup> (let there be no
mistake as to that<sup>[12](footnote/fn34.htm#P3431_1071324)</sup> ),
neither did they declare what pleased themselves. But First of all they
were endowed with wisdom by the Word, and then again were rightly
instructed in the future by means of visions. And then, when thus
themselves fully convinced, they spake those things
which<sup>[13](footnote/fn34.htm#P3432_1071686)</sup> were revealed by
God to them alone, and concealed from all others. For with what reason
should the prophet be called a prophet, unless he in spirit foresaw the
future? For if the prophet spake of any chance event, he would not be a
prophet then in speaking of things which were under the eye of aIl. But
one who sets forth in detail things yet to be, was rightly judged a
prophet. Wherefore prophets were with good reason called from the very
first "seers."<sup>[14](footnote/fn34.htm#P3433_1072327)</sup> And hence
we, too, who are rightly instructed in what was declared aforetime by
them, speak not of our own capacity. For we do not attempt to made any
change one way or another among ourselves in the words that were spoken
of old by them, but we make the Scriptures in which these are written
public, and read them to those who can believe rightly; for that is a
common benefit for both parties: for him who speaks, in holding in
memory and setting forth correctly things uttered of
old;<sup>[15](footnote/fn34.htm#P3434_1072834)</sup> and for him who
hears, in giving attention to the things spoken. Since, then, in this
there is a work assigned to both parties together, viz., to him who
speaks, that he speak forth faithfully without regard to
risk,<sup>[16](footnote/fn34.htm#P3435_1073191)</sup> and to him who
hears, that he hear and receive in faith that which is spoken, I beseech
you to strive together with me in prayer to God.

3\. Do you wish then to know in what manner the Word of God, who was
again the Son of God,<sup>[17](footnote/fn34.htm#P3437_1073449)</sup> as
He was of old the Word, communicated His revelations to the blessed
prophets in former times? Well, as the Word shows His compassion and His
denial of all respect of persons by all the saints, He enlightens
them<sup>[18](footnote/fn34.htm#P3438_1073848)</sup> and adapts them to
that which is advantageous for us, like a skilful physician,
understanding the weakness of men. And the ignorant He loves to teach,
and the erring He turns again to His own true way. And by those who live
by faith He is easily found; and to those of pure eye and holy heart,
who desire to knock at the door, He opens immediately. For He casts away
none of His servants as unworthy of the divine mysteries. He does not
esteem the rich man more highly than the poor, nor does He despise the
poor man for his poverty. He does not disdain the barbarian, nor does He
set the eunuch aside as no
man.<sup>[19](footnote/fn34.htm#P3439_1074492)</sup> He does not hate
the female on account of the woman's act of disobedience in the
beginning, nor does He reject the male on account of the man's
transgression. But He seeks all, and desires to save all, wishing to
make all the children of God, and calling all the saints unto one
perfect man. For there is also one Son (or Servant) of God, by whom we
too, receiving the regeneration through the Holy Spirit, desire to come
all unto one perfect and heavenly
man.<sup>[20](footnote/fn34.htm#P3440_1074977)</sup>

4\. For whereas the Word of God was without
flesh,<sup>[21](footnote/fn34.htm#P3442_1075046)</sup> He took upon
Himself the holy flesh by the holy Virgin, and prepared a robe which He
wove for Himself, like a bridegroom, in the sufferings of the cross, in
order that by uniting His own power with our moral body, and by
mixing<sup>[22](footnote/fn34.htm#P3443_1075329)</sup> the incorruptible
with the corruptible, and the strong with the weak, He might save
perishing man. The web-beam, therefore, is the pass on of the Lord upon
the cross, and the warp on it is the power of the Holy Spirit, and the
woof is the holy flesh wrought (woven) by the Spirit, and the thread is
the grace which by the love of Christ binds and unites the two in one,
and the combs or (rods) are the Word; and the workers are the patriarchs
and prophets who weave the fair, long, perfect tunic for Christ; and the
Word passing through these, like the combs or (rods), completes through
them that which His Father
willeth.<sup>[23](footnote/fn34.htm#P3444_1076223)</sup>

5\. But as time now presses for the consideration of the question
immediately in hand, and as what has been already said in the
introduction with regard to the glory of God, may suffice, it is proper
that we take the Holy Scriptures themselves in hand, and find out from
them what, and of what manner, the coming of Antichrist is; on what
occasion and at what time that implores one shall be revealed; and
whence and from what I tribe (he shall come); and what his name is,
which is indicated by the number in the Scripture; and how he shall work
error among the people, gathering them from the ends of the earth; and
(how) he shall stir up tribulation and persecution against the saints;
and how he shall glorify himself as God; and what his end shall be; and
how the sudden appearing of the Lord shall be revealed froth heaven; and
what the conflagration of the whole world shall be; and what the
glorious and heavenly kingdom of the saints is to be, when they reign
together with Christ; and what the punishment of the wicked by fire.

6\. Now, as our Lord Jesus Christ, who is also God, was prophesied of
under the figure of a
lion,<sup>[24](footnote/fn34.htm#P3447_1077499)</sup> on account of His
royalty and glory, in the same way have the Scriptures also aforetime
spoken of Antichrist as a lion, on account of his tyranny and violence.
For the deceiver seeks to liken himself in all things to the Son of God.
Christ is a lion, so Antichrist is also a lion; Christ is a
king,<sup>[25](footnote/fn34.htm#P3448_1077851)</sup> so Antichrist is
also a king. The Saviour was manifested as a
lamb;<sup>[26](footnote/fn34.htm#P3449_1077940)</sup> so he too, in like
manner, will appear as a lamb, though within he is a wolf. The Saviour
came into the World in the circumcision, and he will come in the same
manner. The Lord sent apostles among all the nations, and he in like
manner will send false apostles. The Saviour gathered together the sheep
that were scattered
abroad,<sup>[27](footnote/fn34.htm#P3450_1078287)</sup> and he in like
manner will bring together a people that is scattered abroad. The Lord
gave a seal to those who believed on Him, and he will give one like
manner. The Saviour appeared in the form of man, and he too will come in
the form of a man. The Saviour raised up and showed His holy flesh like
a temple,<sup>[28](footnote/fn34.htm#P3451_1078614)</sup> and he will
raise a temple of stone in Jerusalem. And his seductive arts we shall
exhibit in what follows. But for the present let us turn to the question
in hand.

7\. Now the blessed Jacob speaks to the following effect in his
benedictions, testifying prophetically of our Lord and Saviour: "Judah,
let thy brethren praise thee: thy hand shall be on the neck of thine
enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a
lion's whelp: from the shoot, my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down,
he couched as a lion, and as a lion's whelp; who shall rouse him up? A
ruler shall not depart from Judah, nor a leader from his thighs, until
he come for whom it is reserved; and he shall be the expectation of the
nations. Binding his ass to a vine, and his ass's colt to the vine
tendril; he shall wash his garment in wine, and his clothes in the blood
of the grapes. His eyes shall be gladsome as with wine, and his teeth
shall be whiter than
milk."<sup>[29](footnote/fn34.htm#P3453_1079594)</sup>

8\. Knowing, then, as I do, how to explain these things in detail, I
deem it right at present to quote the words themselves. But since the
expressions themselves urge us to speak of them. I shall not omit to do
so. For these are truly divine and glorious things, and things well
calculated to benefit the soul. The prophet, in using the expression, *a
lion's whelp*, means him who sprang from Judah and David according to
the flesh, who was not made indeed of the seed of David, but was
conceived by the (power of the) Holy Ghost, and came
forth<sup>[30](footnote/fn34.htm#P3455_1080159)</sup> from the holy
shoot of earth. For Isaiah says, "There shall come forth a rod out of
the root of Jesse, and a flower shall grow up out of
it."<sup>[31](footnote/fn34.htm#P3456_1080391)</sup> That which is
called by Isaiah a *flower*, Jacob calls a shoot. For first he shot
forth, and then he flourished in the world. And the expression, "he
stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as a lion's whelp," refers to
the three days' sleep (death, couching) of Christ; as also Isaiah says,
"How is faithful Sion become an harlot! it was full of judgment; in
which righteousness lodged (couched); but now
murderers."<sup>[32](footnote/fn34.htm#P3457_1080824)</sup> And David
says to the same effect, "I laid me down (couched) and slept; I awaked:
for the Lord will sustain me;
"<sup>[33](footnote/fn34.htm#P3458_1080955)</sup> in which words he
points to the fact of his sleep and rising again. And Jacob says, "Who
shall rouse him up? "And that is just what David and Paul both refer to,
as when Paul says, "and God the Father, who raised Him from the
dead."<sup>[34](footnote/fn34.htm#P3459_1081205)</sup>

9\. And in saying, "A ruler shall not depart from Judah, nor a leader
from his thighs, until he come for whom it is reserved; and he shall be
the expectation of the nations," he referred the fulfilment (of that
prophecy) to Christ. For He is our expectation. For we expect Him, (and)
by faith we behold Him as He comes from heaven with power.

10\. "Binding his ass to a vine: "that means that He unites His people
of the circumcision with His own calling (vocation). For He was the
vine.<sup>[35](footnote/fn34.htm#P3462_1081706)</sup> "And his ass's
colt to the vine-tendril: "that denotes the people of the Gentiles, as
He calls the circumcision and the uncircumcision unto one faith.

11\. "He shall wash his garment in wine," that is, according to that
voice of His Father which came down by the Holy Ghost at the
Jordan.<sup>[36](footnote/fn34.htm#P3464_1082010)</sup> "And his clothes
in the blood of the grape." In the blood of what grape, then, but just
His own flesh, which hung upon the tree like a cluster of grapes?-from
whose side also flowed two streams, of blood and water, in which the
nations are washed and purified, which (nations) He may be supposed to
have as a robe about
Him.<sup>[37](footnote/fn34.htm#P3465_1082922)</sup>

12\. "His eyes gladsome with wine." And what are the eyes of Christ but
the blessed prophets, who foresaw in the Spirit, and announced
beforehand, the sufferings that were to befall Him, and rejoiced in
seeing Him in power with spiritual eyes, being furnished (for their
vocation) by the word Himself and His grace?

13\. And in saying, "And his teeth (shall be) whiter than milk," he
referred to the commandments that proceed from the holy mouth of Christ,
and which are pure (purify) as milk.

14\. Thus did the Scriptures preach before-time of this lion and lion's
whelp. And in like manner also we find it written regarding Antichrist.
For Moses speaks thus: "Dan is a lion's whelp, and he shall leap from
Bashan."<sup>[38](footnote/fn34.htm#P3469_1083761)</sup> But that no one
may err by supposing that this is said of the Saviour, let him attend
carefully to the matter. "Dan," he says, "is a lion's whelp; "and in
naming the tribe of Dan, he declared clearly the tribe from which
Antichrist is destined to spring. For as Christ springs from the tribe
of Judah, so Antichrist is to spring from the tribe of
Dan.<sup>[39](footnote/fn34.htm#P3470_1084136)</sup> And that the case
stands thus, we see also from the words of Jacob: "Let Dan be a serpent,
lying upon the ground, biting the horse's
heel."<sup>[40](footnote/fn34.htm#P3471_1084528)</sup> What, then, is
meant by the serpent but Antichrist, that deceiver who is mentioned in
Genesis,<sup>[41](footnote/fn34.htm#P3472_1084643)</sup> who deceived
Eve and supplanted Adam (pterni/saj, bruised Adam's heel)? But since it
is necessary to prove this assertion by sufficient testimony, we shall
not shrink from the task.

15\. That it is in reality out of the tribe of Dan, then, that that
tyrant and king, that dread judge, that son of the devil, is destined to
spring and arise, the prophet testifies when he says, "Dan shall judge
his people, as (he is) also one tribe in
Israel."<sup>[42](footnote/fn34.htm#P3474_1085103)</sup> But some one
may say that this refers to Samson, who sprang from the tribe of Dan,
and judged the people twenty years. Well, the prophecy had its partial
fulfilment in Samson, but its complete fulfilment is reserved for
Antichrist. For Jeremiah also speaks to this effect: "From Dan we are to
hear the sound of the swiftness of his horses: the whole land trembled
*at the sound of the neighing, of the driving of his
horses*."<sup>[43](footnote/fn34.htm#P3475_1085548)</sup> And another
prophet says: "He shall gather together all his strength, from the east
even to the west. They whom he calls, and they whom he calls not, shall
go with him. He shall make the sea white with the sails of his ships,
and the plain black with the shields of his armaments. And whosoever
shall oppose him in war shall fall by the
sword."<sup>[44](footnote/fn34.htm#P3476_1085913)</sup> That these
things, then, are said of no one else but that tyrant, and shameless
one, and adversary of God, we shall show in what follows.

16\. But Isaiah also speaks thus: "And it shall come to pass, that when
the Lord hath performed His whole work upon Mount Zion and on Jerusalem,
He will punish (visit) the stout mind, the king of Assyria, and the
greatness (height) of the glory of his eyes. For he said, By my strength
will I do it, and by the wisdom of my understanding I will remove the
bounds of the peoples, and will rob them of their strength: and I will
make the inhabited cities tremble, and will gather the whole world in my
hand like a nest, and I will lift it up like eggs that are left. And
there is no one that shall escape or gainsay me, *and open the mouth and
chatter. Shall the axe boast itself without him that heweth therewith?
or shall the saw magnify itself without him that shaketh (draweth) it?
As if one should raise a rod or a staff, and the staff should lift
itself up*: and not thus. But the Lord shall send dishonour unto thy
honour; and into thy glory a burning fire shall burn. And the light of
Israel shall be a fire, and shall sanctify him in flame, and shall
consume the forest like
grass."<sup>[45](footnote/fn34.htm#P3478_1087201)</sup>

17\. And again he says in another place: "How bath the exactor ceased,
and how hath the oppressor
ceased!<sup>[46](footnote/fn34.htm#P3480_1087328)</sup> God hath broken
the yoke of the rulers of sinners, He who smote the people in wrath, and
with an incurable stroke: He that strikes the people with an incurable
stroke, which He did not spare. He ceased (rested) confidently: the
whole earth shouts with rejoicing. The trees of Lebanon rejoiced at
thee, and the cedar of Lebanon, (saying), Since thou art laid down, no
feller is come up against us. Hell from beneath is moved at meeting
thee: all the mighty ones, the rulers of the earth, are gathered
together-the lords from their thrones. All the kings of the nations, all
they shall answer together, and shall say, And thou, too, art taken as
we; and thou art reckoned among us. Thy pomp is brought down to earth,
thy great rejoicing: they will spread decay under thee; and the worm
shall be thy covering.<sup>[47](footnote/fn34.htm#P3481_1088155)</sup>
How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the
morning!<sup>[48](footnote/fn34.htm#P3482_1088274)</sup> He is cast down
to the ground who sends off to all the nations. And thou didst say in
thy mind, I will ascend into heaven, I will set my throne above the
stars of heaven: I will sit down upon the lofty mountains towards the
north: I will ascend above the clouds: I will be like the Most High. Yet
now thou shalt be brought down to hell, and to the foundations of the
earth! They that see thee shall wonder at thee, and shall say, This is
the man that excited the earth, that did shake kings, that made the
whole world a wilderness, and destroyed the cities, that released not
those in prison.<sup>[49](footnote/fn34.htm#P3483_1088898)</sup> All the
kings of the earth did lie in honour, every one in his own house; but
thou shall be cast out on the mountains like a loathsome carcase, with
many who fall, pierced through with the sword, and going down to hell.
As a garment stained with blood is not pure, so neither shall thou be
comely (or clean); because thou hast destroyed my land, and slain my
people. Thou shalt not abide, enduring for ever, a wicked seed. Prepare
thy children for slaughter, for the sins of thy father, that they rise
not, neither possess my
land."<sup>[50](footnote/fn34.htm#P3484_1089497)</sup>

18\. Ezekiel also speaks of him to the same effect, thus: "Thus saith
the Lord God, Because thine heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am
God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the sea; yet art thou a
man, and not God, (though) thou hast set thine heart as the heart of
God. Art thou wiser than Daniel? Have the wise not instructed thee in
their wisdom? With thy wisdom or with thine understanding hast thou
gotten thee power, and gold and silver in thy treasures? By thy great
wisdom and by thy
traffic<sup>[51](footnote/fn34.htm#P3486_1090034)</sup> hast thou
increased thy power? Thy heart is lifted up in thy power. Therefore thus
saith the Lord God: Because thou hast set thine heart as the heart of
God: behold, therefore I will bring
strangers<sup>[52](footnote/fn34.htm#P3487_1090314)</sup> upon thee,
plagues from the nations: and they shall draw their swords against thee,
and against the beauty of thy wisdom; and they shall level thy beauty to
destruction; and they shall bring thee down; and thou shall die by the
death of the wounded in the midst of the sea. Wilt thou yet say *before
them that slay thee, I am God? But thou art a man, and no God, in the
hand of them that wound thee. Thou shalt die the deaths of the
uncircumcised by the hand of* strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the
Lord."<sup>[53](footnote/fn34.htm#P3488_1090886)</sup>

19\. These words then being thus presented, let us observe somewhat in
detail what Daniel says in his visions. For in distinguishing the
kingdoms that are to rise after these things, he showed also the coming
of Antichrist in the last times, and the consummation of the whole
world. In expounding the vision of Nebuchadnezzar, then, he speaks thus:
"Thou, O king, sawest, and behold a great image standing before thy
face: the head of which was of fine gold, its arms and shoulders of
silver, its belly and its thighs of brass, and its legs of iron, (and)
its feet part of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest, then, till that a
stone was cut out without hands, and smote the image upon the feet that
were of iron and clay, and brake them to an end. Then were the clay, the
iron, the brass, the silver, (and) the gold broken, and became like the
chaff from the summer threshing-floor; and the strength (fulness) of the
wind carried them away, and there was no place found for them. And the
stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole
earth."<sup>[54](footnote/fn34.htm#P3490_1091979)</sup>

20\. Now if we set Daniel's own visions also side by side with this, we
shall have one exposition to give of the two together, and shall (be
able to) show how concordant with each other they are, and how true. For
he speaks thus: "I Daniel saw, and behold the four winds of the heaven
strove upon the great sea. And four great beasts came up from the sea,
diverse one from another. The first (was) like a lioness, and had wings
as of an eagle. I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was
lifted up from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as a man, and a
man's heart was given to it. And behold a second beast like to a bear,
and it was made stand on one part, and it had three ribs in the mouth of
it.<sup>[55](footnote/fn34.htm#P3492_1092719)</sup> I beheld, and lo a
beast like a leopard, and it had upon the back of it four wings of a
fowl, and the beast had four heads. After this I saw, and behold a
fourth beast, dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; it had iron
teeth *and claws of
brass*,<sup>[56](footnote/fn34.htm#P3493_1093075)</sup> which devoured
and brake in pieces, and it stamped the residue with the feet of it; and
it was diverse from all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten
horns. I considered its horns, and behold there came up among them
another little horn, and before it there were three of the first horns
plucked up by the roots; and behold in this horn were eyes like the eyes
of man, and a mouth speaking great
things."<sup>[57](footnote/fn34.htm#P3494_1093657)</sup>

21\. "I beheld till the thrones were set, and the Ancient of days did
sit: and His garment was white as snow, and the hair of His head like
pure wool: His throne was a flame of fire, His wheels were a burning
fire. A stream of fire flowed before Him. Thousand thousands ministered
unto Him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood around Him: the
judgment was set, and the books were opened. I beheld then, because of
the voice of the great words which the horn spake, till the beast was
slain and perished, and his body given to the burning of fire. And the
dominion of the other beasts was taken
away."<sup>[58](footnote/fn34.htm#P3496_1094284)</sup>

22\. "I saw in the night vision, and, behold, one like the Son of man
was coming with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days,
and was brought near before Him. And there was given Him dominion, and
honour, and the kingdom; and all peoples, tribes, and tongues shall
serve Him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass
away, and His kingdom shall not be
destroyed."<sup>[59](footnote/fn34.htm#P3498_1094704)</sup>

23\. Now since these things, spoken as they are with a mystical meaning,
may seem to some hard to understand, we shall keep back nothing fitted
to impart an intelligent apprehension of them to those who are possessed
of a sound mind. He said, then, that a "lioness came up from the sea,"
and by that he meant the kingdom of the Babylonians in the world, which
also was the head of gold on the image. In saying that "it had wings as
of an eagle," he meant that Nebuchadnezzar the king was lifted up and
was exalted against God. Then he says, "the wings thereof were plucked,"
that is to say, his glory was destroyed; for he was driven out of his
kingdom. And the words, "a man's heart was given to it, and it was made
stand upon the feet as a man," refer to the fact that he repented and
recognised himself to be only a man, and gave the glory to God.

24\. Then, after the lioness, he sees a "second beast like a bear," and
that denoted the Persians. For after the Babylonians, the Persians held
the sovereign power And in saving that there were "three ribs in the
mouth of it," he pointed to three nations, viz., the Persians, and the
Medes, and the Babylonians; which were also represented on the image by
the silver after the gold. Then (there was) "the third beast, a
leopard," which meant the Greeks. For after the Persians, Alexander of
Macedon obtained the sovereign power on subverting Darius, as is also
shown by the brass on the image. And in saying that it had "four wings
of a fowl," he taught us most clearly how the kingdom of Alexander was
partitioned. For in speaking of "four heads," he made mention of four
kings, viz., those who arose out of that
(kingdom).<sup>[60](footnote/fn35)</sup> For Alexander, when dying,
partitioned out his kingdom into four divisions.

25\. Then he says: "A fourth beast, dreadful and terrible; it had iron
teeth and claws of brass." And who are these but the Romans? which
(kingdom) is meant by the iron-the kingdom which is now established; for
the legs of that (image) were of iron. And after this, what remains,
beloved, but the toes of the feet of the image, in which part is iron
and part clay, mixed together? And mystically by the toes of the feet he
meant the kings who are to arise from among them; as Daniel also says
(in the words), "I considered the beast, and lo there were ten horns
behind it, among which shall rise another (horn), an offshoot, and shall
pluck up by the roots the three (that were) before it." And under this
was signified none other than Antichrist, who is also himself to raise
the kingdom of the Jews. He says that three horns are plucked up by the
root by him, viz., the three kings of Egypt, and Libya, and Ethiopia,
whom he cuts off in the array of battle. And he, after gaining terrible
power over all, being nevertheless a
tyrant,<sup>[61](footnote/fn35.htm#P3503_1097689)</sup> shall stir up
tribulation and persecution against men, exalting himself against them.
For Daniel says: "I considered the horn, and behold that horn made war
with the saints, and prevailed against them, till the beast was slain
and perished, and its body was given to the burning of
fire."<sup>[62](footnote/fn35.htm#P3504_1098039)</sup>

26\. After a little space the
stone<sup>[63](footnote/fn35.htm#P3506_1098097)</sup> will come from
heaven which smites the image and breaks it in pieces, and subverts all
the kingdoms, and gives the kingdom to the saints of the Most High. This
is the stone which becomes a great mountain, and fills the whole earth,
of which Daniel says: "I saw in the night visions, and behold one like
the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient
of days, and was brought near before Him. And there was given Him
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom; and all peoples, tribes, and
languages shall serve Him: and His dominion is an everlasting dominion,
which shall not pass away, and His kingdom shall not be
destroyed."<sup>[64](footnote/fn35.htm#P3507_1098764)</sup> He showed
all power given by the Father to the
Son,<sup>[65](footnote/fn35.htm#P3508_1098839)</sup> who is ordained
Lord of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the
earth, and Judge of all:<sup>[66](footnote/fn35.htm#P3509_1098972)</sup>
of things in heaven, because He was born, the Word of God, before all
(ages); and of things on earth, because He became man in the midst of
men, to re-create our Adam through Himself; and of things under the
earth, because He was also reckoned among the dead, preaching the Gospel
to the souls of the
saints,<sup>[67](footnote/fn35.htm#P3510_1099300)</sup> (and) by death
overcoming death.

27\. As these things, then, are in the future, and as the ten toes of
the image are equivalent to (so many)
democracies,<sup>[68](footnote/fn35.htm#P3512_1099473)</sup> and the ten
horns of the fourth beast are distributed over ten kingdoms, let us look
at the subject a little more closely, and consider these matters as in
the clear light of a personal
survey.<sup>[69](footnote/fn35.htm#P3513_1099836)</sup>

28\. The golden head of the image and the lioness denoted the
Babylonians; the shoulders and arms of silver, and the bear, represented
the Persians and Medes; the belly and thighs of brass, and the leopard,
meant the Greeks, who held the sovereignty from Alexander's time; the
legs of iron, and the beast dreadful and terrible, expressed the Romans,
who hold the sovereignty at present; the toes of the feet which were
part clay and part iron, and the ten horns, were emblems of the kingdoms
that are yet to rise; the other little horn that grows up among them
meant the Antichrist in their midst; the stone that smites the earth and
brings judgment upon the world was Christ.

29\. These things, beloved, we impart to you with fear, and yet readily,
on account of the love of Christ, which surpasseth all. For if the
blessed prophets who preceded us did not choose to proclaim these
things, though they knew them, openly and boldly, lest they should
disquiet the souls of men, but recounted them mystically in parables and
dark sayings, speaking thus, "Here is the mind which hath
wisdom,"<sup>[70](footnote/fn35.htm#P3516_1100942)</sup> how much
greater risk shall we run in venturing to declare openly things spoken
by them in obscure terms! Let us look, therefore, at the things which
are to befall this unclean harlot in the last days; and (let us
consider) what and what manner of tribulation is destined to visit her
in the wrath of God before the judgment as an earnest of her doom.

30\. Come, then, O blessed Isaiah; arise, tell us clearly what thou
didst prophesy with respect to the mighty Babylon. For thou didst speak
also of Jerusalem, and thy word is accomplished. For thou didst speak
boldly and openly: "Your country is desolate, your cities are burned
with fire; your land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is
desolate as overthrown by many
strangers.<sup>[71](footnote/fn35.htm#P3518_1101702)</sup> The daughter
of Sion shall be left as a cottage in a vineyard, and as a lodge in a
garden of cucumbers, as a besieged
city."<sup>[72](footnote/fn35.htm#P3519_1101886)</sup> What then? Are
not these things come to pass? Are not the things announced by thee
fulfilled? Is not their country, Judea, desolate? Is not the holy place
burned with fire? Are not their walls cast down? Are not their cities
destroyed? Their land, do not strangers devour it? Do not the Romans
rule the country? And indeed these impious people hated thee, and did
saw thee asunder, and they crucified Christ. Thou art dead in the world,
but thou livest in Christ.

31\. Which of you, then, shall I esteem more than thee? Yet Jeremiah,
too, is stoned. But if I should esteem Jeremiah most, yet Daniel too has
his testimony. Daniel, I commend thee above all; yet John too gives no
false witness. With how many mouths and tongues would I praise you; or
rather the Word who spake in you! Ye died with Christ; and ye will live
with Christ. Hear ye, and rejoice; behold the things announced by you
have been fulfilled in their time. For ye saw these things yourselves
first, and then ye proclaimed them to all generations. Ye ministered the
oracles of God to all generations. Ye prophets were called, that ye
might be able to save all. For then is one a prophet indeed, when,
having announced beforetime things about to be, he can afterwards show
that they have actually happened. Ye were the disciples of a good
Master. These words I address to you as if alive, and with propriety.
For ye hold already the crown of life and immortality which is laid up
for you in heaven.<sup>[73](footnote/fn35.htm#P3521_1103369)</sup>

32\. Speak with me, O blessed Daniel. Give me full assurance, I beseech
thee. Thou dost prophesy concerning the lioness in
Babylon;<sup>[74](footnote/fn35.htm#P3523_1103520)</sup> for thou wast a
captive there. Thou hast unfolded the future regarding the bear; for
thou wast still in the world, and didst see the things come to pass.
Then thou speakest to me of the leopard; and whence canst thou know
this, for thou art already gone to thy rest? Who instructed thee to
announce these things, but He who
formed<sup>[75](footnote/fn35.htm#P3524_1103869)</sup> thee in (from)
thy mother's womb?<sup>[76](footnote/fn35.htm#P3525_1103976)</sup> That
is God, thou sayest. Thou hast spoken indeed, and that not falsely. The
leopard has arisen; the he-goat is come; he hath smitten the ram; he
hath broken his horns in pieces; he hath stamped upon him with his feet.
He has been exalted by his fall; (the) four horns have come up from
under that one.<sup>[77](footnote/fn35.htm#P3526_1104295)</sup> Rejoice,
blessed Daniel! thou hast not been in error: all these things have come
to pass.

33\. After this again thou hast told me of the beast dreadful and
terrible. "It had iron teeth and claws of brass: it devoured and brake
in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of
it."<sup>[78](footnote/fn35.htm#P3528_1104598)</sup> Already the iron
rules; already it subdues and breaks all in pieces; already it brings
all the unwilling into subjection; already we see these things
ourselves. Now we glorify God, being instructed by thee.

34\. But as the task before us was to speak of the harlot, be thou with
us, O blessed Isaiah. Let us mark what thou sayest about Babylon. "Come
down, sit upon the ground, O virgin daughter of Babylon; sit, O daughter
of the Chaldeans; thou shalt no longer be called tender and delicate.
Take the millstone, grind meal, draw aside thy
veil,<sup>[79](footnote/fn35.htm#P3530_1105162)</sup> shave the grey
hairs, make bare the legs, pass over the rivers. Thy shame shall be
uncovered, thy reproach shall be seen: I will take justice of thee, I
will no more give thee over to men. As for thy Redeemer, (He is) the
Lord of hosts, the Holy One of Israel is his name. Sit thou in
compunction, get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans: thou
shall no longer be called the strength of the kingdom.

35\. "I was wroth with my people; I have polluted mine inheritance, I
have given them into thine hand: and thou didst show them no mercy; but
upon the ancient (the elders) thou hast very heavily laid thy yoke. And
thou saidst, I shall be a princess for ever: thou didst not lay these
things to thy heart, neither didst remember thy latter end. Therefore
hear now this, thou that art delicate; that sittest, that art confident,
that sayest in thine heart, I am, and there is none else; I shall not
sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss of children. But now these
two things shall come upon thee in one day, widowhood and the loss of
children: they shall come upon thee suddenly in thy sorcery, in the
strength of thine enchantments mightily, in the hope of thy fornication.
For thou hast said, I am, and there is none else. And thy fornication
shall be thy shame, because thou hast said in thy heart, I am. And
destruction shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not know it. *(And
there shall be) a pit, and thou shalt full into it; and misery shall
fall upon thee, and thou shalt not be able to be made clean; and
destruction shall come upon thee, and thou shalt not know it*. Stand now
with thy enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, which
thou hast learned from thy youth; if so be thou shalt be able to be
profited. Thou art wearied in thy counsels. Let the astrologers of the
heavens stand and save thee; let the star-gazers announce to thee what
shall come upon thee. Behold, they shall all be as sticks for the fire;
so shall they be burned, and they shall not deliver their soul from the
flame. Because thou hast coals of fire, sit upon them; so shall it be
for thy help. Thou art wearied with change from thy youth. Man has gone
astray (each one) by himself; and there shall be no salvation for
thee."<sup>[80](footnote/fn35.htm#P3532_1107455)</sup> These things does
Isaiah prophesy for thee. Let us see now whether John has spoken to the
same effect.

36\. For he sees, when in the isle Patmos, a revelation of awful
mysteries, which he recounts freely, and makes known to others. Tell me,
blessed John, apostle and disciple of the Lord, what didst thou see and
hear concerning Babylon? Arise, and speak; for it sent thee also into
banishment.<sup>[81](footnote/fn35.htm#P3534_1107871)</sup> "And there
came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with
me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will show unto thee the judgment of
the great whore that sitteth upon many waters; with whom the kings of
the earth have committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth
have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication. And he carried me
away in the spirit into the wilderness: and I saw a woman sit upon a
scarlet-coloured beast, full of names of blasphemy, having seven heads
and ten horns. And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet colour,
and decked with gold, and precious
stone,<sup>[82](footnote/fn35.htm#P3535_1108580)</sup> and pearls,
having a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and
filthiness<sup>[83](footnote/fn35.htm#P3536_1108684)</sup> of the
fornication of the earth. Upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery,
Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth.

37\. "And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with
the blood of the martyrs of Jesus: and when I saw her, I wondered with
great admiration. And the angel said unto me, Wherefore didst thou
marvel? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that
carrieth her, which hath the seven heads and the ten horns. The beast
that thou sawest was, and is not; and shall ascend out of the bottomless
pit, and go into perdition: and they that dwell on the earth shall
wonder (whose name was not written in the book of life from the
foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is
not, and yet shall be.<sup>[84](footnote/fn35.htm#P3538_1109534)</sup>

38\. "And here is the mind that has wisdom. The seven heads are seven
mountains, on which the woman sitteth. And there are seven kings: five
are fallen, and one is, and the other is not ye come; and when he
cometh, he must continue a short space. And the beast that was and is
not, (even he is the eighth,) and is of the seven, and goeth into
perdition. And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which have
received no kingdom as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the
beast. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto
the beast. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall
overcome them: for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they that
are with Him are called, and chosen, and faithful.

39\. "And he saith to me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore
sitteth, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. And the
ten horns which thou sawest,
and<sup>[85](footnote/fn35.htm#P3541_1110510)</sup> the beast, these
shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall
eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God hath put in their hearts
to fulfil His will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast,
until the words of God shall be fulfilled. And the woman which thou
sawest is that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.

40\. "After these things I saw another angel come down from heaven,
having great power; and the earth was lightened with his glory. And he
cried mightily<sup>[86](footnote/fn35.htm#P3543_1111066)</sup> with a
strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is
become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, *and
a cage of every unclean* and hateful bird. For all nations have drunk of
the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the kings of the earth
have committed fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth are
waxed rich through the abundance of her delicacies. And I heard another
voice from heaven, saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues: for her
sins did cleave even unto
heaven,<sup>[87](footnote/fn35.htm#P3544_1111700)</sup> and God hath
remembered her l iniquities.

41\. "Reward her even as she rewarded (you), and double unto her double,
according to her works: in the cup which she hath filled, fill to her
double. How much she hath glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so
much torment and sorrow give her: for she saith in her heart, I sit a
queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her
plagues come in one day, death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall
be utterly burned with fire: for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her.
And the kings of the earth, who have committed fornication, and lived
deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they
shall see the smoke of her burning, standing afar off for the fear of
her torment, saying, Alas, alas! that great city Babylon, that mighty
city! for in one hour is thy judgment come. And the merchants of the
earth shall weep and mourn over her; for no man shall buy their
merchandise<sup>[88](footnote/fn35.htm#P3546_1112711)</sup> any more.
The merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls,
and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood,
and all manner vessels of ivory, and all manner vessels of most precious
wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble, and cinnamon, and
spices,<sup>[89](footnote/fn35.htm#P3547_1113049)</sup> and odours, and
ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oil, and fine flour, and
wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and
goats,<sup>[90](footnote/fn35.htm#P3548_1113217)</sup> and horses, and
chariots, and slaves (bodies), and souls of men. And the fruits that thy
soul lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were
dainty and goodly have
perished<sup>[91](footnote/fn35.htm#P3549_1113454)</sup> from thee, and
thou shalt find them no more at all. The merchants of these things,
which were made rich<sup>[92](footnote/fn35.htm#P3550_1113598)</sup> by
her, shall stand afar off for the fear of her torment, weeping and
wailing, and saying, Alas, alas! that great city, that was clothed in
fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious
stones, and pearls! for in one hour so great riches is come to nought.
And every shipmaster, and all the company in ships, and sailors, and as
many as trade by sea, stood afar off, and cried, when they saw the smoke
of her burning, saying, What city is like unto this great city? And they
cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and wailing, saying, Alas,
alas! that great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the
sea by reason of her
fatness!<sup>[93](footnote/fn35.htm#P3551_1114323)</sup> for in one hour
is she made desolate.

42\. "Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye
angels,<sup>[94](footnote/fn35.htm#P3553_1114455)</sup> and apostles,
and prophets; for God hath avenged you on her. And a mighty angel took
up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying,
Thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be thrown down, and
shall be found no more at all. And the voice of harpers and musicians,
and of pipers and trumpeters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; and
no craftsman, of whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in
thee; and the sound of a millstone shall be heard no more at all in
thee; and the light of a candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and
the voice of the bridegroom and of the bride shall be heard no more at
all in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth; for by
thy sorceries were all nations deceived. And in her was found the blood
of prophets and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the
earth."<sup>[95](footnote/fn35.htm#P3554_1115362)</sup>

43\. With respect, then, to the particular judgment in the torments that
are to come upon it in the last times by the hand of the tyrants who
shall arise then, the clearest statement has been given in these
passages. But it becomes us further diligently to examine and set forth
the period at which these things shall come to pass, and how the little
horn shall spring up in their midst. For when the legs of iron have
issued in the feet and toes, according to the similitude of the image
and that of the terrible beast, as has been shown in the above, (then
shall be the time) when the iron and the clay shall be mingled together.
Now Daniel will set forth this subject to us. For he says, "And one week
will make<sup>[96](footnote/fn35.htm#P3556_1116106)</sup> a covenant
with many, and it shall be that in the midst (half) of the week my
sacrifice and oblation shall
cease."<sup>[97](footnote/fn35.htm#P3557_1116282)</sup> By one week,
therefore, he meant the last week which is to be at the end of the whole
world of which week the two prophets Enoch and Elias will take up the
half. For they will preach 1, 260 days clothed in sackcloth, proclaiming
repentance to the people and to all the nations.

44\. For as two advents of our Lord and Saviour are indicated in the
Scriptures, the one being His first advent in the flesh, which took
place without honour by reason of His being set at nought, as Isaiah
spake of Him aforetime, saying, "We saw Him, and He had no form nor
comeliness, but His form was despised (and) rejected (lit. = deficient)
above all men; a man smitten and familiar with bearing infirmity, (for
His face was turned away); He was despised, and esteemed
not."<sup>[98](footnote/fn35.htm#P3559_1117056)</sup> But His second
advent is announced as glorious, when He shall come from heaven with the
host of angels, and the glory of His Father, as the prophet saith, "Ye
shall see the King in glory;
"<sup>[99](footnote/fn35.htm#P3560_1117267)</sup> and, "I saw one like
the Son of man coming with the clouds of heaven; and he came to the
Ancient of days, and he was brought to Him. And there were given Him
dominion, and honour, and glory, and the kingdom; all tribes and
languages shall serve Him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion,
which shall not pass
away."<sup>[100](footnote/fn35.htm#P3561_1117609)</sup> Thus also two
forerunners were indicated. The first was John the son of Zacharias, who
appeared in all things a forerunner and herald of our Saviour, preaching
of the heavenly light that had appeared in the world. He first fulfilled
the course of forerunner, and that from his mother's womb, being
conceived by Elisabeth, in order that to those, too, who are children
from their mother's womb he might declare the new birth that was to take
place for their sakes by the Holy Ghost and the Virgin.

45\. He, on hearing the salutation addressed to Elisabeth, leaped with
joy in his mother's womb, recognising God the Word conceived in the womb
of the Virgin. Thereafter he came forward preaching in the wilderness,
proclaiming the baptism of repentance to the people, (and thus)
announcing prophetically salvation to the nations living in the
wilderness of the world. After this, at the Jordan, seeing the Saviour
with his own eye, he points Him out, and says, "Behold the Lamb of God,
that taketh away the sin of the
world!"<sup>[101](footnote/fn35.htm#P3563_1118655)</sup> He also first
preached to those in
Hades,<sup>[102](footnote/fn35.htm#P3564_1118717)</sup> becoming a
forerunner there when he was put to death by Herod, that there too he
might intimate that the Saviour would descend to ransom the souls of the
saints from the hand of death.

46\. But since the Saviour was the beginning of the resurrection of all
men, it was meet that the Lord alone should rise from the dead, by whom
too the judgment is to enter for the whole world, that they who have
wrestled worthily may be also crowned worthily by Him, by the
illustrious Arbiter, to wit, who Himself first accomplished the course,
and was received into the heavens, and was set down on the right hand of
God the Father, and is to be manifested again at the end of the world as
Judge. It is a matter of course that His forerunners must appear first,
as He says by Malachi and the
angel,<sup>[103](footnote/fn35.htm#P3566_1119668)</sup> "I will send to
you Elias the Tishbite before the day of the Lord, the great and notable
day, comes; and he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,
and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, lest I come and smite the
earth utterly."<sup>[104](footnote/fn35.htm#P3567_1120364)</sup> These,
then, shall come and proclaim the manifestation of Christ that is to be
from heaven; and they shall also perform signs and wonders, in order
that men may be put to shame and turned to repentance for their
surpassing wickedness and impiety.

47\. For John says, "And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and
they shall prophesy a thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed
in sackcloth."<sup>[105](footnote/fn35.htm#P3569_1120788)</sup> That is
the half of the week whereof Daniel spake. "These are the two olive
trees and the two candlesticks standing before the Lord of the earth.
And if any man will hurt them, fire will proceed out of their mouth, and
devour their enemies; and if any man will hurt them, he must in this
manner be killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in
the days of their prophecy; and have power over waters, to turn them to
blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues as often as *they will.
And when* they shall have finished their course and their testimony,"
what saith the prophet? "the beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless
pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill
them,"<sup>[106](footnote/fn35.htm#P3570_1121525)</sup> because they
will not give glory to Antichrist. For this is meant by the little horn
that grows up. He, being now elated in heart, begins to exalt himself,
and to glorify himself as God, persecuting the saints and blaspheming
Christ, even as Daniel says, "I considered the horn, and, behold, in the
horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and a mouth speaking great things;
and he opened his mouth to blaspheme God. And that born made war against
the saints, and prevailed against them until the beast was slain, and
perished, and his body was given to be
burned."<sup>[107](footnote/fn35.htm#P3571_1122109)</sup>

48\. But as it is incumbent on us to discuss this matter of the beast
more exactly, and in particular the question how the Holy Spirit has
also mystically indicated his name by means of a number, we shall
proceed to state more clearly what bears upon him. John then speaks
thus: "And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth; and he had
two horns, like a lamb, and he spake as a dragon. And he exercised all
the power of the first beast before him; and he made the earth and them
which dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was
healed. And he did great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from
heaven on the earth in the sight of men, and deceiveth them that dwell
on the earth by means of those miracles which he had power to do in the
sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they
should make an image to the beast which had the wound by a sword and did
live. And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast, *that
the image of the beast should both speak*, and cause that as many as
would not worship the image of the beast should be killed. And he caused
all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a
mark in their right hand or in their forehead; and that no man might buy
or sell, save he that had the mark, the name of the beast, or the number
of his name. Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the
number of the beast; for if is the number of a man, and his number is
six hundred threescore and
six."<sup>[108](footnote/fn35.htm#P3573_1123650)</sup>

49\. By the beast, then, coming up out of the earth, he means the
kingdom of Antichrist; and by the two horns he means him and the false
prophet after him.<sup>[109](footnote/fn35.htm#P3575_1123831)</sup> And
in speaking of "the horns being like a lamb," he means that he will make
himself like the Son of God, and set himself forward as king. And the
terms, "he spake like a dragon," mean that he is a deceiver, and not
truthful. And the words, "he exercised all the power of the first beast
before him, and caused the earth and them which dwell therein to worship
the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed," signify that, after the
manner of the law of Augustus, by whom the empire of Rome was
established, he too will rule and govern, sanctioning everything by it,
and taking greater glory to himself. For this is the fourth beast, whose
head was wounded and healed again, in its being broken up or even
dishonoured, and partitioned into four crowns; and he then (Antichrist)
shall with knavish skill heal it, as it were, and restore it. For this
is what is meant by the prophet when he says, "He will give life unto
the image, and the image of the beast will speak." For he will act with
vigour again, and prove strong by reason of the laws established by him;
and he will cause all those who will not worship the image of the beast
to be put to death. Here the faith and the patience of the saints will
appear, for he says: "And he will cause all, both small and great, rich
and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand or in
their forehead; that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark, the name of the beast, or the number of his name." For, being full
of guile, and exalting himself against the servants of God, with the
wish to afflict them and persecute them out of the world, because they
give not glory to him, he will order
incense-pans<sup>[110](footnote/fn35.htm#P3576_1125710)</sup> to be set
up by all everywhere, that no man among the saints may be able to buy or
sell without first sacrificing; for this is what is meant by the mark
received upon the right hand. And the word-"in their forehead"-indicates
that all are crowned, and put on a crown of fire, and not of life, but
of death. For in this wise, too, did Antiochus Epiphanes the king of
Syria, the descendant of Alexander of Macedon, devise measures against
the Jews. He, too, in the exaltation of his heart, issued a decree in
those times, that "all should set up shrines before their doors, and
sacrifice, and that they should march in procession to the honour of
Dionysus, waving chaplets of ivy; "and that those who refused obedience
should be put to death by strangulation and torture. But he also met his
due recompense at the hand of the Lord, the righteous Judge and
all-searching God; for he died eaten up of worms. And if one desires to
inquire into that more accurately, he will find it recorded in the books
of the Maccabees.<sup>[111](footnote/fn35.htm#P3577_1126902)</sup>

50\. But now we shall speak of what is before us. For such measures will
he, too, devise, seeking to afflict the saints in every way. For the
prophet and apostle says: "Here is wisdom, Let him that hath
understanding count the number of the beast; for it is the number of a
man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six." With respect to
his name, it is not in our power to explain it exactly, as the blessed
John understood it and was instructed about it, but only to give a
conjectural account of
it;<sup>[112](footnote/fn35.htm#P3579_1127478)</sup> for when he
appears, the blessed one will show us what we seek to know. Yet as far
as our doubtful apprehension of the matter goes, we may speak. Many
names indeed we find,<sup>[113](footnote/fn35.htm#P3580_1127680)</sup>
the letters of which are the equivalent of this number: such as, for
instance, the word
Titan,<sup>[114](footnote/fn35.htm#P3581_1127791)</sup> an ancient and
notable name; or
Evanthas,<sup>[115](footnote/fn35.htm#P3582_1128092)</sup> for it too
makes up the same number; and many others which might be found. But, as
we have already said,<sup>[116](footnote/fn35.htm#P3583_1128277)</sup>
the wound of the first beast was healed, and he (the second beast) was
to make the image
speak,<sup>[117](footnote/fn35.htm#P3584_1128448)</sup> that is to say,
he should be powerful; and it is manifest to all that those who at
present still hold the power are Latins. If, then, we take the name as
the name of a single man, it becomes *Latinus*. Wherefore we ought
neither to give it out as if this were certainly his name, nor again
ignore the fact that he may not be otherwise designated. But having the
mystery of God in our heart, we ought in fear to keep faithfully what
has been told us by the blessed prophets, in order that when those
things come to pass, we may be prepared for them, and not deceived. For
when the times advance, he too, of whom these thing are said, will be
manifested.<sup>[118](footnote/fn35.htm#P3585_1129132)</sup>

51\. But not to confine ourselves to these words and arguments alone,
for the purpose of convincing those who love to study the oracles of
God, we shall demonstrate the matter by many other proofs. For Daniel
says, "And these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom, and Moab, and
the chief of the children of
Ammon."<sup>[119](footnote/fn35.htm#P3587_1129668)</sup> Ammon and
Moab<sup>[120](footnote/fn35.htm#P3588_1129703)</sup> are the children
born to Lot by his daughters, and their race survives even now. And
Isaiah says: "And they shall fly in the boats of strangers, plundering
the sea together, and (they shall spoil) them of the east: and they
shall lay hands upon Moab first; and the children of Ammon shall first
obey them."<sup>[121](footnote/fn35.htm#P3589_1130035)</sup>

52\. In those times, then, he shall arise and meet them. And when he has
overmastered three horns out of the ten in the array of war, and has
rooted these out, viz., Egypt, and Libya, and Ethiopia, and has got
their spoils and trappings, and has brought the remaining horns which
suffer into subjection, he will begin to be lifted up in heart, and to
exalt himself against God as master of the whole world. And his first
expedition will be against Tyre and Berytus, and the circumjacent
territory. For by storming these cities first he will strike terror into
the others, as Isaiah says, "Be thou ashamed, O Sidon; the sea hath
spoken, even the strength of the sea hath spoken, saying, I travailed
not, nor brought forth children; neither did I nurse up young men, nor
bring up virgins. But when the report comes to Egypt, pain shall seize
them for Tyre."<sup>[122](footnote/fn35.htm#P3591_1130911)</sup>

53\. These things, then, shall be in the future, beloved; and when the
three horns are cut off, he will begin to show himself as God, as
Ezekiel has said aforetime: "Because thy heart has been lifted up, and
thou hast said, I am
God."<sup>[123](footnote/fn35.htm#P3593_1131170)</sup> And to the like
effect Isaiah says: "For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend
into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of heaven: I will be
like the Most High. Yet now thou shall be brought down to hell (Hades),
to the foundations of the
earth."<sup>[124](footnote/fn35.htm#P3594_1131460)</sup> In like manner
also Ezekiel: "Wilt thou yet say to those who slay thee, I am God? But
thou (shall be) a man, and no
God."<sup>[125](footnote/fn35.htm#P3595_1131606)</sup>

54\. As his tribe, then, and his manifestation, and his destruction,
have been set forth in these words, and as his name has also been
indicated mystically, let us look also at his action. For he will call
together all the people to himself, out of every country of the
dispersion, making them his own, as though they were his own children,
and promising to restore their country, and establish again their
kingdom and nation, in order that he may be worshipped by them as God,
as the prophet says: "He will collect his whole kingdom, from the rising
of the sun even to its setting: they whom he summons and they whom he
does not summon shall march with
him."<sup>[126](footnote/fn35.htm#P3597_1132289)</sup> And Jeremiah
speaks of him thus in a parable: "The partridge cried, (and) gathered
what he did not hatch, making himself riches without judgment: in the
midst of his days they shall leave him, and at his end he shall be a
fool."<sup>[127](footnote/fn35.htm#P3598_1132582)</sup>

55\. It will not be detrimental, therefore, to the course of our present
argument, if we explain the art of that creature, and show that the
prophet has not spoken<sup>[128](footnote/fn36)</sup> without a purpose
in using the parable (or similitude) of the creature. For as the
partridge is a vainglorious creature, when it sees near at hand the nest
of another partridge with young in it, and with the parent-bird away on
the wing in quest of food, it imitates the cry of the other bird, and
calls the young to itself; and they, taking it to be their own parent,
run to it. And it delights itself proudly in the alien pullets as in its
own. But when the real parent-bird returns, and calls them with its own
familiar cry, the young recognise it, and forsake the deceiver, and
betake themselves to the real parent. This thing, then, the prophet has
adopted as a simile, applying it in a similar manner to Antichrist. For
he will allure mankind to himself, wishing to gain possession of those
who are not his own, and promising deliverance to all, while he is
unable to save himself.

56\. He then, having gathered to himself the unbelieving everywhere
throughout the world, comes at their call to persecute the saints, their
enemies and antagonists, as the apostle and evangelist says: "There was
in a city a judge, which feared not God, neither regarded man: and there
was a widow in that city, who came unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine
adversary. And he would not for a while: but afterward he said within
himself, Though I fear not God, nor regard man; yet because this widow
troubleth me, I will avenge
her."<sup>[129](footnote/fn36.htm#P3602_1134227)</sup>

57\. By the unrighteous judge, who fears not God, neither regards man,
he means without doubt Antichrist, as he is a son of the devil and a
vessel of Satan. For when he has the power, he will begin to exalt
himself against God, neither in truth fearing God, nor regarding the Son
of God, who is the Judge of all. And in saying that there was a widow in
the city, he refers to Jerusalem itself, which is a widow indeed,
forsaken of her perfect, heavenly spouse, God. She calls Him her
adversary, and not her Saviour; for she does not understand that which
was said by the prophet Jeremiah: "Because they obeyed not the truth, a
spirit of error shall speak then to this people and to
Jerusalem."<sup>[130](footnote/fn36.htm#P3604_1134944)</sup> And Isaiah
also to the like effect: "Forasmuch as the people refuseth to drink the
water of Siloam that goeth softly, but chooseth to have Rasin and
Romeliah's son as king over you: therefore, lo, the Lord bringeth up
upon you the water of the river, strong and full, even the king of
Assyria."<sup>[131](footnote/fn36.htm#P3605_1135259)</sup> By the king
he means metaphorically Antichrist, as also another prophet saith: "And
this man shall be the peace from me, when the Assyrian shall come up
into your land, and when he shall tread in your
mountains."<sup>[132](footnote/fn36.htm#P3606_1135496)</sup>

58\. And in like manner Moses, knowing beforehand that the people would
reject and disown the true Saviour of the world, and take part with
error, and choose an earthly king, and set the heavenly King at nought,
says: "Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
treasures? In the day of vengeance I will recompense (them), and in the
time when their foot shall
slide."<sup>[133](footnote/fn36.htm#P3608_1136320)</sup> They did slide,
therefore, in all things, as they were found to be in harmony with the
truth in nothing: neither as concerns the law, because they became
transgressors; nor as concerns the prophets, because they cut off even
the prophets themselves; nor as concerns the voice of the Gospels,
because they crucified the Saviour Himself; nor in believing the
apostles, because they persecuted them. At all times they showed
themselves enemies and betrayers of the truth, and were found to be
haters of God, and not lovers of Him; and such they shall be then when
they find opportunity: for, rousing themselves against the servants of
God, they will seek to obtain vengeance by the hand of a mortal man. And
he, being puffed up with pride by their subserviency, will begin to
despatch missives against the saints, commanding to cut them all off
everywhere, on the ground of their refusal to reverence and worship him
as God, according to the word of Esaias: "Woe to the wings of the
vessels of the land,<sup>[134](footnote/fn36.htm#P3609_1137349)</sup>
beyond the rivers of Ethiopia: (woe to him) who sendeth sureties by the
sea, and letters of papyrus (upon the water; for nimble messengers will
go) to a nation<sup>[135](footnote/fn36.htm#P3610_1137543)</sup> anxious
and expectant, and a people strange and bitter against them; a nation
hopeless and trodden
down."<sup>[136](footnote/fn36.htm#P3611_1137666)</sup>

59\. But we who hope for the Son of God are persecuted and trodden down
by those unbelievers. For the *wings of the vessels* are the churches;
and the sea is the world, in which the Church is set, like a ship tossed
in the deep, but not destroyed; for she has with her the skilled Pilot,
Christ. And she bears in her midst also the trophy (which is erected)
over death; for she carries with her the cross of the
Lord.<sup>[137](footnote/fn36.htm#P3613_1138106)</sup> For her prow is
the east, and her stern is the west, and her
hold<sup>[138](footnote/fn36.htm#P3614_1138282)</sup> is the south, and
her tillers are the two Testaments; and the ropes that stretch around
her are the love of Christ, which binds the Church; and the
net<sup>[139](footnote/fn36.htm#P3615_1138489)</sup> which she bears
with her is the layer of the regeneration which renews the believing,
whence too are these glories. As the wind the Spirit from heaven is
present, by whom those who believe are sealed: she has also anchors of
iron accompanying her, viz., the holy commandments of Christ Himself,
which are strong as iron. She has also mariners on the right and on the
left, assessors like the holy angels, by whom the Church is always
governed and defended. The ladder in her leading up to the sailyard is
an emblem of the passion of Christ, which brings the faithful to the
ascent of heaven. And the
top-sails<sup>[140](footnote/fn36.htm#P3616_1139152)</sup>
aloft<sup>[141](footnote/fn36.htm#P3617_1139232)</sup> upon the yard are
the company of prophets, martyrs, and apostles, who have entered into
their rest in the kingdom of Christ.

60\. Now, concerning the tribulation of the persecution which is to fall
upon the Church from the adversary, John also speaks thus: "And I saw a
great and wondrous sign in heaven; a woman clothed with the sun, and the
moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars. And she,
being with child, cries, travailing in birth, and pained to be
delivered. And the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered, for to devour her child as soon as it was born. And she
brought forth a man-child, who is to rule all the nations: and the child
was caught up unto God and to His throne. And the woman fled into the
wilderness, where she hath the place prepared of God, that they should
feed her there a thousand two hundred and threescore days. And then when
the dragon saw *it*, he persecuted the woman which brought forth the
man-*child*. And to the woman were given two wings of the great eagle,
that she might fly into the wilderness, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent. And the
serpent cast (out of his mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he
might cause her to be carried away of the flood. And the earth helped
the woman, and opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the
dragon cast) out of his mouth. And the dragon was wroth with the woman,
and went to make war with the saints of her seed, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus."<sup>[142](footnote/fn36.htm#P3619_1140912)</sup>

61\. By the woman then clothed with the sun," he meant most manifestly
the Church, endued with the Father's
word,<sup>[143](footnote/fn36.htm#P3621_1141052)</sup> whose brightness
is above the sun. And by the "moon under her feet" he referred to her
being adorned, like the moon, with heavenly glory. And the words, "upon
her head a crown of twelve stars," refer to the twelve apostles by whom
the Church was founded. And those, "she, being with child, cries,
travailing in birth, and pained to be delivered," mean that the Church
will not cease to bear from her
heart<sup>[144](footnote/fn36.htm#P3622_1141489)</sup> the Word that is
persecuted by the unbelieving in the world. "And she brought forth," he
says, "a man-child, who is to rule all the nations; "by which is meant
that the Church, always bringing forth Christ, the perfect man-child of
God, who is declared to be God and man, becomes the instructor of all
the nations. And the words, "her child was caught up unto God and to His
throne," signify that he who is always born of her is a heavenly king,
and not an earthly; even as David also declared of old when he said,
"The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make
Thine enemies Thy
footstool."<sup>[145](footnote/fn36.htm#P3623_1142130)</sup> "And the
dragon," he says, "saw and persecuted the woman which brought forth the
man-*child*. And to the woman were given two wings of the great eagle,
that she might fly into the wilderness, where she is nourished for a
time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the
serpent."<sup>[146](footnote/fn36.htm#P3624_1142432)</sup> That refers
to the one thousand two hundred and threescore days (the half of the
week) during which the tyrant is to reign and persecute the
Church,<sup>[147](footnote/fn36.htm#P3625_1142600)</sup> which flees
from city to city, and seeks conceal-meat in the wilderness among the
mountains, possessed of no other defence than the two wings of the great
eagle, that is to say, the faith of Jesus Christ, who, in stretching
forth His holy hands on the holy tree, unfolded two wings, the right and
the left, and called to Him all who believed upon Him, and covered them
as a hen her chickens. For by the mouth of Malachi also He speaks thus:
"And unto you that fear my name shall the Sun of righteousness arise
with healing in His
wings."<sup>[148](footnote/fn36.htm#P3626_1143222)</sup>

62\. The Lord also says, "When ye shall see the abomination of
desolation stand in the holy place (whoso readeth, let him understand),
then let them which be in Judea flee into the mountains, and let him
which is on the housetop not come down to take his clothes; neither let
him which is in the field return back to take anything out of his house.
And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in
those days! for then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since
the beginning of the world. And except those days should be shortened,
there should no flesh be
saved."<sup>[149](footnote/fn36.htm#P3628_1143835)</sup> And Daniel
says, "And they shall place the abomination of desolation a thousand two
hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the
thousand two hundred and ninety-five
days."<sup>[150](footnote/fn36.htm#P3629_1144095)</sup>

63\. And the blessed Apostle Paul, writing to the Thessalonians, says:
"Now we beseech you, brethren, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and our gathering together at
it,<sup>[151](footnote/fn36.htm#P3631_1144373)</sup> that ye be not soon
shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by
letters as from us, as that the day of the Lord is at hand. Let no man
deceive you by any means; for (that day shall not come) except there
come the falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of
perdition, who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: so that he sitteth in the temple of God,
showing himself that he is God. Remember ye not, that when I was yet
with you, I told you these things? And now ye know what withholdeth,
that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth
already work; only he who now letteth (will let), until he be taken out
of the way. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus
shall consume with the Spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of His coming: (even him) whose coming is after the working
of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they
received not the love of the truth. And for this cause God shall send
them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all
might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness."<sup>[152](footnote/fn36.htm#P3632_1145781)</sup> And
Esaias says, "Let the wicked be cut off, that he behold not the glory of
the Lord."<sup>[153](footnote/fn36.htm#P3633_1145895)</sup>

64\. These things, then, being to come to pass, beloved, and the one
week being divided into two parts, and the abomination of desolation
being manifested then, and the two prophets and forerunners of the Lord
having finished their course, and the whole world finally approaching
the consummation, what remains but the coming of our Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ from heaven, for whom we have looked in hope? who shall
bring the conflagration and just judgment upon all who have refused to
believe on Him. For the Lord says, "And when these things begin to come
to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads; for your redemption
draweth nigh."<sup>[154](footnote/fn36.htm#P3635_1146560)</sup> "And
there shall not a hair of your head
perish."<sup>[155](footnote/fn36.htm#P3636_1146631)</sup> "For as the
lightning cometh out of the east, and shineth even unto the west, so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be. For wheresoever the carcase
is, there will the eagles be gathered
together."<sup>[156](footnote/fn36.htm#P3637_1146854)</sup> Now the
fall<sup>[157](footnote/fn36.htm#P3638_1146894)</sup> took place in
paradise; for Adam fell there. And He says again, "Then shall the Son of
man send His angels, and they shall gather together His elect from the
four winds of heaven."<sup>[158](footnote/fn36.htm#P3639_1147203)</sup>
And David also, in announcing prophetically the judgment and coming of
the Lord, says, "His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and His
circuit unto the end of the heaven: and there is no one hid from the
heat thereof."<sup>[159](footnote/fn36.htm#P3640_1147453)</sup> By the
heat he means the conflagration. And Esaias speaks thus: "Come, my
people, enter thou into thy chamber, (and) shut thy door: hide thyself
as it were for a little moment, until the indignation of the Lord be
overpast."<sup>[160](footnote/fn36.htm#P3641_1147697)</sup> And Paul in
like manner: "For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth of God in
unrighteousness."<sup>[161](footnote/fn36.htm#P3642_1147889)</sup>

65\. Moreover, concerning the resurrection and the kingdom of the
saints, Daniel says, "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall arise, some to everlasting life, (and some to shame and
everlasting contempt)."<sup>[162](footnote/fn36.htm#P3644_1148134)</sup>
Esaias says, "The dead men shall arise, and they that are in their tombs
shall awake; for the dew from thee is healing to
them."<sup>[163](footnote/fn36.htm#P3645_1148283)</sup> The Lord says,
"Many in that day shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live."<sup>[164](footnote/fn36.htm#P3646_1148410)</sup> And
the prophet says, "Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee
light."<sup>[165](footnote/fn36.htm#P3647_1148539)</sup> And John says,
"Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on
such the second death hath no
power."<sup>[166](footnote/fn36.htm#P3648_1148998)</sup> For the second
death is the lake of fire that burneth. And again the Lord says, "Then
shall the righteous shine forth as the sun shineth in his
glory."<sup>[167](footnote/fn36.htm#P3649_1149169)</sup> And to the
saints He will say, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the
world."<sup>[168](footnote/fn36.htm#P3650_1149327)</sup> But what saith
He to the wicked? "Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels, which my Father hath prepared."
And John says, "Without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever maketh and loveth a lie; for
your part is in the hell of
fire."<sup>[169](footnote/fn36.htm#P3651_1149680)</sup> And in like
manner also Esaias: "And they shall go forth and look upon the carcases
of the men that have transgressed against me. And their worm shall not
die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be for a
spectacle to all
flesh."<sup>[170](footnote/fn36.htm#P3652_1149948)</sup>

66\. Concerning the resurrection of the righteous, Paul also speaks thus
in writing to the Thessalonians: "We would not have you to be ignorant
concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others
which have no hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again,
even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him. For this
we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive (and)
remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep. For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout,
with the voice and trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise
first. Then we which are alive (and) remain shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we
ever be with the Lord."<sup>[171](footnote/fn36.htm#P3654_1150765)</sup>

67\. These things, then, I have set shortly before thee, O Theophilus,
drawing them *from Scripture
itself*,<sup>[172](footnote/fn36.htm#P3656_1150895)</sup> in order that,
maintaining in faith what is written, and anticipating the things that
are to be, thou mayest keep thyself void of offence both toward God and
toward men, "looking for that blessed hope and appearing of our God and
Saviour,"<sup>[173](footnote/fn36.htm#P3657_1151322)</sup> when, having
raised the saints among us, He will rejoice with them, glorifying the
Father. To Him be the glory unto the endless ages of the ages. Amen.

1\. Now, then, incline thine ear to me, and hear my words, and give
heed, thou Jew. Many a time dost thou boast thyself, in that thou didst
condemn Jesus of Nazareth to death, and didst give Him vinegar and gall
to drink; and thou dost vaunt thyself because of this. Come therefore,
and let us consider together whether perchance thou dost not boast
unrighteously, O Israel, (and) whether that small portion of vinegar and
gall has not brought down this fearful threatening upon thee, (and)
whether this is not the cause of thy present condition involved in these
myriad troubles.

2\. Let him then be introduced before us who speaketh by the Holy
Spirit, and saith truth-David the son of Jesse. He, singing a certain
strain with prophetic reference to the true Christ, celebrated our God
by the Holy Spirit, (and) declared clearly all that befell Him by the
hands of the Jews in His passion; in which (strain) the Christ who
humbled Himself and took unto Himself the form of the servant Adam,
calls upon God the Father in heaven as it were in our person, and speaks
thus in the sixty-ninth Psalm: "Save me, O God; for the waters are come
in unto my soul. I am sunk in the mire of the abyss," that is to say, in
the corruption of Hades, on account of the transgression in paradise;
and "there is no substance," that is, help. "My eyes failed while I
hoped (or, from my hoping) upon my God; when will He come and save me?
"<sup>[174](footnote/fn36.htm#P3662_1152949)</sup>

3\. Then, in what next follows, Christ speaks, as it were, in His own
person: "Then I restored that," says He, "which I took not away; "that
is, on account of the sin of Adam I endured the death which was not mine
by sinning. "For, O God, Thou knowest my foolishness; and my sins are
not hid from Thee," that is, "for I did not sin," as He means it; and
for this reason (it is added), "Let not them be ashamed who want to see"
my resurrection on the third day, to wit, the apostles. "Because for Thy
sake," that is, for the sake of obeying Thee, "I have borne reproach,"
namely the cross, when "they covered my face with shame," that is to
say, the Jews; when "I became a stranger unto my brethren after the
flesh, and an alien unto my mother's children," meaning (by the mother)
the synagogue. "For the zeal of Thine house, Father, hath eaten me up;
and the reproaches of them that reproached Thee are fallen on me," and
of them that sacrificed to idols. Wherefore "they that sit in the gate
spoke against me," for they crucified me without the gate. "And they
that drink sang against me," that is, (they who drink wine) at the feast
of the passover. "But as for me, in my prayer unto Thee, O Lord, I said,
Father, forgive them," namely the Gentiles, because it is the time for
favour with Gentiles. "Let not then the hurricane (of temptations)
overwhelm me, neither let the deep (that is, Hades) swallow me up: for
Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell (Hades); neither let the pit shut
her mouth upon me,"<sup>[175](footnote/fn36.htm#P3664_1154478)</sup>
that is, the sepulchre. "By reason of mine enemies, deliver me," that
the Jews may not boast, saying, Let us consume him.

4\. Now Christ prayed all this
economically<sup>[176](footnote/fn36.htm#P3666_1154662)</sup> as man;
being, however, true God. But, as I have already said, it was the "form
of the servant"<sup>[177](footnote/fn36.htm#P3667_1154922)</sup> that
spake and suffered these things. Wherefore He added, "My soul looked for
reproach and trouble," that is, I suffered of my own will, (and) not by
any compulsion. Yet "I waited for one to mourn with me, and there was
none," for all my disciples forsook me and fled; and for a "comforter,
and I found none."

5\. Listen with understanding, O Jew, to what the Christ says: "They
gave me gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to
drink." And these things He did indeed endure from you. Hear the Holy
Ghost tell you also what return He made to you for that little portion
of vinegar. For the prophet says, as in the person of God, "Let their
table become a snare and retribution." Of what retribution does He
speak? Manifestly, of the misery which has now got hold of thee.

6\. And then hear what follows: "Let their eyes be darkened, that they
see not." And surely ye have been darkened in the eyes of your soul with
a darkness utter and everlasting. For now that the true light has
arisen, ye wander as in the night, and stumble on places with no roads,
and fall headlong, as having forsaken the way that saith, "I am the
way."<sup>[178](footnote/fn36.htm#P3670_1156083)</sup> Furthermore, hear
this yet more serious word: "And their back do thou bend always; "that
means, in order that they may be slaves to the nations, not four hundred
and thirty years as in Egypt, nor seventy as in Babylon, but bend them
to servitude, he says, "always." In fine, then, how dost thou indulge
vain hopes, expecting to be delivered from the misery which holdeth
thee? For that is somewhat strange. And not unjustly has he imprecated
this blindness of eyes upon thee. But because thou didst cover the eyes
of Christ, (and<sup>[179](footnote/fn36.htm#P3671_1156633)</sup> ) thus
thou didst beat Him, for this reason, too, bend thou thy back for
servitude always. And whereas thou didst pour out His blood in
indignation, hear what thy recompense shall be: "Pour out Thine
indignation upon them, and let Thy wrathful anger take hold of them;
"and, "Let their habitation be desolate," to wit, their celebrated
temple.

7\. But why, O prophet, tell us, and for what reason, was the temple
made desolate? Was it on account of that ancient fabrication of the
calf? Was it on account of the idolatry of the people? Was it for the
blood of the prophets? Was it for the adultery and fornication of
Israel? By no means, he says; for in all these transgressions they
always found pardon open to them, and benignity; but it was because they
killed the Son of their Benefactor, for He is coeternal with the Father.
Whence He saith, "Father, let their temple be made
desolate;<sup>[180](footnote/fn36.htm#P3673_1157583)</sup> for they have
persecuted Him whom Thou didst of Thine own will smite for the salvation
of the world; "that is, they have persecuted me with a violent and
unjust death, "and they have added to the pain of my wounds." In former
time, as the Lover of man, I had pain on account of the straying of the
Gentiles; but to this pain they have added another, by going also
themselves astray. Wherefore "add iniquity to their iniquity, and
tribulation to tribulation, and let them not enter into Thy
righteousness," that is, into Thy kingdom; but "let them be blotted out
of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous," that
is, with their holy fathers and patriarchs.

8\. What sayest thou to this, O Jew? It is neither Matthew nor Paul that
saith these things, but David, thine anointed, who awards and declares
these terrible sentences on account of Christ. And like the great Job,
addressing you who speak against the righteous and true, he says, "Thou
didst barter the Christ like a slave, thou didst go to Him like a robber
in the garden."

9\. I produce now the prophecy of Solomon, which speaketh of Christ, and
announces clearly and perspicuously things concerning the Jews; and
those which not only are befalling them at the present time, but those,
too, which shall befall them in the future age, on account of the
contumacy and audacity which they exhibited toward the Prince of Life;
for the prophet says, "The ungodly said, reasoning with themselves, but
not aright," that is, about Christ, "Let us lie in wait for the
righteous, because he is not for our turn, and he is clean contrary to
our doings and words, and upbraideth us with our offending the law, and
professeth to have knowledge of God; and he calleth himself the Child of
God."<sup>[181](footnote/fn36.htm#P3676_1159369)</sup> And then he says,
"He is grievous to us even to behold; for his life is not like other
men's, and his ways are of another fashion. We are esteemed of him as
counterfeits, and he abstaineth from our ways as from filthiness, and
pronounceth the end of the just to be
blessed."<sup>[182](footnote/fn36.htm#P3677_1159673)</sup> And again,
listen to this, O Jew! None of the righteous or prophets called himself
the Son of God. And therefore, as in the person of the Jews, solomon
speaks again of this righteous one, who is Christ, thus: "He was made to
reprove our thoughts, and he maketh his boast that God is his Father.
Let us see, then, if his words be true, and let us prove what shall
happen in the end of him; for if the just man be the Son of God, He will
help him, and deliver him from the hand of his enemies. Let us condemn
him with a shameful death, for by his own saying he shall be
respected."<sup>[183](footnote/fn36.htm#P3678_1160278)</sup>

10\. And again David, in the Psalms, says with respect to the future
age, "Then shall He" (namely Christ) "speak unto them in His wrath, and
vex them in His sore
displeasure."<sup>[184](footnote/fn36.htm#P3680_1160741)</sup> And again
Solomon says concerning Christ and the Jews, that "when the righteous
shall stand in great boldness before the face of such as have afflicted
Him, and made no account of His words, when they see it they shall be
troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the strangeness of
His salvation; and they, repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit,
shall say within themselves, This is He whom we had sometimes in
derision and a proverb of reproach; we fools accounted His life madness,
and His end to he without honour. How is He numbered among the children
of God, and His lot is among the saints? Therefore have we erred from
the way of truth, and the light of righteousness bath not shined unto
us, and the sun of righteousness rose not on us. We wearied ourselves in
the way of wickedness and destruction; we have gone through deserts
where there lay no way: but as for the way of the Lord, we have not
known it. What hath our pride profited us? all those things are passed
away like a shadow."<sup>[185](footnote/fn36.htm#P3681_1161774)</sup>

The Conclusion IS
Wanting.<sup>[186](footnote/fn36.htm#P3683_1161822)</sup>

1\. And this is the passage regarding
demons.<sup>[188](footnote/fn36.htm#P3688_1162779)</sup> But now we must
speak of Hades, in which the souls both of the righteous and the
unrighteous are detained. Hades is a place in the created system,
rude,<sup>[189](footnote/fn36.htm#P3689_1162975)</sup> a locality
beneath the earth, in which the light of the world does not shine; and
as the sun does not shine in this locality, there must necessarily be
perpetual darkness there. This locality has been destined to be as it
were a guard-house for souls, at which the angels are stationed as
guards, distributing according to each one's deeds the
temporary<sup>[190](footnote/fn36.htm#P3690_1163352)</sup> punishments
for (different) characters. And in this locality there is a certain
place<sup>[191](footnote/fn36.htm#P3691_1163485)</sup> set apart by
itself, a lake of unquenchable fire, into which we suppose no one has
ever yet been cast; for it is prepared against the day determined by
God, in which one sentence of righteous judgment shall be justly applied
to all. And the unrighteous, and those who believed not God, who have
honoured as God the vain works of the hands of men, idols fashioned (by
themselves), shall be sentenced to this endless punishment. But the
righteous shall obtain the incorruptible and un-fading kingdom, who
indeed are at present detained in Hades, but not in the same place with
the unrighteous. For to this locality there is one descent, at the gate
whereof we believe an archangel is stationed with a host. And when those
who are conducted by the angels appointed unto the souls have passed
through this gate, they do not proceed on one and the same way; but the
righteous, being conducted in the light toward the right, and being
hymned by the angels stationed at the place, are brought to a locality
full of light. And there the righteous from the
beginning<sup>[192](footnote/fn36.htm#P3692_1164607)</sup> dwell, not
ruled by necessity, but enjoying always the contemplation of the
blessings which are in their view, and delighting themselves with the
expectation of others ever new, and deeming those ever better than
these. And that place brings no toils to them. There, there is neither
fierce heat, nor cold, nor
thorn;<sup>[193](footnote/fn36.htm#P3693_1165036)</sup> but the face of
the fathers and the righteous is seen to be always smiling, as they wait
for the rest and eternal revival in heaven which succeed this location.
And we call it by the name *Abraham's bosom*. But the unrighteous are
dragged toward the left by angels who are ministers of punishment, and
they go of their own accord no longer, but are dragged by force as
prisoners. And the angels appointed over them send them
along,<sup>[194](footnote/fn36.htm#P3694_1165537)</sup> reproaching them
and threatening them with an eye of terror, forcing them down into the
lower parts. And when they are brought there, those appointed to that
service drag them on to the confines or
hell.<sup>[195](footnote/fn36.htm#P3695_1165819)</sup> And those who are
so near hear incessantly the agitation, and feel the hot smoke. And when
that vision is so near, as they see the terrible and excessively
glowing<sup>[196](footnote/fn36.htm#P3696_1165998)</sup> spectacle of
the fire, they shudder in horror at the expectation of the future
judgment, (as if they were) already feeling the power of their
punishment. And again, where they see the place of the fathers and the
righteous,<sup>[197](footnote/fn36.htm#P3697_1166296)</sup> they are
also punished there. For a deep and vast abyss is set there in the
midst, so that neither can any of the righteous in sympathy think to
pass it, nor any of the unrighteous dare to cross it.

2\. Thus far, then, on the subject of Hades, in which the souls of all
are detained until the time which God has determined; and
then<sup>[198](footnote/fn36.htm#P3699_1166773)</sup> He will accomplish
a resurrection of all, not by transferring souls into other
bodies,<sup>[199](footnote/fn37)</sup> but by raising the bodies
themselves. And if, O Greeks, ye refuse credit to this because ye see
these (bodies) in their dissolution, learn not to be incredulous. For if
ye believe that the soul is originated and is made immortal by God,
according to the opinion of
Plato,<sup>[200](footnote/fn37.htm#P3701_1167501)</sup> in time, ye
ought not to refuse to believe that God is able also to raise the body,
which is composed of the same elements, and make it
immortal.<sup>[201](footnote/fn37.htm#P3702_1167670)</sup> To be able in
one thing, and to be unable in another, is a word which cannot be said
of God. We therefore believe that the body also is raised. For if it
become corrupt, it is not at least destroyed. For the earth receiving
its remains preserves them, and they, becoming as it were seed, and
being wrapped up with the richer part of earth, spring up and bloom. And
that which is sown is sown indeed bare grain; but at the command of God
the Artificer it buds, and is raised arrayed and glorious, but not until
it has first died, and been dissolved, and mingled with earth. Not,
therefore, without good reason do we believe in the resurrection of the
body. Moreover, if it is dissolved in its season on account of the
primeval transgression, and is committed to the earth as to a furnace,
to be moulded again anew, it is not raised the same thing as it is now,
but pure and no longer corruptible. And to every body its own proper
soul will be given again; and the soul, being endued again with it,
shall not be grieved, but shall rejoice together with it, abiding itself
pure with it also pure. And as it now sojourns with it in the world
righteously, and finds it in nothing now a traitor, it will receive it
again (the body) with great joy. But the unrighteous will receive their
bodies unchanged, and unransomed from suffering and disease, and
unglorified, and still with all the ills in which they died. And
whatever manner of persons they (were when they) lived without faith, as
such they shall be faithfully
judged.<sup>[202](footnote/fn37.htm#P3703_1169259)</sup>

3.<sup>[203](footnote/fn37.htm#P3705_1169366)</sup> For all, the
righteous and the unrighteous alike, shall be brought before God the
Word. For the Father hath committed all judgment to Him; and in
fulfilment of the Father's counsel, He cometh as Judge whom we call
Christ. For it is not Minos and Rhadamanthys that are to judge (the
world), as ye fancy, O Greeks, but He whom God the Father hath
glorified, of whom we have spoken elsewhere more in particular, for the
profit of those who seek the truth. He, in administering the righteous
judgment of the Father to all, assigns to each what is righteous
according to his works. And being present at His judicial decision, all,
both men and angels and demons, shall utter one voice, saying,
"Righteous is Thy
judgment."<sup>[204](footnote/fn37.htm#P3706_1170148)</sup> Of which
voice the justification will be seen in the awarding to each that which
is just; since to those who have done well shall be assigned righteously
eternal bliss, and to the lovers of iniquity shall be given eternal
punishment. And the fire which is un-quenchable and without end awaits
these latter, and a certain fiery worm which dieth not, and which does
not waste the body, but continues bursting forth from the body with
unending pain. No sleep will give them rest; no night will soothe them;
no death will deliver them from punishment; no voice of interceding
friends will profit
them.<sup>[205](footnote/fn37.htm#P3707_1170769)</sup> For neither are
the righteous seen by them any longer, nor are they worthy of
remembrance. But the righteous will remember only the righteous deeds by
which they reached the heavenly kingdom, in which there is neither
sleep, nor pain, nor corruption, nor
care,<sup>[206](footnote/fn37.htm#P3708_1171344)</sup> nor night, nor
day measured by time; nor sun traversing in necessary course the circle
of heaven, which marks the limits of seasons, or the points measured out
for the life of man so easily read; nor moon waning or waxing, or
inducing the changes of seasons, or moistening the earth; no burning
sun, no changeful Bear, no Orion coming forth, no numerous wandering of
stars, no painfully-trodden earth, no abode of paradise hard to find; no
furious roaring of the sea, forbidding one to touch or traverse it; but
this too will be readily passable for the righteous, although it lacks
no water. There will be no heaven inaccessible to men, nor will the way
of its ascent be one impossible to find; and there will be no earth
unwrought, or toilsome for men, but one producing fruit spontaneously in
beauty and order; nor will there be generation of wild beasts again, nor
the bursting<sup>[207](footnote/fn37.htm#P3709_1172281)</sup> substance
of other creatures. Neither with man will there be generation again, but
the number of the righteous remains indefectible with the righteous
angels and spirits. Ye who believe these words, O men, will be partakers
with the righteous, and will have part in these future blessings, which
"eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of
man the things which God hath prepared for them that love
Him."<sup>[208](footnote/fn37.htm#P3710_1172735)</sup> To Him be the
glory and the power, for ever and ever. Amen.

1\. Some others are secretly introducing another doctrine, who have
become disciples of one Noetus, who was a native of
Smyrna,<sup>[210](footnote/fn37.htm#P3715_1173036)</sup> (and) lived not
very long ago.<sup>[211](footnote/fn37.htm#P3716_1173319)</sup> This
person was greatly puffed up and inflated with pride, being inspired by
the conceit of a strange spirit. He alleged that Christ was the Father
Himself, and that the Father Himself was born, and suffered, and died.
Ye see what pride of heart and what a strange inflated spirit had
insinuated themselves into him. Froth his other actions, then, the proof
is already given us that he spoke not with a pure spirit; for he who
blasphemes against the Holy Ghost is cast out from the holy inheritance.
He alleged that he was himself Moses, and that Aaron was his
brother.<sup>[212](footnote/fn37.htm#P3717_1173922)</sup> When the
blessed presbyters heard this, they summoned him before the Church, and
examined him. But he denied at first that he held such opinions.
Afterwards, however, taking shelter among some, and having gathered
round him some others who had embraced the same error, he wished
thereafter to uphold his dogma openly as correct. And the blessed
presbyters called him again before them, and examined him. But he stood
out against them, saying, "What evil, then, am I doing in glorifying
Christ? "And the presbyters replied to him, "We too know in truth one
God; we know Christ; we know that the Son suffered even as He suffered,
and died even as He died, and rose again on the third day, and is at the
right hand of the Father, and cometh to judge the living and the dead.
And these things which we have learned we allege." Then, after examining
him, they expelled him from the Church. And he was carried to such a
pitch of pride, that he established a school.

2\. Now they seek to exhibit the foundation for their dogma by citing
the word in the law, "I am the God of your fathers: ye shall have no
other gods beside me; " and again in another passage, "I am the first,"
He saith, "and the last; and beside me there is none other." Thus they
say they prove that God is one. And then they answer in this manner: "If
therefore I acknowledge Christ to be God, He is the Father Himself, if
He is indeed God; and Christ suffered, being Himself God; and
consequently the Father suffered, for He was the Father Himself." But
the case stands not thus; for the Scriptures do not set forth the matter
in this manner. But they make use also of other testimonies, and say,
Thus it is written: "This is our God, and there shall none other be
accounted of in comparison of Him. He hath found out all the way of
knowledge, and hath given it unto Jacob His servant (son), and to Israel
His beloved. Afterward did He show Himself upon earth, and conversed
with men." You see, then, he says, that this is God, who is the only
One, and who afterwards did show Himself, and con-versed with men." And
in another place he says, "Egypt hath laboured; and the merchandise of
Ethiopia and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee,
(and they shall be slaves to thee); and they shall come after thee bound
with manacles, and they shall fall down unto thee, because God is in
thee; and they shall make supplication unto thee: and there is no God
beside thee. For Thou art God, and we knew not; God of Israel, the
Saviour." Do you see, he says, how the Scriptures proclaim one God? And
as this is clearly exhibited, and these passages are testimonies to it,
I am under necessity, he says, since one is acknowledged, to make this
One the subject of suffering. For Christ was God, and suffered on
account of us, being Himself the Father, that He might be able also to
save us. And we cannot express ourselves otherwise, he says; for the
apostle also acknowledges one God, when he says, "Whose are the fathers,
(and) of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God
blessed for ever."

3\. In this way, then, they choose to set forth these things, and they
make use only of one class of passages; just in the same one-sided
manner that Theodotus employed when he sought to prove that Christ was a
mere man. But neither has the one party nor the other understood the
matter rightly, as the Scriptures themselves confute their
senselessness, and attest the truth. See, brethren, what a rash and
audacious dogma they have introduced, when they say without shame, the
Father is Himself Christ, Himself the Son, Himself was born, Himself
suffered, Himself raised Himself. But it is not so. The Scriptures speak
what is right; but Noetus is of a different mind from them. Yet, though
Noetus does not understand the truth, the Scriptures are not at once to
be repudiated. For who will not say that there is one God? Yet he will
not on that account deny the economy (i.e., the number and disposition
of persons in the Trinity). The proper way, therefore, to deal with the
question is first of all to refute the interpretation put upon these
passages by these men, and then to explain their real meaning. For it is
right, in the first place, to expound the truth that the Father is one
God, "of whom is every family," "by whom are all things, of whom are all
things, and we in Him."

4\. Let us, as I said, see how he is confuted, and then let us set forth
the truth. Now he quotes the words, "Egypt has laboured, and the
merchandise of Ethiopia and the Sabeans," and so forth on to the words,
"For Thou art the God of Israel, the Saviour." And these words he cites
without understanding what precedes them. For whenever they wish to
attempt anything underhand, they mutilate the Scriptures. But let him
quote the passage as a whole, and he will discover the reason kept in
view in writing it. For we have the beginning of the section a little
above; and we ought, of course, to commence there in showing to whom and
about whom the passage speaks. For above, the beginning of the section
stands thus: "Ask me concerning my sons and my daughters, and concerning
the work of my hands command ye me. I have made the earth, and man upon
it: I with my hand have stablished the heaven; I have commanded all the
stars. I have raised him up, and all his ways are straight. He shall
build my city, and he shall turn back the captivity; not for price nor
reward, said the Lord of hosts. Thus said the Lord of hosts, Egypt hath
laboured, and the merchandise of Ethiopia anti the Sabeans, men of
stature, shall come over unto thee, and they shall be slaves to thee:
and they shall come after thee bound with manacles, and they shall fall
down unto thee; and they shall make supplication unto thee, because God
is in thee; and there is no God beside thee. For Thou art God, and we
knew not; the God of Israel, the Saviour," "In thee, therefore," says
he, "God is." But in whom is God except in Christ Jesus, the Father's
Word, and the mystery of the economy? And again, exhibiting the truth
regarding Him, he points to the fact of His being in the flesh when He
says, "I have raised Him up in righteousness, and all His ways are
straight." For what is this? Of whom does the Father thus testify? It is
of the Son that the Father says, "I have raised Him up in
righteousness." And that the Father did raise up His Son in
righteousness, the Apostle Paul bears witness, saying, "But if the
Spirit of Him that raised up Christ Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He
that raised up Christ Jesus from the dead shall also quicken your mortal
bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you." Behold, the word spoken by
the prophet is thus made good, "I have raised Him up in righteousness."
And in saying, "God is in thee," he referred to the mystery of the
economy, because when the Word was made incarnate and became man, the
Father was in the Son, and the Son in the Father, while the Son was
living among men. This, therefore, was signified, brethren, that in
reality the mystery of the economy by the Holy Ghost and the Virgin was
this Word, constituting yet one Son to God. And it is not simply that I
say this, but He Himself attests it who came down from heaven; for He
speaketh thus: "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but He that came down
from heaven, even the Son of man which is in heaven." What then can he
seek beside what is thus written? Will he say, forsooth, that flesh was
in heaven? Yet there is the flesh which was presented by the Father's
Word as an offering,-the flesh that came by the Spirit and the Virgin,
(and was) demonstrated to be the perfect Son of God. It is evident,
therefore, that He offered Himself to the Father. And before this there
was no flesh in heaven. Who, then, was in heaven but the Word
unincarnate, who was despatched to show that He was upon earth and was
also in heaven? For He was Word, He was Spirit, He was Power. The same
took to Himself the name common and current among men, and was called
from the beginning the Son of man on account of what He was to be,
although He was not yet man, as Daniel testifies when he says, "I saw,
and behold one like the Son of man came on the clouds of heaven."
Rightly, then, did he say that He who was in heaven was called from the
beginning by this name, the Word of God, as being that from the
beginning.

5\. But what is meant, says he, in the other passage: "This is God, and
there shall none other be accounted of in comparison of Him? " That said
he rightly. For in comparison of the Father who shall be accounted of?
But he says: "This is our God; there shall none other be accounted of in
comparison of Him. He hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath
given it unto Jacob His servant, and to Israel His beloved." He saith
well. For who is Jacob His servant, Israel His beloved, but He of whom
He crieth, saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased:
hear ye Him? " Having received, then, all knowledge from the Father, the
perfect Israel, the true Jacob, afterward did show Himself upon earth,
and conversed with men. And who, again, is meant by Israel but *a man
who sees God?* and there is no one who sees God except the Son alone,
the perfect man who alone declares the will of the Father. For John also
says, "No man hath seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, which is
in the bosom of the Father, He hath
declared<sup>[213](footnote/fn37.htm#P3722_1183483)</sup>
Him."<sup>[214](footnote/fn37.htm#P3723_1183510)</sup> And again: "He
who came down from heaven testifieth what He hath heard and
seen."<sup>[215](footnote/fn37.htm#P3724_1183789)</sup> This, then, is
He to whom the Father hath given all knowledge, who did show Himself
upon earth, and conversed with men.

6\. Let us look next at the apostle's word: "Whose are the fathers, of
whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed
for ever."<sup>[216](footnote/fn37.htm#P3726_1184081)</sup> This word
declares the mystery of the truth rightly and clearly. He who is over
all is God; for thus He speaks boldly, "All things are delivered unto me
of my Father."<sup>[217](footnote/fn37.htm#P3727_1184268)</sup> He who
is over all, God blessed, has been born; and having been made man, He is
(yet) God for ever. For to this effect John also has said, "Which is,
and which was, and which is to come, the
Almighty."<sup>[218](footnote/fn37.htm#P3728_1185242)</sup> And well has
he named Christ the Almighty. For in this he has said only what Christ
testifies of Himself. For Christ gave this testimony, and said, "All
things are delivered unto me of my Father;
"<sup>[219](footnote/fn37.htm#P3729_1185461)</sup> and Christ rules all
things, and has been
appointed<sup>[220](footnote/fn37.htm#P3730_1185536)</sup> Almighty by
the Father. And in like manner Paul also, in setting forth the truth
that all things are delivered unto Him, said, "Christ the first-fruits;
afterwards they that are Christ's at His coming. Then cometh the end,
when He shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father;
when He shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and power. For
He must reign, till He hath put all enemies under His feet. The last
enemy that shall be destroyed is death. For all things are put under
Him. But when He saith, All things are put under Him, it is manifest
that He is excepted which did put all things under Him. Then shall He
also Himself be subject to Him who put all things under Him, that God
may be all in all."<sup>[221](footnote/fn37.htm#P3731_1186292)</sup> If,
therefore, all things are put under Him with the exception of Him who
put them under Him, He is Lord of all, and the Father is Lord of Him,
that in all there might be manifested one God, to whom all things are
made subject together with Christ, to whom the Father hath made all
things subject, with the exception of Himself. And this, indeed, is said
by Christ Himself, as when in the Gospel He confessed Him to be His
Father and His God. For He speaks thus: "I go to my Father and your
Father, and to my God and your
God."<sup>[222](footnote/fn37.htm#P3732_1186875)</sup> If then, Noetus
ventures to say that He is the Father Himself, to what father will he
say Christ goes away according to the word of the Gospel? But if he will
have us abandon the Gospel and give credence to his senselessness, he
expends his labour in vain; for "we ought to obey God rather than
men."<sup>[223](footnote/fn37.htm#P3733_1187198)</sup>

7\. If, again, he allege His own word when He said, "I and the Father
are one,"<sup>[224](footnote/fn37.htm#P3735_1187551)</sup> let him
attend to the fact, and understand that He did not say, "I and the
Father *am one*, but *are
one*."<sup>[225](footnote/fn37.htm#P3736_1187676)</sup> For the word
*are*<sup>[226](footnote/fn37.htm#P3737_1187717)</sup> is not said of
one person, but it refers to *two persons*, and one
power.<sup>[227](footnote/fn37.htm#P3738_1187810)</sup> He has Himself
made this clear, when He spake to His Father concerning the disciples,
"The glory which Thou gavest me I have given them; that they may be one,
even as we are one: I in them, and Thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one; that the world may know that Thou hast sent
me."<sup>[228](footnote/fn37.htm#P3739_1188131)</sup> What have the
Noetians to say to these things? Are alI one body in respect of
substance, or is it that we become one in the power and disposition of
unity of mind?<sup>[229](footnote/fn37.htm#P3740_1188317)</sup> In the
same manner the Son, who was sent and was not known of those who are in
the world, confessed that He was in the Father in power and disposition.
For the Son is the one mind of the Father. We who have the Father's mind
believe so (in Him); but they who have it not have denied the Son. And
if, again, they choose to allege the fact that Philip inquired about the
Father, saying, "Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us," to whom the
Lord made answer in these terms: "Have I been so long time with you, and
yet hast thou not known me, Philip? He that hath seen me hath seen the
Father. Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me? "<sup>[230](footnote/fn37.htm#P3741_1189756)</sup> and if they
choose to maintain that their dogma is ratified by this passage, as if
He owned Himself to be the Father, let them know that it is decidedly
against them, and that they are confuted by this very word. For though
Christ had spoken of Himself, and showed Himself among all as the Son,
they had not yet recognised Him to be such, neither had they been able
to apprehend or contemplate His real power. And Philip, not having been
able to receive this, as far as it was possible to see it, requested to
behold the Father. To whom then the Lord said, "Philip, have I been so
long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me? He that hath seen me
hath seen the Father." By which He means, If thou hast seen me, thou
mayest know the Father through me. For through the image, which is like
(the original), the Father is made readily known. But if thou hast not
known the image, which is the Son, how dost thou seek to see the Father?
And that this is the case is made clear by the rest of the chapter,
which signifies that the Son who "has been set
forth<sup>[231](footnote/fn37.htm#P3742_1190865)</sup> was sent from the
Father,<sup>[232](footnote/fn37.htm#P3743_1190910)</sup> and goeth to
the Father."<sup>[233](footnote/fn37.htm#P3744_1190961)</sup>

8\. Many other passages, or rather all of them, attest the truth. A man,
therefore, even though he will it not, is compelled to acknowledge God
the Father Almighty, and Christ Jesus the Son of God, who, being God,
became man, to whom also the Father made all things subject, Himself
excepted, and the Holy Spirit; and that these, therefore, are three. But
if he desires to learn how it is shown still that there is one God, let
him know that His power<sup>[234](footnote/fn37.htm#P3746_1191432)</sup>
is one. As far as regards the power, therefore, God is one. But as far
as regards the economy there is a threefold manifestation, as shall be
proved afterwards when we give account of the true doctrine. In these
things, however, which are thus set forth by us, we are at one. For
there is one God in whom we must believe, but unoriginated, impassible,
immortal, doing all things as He wills, in the way He wills, and when He
wills. What, then, will this Noetus, who
knows<sup>[235](footnote/fn37.htm#P3747_1191925)</sup> nothing of the
truth, dare to say to these things? And now, as Noetus has been
confuted, let us turn to the exhibition of the truth itself, that we may
establish the truth, against which all these mighty
heresies<sup>[236](footnote/fn37.htm#P3748_1192204)</sup> have arisen
without being able to state anything to the purpose.

9\. There is, brethren, one God, the knowledge of whom we gain from the
Holy Scriptures, and from no other source. For just as a man, if he
wishes to be skilled in the wisdom of this world, will find himself
unable to get at it in any other way than by mastering the dogmas of
philosophers, so all of us who wish to practise piety will be unable to
learn its practice from any other quarter than the oracles of
God.<sup>[237](footnote/fn37.htm#P3750_1192890)</sup> Whatever things,
then, the Holy Scriptures declare, at these let us took; and whatsoever
things they teach, these let us learn; and as the Father wills our
belief to be, let us believe; and as He wills the Son to be glorified,
let us glorify Him; and as He wills the Holy Spirit to be bestowed, let
us receive Him. Not according to our own will, nor according to our own
mind, nor yet as using violently those things which are given by God,
but even as He has chosen to teach them by the Holy Scriptures, so let
us discern them.

10\. God, subsisting alone, and having nothing contemporaneous with
Himself, determined to create the world. And conceiving the world in
mind, and willing and uttering the word, He made it; and straightway it
appeared, formed as it had pleased Him. For us, then, it is sufficient
simply to know that there was nothing contemporaneous with God. Beside
Him there was nothing;
but<sup>[238](footnote/fn37.htm#P3752_1193997)</sup> He, while existing
alone, yet existed in
plurality.<sup>[239](footnote/fn37.htm#P3753_1194138)</sup> For He was
neither without reason, nor wisdom, nor power, nor
counsel<sup>[240](footnote/fn37.htm#P3754_1194225)</sup> And all things
were in Him, and He was the All. When He willed, and as He
willed,<sup>[241](footnote/fn37.htm#P3755_1194352)</sup> He manifested
His word in the times determined by Him, and by Him He made all things.
When He wills, He does; and when He thinks, He executes; and when He
speaks, He manifests; when He fashions, He contrives in wisdom. For all
things that are made He forms by reason and wisdom-creating them in
reason, and arranging them in wisdom. He made them, then, as He pleased,
for He was God. And as the Author, and fellow-Counsellor, and
Framer<sup>[242](footnote/fn37.htm#P3756_1194902)</sup> of the things
that are in formation, He
begat<sup>[243](footnote/fn37.htm#P3757_1194992)</sup> the Word; and as
He bears this Word in Himself, and that, too, as (yet) invisible to the
world which is created, He makes Him visible; (and) uttering the voice
first, and begetting Him as Light of
Light,<sup>[244](footnote/fn37.htm#P3758_1195548)</sup> He set Him forth
to the world as its Lord, (and) His own
mind;<sup>[245](footnote/fn37.htm#P3759_1196180)</sup> and whereas He
was visible formerly to Himself alone, and invisible to the world which
is made, He makes Him visible in order that the world might see Him in
His manifestation, and be capable of being saved.

11\. And thus there appeared another beside Himself. But when I say
*another*,<sup>[246](footnote/fn37.htm#P3761_1196476)</sup> I do not
mean that there are two Gods, but that it is only as light of light, or
as water from a fountain, or as a ray from the sun. For there is but one
power, which is from the
All;<sup>[247](footnote/fn37.htm#P3762_1196955)</sup> and the Father is
the All, from whom cometh this Power, the Word. And this is the
mind<sup>[248](footnote/fn37.htm#P3763_1197064)</sup> which came forth
into the world, and was manifested as the
Son<sup>[249](footnote/fn37.htm#P3764_1197145)</sup> of God. All things,
then, are by Him, and He alone is of the Father. Who then adduces a
multitude of gods brought in, time after time? For all are shut up,
however unwillingly, to admit this fact, that the All runs up into one.
If, then, all things run up into one, even according to Valentinus, and
Marcion, and Cerinthus, and all their fooleries, they are also reduced,
however unwillingly, to this position, that they must acknowledge that
the One is the cause of all things. Thus, then, these too, though they
wish it not, fall in with the truth, and admit that one God made all
things according to His good pleasure. And He gave the law and the
prophets; and in giving them, He made them speak by the Holy Ghost, in
order that, being gifted with the inspiration of the Father's power,
they might declare the Father's counsel and will.

12\. Acting then in these (prophets), the Word spoke of Himself. For
already He became His own herald, and showed that the Word would be
manifested among men. And for this reason He cried thus: "I am made
manifest to them that sought me not; I am found of them that asked not
for me."<sup>[250](footnote/fn37.htm#P3766_1198282)</sup> And who is He
that is made manifest but the Word of the Father?-whom the Father sent,
and in whom He showed to men the power proceeding from Him. Thus, then,
was the Word made manifest, even as the blessed John says. For he sums
up the things that were said by the prophets, and shows that this is the
Word, by whom all things were made. For he speaks to this effect: "In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was not anything
made."<sup>[251](footnote/fn37.htm#P3767_1198820)</sup> And beneath He
says, "The world was made by Him, and the world knew Him not; He came
unto His own, and His own received Him
not."<sup>[252](footnote/fn37.htm#P3768_1199515)</sup> If, then, said
he, the world was made by Him, according to the word of the prophet, "By
the Word of the Lord were the heavens
made,"<sup>[253](footnote/fn37.htm#P3769_1199671)</sup> then this is the
Word that was also made manifest. We accordingly see the Word incarnate,
and we know the Father by Him, and we believe in the Son, (and) we
worship the Holy Spirit. Let us then look at the testimony of Scripture.
with respect to the announcement of the future manifestation of the
Word.

13\. Now Jeremiah says, "Who hath stood in the
counsel<sup>[254](footnote/fn37.htm#P3771_1200051)</sup> of the Lord,
and hath perceived His Word?
"<sup>[255](footnote/fn37.htm#P3772_1200230)</sup> But the Word of God
alone is visible, while the word of man is audible. When he speaks of
seeing the Word, I must believe that this visible (Word) has been sent.
And there was none other (sent) but the Word. And that He was sent Peter
testifies, when he says to the centurion Cornelius: "God sent His Word
unto the children of Israel by the preaching of Jesus Christ. This is
the God who is Lord of
all."<sup>[256](footnote/fn37.htm#P3773_1200658)</sup> If, then, the
Word is sent by Jesus Christ, the
will<sup>[257](footnote/fn37.htm#P3774_1200730)</sup> of the Father is
Jesus Christ.

14\. These things then, brethren, are declared by the Scriptures. And
the blessed John, in the testimony of his Gospel, gives us an account of
this economy (disposition) and acknowledges this Word as God, when he
says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the
Word was God." If, then, the Word was with God, and was also God, what
follows? Would one say that he speaks of two
Gods?<sup>[258](footnote/fn37.htm#P3776_1202234)</sup> I shall not
indeed speak of two Gods, but of one; of two Persons however, and of a
third economy (disposition), viz., the grace of the Holy Ghost. For the
Father indeed is One, but there are two Persons, because there is also
the Son; and then there is the third, the Holy Spirit. The Father
decrees, the Word executes, and the Son is manifested, through whom the
Father is believed on. The
economy<sup>[259](footnote/fn37.htm#P3777_1202749)</sup> of harmony is
led back to one God; for God is One. It is the Father who
commands,<sup>[260](footnote/fn37.htm#P3778_1203264)</sup> and the Son
who obeys, and the Holy Spirit who gives
understanding:<sup>[261](footnote/fn37.htm#P3779_1203350)</sup> the
Father who is *above
all*,<sup>[262](footnote/fn37.htm#P3780_1203420)</sup> and the Son who
is *through all*, and the Holy Spirit who is *in all*. And we cannot
otherwise think of one
God,<sup>[263](footnote/fn37.htm#P3781_1203813)</sup> but by believing
in truth in Father and Son and Holy Spirit. For the Jews glorified (or
gloried in) the Father, but gave Him not thanks, for they did not
recognise the Son. The disciples recognised the Son, but not in the Holy
Ghost; wherefore they also denied
Him.<sup>[264](footnote/fn37.htm#P3782_1204142)</sup> The Father's Word,
therefore, knowing the economy (disposition) and the will of the Father,
to wit, that the Father seeks to be worshipped in none other way than
this, gave this charge to the disciples after He rose from the dead: "Go
ye and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost."<sup>[265](footnote/fn37.htm#P3783_1204510)</sup> And by this He
showed, that whosoever omitted any one of these, failed in glorifying
God perfectly. For it is through this Trinity that the Father is
glorified. For the Father willed, the Son did, the Spirit manifested.
The whole Scriptures, then, proclaim this truth.

15\. But some one will say to me, You adduce a thing strange to me, when
you call the Son the Word. For John indeed speaks of the Word, but it is
by a figure of speech. *Nay, it is by no figure of
speech*.<sup>[266](footnote/fn37.htm#P3785_1205040)</sup> For while thus
presenting this Word that was from the beginning, and has now been sent
forth, he said below in the Apocalypse, "And I saw heaven opened, and
behold a white horse; and He that sat upon him (was) Faithful and True;
and in righteousness He doth judge and make war. And His eyes (were) as
flame of fire, and on His head were many crowns; and He had a name
written that no man knew but He Himself. And He (was) clothed in a
vesture dipped in blood: and His name is called the Word of
God."<sup>[267](footnote/fn37.htm#P3786_1205726)</sup> See then,
brethren, how the vesture sprinkled with blood denoted in symbol the
flesh, through which the impassible Word of God came under suffering, as
also the prophets testify to me. For thus speaks the blessed Micah: "The
house of Jacob provoked the Spirit of the Lord to anger. These are their
pursuits. Are not His words good with them, and do they walk rightly?
And they have risen up in enmity against His countenance of peace, and
they have stripped off His
glory."<sup>[268](footnote/fn37.htm#P3787_1206225)</sup> That means His
suffering in the flesh. And in like manner also the blessed Paul says,
"For what the law could not do, in that it was weak, God, sending His
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, condemned sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the law might be shown in us, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the
Spirit."<sup>[269](footnote/fn37.htm#P3788_1206645)</sup> What Son of
His own, then, did God send through the flesh but the
Word,<sup>[270](footnote/fn37.htm#P3789_1206821)</sup> whom He addressed
as Son because He was to become such (or be begotten) in the future? And
He takes the common name for tender affection among men in being called
the Son. For neither was the Word, prior to incarnation and when by
Himself,<sup>[271](footnote/fn37.htm#P3790_1207119)</sup> yet perfect
Son, although He was perfect Word, only-begotten. Nor could the flesh
subsist by itself apart from the Word, because it has its
subsistence<sup>[272](footnote/fn37.htm#P3791_1207627)</sup> in the
Word.<sup>[273](footnote/fn37.htm#P3792_1207661)</sup> Thus, then, one
perfect Son of God was manifested.

16\. And these indeed are testimonies bearing on the incarnation of the
Word; and there are also very many others. But let us also look at the
subject in hand,-namely, the question, brethren, that in reality the
Father's power, which is the Word, came down from heaven, and not the
Father Himself. For thus He speaks: "I came forth from the Father, and
am come."<sup>[274](footnote/fn37.htm#P3794_1208820)</sup> Now what
subject is meant in this sentence, "I came forth from the
Father,"<sup>[275](footnote/fn37.htm#P3795_1208917)</sup> but just the
Word? And what is it that is begotten of Him, but just the
Spirit,<sup>[276](footnote/fn37.htm#P3796_1209096)</sup> that is to say,
the Word? But you will say to me, How is He begotten? In your own case
you can give no explanation of the way in which you were begotten,
although you see every day the cause according to man; neither can you
tell with accuracy the economy in His
case.<sup>[277](footnote/fn37.htm#P3797_1209584)</sup> For you have it
not in your power to acquaint yourself with the practised and
indescribable art<sup>[278](footnote/fn37.htm#P3798_1209715)</sup>
(method) of the Maker, but only to see, and understand, and believe that
man is God's work. Moreover, you are asking an account of the generation
of the Word, whom God the Father in His good pleasure begat as He
willed. Is it not enough for you to learn that God made the world, but
do you also venture to ask whence He made it? Is it not enough for you
to learn that the Son of God has been manifested to you for salvation if
you believe, but do you also inquire curiously how He was begotten after
the Spirit? No more than
two,<sup>[279](footnote/fn37.htm#P3799_1210310)</sup> in sooth, have
been put in trust to give the account of His generation after the flesh;
and are you then so bold as to seek the account (of His generation)
after the Spirit, which the Father keeps with Himself, intending to
reveal it then to the holy ones and those worthy of seeing His face?
Rest satisfied with the word spoken by Christ, viz., "That which is born
of the Spirit is spirit,"<sup>[280](footnote/fn38)</sup> just as,
speaking by the prophet of the generation of the Word, He shows the fact
that He is begotten, but reserves the question of the manner and means,
to reveal it only in the time determined by Himself. For He speaks thus:
"From the womb, before the morning star, I have begotten
Thee."<sup>[281](footnote/fn38.htm#P3801_1211061)</sup>

17\. These testimonies are sufficient for the believing who study truth,
and the unbelieving credit no
testimony.<sup>[282](footnote/fn38.htm#P3803_1211193)</sup> For the Holy
Spirit, indeed, in the person of the apostles, has testified to this,
saying, "And who has believed our report?
"<sup>[283](footnote/fn38.htm#P3804_1211576)</sup> Therefore let us not
prove ourselves unbelieving, lest the word spoken be fulfilled in us.
Let us believe then,
dear<sup>[284](footnote/fn38.htm#P3805_1211714)</sup> brethren,
according to the tradition of the apostles, that God the Word came down
from heaven, (and entered) into the holy Virgin Mary, in order that,
taking the flesh from her, and assuming also a human, by which I mean a
rational soul, and becoming thus all that man is with the exception of
sin, He might save fallen man, and confer immortality on men who believe
on His name. In all, therefore, the word of truth is demonstrated to us,
to wit, that the Father is One, whose word is present (with Him), by
whom He made all things; whom also, as we have said above, the Father
sent forth in later times for the salvation of men. This (Word) was
preached by the law and the prophets as destined to come into the world.
And even as He was preached then, in the same manner also did He come
and manifest Himself, being by the Virgin and the Holy Spirit made a new
man; for in that He had the heavenly (nature) of the Father, as the Word
and the earthly (nature), as taking to Himself the flesh from the old
Adam by the medium of the Virgin, He now, coming forth into the world,
was manifested as God in a body, coming forth too as a perfect man. For
it was not in mere appearance or by
conversion,<sup>[285](footnote/fn38.htm#P3806_1212928)</sup> but in
truth, that He became man.

18.<sup>[286](footnote/fn38.htm#P3808_1212997)</sup> Thus then, too,
though demonstrated as God, He does not refuse the conditions proper to
Him as man,<sup>[287](footnote/fn38.htm#P3809_1213220)</sup> since He
hungers and toils and thirsts in weariness, and flees in fear, and prays
in trouble. And He who as God has a sleepless nature, slumbers on a
pillow. And He who for this end came into the world, begs off from the
cup of suffering. And in an agony He sweats blood, and is strengthened
by an angel, who Himself strengthens those who believe on Him, and
taught men to despise death by His
work.<sup>[288](footnote/fn38.htm#P3810_1213910)</sup> And He who knew
what manner of man Judas was, is betrayed by Judas. And He, who formerly
was honoured by him as God, is contemned by
Caiaphas.<sup>[289](footnote/fn38.htm#P3811_1214079)</sup> And He is set
at nought by Herod, who is Himself to judge the whole earth. And He is
scourged by Pilate, who took upon Himself our infirmities. And by the
soldiers He is mocked, at whose behest stand thousands of thousands and
myriads of myriads of angels and archangels. And He who fixed the
heavens like a vault is fastened to the cross by the Jews. And He who is
inseparable from the Father cries to the Father, and commends to Him His
spirit; and bowing His head, He gives up the ghost, who said, "I have
power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again;
"<sup>[290](footnote/fn38.htm#P3812_1214703)</sup> and because He was
not overmastered by death, as being Himself Life, He said this: "I lay
it down of myself."<sup>[291](footnote/fn38.htm#P3813_1214833)</sup> And
He who gives life bountifully to all, has His side pierced with a spear.
And He who raises the dead is wrapped in linen and laid in a sepulchre,
and on the third day He is raised again by the Father, though Himself
the Resurrection and the Life. For all these things has He finished for
us, who for our sakes was made as we are. For "Himself hath borne our
infirmities, and carried our diseases; and for our sakes He was
afflicted,"<sup>[292](footnote/fn38.htm#P3814_1215290)</sup> as Isaiah
the prophet has said. This is He who was hymned by the angels, and seen
by the shepherds, and waited for by Simeon, and witnessed to by Anna.
This is He who was inquired after by the wise men, and indicated by the
star; He who was engaged in His Father's house, and pointed to by John,
and witnessed to by the Father from above in the voice, "This is my
beloved Son; hear ye
Him."<sup>[293](footnote/fn38.htm#P3815_1215702)</sup> He is crowned
victor against the
devil.<sup>[294](footnote/fn38.htm#P3816_1215979)</sup> This is Jesus of
Nazareth, who was invited to the marriage-feast in Cana, and turned the
water into wine, and rebuked the sea when agitated by the violence of
the winds, and walked on the deep as on dry land, and caused the blind
man from birth to see, and raised Lazarus to life after he had been dead
four days, and did many mighty works, and forgave sins, and conferred
power on the disciples, and had blood and water flowing from His sacred
side when pierced with the spear. For His sake the sun is darkened, the
day has no light, the rocks are shattered, the veil is rent, the
foundations of the earth are shaken, the graves are opened, and the dead
are raised, and the rulers are ashamed when they see the Director of the
universe upon the cross closing His eye and giving up the ghost.
Creation saw, and was troubled; and, unable to bear the sight of His
exceeding glory, shrouded itself in
darkness.<sup>[295](footnote/fn38.htm#P3817_1216959)</sup> This (is He
who) breathes upon the disciples, and gives them the Spirit, and comes
in among them when the doors are shut, and is taken up by a cloud into
the heavens while the disciples gaze at Him, and is set down on the
right hand of the Father, and comes again as the Judge of the living and
the dead. This is the God who for our sakes became man, to whom also the
Father hath put all things in subjection. To Him be the glory and the
power, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, in the holy Church both now
and ever, and even for evermore. Amen.

Fragment I.

By the omnipotent will of God all things are made, and the things that
are made are also preserved, being maintained according to their several
principles in perfect harmony by Him who is in His nature the omnipotent
God and maker of all
things,<sup>[299](footnote/fn38.htm#P3826_1218520)</sup> His divine will
remaining unalterable by which He has made and moves all things,
sustained as they severally are by their own natural
laws.<sup>[300](footnote/fn38.htm#P3827_1218683)</sup> For the infinite
cannot in any manner or by any account be susceptible of movement,
inasmuch as it has nothing towards which and nothing around which it
shall be moved. For in the case of that which is in its nature infinite,
and so incapable of being moved, movement would be
conversion.<sup>[301](footnote/fn38.htm#P3828_1219131)</sup> Wherefore
also the Word of God being made truly man in our manner, yet without
sin, and acting and enduring in man's way such sinless things as are
proper to our nature, and assuming the circumscription of the flesh of
our nature on our behalf sustained no conversion in that aspect in which
He is one with the Father, being made in no respect one with the flesh
through the
exinanition.<sup>[302](footnote/fn38.htm#P3829_1219736)</sup> Burns He
was without flesh,<sup>[303](footnote/fn38.htm#P3830_1220219)</sup> He
remained without any circumscription. And through the flesh He wrought
divinely<sup>[304](footnote/fn38.htm#P3831_1220435)</sup> those things
which are proper to divinity, showing Himself to have both those natures
in both of which He wrought, I mean the divine and the human, according
to that veritable and real and natural
subsistence,<sup>[305](footnote/fn38.htm#P3832_1220660)</sup> (showing
Himself thus) as both being in reality and as being understood to be at
one and the same time infinite God and finite man, having the
nature<sup>[306](footnote/fn38.htm#P3833_1220872)</sup> of each in
perfection, with the same
activity,<sup>[307](footnote/fn38.htm#P3834_1220934)</sup> that is to
say, the same natural
properties;<sup>[308](footnote/fn38.htm#P3835_1220997)</sup> whence we
know that their distinction abides always according to the nature of
each, and without conversion. But it is not (i.e., the distinction
between deity and humanity), as some say, a merely comparative (or
relative) matter,<sup>[309](footnote/fn38.htm#P3836_1221253)</sup> that
we may not speak in an unwarrantable manner of a greater and a less in
one who is ever the same in
Himself.<sup>[310](footnote/fn38.htm#P3837_1221729)</sup> For
comparisons can be instituted only between objects of like nature, and
not between objects of unlike nature. But between God the Maker of all
things and that which is made, between the infinite and the finite,
between infinitude and finitude, there can be no kind of comparison,
since these differ from each other not in mere comparison (or
relatively), but absolutely in essence. And yet at the same time there
has been effected a certain inexpressible and irrefragable union of the
two into one substance,<sup>[311](footnote/fn38.htm#P3838_1222333)</sup>
which entirely passes the understanding of anything that is made. For
the divine is just the same after the incarnation that it was before the
incarnation; in its essence infinite, illimitable, impassible,
incomparable, unchangeable, inconvertable,
self-potent,<sup>[312](footnote/fn38.htm#P3839_1222615)</sup> and, in
short, subsisting in essence alone the infinitely worthy good.

Fragment II.

The God of all things therefore became truly, according to the
Scriptures, without conversion, sinless man, and that in a manner known
to Himself alone, as He is the natural Artificer of things which are
above our comprehension. And by that same saving act of the
incarnation<sup>[313](footnote/fn38.htm#P3842_1222992)</sup> He
introduced into the flesh the activity of His proper divinity, yet
without having it (that activity) either circumscribed by the flesh
through the exinanition, or growing naturally out of the flesh as it
grew out of His
divinity,<sup>[314](footnote/fn38.htm#P3843_1223251)</sup> but
manifested through it in the things which He wrought in a divine manner
in His incarnate state. For the flesh did not become divinity in nature
by a transmutation of nature, as though it became essentially flesh of
divinity. But what it was before, that also it continued to be in nature
and activity when united with divinity, even as the Saviour said, "The
spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is
weak."<sup>[315](footnote/fn38.htm#P3844_1223736)</sup> And working and
enduring in the flesh things which were proper to sinless flesh, He
proved the evacuation of divinity (to be) for our sakes, confirmed as it
was by wonders and by sufferings of the flesh naturally. For with this
purpose did the God of all things become man, viz., in order that by
suffering in the flesh, which is susceptible of suffering, He might
redeem our whole race, which was sold to death; and that by working
wondrous things by His divinity, which is unsusceptible of suffering,
through the medium of the flesh He might restore it to that
incorruptible and blessed life from which it fell away by yielding to
the devil; and that He might establish the holy orders of intelligent
existences in the heavens in immutability by the mystery of His
incarnation,<sup>[316](footnote/fn38.htm#P3845_1224539)</sup> the doing
of which is the recapitulation of all things in
himself.<sup>[317](footnote/fn38.htm#P3846_1224625)</sup> He remained
therefore, also, after His incarnation, according to nature, God
infinite, and more,<sup>[318](footnote/fn38.htm#P3847_1224763)</sup>
having the activity proper and suitable to Himself,-an activity growing
out of His divinity essentially, and manifested through His perfectly
holy flesh by wondrous acts economically, to the intent that He might be
believed in as God, while working out of
Himself<sup>[319](footnote/fn38.htm#P3848_1225047)</sup> by the flesh,
which by nature is weak, the salvation of the universe.

Fragment III.

Now, with the view of explaining, by means of an illustration, what has
been said concerning the Saviour, (I may say that) the power of
thought<sup>[320](footnote/fn38.htm#P3851_1225291)</sup> which I have by
nature is proper and suitable to me, as being possessed of a rational
and intelligent soul; and to this soul there pertains, according to
nature, a self-moved energy and first power, ever-moving, to wit, the
thought that streams from it naturally. This thought I utter, when there
is occasion, by fitting it to words, and expressing it rightly in signs,
using the tongue as an organ, or artificial characters, showing that it
is heard, though it comes into actuality by means of objects foreign to
itself, and yet is not changed itself by those foreign
objects.<sup>[321](footnote/fn38.htm#P3852_1225883)</sup> For my natural
thought does not belong to the tongue or the letters, although I effect
its utterance by means of these; but it belongs to me, who speak
according to my nature, and by means of both these express it as my own,
streaming as it does always from my intelligent soul according to its
nature, and uttered by means of my bodily tongue organically, as I have
said, when there is occasion. Now, to institute a comparison with that
which is utterly beyond comparison, just as in us the power of thought
that belongs by nature to the soul is brought to utterance by means of
our bodily tongue without any change in itself, so, too, in the wondrous
incarnation<sup>[322](footnote/fn38.htm#P3853_1226629)</sup> of God is
the omnipotent and all-creating energy of the entire
deity<sup>[323](footnote/fn38.htm#P3854_1226718)</sup> manifested
without mutation in itself, by means of His perfectly holy flesh, and in
the works which He wrought after a divine manner, (that energy of the
deity) remaining in its essence free from all circumscription, although
it shone through the flesh, which is itself essentially limited. For
that which is in its nature unoriginated cannot be circumscribed by an
originated nature, although this latter may have grown into one with
it<sup>[324](footnote/fn38.htm#P3855_1227183)</sup> by a conception
which circumscribes all
understanding:<sup>[325](footnote/fn38.htm#P3856_1227253)</sup> nor can
this be ever brought into the same nature and natural activity with
that, so long as they remain each within its own proper and
inconvertible nature.<sup>[326](footnote/fn38.htm#P3857_1227458)</sup>
For it is only in objects of the same nature that there is the motion
that works the same works, showing that the
being<sup>[327](footnote/fn38.htm#P3858_1227748)</sup> whose power is
natural is incapable in any manner of being or becoming the possession
of a being of a different nature without
mutation.<sup>[328](footnote/fn38.htm#P3859_1227900)</sup>

Fragment IV.

For, in the view of apostles and prophets and teachers, the mystery of
the divine incarnation has been distinguished as having two points of
contemplation natural to
it,<sup>[329](footnote/fn38.htm#P3862_1228568)</sup> distinct in all
things, inasmuch as on the one hand it is the subsistence of perfect
deity, and on the other is demonstrative of full humanity. As long,
therefore,<sup>[330](footnote/fn38.htm#P3863_1228804)</sup> as the Word
is acknowledged to be in substance one, of one energy, there shall never
in any way be known a
movement<sup>[331](footnote/fn38.htm#P3864_1229056)</sup> in the two.
For while God, who is essentially ever-existent, became by His infinite
power, according to His will, sinless man, He is what He was, in all
wherein God is known; and what He became, He is in all wherein man is
known and can be recognised. In both aspects of Himself He never falls
out of Himself,<sup>[332](footnote/fn38.htm#P3865_1229390)</sup> in His
divine activities and in His human alike, preserving in both relations
His own essentially unchangeable perfection.

Fragment V.

For lately a certain person, Beron, along with some others, forsook the
delusion of Valentinus, only to involve themselves in deeper error,
affirming that the flesh assumed to Himself by the Word became capable
of working like works with the
deity<sup>[333](footnote/fn38.htm#P3868_1229796)</sup> by virtue of its
assumption, and that the deity became susceptible of suffering in the
same way with the flesh<sup>[334](footnote/fn38.htm#P3869_1229946)</sup>
by virtue of the
exinanition;<sup>[335](footnote/fn38.htm#P3870_1230003)</sup> and thus
they assert the doctrine that there was at the same time a conversion
and a mixing and a
fusing<sup>[336](footnote/fn38.htm#P3871_1230124)</sup> of the two
aspects one with the other. For if the flesh that was assumed became
capable of working like works with the deity, it is evident that it also
became God in essence in all wherein God is essentially known. And if
the deity by the exinanition became susceptible of the same sufferings
with the flesh, it is evident that it also became in essence flesh in
all wherein flesh essentially can be known. For objects that act in like
manner,<sup>[337](footnote/fn38.htm#P3872_1230586)</sup> and work like
works, and are altogether of like kind, and are susceptible of like
suffering with each other, admit of no difference of nature; and if the
natures are fused
together,<sup>[338](footnote/fn38.htm#P3873_1230784)</sup> Christ will
be a duality;<sup>[339](footnote/fn38.htm#P3874_1230852)</sup> and if
the persons<sup>[340](footnote/fn38.htm#P3875_1230884)</sup> are
separated, there will be a
quaternity,<sup>[341](footnote/fn38.htm#P3876_1230944)</sup> -a thing
which is altogether to be avoided. And how will they conceive of the one
and the same Christ, who is at once God and man by nature? And what
manner of existence will He have according to them, if He has become man
by a conversion of the deity, and if he has become God by a change of
the flesh? For the
mutation<sup>[342](footnote/fn38.htm#P3877_1231318)</sup> of these, the
one into the other, is a complete subversion of both. Let the
discussion, then, be considered by us again in a different way.

Fragment VI.

Among Christians it is settled as the doctrine of piety, that, according
to nature itself, and to the activity and to whatever else pertains
thereunto, God is equal and the same with
Himself,<sup>[343](footnote/fn38.htm#P3880_1231717)</sup> having nothing
that is His unequal to Himself at all and
heterogeneous.<sup>[344](footnote/fn38.htm#P3881_1231819)</sup> If,
then, according to Beron, the flesh that He assumed to Himself became
possessed of the like natural energy with them, it is evident that it
also became possessed of the like nature with Him in all wherein that
nature consists,-to wit, non-origination, non-generation, infinitude,
eternity, incomprehensibility, and whatever else in the way of the
transcendent the theological mind discerns in deity; and thus they both
underwent conversion, neither the one nor the other preserving any more
the substantial relation of its own proper
nature.<sup>[345](footnote/fn38.htm#P3882_1232385)</sup> For he who
recognises an identical
operation<sup>[346](footnote/fn38.htm#P3883_1232469)</sup> in things of
unlike nature, introduces at the same time a fusion of natures and a
separation of persons,<sup>[347](footnote/fn38.htm#P3884_1232594)</sup>
their natural existence<sup>[348](footnote/fn38.htm#P3885_1232646)</sup>
being made entirely undistinguishable by the transference of
properties.<sup>[349](footnote/fn38.htm#P3886_1232736)</sup>

Fragment VII.

But if it (the flesh) did not become of like nature with that (the
deity), neither shall it ever become of like natural energy with that;
that He may not be shown to have His energy unequal with His nature, and
heterogeneous, and, through all that pertains to Himself, to have
entered on an existence outside of His natural equality and
identity,<sup>[350](footnote/fn38.htm#P3889_1233115)</sup> which is an
impious supposition.

Fragment VIII.

Into this error, then, have they been carried, by believing, unhappily,
that that divine energy was made the property of the flesh which was
only manifested through the flesh in His miraculous actions; by which
energy Christ, in so far as He is apprehended as God, gave existence to
the universe, and now maintains and governs it. For they did not
perceive that it is impossible for the energy of the divine nature to
become the property<sup>[351](footnote/fn38.htm#P3892_1233651)</sup> of
a being of a different
nature<sup>[352](footnote/fn38.htm#P3893_1233699)</sup> apart from
conversion; nor did they understand that that is not by any means the
property of the flesh which is only manifested through it, and does not
spring out of it according to nature; and yet the proof thereof was
clear and evident to them. For I, by speaking with the tongue and
writing with the hand, reveal through both these one and the same
thought of my intelligent soul, its energy (or operation) being natural;
in no way showing it as springing naturally out of tongue or hand; nor
yet (showing) even the spoken thought as made to belong to them in
virtue of its revelation by their means. For no intelligent person ever
recognised tongue or hand as capable of thought, just as also no one
ever recognised the perfectly holy flesh of God, in virtue of its
assumption, and in virtue of the revelation of the divine energy through
its medium, as becoming in nature
creative.<sup>[353](footnote/fn38.htm#P3894_1234614)</sup> But the pious
confession of the believer is that, with a view to our salvation, and in
order to connect the universe with unchangeableness, the Creator of all
things incorporated with
Himself<sup>[354](footnote/fn38.htm#P3895_1234825)</sup> a rational soul
and a sensible<sup>[355](footnote/fn38.htm#P3896_1234875)</sup> body
from the all-holy Mary, ever-virgin, by an undefiled conception, without
conversion, and was made man in nature, but separate from wickedness:
the same was perfect God, and the same was perfect man; the same was in
nature at once perfect God and man. In His deity He wrought divine
things through His all-holy flesh,-such things, namely, as did not
pertain to the flesh by nature; and in His humanity He suffered human
things,-such things, namely, as did not pertain to deity by nature, by
the upbearing of the
deity.<sup>[356](footnote/fn38.htm#P3897_1235431)</sup> He wrought
nothing divine without the
body;<sup>[357](footnote/fn38.htm#P3898_1235505)</sup> nor did the same
do anything human without the participation of
deity.<sup>[358](footnote/fn38.htm#P3899_1235599)</sup> Thus He
preserved for Himself a new and fitting
method<sup>[359](footnote/fn39)</sup> by which He wrought (according to
the manner of) both, while that which was natural to both remained
unchanged;<sup>[360](footnote/fn39.htm#P3901_1235824)</sup> to the
accrediting<sup>[361](footnote/fn39.htm#P3902_1235883)</sup> of His
perfect incarnation,<sup>[362](footnote/fn39.htm#P3903_1235932)</sup>
which is really genuine, and has nothing lacking in
it.<sup>[363](footnote/fn39.htm#P3904_1236051)</sup> Beron, therefore,
since the case stands with him as I have already stated, confounding
together in nature the deity and the humanity of Christ in a single
energy,<sup>[364](footnote/fn39.htm#P3905_1236247)</sup> and again
separating them in person, subverts the life, not knowing that identical
operation<sup>[365](footnote/fn39.htm#P3906_1236365)</sup> is indicative
of the connatural identity only of connatural
persons.<sup>[366](footnote/fn39.htm#P3907_1236453)</sup>

1\. Good, yea, very good, are all the works of our God and Saviour-all
of them that eye seeth and mind perceiveth, all that reason interprets
and hand handles, all that intellect comprehends and human nature
understands. For what richer beauty can there be than that of the
circle<sup>[367](footnote/fn39.htm#P3911_1236828)</sup> of heaven? And
what form of more blooming fairness than that of earth's surface? And
what is there swifter in the course than the chariot of the sun? And
what more graceful car than the lunar
orb?<sup>[368](footnote/fn39.htm#P3912_1237040)</sup> And what work more
wonderful than the compact mosaic of the
stars?<sup>[369](footnote/fn39.htm#P3913_1237136)</sup> And what more
productive of supplies than the seasonable winds? And what more spotless
mirror than the light of day? And what creature more excellent than man?
Very good, then, are all the works of our God and Saviour. And what more
requisite gift, again, is there than the
element<sup>[370](footnote/fn39.htm#P3914_1237457)</sup> of water? For
with water all things are washed and nourished, and cleansed and
bedewed. Water bears the earth, water produces the dew, water
exhilarates the vine; water matures the corn in the ear, water ripens
the grapecluster, water softens the olive, water sweetens the palm-date,
water reddens the rose and decks the violet, water makes the lily bloom
with its brilliant cups. And why should I speak at length? Without the
element of water, none of the present order of things can subsist. So
necessary is the element of water; for the other
elements<sup>[371](footnote/fn39.htm#P3915_1238028)</sup> took their
places beneath the highest vault of the heavens, but the nature of water
obtained a seat also above the heavens. And to this the prophet himself
is a witness, when he exclaims, "Praise the Lord, ye heavens of heavens,
and the water that is above the
heavens."<sup>[372](footnote/fn39.htm#P3916_1238316)</sup>

2\. Nor is this the only thing that proves the
dignity<sup>[373](footnote/fn39.htm#P3918_1238472)</sup> of the water.
But there is also that which is more honourable than all-the fact that
Christ, the Maker of all, came down as the
rain,<sup>[374](footnote/fn39.htm#P3919_1238626)</sup> and was known as
a spring,<sup>[375](footnote/fn39.htm#P3920_1238672)</sup> and diffused
Himself as a river,<sup>[376](footnote/fn39.htm#P3921_1238725)</sup> and
was baptized in the
Jordan.<sup>[377](footnote/fn39.htm#P3922_1238778)</sup> For you have
just heard how Jesus came to John, and was baptized by him in the
Jordan. Oh things strange beyond compare! How should the boundless
River<sup>[378](footnote/fn39.htm#P3923_1238952)</sup> that makes glad
the city of God have been dipped in a little water! The illimitable
Spring that bears life to all men, and has no end, was covered by poor
and temporary waters! He who is present everywhere, and absent
nowhere-who is incomprehensible to angels and invisible to men-comes to
the baptism according to His own good pleasure. When you hear these
things, beloved, take them not as if spoken literally, but accept them
as presented in a
figure.<sup>[379](footnote/fn39.htm#P3924_1239427)</sup> Whence also the
Lord was not unnoticed by the watery element in what He did in secret,
in the kindness of His condescension to man. "For the waters saw Him,
and were afraid."<sup>[380](footnote/fn39.htm#P3925_1239623)</sup> They
wellnigh broke from their place, and burst away from their boundary.
Hence the prophet, having this in his view many generations ago, puts
the question, "What aileth thee, O sea, that thou reddest; and thou,
Jordan, that thou wast driven back?
"<sup>[381](footnote/fn39.htm#P3926_1239897)</sup> And they in reply
said, We have seen the Creator of all things in the "form of a
servant,"<sup>[382](footnote/fn39.htm#P3927_1240008)</sup> and being
ignorant of the mystery of the economy, we were lashed with fear.

3\. But we, who know the economy, adore His mercy, because He hath come
to save and not to judge the world. Wherefore John, the forerunner of
the Lord, who before knew not this mystery, on learning that He is Lord
in truth, cried out, and spake to those who came to be baptized of him,
"O generation of
vipers,"<sup>[383](footnote/fn39.htm#P3929_1240414)</sup> why look ye so
earnestly at me? "I am not the Christ;
"<sup>[384](footnote/fn39.htm#P3930_1240491)</sup> I am the servant, and
not the lord; I am the subject, and not the king; I am the sheep, and
not the shepherd; I am a man, and not God. By my birth I loosed the
barrenness of my mother; I did not make virginity
barren.<sup>[385](footnote/fn39.htm#P3931_1240728)</sup> I was brought
up from beneath; I did not come down from above. I bound the tongue of
my father;<sup>[386](footnote/fn39.htm#P3932_1241056)</sup> I did not
unfold divine grace. I was known by my mother, and I was not announced
by a star.<sup>[387](footnote/fn39.htm#P3933_1241168)</sup> I am
worthless, and the least; but "after me there comes One who is before
me"<sup>[388](footnote/fn39.htm#P3934_1241267)</sup> -after me, indeed,
in time, but before me by reason of the inaccessible and unutterable
light of divinity. "There comes One mightier than I, whose shoes I am
not worthy to bear: He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with
fire."<sup>[389](footnote/fn39.htm#P3935_1241522)</sup> I am subject to
authority, but He has authority in Himself. I am bound by sins, but He
is the Remover of sins.
apply<sup>[390](footnote/fn39.htm#P3936_1241661)</sup> the law, but He
bringeth grace to light. teach as a slave, but He judgeth as the Master.
I have the earth as my couch, but He possesses heaven. I baptize with
the baptism of repentance, but He confers the gift of adoption: "He
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire." Why give ye
attention to me? I am not the Christ.

4\. As John says these things to the multitude, and as the people watch
in eager expectation of seeing some strange spectacle with their bodily
eyes, and the devil<sup>[391](footnote/fn39.htm#P3938_1242171)</sup> is
struck with amazement at such a testimony from John, lo, the Lord
appears, plain, solitary,
uncovered,<sup>[392](footnote/fn39.htm#P3939_1242509)</sup> without
escort,<sup>[393](footnote/fn39.htm#P3940_1242540)</sup> having on Him
the body of man like a garment, and hiding the dignity of the Divinity,
that He may elude the snares of the dragon. And not only did He approach
John as Lord without royal retinue; but even like a mere man, and one
involved in sin, He bent His head to be baptized by John. Wherefore
John, on seeing so great a humbling of Himself, was struck with
astonishment at the affair, and began to prevent Him, saying, as ye have
just heard, "I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest Thou to me?
"<sup>[394](footnote/fn39.htm#P3941_1243071)</sup> What doest Thou, O
Lord? Thou teachest things not according to
rule.<sup>[395](footnote/fn39.htm#P3942_1243162)</sup> I have preached
one thing (regarding Thee), and Thou performest another; the devil has
heard one thing, and perceives another. Baptize me with the fire of
Divinity; why waitest Thou for water? Enlighten me with the Spirit; why
dost Thou attend upon a creature? Baptize me, the Baptist, that Thy
pre-eminence may be known. I, O Lord, baptize with the baptism of
repentance, and I cannot baptize those who come to me unless they first
confess fully their sins. Be it so then that I baptize Thee, what hast
Thou to confess? Thou art the Remover of sins, and wilt Thou be baptized
with the baptism of repentance? Though I should venture to baptize Thee,
the Jordan dares not to come near Thee. "I have need to be baptized of
Thee, and comest Thou to me? "

5\. And what saith the Lord to him? "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it
becometh us to fulfil all
righteousness."<sup>[396](footnote/fn39.htm#P3944_1244058)</sup> "Suffer
it to be so now," John; thou art not wiser than I. Thou seest as man; I
foreknow as God. It becomes me to do this first, and thus to teach. I
engage in nothing unbecoming, for I am invested with honour. Dost thou
marvel, O John, that I am not come in my dignity? The purple robe of
kings suits not one in private station, but military splendour suits a
king: am I come to a prince, and not to a friend? "Suffer it to be so
now for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness: "I am the
Fulfiller of the law; I seek to leave nothing wanting to its whole
fulfilment, that so after me Paul may exclaim, "Christ is the fulfilling
of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth."<sup>[397](footnote/fn39.htm#P3945_1244777)</sup> "Suffer it
to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness."
Baptize me, John, in order that no one may despise baptism. I am
baptized by thee, the servant, that no one among kings or dignitaries
may scorn to be baptized by the hand of a poor priest. Suffer me to go
down into the Jordan, in order that they may hear my Father's testimony,
and recognise the power of the Son. "Suffer it to be so now, for thus it
becometh us to fulfil all righteousness." Then at length John suffers
Him. "And Jesus, when He was baptized, went up straightway out of the
water: and the heavens were opened unto Him; and, lo, the Spirit of God
descended like a dove, and rested upon Him. And a voice (came) from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased."<sup>[398](footnote/fn39.htm#P3946_1245574)</sup>

6\. Do you see, beloved, how many and how great blessings we would have
lost, if the Lord had yielded to the exhortation of John, and declined
baptism? For the heavens were shut before this; the region above was
inaccessible. We would in that case descend to the lower parts, but we
would not ascend to the upper. But was it only that the Lord was
baptized? He also renewed the old man, and committed to him again the
sceptre of adoption. For straightway "the heavens were opened to Him." A
reconciliation took place of the visible with the invisible; the
celestial orders were filled with joy; the diseases of earth were
healed; secret things were made known; those at enmity were restored to
amity. For you have heard the word of the evangelist, saying, "The
heavens were opened to Him," on account of three wonders. For when
Christ the Bridegroom was baptized, it was meet that the bridal-chamber
of heaven should open its brilliant gates. And in like manner also, when
the Holy Spirit descended in the form of a dove, and the Father's voice
spread everywhere, it was meet that "the gates of heaven should be
lifted up."<sup>[399](footnote/fn39.htm#P3948_1246723)</sup> "And, lo,
the heavens were opened to Him; and a voice was heard, saying, This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

7\. The beloved generates love, and the light immaterial the light
inaccessible.<sup>[400](footnote/fn39.htm#P3950_1246948)</sup> "This is
my beloved Son," He who, being manifested on earth and yet unseparated
from the Father's bosom, was manifested, and yet did not
appear.<sup>[401](footnote/fn39.htm#P3951_1247277)</sup> For the
appearing is a different thing, since in appearance the baptizer here is
superior to the baptized. For this reason did the Father send down the
Holy Spirit from heaven upon Him who was baptized. For as in the ark of
Noah the love of God toward man is signified by the dove, so also now
the Spirit, descending in the form of a dove, bearing as it were the
fruit of the olive, rested on Him to whom the witness was borne. For
what reason? That the faithfulness of the Father's voice might be made
known, and that the prophetic utterance of a long time past might be
ratified. And what utterance is this? "The voice of the Lord (is) on the
waters, the God of glory thundered; the Lord (is) upon many
waters."<sup>[402](footnote/fn39.htm#P3952_1248096)</sup> And what
voice? "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." This is He
who is named the son of Joseph, and (who is) according to the divine
essence my Only-begotten. "This is my beloved Son"-He who is hungry, and
yet maintains myriads; who is weary, and yet gives rest to the weary;
who has not where to lay His
head,<sup>[403](footnote/fn39.htm#P3953_1248444)</sup> and yet bears up
all things in His hand; who suffers, and yet heals sufferings; who is
smitten,<sup>[404](footnote/fn39.htm#P3954_1248668)</sup> and yet
confers liberty on the
world;<sup>[405](footnote/fn39.htm#P3955_1248786)</sup> who is pierced
in the side,<sup>[406](footnote/fn39.htm#P3956_1248832)</sup> and yet
repairs the side of
Adam.<sup>[407](footnote/fn39.htm#P3957_1248923)</sup>

8\. But give me now your best attention, I pray you, for I wish to go
back to the fountain of life, and to view the fountain that gushes with
healing. The Father of immortality sent the immortal Son and Word into
the world, who came to man in order to wash him with water and the
Spirit; and He, begetting us again to incorruption of soul and body,
breathed into us the breath (spirit) of life, and endued us with an
incorruptible panoply. If, therefore, man has become immortal, he will
also be God.<sup>[408](footnote/fn39.htm#P3959_1249521)</sup> And if he
is made God by water and the Holy Spirit after the regeneration of the
layer<sup>[409](footnote/fn39.htm#P3960_1249985)</sup> he is found to be
also joint-heir with
Christ<sup>[410](footnote/fn39.htm#P3961_1250051)</sup> after the
resurrection from the dead. Wherefore I preach to this effect: Come, all
ye kindreds of the nations, to the immortality of the baptism. I bring
good tidings of life to you who tarry in the darkness of ignorance. Come
into liberty from slavery, into a kingdom from tyranny, into
incorruption from corruption. And how, saith one, shall we come? How? By
water and the Holy Ghost. This is the water in conjunction with the
Spirit, by which paradise is watered, by which the earth is enriched, by
which plants grow, by which animals multiply, and (to sum up the whole
in a single word) by which man is begotten again and endued with life,
in which also Christ was baptized, and in which the Spirit descended in
the form of a dove.

9\. This is the Spirit that at the beginning "moved upon the thee of the
waters; "<sup>[411](footnote/fn39.htm#P3963_1250890)</sup> by whom the
world moves; by whom creation consists, and all things have life; who
also wrought mightily in the
prophets,<sup>[412](footnote/fn39.htm#P3964_1251029)</sup> and descended
in flight upon Christ.<sup>[413](footnote/fn39.htm#P3965_1251090)</sup>
This is the Spirit that was given to the apostles in the form of fiery
tongues.<sup>[414](footnote/fn39.htm#P3966_1251192)</sup> This is the
Spirit that David sought when he said, "Create in me a clean heart, O
God, and renew a right spirit within
me."<sup>[415](footnote/fn39.htm#P3967_1251335)</sup> Of this Spirit
Gabriel also spoke to the Virgin, "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the Highest shall overshadow
thee."<sup>[416](footnote/fn39.htm#P3968_1251494)</sup> By this Spirit
Peter spake that blessed word, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the
living God."<sup>[417](footnote/fn39.htm#P3969_1251609)</sup> By this
Spirit the rock of the Church was
stablished.<sup>[418](footnote/fn39.htm#P3970_1251685)</sup> This is the
Spirit, the Comforter, that is sent because of
thee,<sup>[419](footnote/fn39.htm#P3971_1251772)</sup> that He may show
thee to be the Son<sup>[420](footnote/fn39.htm#P3972_1251829)</sup> of
God.

10\. Come then, be begotten again, O man, into the adoption of God. And
how? says one. If thou practisest adultery no more, and committest not
murder, and servest not idols; if thou art not overmastered by pleasure;
if thou dost not suffer the feeling of pride to rule thee; if thou
cleanest off the filthiness of impurity, and puttest off the burden of
sin; if thou castest off the armour of the devil, and puttest on the
breastplate of faith, even as Isaiah saith, "Wash you, and seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and plead for the
widow. And come and let us reason together, saith the Lord. Though your
sins be as scarlet, I shall make them white as snow; and though they be
like crimson, I shall make them white as wool. And if ye be willing, and
hear my voice, ye shall eat the good of the
land."<sup>[421](footnote/fn39.htm#P3974_1252678)</sup> Do you see,
beloved, how the prophet spake beforetime of the purifying power of
baptism? For he who comes down in faith to the layer of regeneration,
and renounces the devil, and joins himself to Christ; who denies the
enemy, and makes the confession that Christ is God; who puts off the
bondage, and puts on the adoption,-he comes up from the baptism
brilliant as the sun,<sup>[422](footnote/fn39.htm#P3975_1253074)</sup>
flashing forth the beams of righteousness, and, which is indeed the
chief thing, he returns a son of God and joint-heir with Christ. To Him
be the glory and the power, together with His most holy, and good, and
quickening Spirit, now and ever, and to all the ages of the ages. Amen.

I.<sup>[423](footnote/fn39.htm#P3980_1253664)</sup>

> From the Discourse of Hippolytus, Bishop of Rome, on the Resurrection
> and Incorruption.

Men, he says, "in the resurrection will be like the angels of
God,"<sup>[424](footnote/fn39.htm#P3983_1254035)</sup> to wit, in
incorruption, and immortality, and incapacity of
loss.<sup>[425](footnote/fn39.htm#P3984_1254124)</sup> For the
incorruptible nature is not the subject of
generation;<sup>[426](footnote/fn39.htm#P3985_1254203)</sup> it grows
not, sleeps not, hungers not, thirsts not, is not wearied, suffers not,
dies not, is not pierced by nails and spear, sweats not, drops not with
blood. Of such kind are the natures of the angels and of souls released
from the body. For both these are of another kind, and different from
these creatures of our world, which are visible and perishing.

II.<sup>[427](footnote/fn39.htm#P3988_1254581)</sup>

> From the Discourse of St. Hippolytus, Bishop and Martyr, on the Divine
> Nature.<sup>[428](footnote/fn39.htm#P3990_1254865)</sup>

God is capable of willing, but not of not
willing<sup>[429](footnote/fn39.htm#P3992_1254938)</sup> for that
pertains only to one that changes and makes
choice;<sup>[430](footnote/fn39.htm#P3993_1255023)</sup> for things that
are being made follow the eternal will of God, by which also things that
are made abide sustained.

III.<sup>[431](footnote/fn39.htm#P3996_1255173)</sup>

> St. Hippolytus, Bishop and Martyr, in his Homily on the Paschal
> Supper.

He was altogether<sup>[432](footnote/fn39.htm#P3999_1255328)</sup> in
all, and everywhere; and though He filleth the universe up to all the
principalities of the air, He stripped Himself again. And for a brief
space He cries that the cup might pass from Him, with a view to show
truly that He was also
man.<sup>[433](footnote/fn40.htm#P4000_1255581)</sup> But remembering,
too, the purpose for which He was sent, He fulfils the dispensation
(economy) for which He was sent, and exclaims, "Father, not my
will,"<sup>[434](footnote/fn40.htm#P4001_1255751)</sup> and, "The spirit
is willing, but the flesh is
weak."<sup>[435](footnote/fn40.htm#P4002_1255826)</sup>

IV.<sup>[436](footnote/fn40.htm#P4005_1255853)</sup>

1\. Take me, O Samuel, the heifer brought to Bethlehem, in order to show
the king begotten of David, and him who is anointed to be king and
priest by the Father.

2\. Tell me, O blessed Mary, what that was that was conceived by thee in
the womb, and what that was that was born by thee in thy virgin matrix.
For it was the first-born Word of God that descended to thee from
heaven, and was formed as a first-born man in the womb, in order that
the first-born Word of God might be shown to be united with a first-born
man.

3\. And in the second (form),-to wit, by the prophets, as by Samuel,
calling back and delivering the people from the slavery of the aliens.
And in the third (form), that in which He was incarnate, taking to
Himself humanity from the Virgin, in which character also He saw the
city, and wept over it.

V.<sup>[437](footnote/fn40.htm#P4011_1256811)</sup>

And for this reason three seasons of the year prefigured the Saviour
Himself, so that He should fulfil the mysteries prophesied of Him. In
the Passover season, so as to exhibit Himself as one destined to be
sacrificed like a sheep, and to prove Himself the true Paschal-lamb,
even as the apostle says, "Even Christ," who is God, "our passover was
sacrificed for us."<sup>[438](footnote/fn40.htm#P4013_1257308)</sup> And
at Pentecost so as to presignify the kingdom of heaven as He Himself
first ascended to heaven and brought man as a gift to
God.<sup>[439](footnote/fn40.htm#P4014_1257460)</sup>

VI.<sup>[440](footnote/fn40.htm#P4017_1257539)</sup>

And an ark of imperishable wood was the Saviour Himself. For by this was
signified the imperishable and incorruptible tabernacle (of His body),
which engendered no corruption of sin. For the man who has sinned also
has this confession to make: "My wounds stank, and were corrupt, because
of my foolishness."<sup>[441](footnote/fn40.htm#P4019_1257930)</sup> But
the Lord was without sin, being of imperishable wood in respect of His
humanity,-that is to say, being of the Virgin and the Holy Spirit,
covered, as it were, within and without with the purest gold of the Word
of God.

VII.<sup>[442](footnote/fn40.htm#P4022_1258181)</sup>

1\. He who rescued from the lowest hell the first-formed man of earth
when he was lost and bound with the chains of death; He who came down
from above, and raised the earthy on
high;<sup>[443](footnote/fn40.htm#P4024_1258508)</sup> He who became the
evangelist of the dead, and the redeemer of the souls, and the
resurrection of the buried,-He was constituted the helper of vanquished
man, being made like him Himself, (so that) the first-born Word
acquainted Himself with the first-formed Adam in the Virgin; He who is
spiritual sought out the earthy in the womb; He who is the ever-living
One sought out him who, through disobedience, is subject to death; He
who is heavenly called the terrene to the things that are above; He who
is the nobly-born sought, by means of His own subjection, to declare the
slave free; He transformed the man into adamant who was dissolved into
dust and made the food of the serpent, and declared Him who hung on the
tree to be Lord over the conqueror, and thus through the tree He is
found victor.

2\. For they who know not now the Son of God incarnate, shall know in
Him who comes as Judge in glory, Him who is now despised in the body of
His humiliation.

3\. And the apostles, when they came to the sepulchre on the third day,
did not find the body of Jesus; just as the children of Israel went up
the mount and sought for the tomb of Moses, but did not find it.

VIII.<sup>[444](footnote/fn40.htm#P4029_1259733)</sup>

Under the figure of Egypt he described the world; and under things made
with hands, idolatry; and under the earthquake, the subversion, and
dissolution of the earth itself. And he represented the Lord the Word as
a light cloud, the purest tabernacle. enthroned on which our Lord Jesus
Christ entered into this life in order to subvert error.

IX.<sup>[445](footnote/fn40.htm#P4033_1260160)</sup>

Now Hippolytus, the martyr and bishop of \[the Province of\] Rome, in
his second discourse on Daniel, speaks thus:-

Then indeed Azarias, standing along with the others, made their
acknowledgments to God with song and prayer in the midst of the furnace.
Beginning thus with His holy and glorious and honourable name, they came
to the works of the Lord themselves, and named first of all those of
heaven, and glorified Him, saying, "Bless the Lord, all ye works of the
Lord." Then they passed to the sons of men, and taking up their hymn in
order, they then named the spirits \[that people
Tartarus<sup>[446](footnote/fn40.htm#P4036_1261154)</sup> beneath the
earth, \] and the souls of the righteous, in order that they might
praise God together with
them.X<sup>[447](footnote/fn40.htm#P4037_1261321)</sup>

Now a person might say that these men, and those who hold a different
opinion, are yet near neighbours, being involved in like error. For
those men, indeed, either profess that Christ came into our life a mere
man, and deny the talent of His divinity, or else, acknowledging Him to
be God, they deny, on the other hand, His humanity, and teach that His
appearances to those who saw Him as man were illusory, inasmuch as He
did not bear with Him true manhood, but was rather a kind of phantom
manifestation. Of this class are, for example, Marcion and Valentinus,
and the Gnostics, who sunder the Word from the flesh, and thus set aside
the one talent, viz., the
incarnation.XI<sup>[448](footnote/fn40.htm#P4039_1262084)</sup>

1\. The body of the Lord presented both these to the world, the sacred
blood and the holy water.

2\. And His body, though dead after the manner of man, possesses in it
great power of life. For streams which flow not from dead bodies flowed
forth from Him, viz., blood and water; in order that we might know what
power for life is held by the virtue that dwelt in His body, so as that
it appears not to be dead like others, and is able to shed forth for us
the springs of life.

3\. And not a bone of the Holy Lamb is broken, this figure showing us
that suffering toucheth not His strength. For the bones are the strength
of the body.

I.

Now Hippolytus, a martyr for piety, who was bishop of the place called
Portus, near Rome, in his book *Against all Heresies*, wrote in these
terms:-

I perceive, then, that the matter is one of contention. For
he<sup>[450](footnote/fn40.htm#P4050_1263175)</sup> speaks thus: Christ
kept the supper, then, on that day, and then suffered; whence it is
needful that I, too, should keep it in the same manner as the Lord did.
But he has fallen into error by not perceiving that at the time when
Christ suffered He did not eat the passover of the
law.<sup>[451](footnote/fn40.htm#P4051_1263547)</sup> For He was the
passover that had been of old proclaimed, and that was fulfilled on that
determinate day.

II.

> From the same.

And again the same (authority), in the first book of his treatise on the
Holy Supper, speaks thus:-

Now that neither in the first nor in the last there was anything false
is evident; for he who said of old, "I will not any more eat the
passover,"<sup>[452](footnote/fn40.htm#P4057_1263977)</sup> probably
partook of supper before the passover. But the passover He did not eat,
but He suffered; for it was not the time for Him to
eat.III<sup>[453](footnote/fn40.htm#P4058_1264140)</sup>

Hippolytus, Bishop and Martyr, in a letter to a certain
queen.<sup>[454](footnote/fn40.htm#P4060_1264395)</sup>

1\. He calls Him, then, "the first-fruits of them that
sleep,"<sup>[455](footnote/fn40.htm#P4062_1264763)</sup> as the
"first-begotten of the
dead."<sup>[456](footnote/fn40.htm#P4063_1264822)</sup> For He, having
risen, and being desirous to show that that same (body) had been raised
which had also died, when His disciples were in doubt, called Thomas to
Him, and said, "Reach hither; handle me, and see: for a spirit hath not
bone and flesh, as ye see me
have."<sup>[457](footnote/fn40.htm#P4064_1265108)</sup>

2\. In calling Him the *first-fruits*, he testified to that which we
have said, viz., that the Saviour, taking to Himself the flesh out of
the same lump, raised this same flesh, and made it the first-fruits of
the flesh of the righteous, in order that all we who have believed in
the hope of the Risen One may have the resurrection in expectation.

The Story OF A Maiden OF Corinth, And A Certain Magistrianus

The account given by Hippolytus, the friend of the
apostles<sup>[458](footnote/fn40.htm#P4068_1265607)</sup>

In another little book bearing the name of Hippolytus, the friend of the
apostles, I found a story of the following nature:-

There lived a certain most noble and beautiful
maiden<sup>[459](footnote/fn40.htm#P4071_1265820)</sup> in the city of
Corinth, in the careful exercise of a virtuous life. At that time some
persons falsely charged her before the judge there, who was a Greek,
with cursing the times, and the princes, and the images. Now those who
trafficked in such things, brought her beauty under the notice of the
impious judge, who lusted after women. And he gladly received the
accusation with his equine ears and lascivious thoughts. And when she
was brought before the bloodstained (judge), he was driven still more
frantic with profligate passion. But when, after bringing every device
to bear upon her, the profane than could not gain over this woman of
God, he subjected the noble maiden to various outrages. And when he
failed in these too, and was unable to seduce her from her confession of
Christ, the cruel judge became furious against her, and gave her over to
a punishment of the following nature: Placing the chaste maiden in a
brothel, he charged the manager, saying, Take this woman, and bring me
three nummi by her every day. And the man, exacting the money from her
by her dishonour, gave her up to any who sought her in the brothel. And
when the women-hunters knew that, they came to the brothel, and, paying
the price lint upon their iniquity, sought to seduce her. But this most
honourable maiden, taking counsel with herself to deceive them, called
them to her, and earnestly besought them, saying: I have a certain
ulceration of the *pudenda*, which has an extremely hateful stench; and
I am afraid that ye might come to hate me on account of the abominable
sore. Grant me therefore a few days, and then ye may have me even for
nothing. With these words the blessed maiden gained over the
profligates, and dismissed them for a
time.<sup>[460](footnote/fn40.htm#P4072_1267622)</sup> And with most
fitting prayers she importuned God, and with contrite supplications she
sought to turn Him to compassion. God, therefore, who knew her thoughts,
and understood how the chaste maiden was distressed in heart for her
purity, gave ear to her; and the Guardian of the safety of all men in
those days interposed with His arrangements in the following manner:-

Of a certain person
Magistrianus.<sup>[461](footnote/fn40.htm#P4074_1268084)</sup>

There was a certain young man,
Magistrianus,<sup>[462](footnote/fn40.htm#P4076_1268164)</sup> comely in
his personal appearance, and of a pious mind, whom God had inspired with
such a burning spiritual zeal, that he despised even death itself. He,
coming under the guise of profligacy, goes in, when the evening was far
gone, to the fellow who kept the women, and pays him five nummi, and
says to him, Permit me to spend this night with this damsel. Entering
then with her into the private apartment, he says to her, Rise, save
thyself. And taking off her garments, and dressing her in his own
attire, his night-gown, his cloak, and all the habiliments of a man, he
says to her, Wrap yourself up with the top of your cloak, and go out;
and doing so, and signing herself entirely with the mystery of the
cross, she went forth uncorrupted from that place, and was preserved
perfectly stainless by the grace of Christ, and by the instrumentality
of the young man, who by his own blood delivered her from dishonour. And
on the following day the matter became known, and Magistrianus was
brought before the infuriated judge. And when the cruel tyrant had
examined the noble champion of Christ, and had learned all, he ordered
him to be thrown to the wild beasts,-that in this, too, the
honour-hating demon might be put to shame. For, whereas he thought to
involve the noble youth in an unhallowed punishment, he exhibited him as
a double martyr for Christ, inasmuch as he had both striven nobly for
his own immortal soul, and persevered manfully in labours also in behalf
of that noble and blessed maiden. Wherefore also he was deemed worthy of
double honour with Christ, and of the illustrious and blessed crowns by
His goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Elucidation.](0050019)
