[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050036)  [Next](0050038.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn49.htm#P4968_1510419.md)</sup>

To the Clergy, Concerning the Lapsed and Catechumens, that They Should
Not Be Left Without Superintendence.

1\. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I
marvel, beloved brethren, that you have answered nothing to me in reply
to my many letters which I have frequently written to you, although as
well the advantage as the need of our brotherhood would certainly be
best provided for if, receiving information from you, I could accurately
investigate and advise upon the management of affairs. Since, however, I
see that there is not yet any Opportunity of coming to you, and that the
summer has already begun-a season that is disturbed with continual and
heavy sicknesses,-I think that our brethren must be dealt with;-that
they who have received certificates from the martyrs, and may be
assisted by their privilege with God, if they should be seized with any
misfortune and peril of sickness, should, without waiting for my
presence, before any presbyter who might be present, or if a presbyter
should not be found and death begins to be imminent, before even a
deacon, be able to make confession of their sin, that, with the
imposition of hands upon them for repentance, they should come to the
Lord with the peace which the martyrs have desired, by their letters to
us, to be granted to
them.<sup>[3](footnote/fn49.htm#P4974_1512587.md)</sup>

2\. Cherish also by your presence the rest of the people who are lapsed,
and cheer them by your consolation, that they may not fail of the faith
and of God's mercy. For those shall not be forsaken by the aid and
assistance of the Lord, who meekly, humbly, and with true penitence have
persevered in good works; but the divine, remedy will be granted to them
also. To the hearers<sup>[4](footnote/fn49.htm#P4976_1512985.md)</sup>
also, if there are any overtaken by danger, and placed near to death,
let your vigilance not be wanting; let not the mercy of the Lord be
denied to those that are imploring the divine
favour.<sup>[5](footnote/fn49.htm#P4977_1513214.md)</sup> I bid you,
beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and remember me. Greet the
whole brotherhood in my name, and remind them and ask them to be mindful
of me. Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XIII.](0050038.md)
