[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050092)  [Next](0050094) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle LXVIII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn61.htm#P6155_1944893)</sup>

To Florentius Pupianus, on Calumniators.

1\. Cyprian, who is also called
Thascius,<sup>[2](footnote/fn61.htm#P6160_1945379)</sup> to Florentius,
who is also Pupianus, his brother, greeting. I had believed, brother,
that you were now at length turned to repentance for having either
rashly heard or believed in time past things so wicked, so disgraceful,
so execrable even among Gentiles, concerning me. But even now in your
letter I perceive that you are still the same as you were before-that
you believe the same things concerning me, and that you persist in what
you did believe, and, lest by chance the dignity of your eminence and
your martyrdom should be stained by communion with me, that you are
inquiring carefully into my character; and after God the Judge who makes
priests, that you wish to judge-I will not say of me, for what am I?-but
of the judgment of God and of Christ. This is not to believe in God-this
is to stand forth as a rebel against Christ and His Gospel; so that
although He says, "Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and neither
of them falls to the ground without the will of my
Father,"<sup>[3](footnote/fn61.htm#P6161_1946692)</sup> and His majesty
and truth prove that even things of little consequence are not done
without the consciousness and permission of God, you think that God's
priests are ordained in the Church without His knowledge. For to believe
that they who are ordained are unworthy and unchaste, what else is it
than to believe that his priests are not appointed in the Church by God,
nor through God?

2\. Think you that my testimony of myself is better than that of God?
when the Lord Himself teaches, and says that testimony is not true, if
any one himself appears as a witness concerning himself, for the reason
that every one would assuredly favour himself. Nor would any one put
forward mischievous and adverse things against himself, but there may be
a simple confidence of truth if, in what was announced of us, another is
the announcer and witness. "If," He says, "I bear witness of myself, my
testimony is not true; but there is another who beareth witness of
me."<sup>[4](footnote/fn61.htm#P6163_1947665)</sup> but if the Lord
Himself, who will by and by judge all things, was unwilling to be
believed on His own testimony, but preferred to be approved by the
judgment and testimony of God the Father, how much more does it be-hove
His servants to observe this, who are not only approved by, but even
glory in the judgment and testimony of God! But with you the fabrication
of hostile and malignant men has prevailed against the divine decree,
and against our conscience resting upon the strength of its faith, as if
among lapsed and profane persons placed outside the Church, from whose
breasts the Holy Spirit has departed, there could be anything else than
a depraved mind and a deceitful tongue, and venomous hatred, and
sacrilegious lies, which whosoever believes, must of necessity be found
with them when the day of judgment shall come.

3\. But with respect to what you have said, that priests should be
lowly, because both the Lord and His apostles were lowly; both all the
brethren and Gentiles also well know and love my humility; and you also
knew and loved it while you were still in the Church, and were in
communion with me. But which of us is far from humility: I, who daily
serve the brethren, and kindly receive with good-will and gladness every
one that comes to the Church; or you, who appoint yourself bishop of a
bishop, and judge of a
judge,<sup>[5](footnote/fn61.htm#P6165_1949035)</sup> given for the time
by God? Although the Lord God says in Deuteronomy, "And the man that
will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priests or unto
the judge who shall be in those days, even that man shall die; and all
the people, when they hear, shall fear, and do no more
presumptuously."<sup>[6](footnote/fn61.htm#P6166_1949408)</sup> And
again He speaks to Samuel, and says, "They have not despised thee, but
they have despised me."<sup>[7](footnote/fn61.htm#P6167_1949530)</sup>
And moreover the Lord, in the Gospel, when it was said to Him,
"Answerest thou the high priest so? "guarding the priestly dignity, and
teaching that it ought to be maintained, would say nothing against the
high priest, but only clearing His own innocence, answered, saying, "If
I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; but if well, why smitest
thou me? "<sup>[8](footnote/fn61.htm#P6168_1949909)</sup> The blessed
apostle also, when it was said to him, "Revilest thou God's high priest?
"spoke nothing reproachfully against the priest, when he might have
lifted up himself boldly against those who had crucified the Lord, and
who had already sacrificed God and Christ, and the temple and the
priesthood; but even although in false and degraded priests, considering
still the mere empty shadow of the priestly name, he said, "I wist not,
brethren, that he was the high priest; for it is written, Thou shall not
speak evil of the ruler of thy
people."<sup>[9](footnote/fn61.htm#P6169_1950476)</sup>

4\. Unless perchance I was a priest to you before the persecution, when
you held communion with me, and ceased to be a priest after the
persecution! For the persecution, when it came, lifted you to the
highest sublimity of martyrdom. But it depressed me with the burden of
proscription, since it was publicly declared, "If any one holds or
possesses any of the property of Caecilius Cyprian, bishop of the
Christians; "so that even they who did not believe in God appointing a
bishop, could still believe in the devil proscribing a bishop. Nor do I
boast of these things, but with grief I bring them forward, since you
constitute yourself a
judge<sup>[10](footnote/fn61.htm#P6171_1951144)</sup> of God and of
Christ, who says to the apostles, and thereby to all chief rulers, who
by vicarious ordination succeed to the apostles: "He that heareth you,
heareth me; and he that heareth me, heareth Him that sent me; and he
that despiseth you, despiseth me, and Him that sent
me."<sup>[11](footnote/fn61.htm#P6172_1951500)</sup>

5\. For from this have arisen, and still arise, schisms and heresies, in
that the bishop who is
one<sup>[12](footnote/fn61.htm#P6174_1951616)</sup> and rules over the
Church is contemned by the haughty presumption of some persons; and the
man who is honoured by God's condescension, is judged unworthy by men.
For what swelling of pride is this, what arrogance of soul, what
inflation of mind, to call prelates and priests to one's own
recognition, and unless I may be declared clear in your sight and
absolved by your judgment, behold now for six years the brotherhood has
neither had a bishop, nor the people a
prelate,<sup>[13](footnote/fn61.htm#P6175_1952200)</sup> nor the flock a
pastor, nor the Church a governor, nor Christ a
representative,<sup>[14](footnote/fn61.htm#P6176_1952328)</sup> nor God
a priest! Pupianus must come to the rescue, and give judgment, and
declare the decision of God and Christ accepted, that so great a number
of the faithful who have been summoned away, under my rule, may not
appear to have departed without hope of salvation and of peace; that the
new crowd of believers may not be considered to have failed of attaining
any grace of baptism and the Holy Spirit by my
ministry;<sup>[15](footnote/fn61.htm#P6177_1952806)</sup> that the peace
conferred upon so many lapsed and penitent persons, and the communion
vouchsafed by my examination, may not be abrogated by the authority of
your judgment. Condescend for once, and deign to pronounce concerning
us, and to establish our episcopate by the authority of your
recognition, that God and His Christ may thank you, in that by your
means a representative and ruler has been restored as well to their
altar as to their people.

6\. Bees have a king, and cattle a leader, and *they* keep faith to him.
Robbers obey their chief with an obedience full of humility. How much
more simple and better than you are the brute cattle and dumb animals,
and robbers, although bloody, and raging among swords and weapons! The
chief among them is acknowledged and feared, whom no divine judgment has
appointed, but on whom an abandoned faction and a guilty band have
agreed.

7\. You say, indeed, that the scruple into which you have fallen ought
to be taken from your mind. You have fallen into it, but it was by your
irreligious credulity. You have fallen into it, but it was by your own
sacrilegious disposition and will in easily hearkening to unchaste, to
impious, to unspeakable things against your brother. against a priest,
and in willingly believing them in defending other men's falsehoods, as
if they were your own and your private property; and in not remembering
that it is written, "Hedge thine ears with thorns, and hearken not to a
wicked tongue; "<sup>[16](footnote/fn61.htm#P6180_1954408)</sup> and
again: "A wicked doer giveth heed to the tongue of the unjust; but a
righteous man regards not lying
lips."<sup>[17](footnote/fn61.htm#P6181_1954556)</sup> Wherefore have
not the martyrs fallen into this scruple, full of the Holy Ghost, and
already by their passion near to the presence of God and of His Christ;
martyrs who, from their dungeon, directed letters to Cyprian the bishop,
acknowledging the priest of God, and bearing witness to him? Wherefore
have not so many bishops, my colleagues, fallen into this scruple, who
either, when they departed from the midst of us, were proscribed, or
being taken were cast into prison and were in chains; or who, sent away
into exile, have gone by an illustrious road to the Lord; or who in some
places, condemned to death, have received heavenly crowns from the
glorification of the Lord? Wherefore have not they fallen into this
scruple, from among that people of ours which is with us, and is by
God's condescension committed to us-so many confessors who have been put
to the question and tortured, and glorious by the memory of illustrious
wounds and scars; so many chaste virgins, so many praiseworthy widows;
finally, all the churches throughout the whole world who are associated
with us in the bond of unity? Unless all these, who are in communion
with me, as you have written, are polluted with the pollution of my
lips, and have lost the hope of eternal life by the contagion of my
communion.<sup>[18](footnote/fn61.htm#P6182_1955874)</sup> Pupianus
alone, sound, inviolate, holy, modest, who would not associate himself
with us, shall dwell alone in paradise and in the kingdom of heaven.

8\. You have written also, that on my account the Church has now a
portion of herself in a state of dispersion, although the whole people
of the Church are collected, and united, and joined to itself in an
undivided concord: they alone have remained without, who even, if they
had been within, would have had to be cast out. Nor does the Lord, the
protector of His people, and their guardian, suffer the wheat to be
snatched from His floor; but the chaff alone can be separated from the
Church, since also the apostle says, "For what if some of them have
departed from the faith? shall their unbelief make the faith of God of
none effect? God forbid; for God is true, but every man a
liar."<sup>[19](footnote/fn61.htm#P6184_1956746)</sup> And the Lord also
in the Gospel, when disciples forsook Him as He spoke, turning to the
twelve, said, "Will ye also go away? "then Peter answered Him, "Lord, to
whom shall we go? Thou hast the word of eternal life; and we believe,
and are sure, that Thou art the Son of the living
God."<sup>[20](footnote/fn61.htm#P6185_1957054)</sup> Peter speaks
there, on whom the Church was to be
built,<sup>[21](footnote/fn61.htm#P6186_1957131)</sup> teaching and
showing in the name of the Church, that although a rebellious and
arrogant multitude of those who will not hear and obey may depart, yet
the Church does not depart from Christ; and they are the Church who are
a people united to the priest, and the flock which adheres to its
pastor.<sup>[22](footnote/fn61.htm#P6187_1957674)</sup> Whence you ought
to know that the bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the
bishop;<sup>[23](footnote/fn61.htm#P6188_1957900)</sup> and if any one
be not with the bishop, that he is not in the Church, and that those
flatter themselves in vain who creep in, not having peace with God's
priests, and think that they communicate secretly with some; while the
Church, which is Catholic and one, is not cut nor divided, but is indeed
connected and bound together by the cement of priests who cohere with
one another.

9\. Wherefore, brother, if you consider God's majesty who ordains
priests, if you will for once have respect to Christ, who by His decree
and word, and by His presence, both rules prelates themselves, and rules
the Church by prelates; if you will trust, in respect of the innocence
of bishops, not human hatred, but the divine judgment; if you will begin
even a late repentance for your temerity, and pride, and insolence; if
you will most abundantly make satisfaction to God and His Christ whom I
serve, and to whom with pure and unstained lips I ceaselessly offer
sacrifices, not only in peace, but in persecution; we may have some
ground for communion with you, even although there still remain among us
respect and fear for the divine censure; so that first I should consult
my Lord whether He would permit peace to be granted to you, and you to
be received to the communion of His Church by His own showing and
admonition.

10\. For I remember what has already been manifested to me, nay, what
has been prescribed by the authority of our Lord and God to an obedient
and fearing servant; and among other things which He condescended to
show and to reveal, He also added this: "Whoso therefore does not
believe Christ, who maketh the priest, shall hereafter begin to believe
Him who avengeth the priest." Although I know that to some men dreams
seem ridiculous and visions foolish, yet assuredly it is to such as
would rather believe in opposition to the priest, than believe the
priest. But it is no wonder, since his brethren said of Joseph, "Behold,
this dreamer cometh; come now therefore, let us slay
him."<sup>[24](footnote/fn61.htm#P6191_1960011)</sup> And afterwards the
dreamer attained to what he had dreamed; and his slayers and sellers
were put to confusion, so that they, who at first did not believe the
words, afterwards believed the deeds. But of those things that you have
done, either in persecution or in peace, it is foolish for me to pretend
to judge you, since you rather appoint yourself a judge over us. These
things, of the pure conscience of my mind, and of my confidence in my
Lord and my God, I have written at length. You have my letter, and I
yours. In the day of judgment, before the tribunal of Christ, both will
be read.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXIX.](0050094)
