[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050020)  [Next](0050022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

The God-bearing Mary, p. 242.

"This name" (qeoto/koj), says Pearson, "was first in use in the Greek
Church, which, delighting in the happy compositions of that language, so
called the Blessed Virgin; from which the Latins, in imitation, styled
her *Virginem Deiparam*," etc. ... Yet those ancient Greeks which call
the Virgin qeoto/koj, did not call her mhte/ra tou= Qeou=, "Mother of
God." This was very different to a pious ear, and rests on no synodical
authority. The very learned notes of Pearson, *On the Creed*, pp. 297,
299, should by all means be consulted. Leo of Rome, called "the Great,"
seems to have coined the less orthodox expression, relying on Holy
Scripture, indeed, in the salutation of Elisabeth (Luke 1:43). This term
has been sadly abused for Mariolatry.

II

Synaxis, p. 257.

It seems to me worth while to quote a few words from the new and
critical edition of Leighton's *Works*, which should be consulted for
fuller information.<sup>[207](footnote/fn46.htm#P4622_1356208)</sup> The
editor says: "Leighton uses a word for the Holy Communion which is worth
noting, because it is rarely used by *Western theologians*." The word
*Synaxis* is but a Christianized form of the word *Synagogue*; but, like
the word koinwni/a, it points to Christ's mystical body,-"gathering
together in one the children of God." *Synaxis* = suna/gei ei0j e \#n.
It sums up the idea, "We, being many, are one Bread and one Body, for we
are all partakers of that one Bread." Compare John 11:52 and 1
Corinthians 10:15.

St. Chrysostom calls the *Synaxis* frikwdesta/th, which is a very
different thing from *maxime tremenda*, as applied to the modern "Mass,"
in behalf of which it is quoted. For Chrysostom applies it to the
*participation* of the "Synaxis," and not to the "oblation," much less
to the "Host" as an object of adoration, of which he never heard or
dreamed. He calls "the Synaxis" *Shudderful* (to borrow a word from the
Germans), because the unworthy recipient, in the *Synaxis*, eats and
drinks his own
condemnation.<sup>[208](footnote/fn46.htm#P4624_1357315)</sup> One must
ever be on his guard against the subtlety which reads into the Fathers
*modern ideas* under ancient
phrases.<sup>[209](footnote/fn46.htm#P4625_1357583)</sup> Precisely so
Holy Scripture itself is paraphrased into Trent doctrine, as in Acts
13:2 the Louvain versionists rendered the text, "And while *they offered
the sacrifice of the Mass* and fasted."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cyprian](0050022)
