[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050078)  [Next](0050080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle LIV.<sup>[1](footnote/fn56)</sup>

To Cornelius, Concerning Fortunatus and Felicissimus, or Against the
Heretics.

1\. I have read your letter, dearest brother, which you sent by Saturus
our brother the acolyte, abundantly full of fraternal love and
ecclesiastical discipline and priestly reproof; in which you signified
that Felicissimus,<sup>[3](footnote/fn57.htm#P5702_1759083)</sup> no new
enemy of Christ, but long ago excommunicated for his very many and grave
crimes, and condemned not only by my judgment, but also by that of very
many of my fellow-bishops, has been rejected by you there, and that when
he came attended by a band and faction of desperadoes, he was driven
from the Church with the full rigour with which it behoves a bishop to
act. From which Church long ago he was driven, with others like himself,
by the majesty of God and the severity of Christ our Lord and Judge;
that the author of schism and disagreement, the fraudulent user of money
entrusted to him, the violator of virgins, the destroyer and corrupter
of many marriages, should not, by the dishonour of his presence and his
immodest and incestuous contact, violate further the spouse of Christ,
hitherto uncorrupt, holy, modest.

2\. But yet, when I read your other letter, brother, which you subjoined
to your first one, I was considerably surprised at observing that you
were in some degree disturbed by the threats and terrors of those who
had come, when, according to what you wrote, they had attacked and
threatened you with the greatest desperation, that if you would not
receive the letters which they had brought, they would read them
publicly, and would utter many base and disgraceful things, and such as
were worthy of their mouth. But if the matter is thus, dearest brother,
that the audacity of the most wicked men is to be dreaded, and that what
evil men cannot do rightly and equitably, they may accomplish by daring
and desperation, there is an end of the vigour of the episcopacy, and of
the sublime and divine power of governing the Church; nor can we
continue any longer, or in fact now be Christians, if it is come to
this, that we are to be afraid of the threats or the snares of outcasts.
For both Gentiles and Jews threaten, and heretics and all those, of
whose hearts and minds the devil has taken possession, daily attest
their venomous madness with furious voice. We are not, therefore, to
yield because they threaten; nor is the adversary and enemy on that
account greater than Christ, because he claims for himself and assumes
so much in the world. There ought to abide with us, dearest brother, an
immoveable strength of faith; and against all the irruptions and onsets
of the waves that roar against us, a steady and unshaken courage should
plant itself as with the fortitude and mass of a resisting rock. Nor
does it matter whence comes the terror or the danger to a bishop, who
lives subject to terrors and dangers, and is nevertheless made glorious
by those very terrors and dangers. For we ought not to consider and
regard the mere threats of the Gentiles or of the Jews, when we see that
the Lord Himself was deserted by His brethren, and was betrayed by him
whom He Himself had chosen among His apostles; that also in the
beginning of the world it was none other than a brother who slew
righteous Abel, and an angry brother pursued the fleeing Jacob, and the
youthful Joseph was sold by the act of his brethren. In the Gospel also
we read that it was foretold that our foes should rather be of our own
household, and that they who have first been associated in the sacrament
of unity<sup>[4](footnote/fn57.htm#P5704_1762367)</sup> shall be they
who shall betray one another. It makes no difference who delivers up or
who rages, since God permits those to be delivered up whom He appoints
to be crowned. For it is no ignominy to us to suffer from our brethren
what Christ suffered, nor is it glory to them to do what Judas did. But
what insolence it is in them, what swelling and inflated and vain
boasting on the part of these threateners, *there* to threaten me in my
absence, when here they have me present in their power! I do not fear
their reproaches with which they daily wound themselves and their own
life; I do not tremble at their clubs and stones and swords, which they
brandish with parricidal words: as far as lies in their power such men
are homicides before God. Yet they are not able to slay unless the Lord
have allowed them to slay; and although I must die but once, yet they
daily slay me by their hatred, their words, and their villanies.

3\. But, dearest brother, ecclesiastical discipline is not on that
account to be forsaken, nor priestly censure to be relaxed, because we
are disturbed with reproaches or are shaken with terrors; since Holy
Scripture meets and warns us, saying, "But he who presumes and is
haughty, the man who boasts of himself, who hath enlarged his soul as
hell, shall accomplish
nothing."<sup>[5](footnote/fn57.htm#P5706_1763730)</sup> And again: "And
fear not the words of a sinful man, for his glory shall be dung and
worms. To-day he is lifted up, and to-morrow he shall not be found,
because he is turned into his earth, and his thought shall
perish."<sup>[6](footnote/fn57.htm#P5707_1763965)</sup> And again: "I
have seen the wicked exalted, and raised above the cedars of Libanus: I
went by, and, lo, he was not; yea, I sought him, and his place was not
found."<sup>[7](footnote/fn57.htm#P5708_1764152)</sup> Exaltation, and
puffing up, and arrogant and haughty boastfulness, spring not from the
teaching of Christ who teaches humility, but from the spirit of
Antichrist, whom the Lord rebukes by His prophet, saying, "For thou hast
said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will place my throne
above the stars of God: I will sit on a lofty mountain, above the lofty
mountains to the north: I will ascend above the clouds; I will be like
the Most High."<sup>[8](footnote/fn57.htm#P5709_1764630)</sup> And he
added, saying, "Yet thou shalt descend into hell, to the foundations of
the earth; and they that see thee shall wonder at
thee."<sup>[9](footnote/fn57.htm#P5710_1764787)</sup> Whence also divine
Scripture threatens a like punishment to such in another place, and
says, "For the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is
injurious and proud, and upon every one that is lifted up, and
lofty."<sup>[10](footnote/fn57.htm#P5711_1765039)</sup> By his mouth,
therefore, and by his words, is every one at once betrayed; and whether
he has Christ in his heart, or Antichrist, is discerned in his speaking,
according to what the Lord says in His Gospel, "O generation of vipers,
how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaketh. A good man out of the good treasure
bringeth forth good things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure
bringeth forth evil
things."<sup>[11](footnote/fn57.htm#P5712_1765524)</sup> Whence also
that rich sinner who implores help from Lazarus, then laid in Abraham's
bosom, and established in a place of comfort, while he, writhing in
torments, is consumed by the heats of burning flame, suffers most
punishment of all parts of his body in his mouth and his tongue, because
doubtless in his mouth and his tongue he had most
sinned.<sup>[12](footnote/fn57.htm#P5713_1765897)</sup>

4\. For since it is written, "Neither shall revilers inherit the kingdom
of God,"<sup>[13](footnote/fn57.htm#P5715_1766173)</sup> and again the
Lord says in His Gospel, "Whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool;
and whosoever shall say, Raca, shall be in danger of the Gehenna of
fire,"<sup>[14](footnote/fn57.htm#P5716_1766355)</sup> how can they
evade the rebuke of the Lord the avenger, who heap up such expressions,
not only on their brethren, but also on the priests, to whom is granted
such honour of the condescension of God, that whosoever should not obey
his priest, and him that judgeth here for the time, was immediately to
be slain? In Deuteronomy the Lord God speaks, saying, "And the man that
will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest or to the
judge, whosoever he shall be in those days, that man shall die; and all
the people, when they hear, shall fear, and shall do no more
wickedly."<sup>[15](footnote/fn57.htm#P5717_1766960)</sup> Moreover, to
Samuel when he was despised by the Jews, God says; "They have not
despised thee, but they have despised
me."<sup>[16](footnote/fn57.htm#P5718_1767107)</sup> And the Lord also
in the Gospel says, "He that heareth you, heareth me, and Him that sent
me; and he that rejecteth you, rejecteth me; and he that rejecteth me,
rejecteth Him that sent
me."<sup>[17](footnote/fn57.htm#P5719_1767318)</sup> And when he had
cleansed the leprous man, he said, "Go, show thyself to the
priest."<sup>[18](footnote/fn57.htm#P5720_1767420)</sup> And when
afterwards, in the time of His passion, He had received a buffet from a
servant of the priest, and the servant said to Him, "Answerest thou the
high priest so? "<sup>[19](footnote/fn57.htm#P5721_1767611)</sup> the
Lord said nothing reproachfully against the high priest, nor detracted
anything from the priest's honour; but rather asserting His own
innocence, and showing it, He says, "If I have spoken evil, bear witness
of the evil; but if well, why smitest thou me?
"<sup>[20](footnote/fn57.htm#P5722_1767893)</sup> Also subsequently, in
the Acts of the Apostles, the blessed Apostle Paul, when it was said to
him, "Revilest thou God's priest?
"<sup>[21](footnote/fn57.htm#P5723_1768044)</sup> -although they had
begun to be sacrilegious, and impious, and bloody, the Lord having
already been crucified, and had no longer retained anything of the
priestly honour and authority-yet Paul, considering the name itself,
however empty, and the shadow, as it were, of the priest, said, "I wist
not, brethren, that he was the high priest: for it is written, Thou
shalt not speak evil of the ruler of thy,
people."<sup>[22](footnote/fn57.htm#P5724_1768477)</sup>

5\. When, then, such and so great examples, and many others, are
precedents whereby the priestly authority and power by the divine
condescension is established, what kind of people, think you, are they
who, being enemies of the priests, and rebels against the Catholic
Church, are frightened neither by the threatening of a forewarning Lord,
nor by the vengeance of coming judgment? For neither have heresies
arisen, nor have schisms originated, from any other source than from
this, that God's priest is not obeyed; nor do they consider that there
is one person for the time priest in the Church, and for the time judge
in the stead of Christ;<sup>[23](footnote/fn57.htm#P5726_1769141)</sup>
whom, if, according to divine teaching, the whole fraternity should
obey, no one would stir up anything against the college of priests; no
one, after the divine judgment, after the suffrage of the people, after
the consent of the co-bishops, would make himself a judge, not now of
the bishop, but of God. No one would rend the Church by a division of
the unity of Christ.<sup>[24](footnote/fn57.htm#P5727_1769654)</sup> No
one, pleasing himself, and swelling with arrogance, would found a new
heresy, separate and without, unless any one be of such sacrilegious
daring and abandoned mind, as to think that a priest is made without
God's judgment, when the Lord says in His Gospel, "Are not two sparrows
sold for a farthing? and one of them does not fall to the ground without
the will of your
Father."<sup>[25](footnote/fn57.htm#P5728_1770167)</sup> When He says
that not even the least things are done without God's will, does any one
think that the highest and greatest things are done in God's Church
either without God's knowledge or permission, and that priests-that is,
His stewards-are not ordained by His decree? This is not to have faith,
whereby we live; this is not to give honour to God, by whose direction
and decision we know and believe that all things are ruled and governed.
Undoubtedly there are bishops made, not by the will of God, but they are
such as are made outside of the Church-such as are made contrary to the
ordinance and tradition of the Gospel, as the Lord Himself in the twelve
prophets asserts, saying, "They have set up a king for themselves, and
not by me."<sup>[26](footnote/fn57.htm#P5729_1770928)</sup> And again:
"Their sacrifices are as the bread of mourning; all that eat thereof
shall be polluted."<sup>[27](footnote/fn57.htm#P5730_1771048)</sup> And
the Holy Spirit also cries by Isaiah, and says, "Woe unto you, children
that are deserters. Thus saith the Lord, Ye have taken counsel, but not
of me; and ye have made a covenant, but not of my Spirit, that ye may
add sin to sin."<sup>[28](footnote/fn57.htm#P5731_1771300)</sup>

6\. But-I speak to you as being provoked; I speak as grieving; I speak
as constrained-when a bishop is appointed into the place of one
deceased, when he is chosen in time of peace by the suffrage of an
entire people, when he is protected by the help of God in persecution,
faithfully linked with all his colleagues, approved to his people by now
four years' experience in his episcopate; observant of discipline in
time of peace; in time of disturbance, proscribed with the name of his
episcopate applied and attached to him; so often asked for in the circus
"for the lions; "in the amphitheatre, honoured with the testimony of the
divine condescension; even in these very days on which I have written
this letter to you, on account of the sacrifices which, by proclaimed
edict, the people were commanded to celebrate, demanded anew in the
circus "for the lions" by the clamour of the populace;-when such a one,
dearest brother, is seen to be assailed by some desperate and reckless
men, and by those who have their place outside the Church, it is
manifest who assails him: not assuredly Christ, who either appoints or
protects his priests; but he who, as the adversary of Christ and the foe
to His Church, for this purpose persecutes with his malice the ruler of
the Church, that when the pilot is removed, he may rage more atrociously
and more violently with a view to the Church's dispersion.

7\. Nor ought it, my dearest brother, to disturb any one who is faithful
and mindful of the Gospel, and retains the commands of the apostle who
forewarns us; if in the last days certain persons, proud, contumacious,
and enemies of God's priests, either depart from the Church or act
against the Church, since both the Lord and His apostles have previously
foretold that there should be such. Nor let any one wonder that the
servant placed over them should be forsaken by some, when His own
disciples forsook the Lord Himself, who performed such great and
wonderful works, and illustrated the attributes of God the Father by the
testimony of His doings. And yet He did not rebuke them when they went
away, nor even severely threaten them; but rather, turning to His
apostles, He said, "Will ye also go away?
"<sup>[29](footnote/fn57.htm#P5734_1773520)</sup> manifestly observing
the law whereby a man left to his own liberty, and established in his
own choice, himself desires for himself either death or salvation.
Nevertheless, Peter,<sup>[30](footnote/fn57.htm#P5735_1773717)</sup>
upon whom by the same Lord the Church had been built, speaking one for
all, and answering with the voice of the Church, says, "Lord, to whom
shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life; and we believe, and
are sure that Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God:
"<sup>[31](footnote/fn57.htm#P5736_1774172)</sup> signifying, doubtless,
and showing that those who departed from Christ perished by their own
fault, yet that the Church which believes on Christ, and holds that
which it has once learned, never departs from Him at all, and that those
are the Church who remain in the house of God; but that, on the other
hand, they are not the plantation planted by God the Father, whom we see
not to be established with the stability of wheat, but blown about like
chaff by the breath of the enemy scattering them, of whom John also in
his epistle says, "They went out from us, but they were not of us; for
if they had been of us, no doubt they would have continued with
us."<sup>[32](footnote/fn57.htm#P5737_1774851)</sup> Paul also warns us,
when evil men perish out of the Church, not to be disturbed, nor to let
our faith be lessened by the departure of the faithless. "For what," he
says, "if some of them have departed from the faith? Hath their unbelief
made the faith of God of none effect? God forbid! For God is true, but
every man a liar."<sup>[33](footnote/fn57.htm#P5738_1775198)</sup>

8\. For our own part, it befits our conscience, dearest brother, to
strive that none should perish *going* out of the Church by our fault;
but if any one, of his own accord and by his own sin, should perish, and
should be unwilling to repent and to return to the Church, that we who
are anxious for their well-being should be blameless in the day of
judgment, and that they alone should remain in punishment who refused to
be healed by the wholesomeness of our advice. Nor ought the reproaches
of the lost to move us in any degree to depart from the right path and
from the sure rule, since also the apostle instructs us, saying, "If I
should please men, I should not be the servant of
Christ."<sup>[34](footnote/fn57.htm#P5740_1775911)</sup> There is a
great difference whether one desires to deserve well of men or of God.
If we seek to please men, the Lord is offended. But if we strive and
labour that we may please God, we ought to contemn human reproaches and
abuse.

9\. But that I did not immediately write to you, dearest brother, about
Fortunatus, that pseudo-bishop, constituted by a few, and those,
inveterate heretics, the matter was not such as ought at once and
hastily to be brought under your notice, as if it were great or to be
feared; especially since you already know well enough the name of
Fortunatus, who is one of the five presbyters who some time back
deserted from the Church, and were lately excommunicated by the judgment
of our fellow-bishops,<sup>[35](footnote/fn57.htm#P5742_1776657)</sup>
men both numerous and entitled to the greatest respect, who on this
matter wrote to you last year. Also you would recognise Felicissimus,
the standard-bearer of sedition, who himself also is comprised in those
same letters long ago written to you by our
co-bishops,<sup>[36](footnote/fn57.htm#P5743_1777030)</sup> and who not
only was excommunicated by them here, but moreover was lately driven
from the Church by you there. Since I was confident that these things
were in your knowledge, and knew for certain that they abode in your
memory and discipline, I did not think it necessary that the follies of
heretics should be told you quickly and urgently. For indeed it ought
not to pertain to the majesty or the dignity of the Catholic Church, to
concern itself with what the audacity of heretics and schismatics may
attempt among themselves. For Novatian's party is also said to have now
made Maximus the presbyter-who was lately sent to us as an ambassador
for Novatian, and rejected from communion with us-their false bishop in
that place; and yet I had not written to you about this, since all these
things are slighted by us; and I had sent to you lately the names of the
bishops appointed there, who with wholesome and sound discipline govern
the brethren in the Catholic
Church.<sup>[37](footnote/fn57.htm#P5744_1778110)</sup> And this
certainly, therefore, it was decided by the advice of all of us to write
to you, that there might be found a short method of destroying error and
of finding out truth, that you and our colleagues might know to whom to
write, and reciprocally, from whom it behoved you to receive letters;
but if any one, except those whom we have comprised in our letter,
should dare to write to you, you would know either that he was polluted
by sacrifice, or by receiving a certificate, or that he was one of the
heretics, and therefore perverted and profane. Nevertheless, having
gained an opportunity, by means of a very great friend and a clerk, I
have written to you by Felicianus the acolyte, whom you had sent with
Perseus our colleague, among other matters which were to be brought
under your notice from their party, about that Fortunatus also. But
while our brother Felicianus is either retarded there by the wind or is
detained by receiving other letters from us, he has been forestalled by
Felicissimus hastening to you. For thus wickedness always hastens, as if
by its speed it could prevail against innocence.

10\. But I intimated to you, my brother, by Felicianus, that there had
come to Carthage, Privatus, an old heretic in the colony of Lambesa,
many years ago condemned for many and grave crimes by the judgment of
ninety bishops, and severely remarked upon in the letters of Fabian and
Donatus, also our predecessors, as is not hidden from your
knowledge;<sup>[38](footnote/fn57.htm#P5746_1779731)</sup> who, when he
said that he wished to plead his cause before us in the council which we
held on the Ides of May then past, and was not permitted, made for
himself that Fortunatus a pretended bishop, worthy of his college. And
there had also come with him a certain Felix, whom he himself had
formerly appointed a pseudo-bishop outside the Church, in heresy. But
Jovinus also, and Maximus, were present as companions with the proved
heretic,<sup>[39](footnote/fn57.htm#P5747_1780193)</sup> condemned for
wicked sacrifices and crimes proved against them by the judgment of nine
bishops, our colleagues, and again excommunicated also by many of us
last year in a council. And with these four was also joined Repostus of
Suturnica, who not only fell himself in the persecution, but cast down
by sacrilegious persuasion the greatest part of his people. These five,
with a few who either had sacrificed, or had evil consciences, concurred
in desiring Fortunatus as a false bishop for themselves, that so, their
crimes agreeing, the ruler should be such as those who are ruled.

11\. Hence also, dearest brother, you may now know the other falsehoods
which desperate and abandoned men have there spread about, that
although, of the sacrificers, or of the heretics, there were not more
than five false bishops who came to Carthage, and appointed Fortunatus
as the associate of their madness; yet they, as children of the devil,
and full of lies, dared, as you write, to boast that there were present
twenty-five bishops; which falsehood they boasted here also before among
our brethren, saying that twenty-five bishops would come from Numidia to
make a bishop for them. After they were detected and confounded in this
their lie (only five who had made shipwreck coming together, and these
being excommunicated by us), they sailed to Rome with the reward of
their lies, as if the truth could not sail after them, and convict their
lying tongues by proof of the certainty. And this, my brother, is real
madness, not to think nor to know that lies do not long deceive, that
the night only lasts so long as until the day brightens; but that when
the day is clear and the sun has arisen, the darkness and gloom give
place to light, and the robberies which were going on through the night
cease. In fine, if you were to seek the names from them, they would have
none which they could even falsely give. For such among them is the
penury even of wicked men, that neither of sacrificers nor of heretics
can there be collected twenty-five for them; and yet, for the sake of
deceiving the ears of the simple and the absent, the number is
exaggerated by a lie, as if, even if this number were true, either the
Church would be overcome by heretics, or righteousness by the
unrighteous.

12\. Nor does it behove me, dearest brother, to do like things to them,
and to go through in my discourse those things which they have
committed, and still commit, since we have to consider what it becomes
God's priests to utter and to write. Nor ought grief to speak among us
so much as shame, and I ought not to seem provoked rather to heap
together reproaches than crimes and sins. Therefore I am silent upon the
deceits practised in the Church. I pass over the conspiracies and
adulteries, and the various kinds of crimes. That circumstance alone,
however, of their wickedness, in which the cause is not mine, nor man's,
but God's, I do not think must be withheld; that from the very first day
of the persecution, while the recent crimes of the guilty were still
hot, and not only the devil's altars, but the very hands and the mouths
of the lapsed, were still smoking with the abominable sacrifices, they
did not cease to communicate with the lapsed, and to interfere with
their repentance. God cries, "He that sacrificeth unto any gods, save
unto the Lord only, shall be rooted
out."<sup>[40](footnote/fn57.htm#P5750_1783677)</sup> And in the Gospel
the Lord says, "Whosoever shall deny me, him will I
deny."<sup>[41](footnote/fn57.htm#P5751_1783773)</sup> And in another
place the divine indignation and anger are not silent, saying, "To them
hast thou poured out a drink-offering, and to them hast thou offered a
meat-offering. Shall I not be angry with these things? saith the
Lord."<sup>[42](footnote/fn57.htm#P5752_1784021)</sup> And they
interfere that God may not be entreated, who Himself declares that He is
angry; they interpose that Christ may not be besought with prayers and
satisfactions, who professes that him who denies Him He will deny.

13\. In the very time of persecution we wrote letters on this matter,
but we were not attended to. A full council being held, we decreed, not
only with our consent, but also with our threatening, that the brethren
should repent,<sup>[43](footnote/fn57.htm#P5754_1784487)</sup> and that
none should rashly grant peace to those who did not repent. And those
sacrilegious persons rush with impious madness against God's priests,
departing from the Church; and raising their parricidal arms against the
Church, in order that the malice of the devil may consummate their
work,<sup>[44](footnote/fn57.htm#P5755_1784876)</sup> take pains that
the divine clemency may not heal the wounded in His Church. They corrupt
the repentance of the wretched men by the deceitfulness of their lies,
that it may not satisfy an offended God-that he who has either blushed
or feared to be a Christian before, may not afterwards seek Christ his
Lord, nor he return to the Church who had departed from the Church.
Efforts are used that the sins may not be atoned for with just
satisfactions and lamentations, that the wounds may not be washed away
with tears. True peace is done away by the falsehood of a false peace;
the healthful bosom of a mother is closed by the interference of the
stepmother, that weeping and groaning may not be heard from the breast
and from the lips of the lapsed. And beyond this, the lapsed are
compelled with their tongues and lips, in the
Capitol<sup>[45](footnote/fn57.htm#P5756_1785787)</sup> wherein before
they had sinned, to reproach the priests-to assail with contumelies and
with abusive words the confessors and virgins, and those righteous men
who are most eminent for the praise of the faith, and most glorious in
the Church. By which things, indeed, it is not so much the modesty and
the humility and the shame of our people that are smitten, as their own
hope and life that are lacerated. For neither is it he who hears, but he
who utters the reproach, that is wretched; nor is it he who is smitten
by his brother, but he who smites a brother, that is a sinner under the
law; and when the guilty do a wrong to the innocent, they suffer the
injury who think that they are doing it. Finally, their mind is smitten
by these things, and their spirit is dull, and their sense of right is
estranged: it is God's wrath that they do not perceive their sins, lest
repentance should follow as it is written, "And God gave them the spirit
of torpor,"<sup>[46](footnote/fn57.htm#P5757_1786855)</sup> that is,
that they may not return and be healed, and be made whole after their
sins by just prayers and satisfactions. Paul the apostle in his epistle
lays it down, and says, "They received not the love of the truth, that
they might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong
delusion, that they should believe a lie: that they all might be judged
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness."<sup>[47](footnote/fn57.htm#P5758_1787327)</sup> The
highest degree of happiness is, not to sin; the second, to acknowledge
our sins. In the former, innocence flows pure and unstained to preserve
us; in the latter, there comes a medicine to heal us. Both of these they
have lost by offending God, both because the grace is lost which is
received from the sanctification of baptism, and repentance comes not to
their help, whereby the sin is healed. Think you, brother, that their
wickednesses against God are trifling, their sins small and
moderate-since by their means the majesty of an angry God is not
besought, since the anger and the fire and the day of the Lord is not
feared-since, when Antichrist is at hand the faith of the militant
people is disarmed by the taking away of the power of Christ and His
fear? Let the laity see to it how they may amend
this.<sup>[48](footnote/fn57.htm#P5759_1788170)</sup> A heavier labour
is incumbent on the priests in asserting and maintaining the majesty of
God, that we seem not to neglect anything in this respect, when God
admonishes us, and says, "And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for
you. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give
glory unto my name, saith the Lord, I will even send a curse upon you,
and I will curse your
blessing."<sup>[49](footnote/fn57.htm#P5760_1788762)</sup> Is honour,
then, given to God when the majesty and decree of God are so condemned,
that when He declares that He is indignant and angry with those who
sacrifice, and when He threatens eternal penalties and perpetual
punishments, it is proposed by the sacrilegious, and said, Let not the
wrath of God be considered, let not the judgment of the Lord be feared,
let not any knock at the Church of Christ; but repentance being done
away with, and no confession of sin being made, the bishops being
despised and trodden under foot, let peace be proclaimed by the
presbyters in deceitful words; and lest the lapsed should rise up, or
those placed without should return to the Church, let communion be
offered to those who are not in communion?

14\. To these also it was not sufficient that they had withdrawn from
the Gospel, that they had taken away from the lapsed the hope of
satisfaction and repentance, that they had taken away those involved in
frauds or stained with adulteries, or polluted with the deadly contagion
of sacrifices, lest they should entreat God, or make confession of their
crimes in the Church, from all feeling and fruit of repentance; that
they had set up<sup>[50](footnote/fn57.htm#P5762_1789956)</sup> outside
for themselves-outside the Church, and opposed to the Church, a
conventicle of their abandoned faction, when there had flowed together a
band of creatures with evil consciences, and unwilling to entreat and to
satisfy God. After such things as these, moreover, they still dare-a
false bishop having been appointed for them by, heretics-to set sail and
to bear letters from schismatic and profane persons to the throne of
Peter, and to the chief church whence priestly unity takes its
source;<sup>[51](footnote/fn57.htm#P5763_1790491)</sup> and not to
consider that these were the Romans whose faith was praised in the
preaching of the apostle, to whom faithlessness could have no
access.<sup>[52](footnote/fn57.htm#P5764_1791014)</sup> But what was the
reason of their coming and announcing the making of the pseudo-bishop in
opposition to the bishops? For either they are pleased with what they
have done, and persist in their wickedness; or, if they are displeased
and retreat, they know whither they may return. For, as it has been
decreed by all of us<sup>[53](footnote/fn57.htm#P5765_1791407)</sup>
-and is equally fair and just-that the case of every one should be heard
there where the crime has been committed; and a portion of the flock has
been assigned to each individual pastor, which he is to rule and govern,
having to give account of his doing to the Lord; it certainly behoves
those over whom we are placed not to run about nor to break up the
harmonious agreement of the bishops with their crafty and deceitful
rashness, but there to plead their cause, where they may be able to have
both accusers and witnesses of their crime; unless perchance the
authority of the bishops constituted in Africa seems to a few desperate
and abandoned men to be too
little,<sup>[54](footnote/fn57.htm#P5766_1792136)</sup> who have already
judged concerning them, and have lately condemned, by the gravity of
their judgment, their conscience bound in many bonds of sins. Already
their case has been examined, already sentence concerning them has been
pronounced; nor is it fitting for the dignity of priests to be blamed
for the levity of a changeable and inconstant mind, when the Lord
teaches and says, "Let your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay,
nay."<sup>[55](footnote/fn57.htm#P5767_1792887)</sup>

15\. If the number of those who judged concerning them last year be
reckoned with the presbyters and deacons, then there were more present
to the judgment and hearing than are those very same persons who now
seem to be associated with Fortunatus. For you ought to know, dearest
brother, that after he was made a pseudo-bishop by the heretics, he was
at once deserted by almost all. For those to whom in past time delusions
were offered, and deceitful words were given, to the effect that they
were to return to the Church together; after they saw that a false
bishop was made there, learned that they had been fooled and deceived,
and are daily returning and knocking at the *door of the* Church; while
we, meanwhile, by whom account is to be given to the Lord, are anxiously
weighing and carefully examining who ought to be received and admitted
into the Church. For some are either hindered by their crimes to such a
degree, or they are so obstinately and firmly opposed by their brethren,
that they cannot be received at all except with offence and risk to a
great many, For neither must some putridities be so collected and
brought together, that the parts which are sound and whole should be
injured; nor is that pastor serviceable or wise who so mingles the
diseased and affected sheep with his flock as to contaminate the whole
flock with the infection of the clinging evil. (Do not pay attention to
their number.<sup>[56](footnote/fn57.htm#P5769_1794324)</sup> For one
who fears God is better than a thousand impious sons, as the Lord spoke
by the prophet, saying, "O son, do not delight in ungodly sons, though
they multiply to thee, except the fear of the Lord be with
them."<sup>[57](footnote/fn57.htm#P5770_1794785)</sup> ) Oh, if you
could, dearest brother, be with us here when those evil and perverse men
return from schism, you would see what labour is mine to persuade
patience to our brethren, that they should calm their grief of mind, and
consent to receive and heal the wicked. For as they rejoice and are glad
when those who are endurable and less guilty return, so, on the other
hand, they murmur and are dissatisfied as often as the incorrigible and
violent, and those who are contaminated either by adulteries or by
sacrifices, and who, in addition to this, are proud besides, so return
to the Church, as to corrupt the good dispositions within it. Scarcely
do I persuade the people; nay, I extort it from them, that they should
suffer such to be admitted. And the grief of the fraternity is made the
more just, from the fact that one and another who, notwithstanding the
opposition and contradiction of the people, have been received by my
facility, have proved worse than they had been before, and have not been
able to keep the faith of their repentance, because they had not come
with true repentance.

16\. But what am I to say of those who have now sailed to you with
Felicissimus, guilty of every crime, as ambassadors sent by Fortunatus
the pseudo-bishop, bringing to you letters as false as he himself is
false, whose letters they bring, as his conscience is full of sins, as
his life is execrable, as it is disgraceful; so that, even if they were
in the Church, such people ought to be expelled from the Church. In
addition, since they have known their own conscience, they do not dare
to come to us or to approach to the I threshold of the Church, but
wander about, without her, through the province, for the sake of
circumventing and defrauding the brethren; and now, being sufficiently
known to all, and everywhere excluded for their crimes, they sail
thither also to you. For they cannot have the face to approach to us, or
to stand before us, since the crimes which are charged upon them by the
brethren are most grievous and grave. If they wish to undergo our
judgment, let them come. Finally, if they can find any excuse or
defence. let us see what thought they have of making satisfaction, what
fruit of repentance they bring forward. The Church is neither closed
here to any one, nor is the bishop denied to any. Our patience, and
facility, and humanity are ready for those who come. I entreat all to
return into the Church. I beg all our fellow-soldiers to be included
within the camp of Christ, and the dwelling-place of God the Father. I
remit everything. I shut my eyes to many things, with the desire and the
wish to gather together the brotherhood. Even those things which are
committed against God I do not investigate with the full judgment of
religion. I almost sin myself, in remitting
sins<sup>[58](footnote/fn57.htm#P5772_1797674)</sup> more than I ought.
I embrace with prompt and full love those who return with repentance,
confessing their sin with lowly and unaffected
atonement.<sup>[59](footnote/fn57.htm#P5773_1797934)</sup>

17\. But if there are some who think that they can return to the Church
not with prayers but with threats, or suppose that they can make a way
for themselves, not with lamentation and atonements, but with terrors,
let them take it for certain that against such the Church of the Lord
stands closed; nor does the camp of Christ, unconquered and firm with
the Lord's protection, yield to threats. The priest of God holding fast
the Gospel and keeping Christ's precepts may be slain; he cannot be
conquered. Zacharias, God's priest, suggests and furnishes to us
examples of courage and faith, who, when he could not be terrified with
threats and stoning, was slain in the temple of God, at the same time
crying out and saying, what we also cry out and say against the
heretics, "Thus saith the Lord, Ye have forsaken the ways of the Lord,
and the Lord will forsake
you."<sup>[60](footnote/fn57.htm#P5775_1798930)</sup> For because a few
rash and wicked men forsake the heavenly and wholesome ways of the Lord,
and not doing holy things are deserted by the Holy Spirit, we also ought
not therefore to be unmindful of the divine tradition, so as to think
that the crimes of madmen are greater than the judgments of priests; or
conceive that human endeavours can do more to attack, than divine
protection avails to defend.

18\. Is the dignity of the Catholic Church, dearest brother, to be laid
aside, is the faithful and uncorrupted majesty of the people placed
within it,<sup>[61](footnote/fn57.htm#P5777_1799505)</sup> and the
priestly authority and power also, all to be laid aside for this, that
those who are set without the Church may say that they wish to judge
concerning a prelate in the Church? heretics concerning a Christian?
wounded men about a whole man? maimed concerning a sound man? lapsed
concerning one who stands fast? guilty concerning their judge?
sacrilegious men concerning a priest? What is left but that the Church
should yield to the Capitol, and that, while the priests depart and
remove the Lord's altar, the images and idols should pass over with
their altars into the sacred and venerable assembly of our clergy, and a
larger and fuller material for declaiming against us and abusing us be
afforded to Novatian; if they who have sacrificed and have publicly
denied Christ should begin not only to be entreated and admitted without
penance done, but, moreover, in addition, to domineer by the power of
their terror?

19\. If they desire peace, let them lay aside their arms. If they make
atonement, why do they threaten? or if they threaten, let them know that
they are not feared by God's priests. For even Antichrist, when he shall
begin to come, shall not enter into the Church because he threatens;
neither shall we yield to his arms and violence, because he declares
that he will destroy us if we resist. Heretics arm us when they think
that we are terrified by their threatenings; nor do they cast us down on
our face, but rather they lift us up and inflame us, when they make
peace itself worse to the brethren than persecution. And we desire,
indeed, that they may not fill up with crime what they speak in madness,
that they who sin with perfidious and cruel words may not also sin in
deeds. We pray and beseech God, whom they do not cease to provoke and
exasperate, that He will soften their hearts, that they may lay aside
their madness, and return to soundness of mind; that their breasts,
covered over with the darkness of sins, may acknowledge the light of
repentance, and that they may rather seek that the prayers and
supplications of the priest may be poured out on their behalf, than
themselves pour out the blood of the priest. But if they continue in
their madness, and cruelly persevere in these their parricidal deceits
and threats, no priest of God is so weak, so prostrate, and so abject,
so inefficient by the weakness of human infirmity, as not to be aroused
against the enemies and impugners of God by strength from above; as not
to find his humility and weakness animated by the vigour and strength of
the Lord who protects him. It matters nothing to us by whom, or when we
are slain, since we shall receive from the Lord the reward of our death
and of our blood. Their
*concision*<sup>[62](footnote/fn57.htm#P5779_1802383)</sup> is to be
mourned and lamented, whom the devil so blinds, that, without
considering the eternal punishments of Gehenna, they endeavour to
imitate the coming of Antichrist, who is now approaching.

20\. And although I know, dearest brother, from the mutual love which we
owe and manifest one towards another, that you always read my letters to
the very distinguished clergy who preside with you
there,<sup>[63](footnote/fn57.htm#P5781_1802979)</sup> and to your very
holy and large
congregation,<sup>[64](footnote/fn57.htm#P5782_1803208)</sup> yet now I
both warn and ask you to do by my request what at other times you do of
your own accord and courtesy; that so, by the reading of this my letter,
if any contagion of envenomed speech and of pestilent propagation has
crept in there, it may be all purged out of the ears and of the hearts
of the brethren, and the sound and sincere affection of the good may be
cleansed anew from all the filth of heretical disparagement.

21\. But for the rest, let our most beloved brethren firmly decline, and
avoid the words and conversations of those whose word creeps onwards
like a cancer; as the apostle says, "Evil communications corrupt good
manners."<sup>[65](footnote/fn57.htm#P5784_1803904)</sup> And again: "A
man that is an heretic, after one admonition, reject: knowing that he
that is such is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of
himself."<sup>[66](footnote/fn57.htm#P5785_1804077)</sup> And the Holy
Spirit speaks by Solomon, saying, "A perverse man carrieth perdition in
his mouth; and in his lips he hideth a
fire."<sup>[67](footnote/fn57.htm#P5786_1804231)</sup> Also again, he
warneth us, and says, "Hedge in thy ears with thorns, and hearken not to
a wicked tongue."<sup>[68](footnote/fn57.htm#P5787_1804357)</sup> And
again: "A wicked doer giveth heed to the tongue of the unjust; but a
righteous man does not listen to lying
lips."<sup>[69](footnote/fn57.htm#P5788_1804512)</sup> And although I
know that our brotherhood
there,<sup>[70](footnote/fn57.htm#P5789_1804580)</sup> assuredly
fortified by your foresight, and besides sufficiently cautious by their
own vigilance, cannot be taken nor deceived by the poisons of heretics,
and that the teachings and precepts of God prevail with them only in
proportion as the fear of God is in them; yet, even although needlessly,
either my solicitude or my love persuaded me to write these things to
you, that no commerce should be entered into with such; that no banquets
nor conferences be entertained with the wicked; but that we should be as
much separated from them, as they are deserters from the Church; because
it is written, "If he shall neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto
thee as a heathen man and a
publican."<sup>[71](footnote/fn57.htm#P5790_1805448)</sup> And the
blessed apostle not only warns, but also commands us to withdraw from
such. "We command you," he says, "in the name of Jesus Christ our Lord,
that ye withdraw yourselves from every brother that walketh disorderly,
and not after the tradition which he received of
us."<sup>[72](footnote/fn57.htm#P5791_1805746)</sup> There can be no
fellowship between faith and I faithlessness. He who is not with Christ,
who is an adversary of Christ, who is hostile to His unity and peace,
cannot be associated with us. If they come with prayers and atonements,
let them be heard; if they heap together curses and threats, let them be
rejected. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily
farewell.<sup>[73](footnote/fn57.htm#P5792_1806235)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LV.](0050080)
