[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050047)  [Next](0050049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXIII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn51.htm#P5125_1555959)</sup>

To the Clergy, on the Letters Sent to Rome, and About the Appointment of
Saturus as Reader, and Optatus as Sub-Deacon. a.d. 250.

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. That
nothing may be unknown to your consciousness, beloved brethren, of what
was written to me and what I replied, I have sent you a copy of each
letter, and I believe that my rejoinder will not displease you. But I
ought to acquaint you in my letter concerning this, that for a very
urgent reason I have sent a letter to the clergy who abide in the city.
And since it behoved me to write by clergy, while I know that very many
of ours are absent, and the few that are there are hardly sufficient for
the ministry of the daily duty, it was necessary to appoint some new
ones, who might be sent. Know, then, that I have made Saturus a reader,
and Optatus, the confessor, a sub-deacon; whom already, by the general
advice, we had made next to the clergy, in having entrusted to Saturus
on Easter-day, once and again, the reading; and when with the
teacher-presbyters<sup>[2](footnote/fn51.htm#P5130_1557579)</sup> we
were carefully trying readers-in appointing Optatus from among the
readers to be a teacher of the hearers;-examining, first of all, whether
all things were found fitting in them, which ought to be found in such
as were in preparation for the clerical office. Nothing new, therefore,
has been done by me in your absence; but what, on the general advice of
all of us had been begun, has, upon urgent necessity, been accomplished.
I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and remember
me.Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXIV.](0050049)
