[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050061)  [Next](0050063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXXVII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn53.htm#P5357_1633177)</sup>

To Caldonius, Herculanus, and Others, About the Excommunication of
Felicissimus.

1\. Cyprian to Caldonius and Herculanus, his colleagues, also to
Rogatianus and Numidicus, his fellow-presbyters, greeting. I have been
greatly grieved, dearest brethren, at the receipt of your letter, that
although I have always proposed to myself and wished to keep all our
brotherhood safe, and to preserve the flock unharmed, as charity
requires, you tell me now that Felicissimus has been attempting many
things with wickedness and craft; so that, besides his old frauds and
plundering, of which I had formerly known a good deal, he has now,
moreover, tried to divide with the bishop a portion of the people; that
is, to separate the sheep from the shepherd, and sons from their
parents, and to scatter the members of Christ. And although I sent you
as my substitutes to discharge the necessities of our brethren, with
funds, and if any, moreover, wished to exercise their crafts, to assist
their wishes with such an addition as might be sufficient, and at the
same time also to take note of their ages and conditions and
deserts,-that I also, upon whom falls the charge of knowing all of them
thoroughly, might promote any that were worthy and humble and meek to
the offices of the ecclesiastical administration;-he has interfered, and
directed that no one should be relieved, and that those things which I
had desired should not be ascertained by careful examination; he has
also threatened our brethren, who had first approached to be relieved,
with a wicked exercise of power, and with a violent dread that those who
desired to obey me should not communicate with him in
death.<sup>[2](footnote/fn53.htm#P5362_1634990)</sup>

2\. And since, after all these things, neither moved by the honour of my
station, nor shaken by your authority and presence, but of his own
impulse, disturbing the peace of the brethren he hath rushed forth with
many more, and asserted himself as a leader of a faction and chief of a
sedition with a hasty madness-in which respect, indeed, I congratulate
several of the brethren that they have withdrawn from this boldness, and
have rather chosen to consent with you, so that they may remain with the
Church, their mother, and receive their stipends from the bishop who
dispenses them, which, indeed, I know for certain, that others also will
peaceably do, and will quickly withdraw from their rash error,-in the
meantime, since Felicissimus has threatened that they should not
communicate with him in
death<sup>[3](footnote/fn53.htm#P5364_1635992)</sup> who had obeyed us,
that is, who communicated with us, let him receive the sentence which he
first of all declared, that he may know that he is excommunicated by us;
inasmuch as he adds to his frauds and rapines, which we have known by
the clearest truth, the crime also of adultery, which our brethren,
grave men, have declared that they have discovered, and have asseverated
that they will prove; all which things we shall then judicially examine,
when, with the Lord's permission, we shall assemble in one place with
many of our colleagues. But Augendus also, who, considering neither his
bishop nor his Church, has equally associated himself with him in this
conspiracy and faction, if he should further persevere with him, let him
bear the sentence which that factious and impetuous man has provoked on
himself. Moreover, whoever shall ally himself with his conspiracy and
faction, let him know that he shall not communicate in the Church with
us, since of his own accord he has preferred to be separated from the
Church. Read this letter of mine to our brethren, and also transmit it
to Carthage to the clergy, the names being added of those who have
joined themselves with Felicissimus. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever
heartily farewell; and remember me. Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXVIII.](0050063)
