[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050001)  [Next](0050003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Preface

------------

This fifth volume will be found a work complete in itself, *simplex et
unum*. At first, indeed, it might look otherwise. The formation of Latin
Christianity in the school of North Africa seems interrupted by the
interpolation, between Tertullian and his great pupil Cyprian, of a
Western bishop and doctor, who writes in Greek. A little reflection,
however, will suggest to the thoughtful student, that, even if our
chronological plan admitted of it, we should divest the works of Cyprian
of a very great advantage should we deprive them of the new and
all-important light shed upon Cyprian and his convicts with Stephen by
the discovery of the *Philosophumena* of Hippolytus. That discovery, as
Dr. Bunsen reminds us, more than once, has *duplicated* our information
concerning the Western Church of the ante-Nicene period. It gives us
overwhelming evidence on many points heretofore imperfectly understood,
and confirms the surmises of the learned and candid authors who have
endeavoured to disentangle certain complications of history. It meets
some questions of our own day with most conclusive testimony, and
probably had not a little to do with the ultimate conclusions of
Dollinger, and the rise of the Old Catholic school, among the Latins. We
cannot fail to observe in all this the hand of a wise and paternal
Providence, which is never wanting to the faithful in the day of trial.
"I believe, with Niebuhr," says Dr. Bunsen, "that Providence always
furnishes every generation with the necessary means of arriving at the
truth and at the solution of its doubts." This consideration has
inspired me with great hopes from the publication of this series in
America, where the aggressions of an alien element are forcing us to
renewed study of that virgin antiquity which is so fatal to its
pretensions. I can adopt with a grateful heart the language of Bunsen,
when he adds:<sup>[1](footnote/fn2.htm#P204_5273.md)</sup> "I cannot help
thinking it of importance that we have *just now* so unexpectedly got
our knowledge of facts respecting early Christianity *doubled*."

To show some tokens of this new light on old difficulties, I shall be
obliged to throw one or two of my *Elucidations* almost into the form of
dissertations. It will appear, as we proceed that we have reached a most
critical point in the ante-Nicene history, and one on which that period
itself depends for its complete exposition. Let me adduce conclusive
evidence of this by reference to two fundamental facts, which need only
to be mentioned to be admitted:-

1\. The Council of Nice did not pretend to be setting forth a new creed,
or making anything doctrine which was not doctrine before. Hence the
period we are now studying is to be interpreted by the testimony of the
Nicene Fathers, who were able to state historically, and with great
felicity, in idioms gradually framed by the Alexandrian theologians,
*the precise intent and purport of their teaching*. The learned Bull has
demonstrated this; demolishing alike the sophistry of Petavius the
Jesuit, and the efforts of latitudinarians to make capital out of some
of those *obiter dicta* of orthodox Fathers, which, like certain
passages of Holy Scripture itself, may be wrested into contradictory and
self-stultifying declarations. Note, therefore, that the Nicene Creed
must be studied not so much in the controvertists of the fourth century
as in the doctors of preceding ages, whom we are reviewing in these
pages.

2\. A like statement is true of the Nicene constitutions and discipline.
The synodical rule, alike in faith and discipline, was Ta arxaia eqh
krateito; "Let the (ancient) primitive examples prevail." Observe,
therefore, what they ruled as to Rome and other churches was already
*ancient*. Now, the "duplicated" light thrown upon the position of the
North-African churches, and others in the West, at this period, by the
discovery of long-lost portions of Hippolytus, will be found to settle
many groundless assertions of Roman controvertists as to what these
arxaia eqh were.

Bearing this in mind, let us return to the point with which this Preface
starts. We are pausing for a moment, in the North-African history, to
take a contemporary survey of Rome, and to mark just where it stands,
and what it is, at this moment. The earliest of the great Roman Fathers
now comes forward, but not as a Latin Father. He writes in Greek; he
continues the Greek line of thought brought into the West by Irenaeus;
he maintains the Johannean rather than the Petrine traditions and
idioms, which are distinct but not clashing; he stands only in the third
generation from St. John himself, through Polycarp, and his master
Irenaeus; and, like his master, he confronts the Roman bishops of his
time with a superior orthodoxy and with an authority more
apostolic.<sup>[2](footnote/fn2.htm#P209_8175.md)</sup> He illustrates in
his own conduct the maxim of Irenaeus, that "the Catholic faith is
preserved in Rome by the testimony *imported into it* by those who visit
it from every side; "that is, who thus keep alive in it the common
faith, as witnessed in all the churches of Christendom.

Thus, Hippolytus, once "torn to pieces as by horses," in his works, if
not in his person, comes to life again in our times, to shed new light
upon the history of Latin Christianity, and to show that Rome had no
place nor hand in its creation. He appears as a Greek Father in a church
which was yet a "Greek colony;
"<sup>[3](footnote/fn2.htm#P211_8820.md)</sup> and he shows to what an
estate of feebleness and humiliation the Roman Church had been brought,
probably by the neglect of preaching, which is an anomaly in its
history, and hardly less probably by its adherence to a Greek liturgy
long after the Christians of Rome had ceased to understand Greek
familiarly. At such a moment Hippolytus proves himself a reformer. His
historical elucidations of the period, therefore, form an admirable
introduction to Cyprian, and will explain the entire independence of
Roman dictation, with which he maintained his own opinions against that
Church and its bishops.

And lastly we have Novatian as a sequel to the works of Cyprian; and
truly, the light upon his sad history is "duplicated" by what Hippolytus
shows us of the times and circumstances which made his schism possible,
and which somewhat relieve his character from its darker shades.

Such, then, is the volume now given to the reader,-Hippolytus, Cyprian,
Novatian,-affording the fullest information ever yet brought together in
one volume, upon the rise of Latin Christianity, the decline of the
Greek period of the Roman See, and the restricted limits of the Roman
province not yet elevated to the technical position of a Nicene
patriarchate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hippolytus.](0050003.md)
