[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050068)  [Next](0050070.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XLIV.<sup>[1](footnote/fn54.htm#P5468_1668069.md)</sup>

To Cornelius, Concerning Polycarp the Adrumetine.

1\. Cyprian to Cornelius his brother, greeting. I have read your
letters, dearest brother, which you sent by Primitivus our co-presbyter,
in which I perceived that you were annoyed that, whereas letters from
the Adrumetine colony in the name of Polycarp were directed to you, yet
after Liberalis and I came to that place, letters began to be directed
thence to the presbyters and to the deacons.

2\. In respect of which I wish you to know, and certainly to believe,
that it was done from no levity or contempt. But when several of our
colleagues who had assembled into one place had determined that, while
our co-bishops Caldonius and Fortunatus were sent as ambassadors to you,
all things should be in the meantime suspended as they were, until the
same colleagues of ours, having reduced matters there to peace, or,
having discovered their truth. should return to us; the presbyters and
deacons abiding in the Adrumetine colony; in the absence of our
co-bishop Polycarp, were ignorant of what had been decided in common by
us. But when we came before them, and our purpose was understood, they
themselves also began to observe what the others did, so that the
agreement of the churches abiding there was in no respect broken.

3\. Some persons, however, sometimes disturb men's minds and spirits by
their words, in that they relate things otherwise than is the truth. For
we, who furnish every person who sails hence with a plan that they may
sail without any of-fence, know that we have exhorted them to
acknowledge and hold the root and matrix of the Catholic
Church.<sup>[2](footnote/fn54.htm#P5475_1670118.md)</sup> But since our
province is wide-spread, and has Numidia and Mauritania attached to it;
lest a schism made in the city should confuse the minds of the absent
with uncertain opinions, we decided-having obtained by means of the
bishops the truth of the matter, and having got a greater authority for
the proof of your ordination, and so at length every scruple being got
rid of from the breast of every one-that letters should be sent you by
all who were placed anywhere in the province; as in fact is done, that
so the whole of our colleagues might decidedly approve of and maintain
both you and your communion, that is as well to the unity of the
Catholic Church as to its charity. That all which has by God's direction
come to pass, and that our design has under Providence been forwarded,
we rejoice.

4\. For thus as well the truth as the dignity of your episcopate has
been established in the most open light, and with the most manifest and
substantial approval; so that from the replies of our colleagues, who
have thence written to us, and from the account and from the testimonies
of our co-bishops Pompeius, and Stephanus, and Caldonius, and
Fortunatus, both the needful cause and the right order, and moreover the
glorious innocence, of your ordination might be known by all. That we,
with the rest of our colleagues, may steadily and firmly administer this
office, and keep it in the concordant unanimity of the Catholic Church,
the divine condescension will accomplish; so that the Lord who
condescends to elect and appoint for Himself priests in His Church, may
protect them also when elected and appointed by His good-will and help,
inspiring them to govern, and supplying both vigour for restraining the
contumacy of the wicked, and gentleness for cherishing the penitence of
the lapsed. I bid you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLV.](0050070.md)
