[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050005)  [Next](0050007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Book I.

--------

The following are the contents of the first book of *The Refutation of
all Heresies*.<sup>[1](footnote/fn2)</sup>

We propose to furnish an account of the tenets of natural philosophers,
and who these are, as well as the tenets of moral philosophers, and who
these are; and thirdly, the tenets of logicians, and who these logicians
are.

Among natural philosophers<sup>[2](footnote/fn2.htm#P269_32288)</sup>
may be enumerated Thales, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Heraclitus,
Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, Archelaus, Parmenides, Leucippus,
Democritus, Xenophanes, Ecphantus, Hippo.

Among moral philosophers are Socrates, pupil of Archelaus the physicist,
(and) Plato the pupil of Socrates. This (speculator) combined three
systems of philosophy.

Among logicians is Aristotle, pupil of Plato. He systematized the art of
dialectics. Among the Stoic (logicians) were Chrysippus (and) Zeno.
Epicurus, however, advanced an opinion almost contrary to all
philosophers. Pyrrho was an
Academic;<sup>[3](footnote/fn2.htm#P272_33628)</sup> this (speculator)
taught the incomprehensibility of everything. The Brahmins among the
Indians, and the Druids among the Celts, and Hesiod (devoted themselves
to philosophic pursuits).

We must not overlook<sup>[4](footnote/fn2.htm#P276_34309)</sup> any
figment devised by those denominated philosophers among the Greeks. For
even their incoherent tenets must be received as worthy of credit, on
account of the excessive madness of the heretics; who, from the
observance of silence, and from concealing their own ineffable
mysteries, have by many been supposed worshippers of
God.<sup>[5](footnote/fn2.htm#P277_34702)</sup> We have likewise, on a
former occasion,<sup>[6](footnote/fn2.htm#P278_34873)</sup> expounded
the doctrines of these briefly, not illustrating them with any degree of
minuteness, but refuting them in coarse digest; not having considered it
requisite to bring to light their
secret<sup>[7](footnote/fn2.htm#P279_35225)</sup> doctrines, in order
that, when we have explained their tenets by enigmas, they, becoming
ashamed, lest also, by our divulging their mysteries, we should convict
them of atheism, might be induced to desist in some degree from their
unreasonable opinion and their profane
attempt.<sup>[8](footnote/fn2.htm#P280_35647)</sup> But since I perceive
that they have not been abashed by our forbearance, and have made no
account of how God is long-suffering, though blasphemed by them, in
order that either from shame they may repent, or should they persevere,
be justly condemned, I am forced to proceed in my intention of exposing
those secret mysteries of theirs, which, to the initiated, with a vast
amount of plausibility they deliver who are not accustomed first to
disclose (to any one), till, by keeping such in suspense during a period
(of necessary preparation), and by rendering him blasphemous towards the
true God they have acquired complete ascendancy over him, and perceive
him eagerly panting after the promised disclosure. And then, when they
have tested him to be enslaved by sin, they initiate him, putting him in
possession of the perfection of wicked things. Previously, however, they
bind him with an oath neither to divulge (the mysteries), nor to hold
communication with any person whatsoever, unless he first undergo
similar subjection, though, when the doctrine has been simply delivered
(to any one), there was no longer any need of an oath. For he who was
content to submit to the necessary
purgation,<sup>[9](footnote/fn2.htm#P281_36909)</sup> and so receive the
perfect mysteries of these men, by the very act itself, as well as in
reference to his own conscience, will feel himself sufficiently under an
obligation not to divulge to others; for if he once disclose wickedness
of this description to any man, he would neither be reckoned among men,
nor be deemed worthy to behold the light, since not even irrational
animals<sup>[10](footnote/fn2.htm#P282_37316)</sup> would attempt such
an enormity, as we shall explain when we come to treat of such topics.

Since, however, reason compels us to
plunge<sup>[11](footnote/fn2.htm#P284_37602)</sup> into the very depth
of narrative, we conceive we should not be silent, but, expounding the
tenets of the several schools with minuteness, we shall evince reserve
in nothing. Now it seems expedient, even at the expense of a more
protracted investigation, not to shrink from labour; for we shall leave
behind us no trifling auxiliary to human life against the recurrence of
error, when all are made to behold, in an obvious light, the clandestine
rites of these men, and the secret orgies which, retaining under their
management, they deliver to the initiated only. But none will refute
these, save the Holy Spirit bequeathed unto the Church, which the
Apostles, having in the first instance received, have transmitted to
those who have rightly believed. But we, as being their successors, and
as participators in this grace, high-priesthood, and office of
teaching,<sup>[12](footnote/fn2.htm#P285_38497)</sup> as well as being
reputed guardians of the Church, must not be found deficient in
vigilance,<sup>[13](footnote/fn2.htm#P286_38817)</sup> or disposed to
suppress correct doctrine.<sup>[14](footnote/fn2.htm#P287_38982)</sup>
Not even, however, labouring with every energy of body and soul, do we
tire in our attempt adequately to render our Divine Benefactor a fitting
return; and yet withal we do not so requite Him in a becoming manner,
except we are not remiss in discharging the trust committed to us, but
careful to complete the measure of our particular opportunity, and to
impart to all without grudging whatever the Holy Ghost supplies, not
only bringing to light,<sup>[15](footnote/fn2.htm#P288_39777)</sup> by
means of our refutation, matters foreign (to our subject), but also
whatsoever things the truth has received by the grace of the
Father,<sup>[16](footnote/fn2.htm#P289_39972)</sup> and ministered to
men. These also, illustrating by argument and creating
testimony<sup>[17](footnote/fn2.htm#P290_40078)</sup> by letters, we
shall unabashed proclaim.

In order, then, as we have already stated, that we may prove them
atheists, both in opinion and their mode (of treating a question) and in
fact, and (in order to show) whence it is that their attempted theories
have accrued unto them, and that they have endeavoured to establish
their tenets, taking nothing from the holy Scriptures-nor is it from
preserving the succession of any saint that they have hurried headlong
into these opinions;-but that their doctrines have derived their
origin<sup>[18](footnote/fn2.htm#P292_40675)</sup> from the wisdom of
the Greeks, from the conclusions of those who have formed systems of
philosophy, and from would-be mysteries, and the vagaries of
astrologers,-it seems, then, advisable, in the first instance, by
explaining the opinions advanced by the philosophers of the Greeks, to
satisfy our readers that such are of greater antiquity than these
(heresies), and more deserving of reverence in reference to their views
respecting the divinity; in the next place, to compare each heresy with
the system of each speculator, so as to show that the earliest champion
of the heresy availing
himself<sup>[19](footnote/fn2.htm#P293_41303)</sup> of these attempted
theories, has turned them to advantage by appropriating their
principles, and, impelled from these into worse, has constructed his own
doctrine. The undertaking admittedly is full of labour, and (is one)
requiring extended research. We shall not, however, be wanting in
exertion; for afterwards it will be a source of joy, just like an
athlete obtaining with much toil the crown, or a merchant after a huge
swell of sea compassing gain, or a husbandman after sweat of brow
enjoying the fruits, or a prophet after reproaches and insults seeing
his predictions turning out true. In the commencement, therefore, we
shall declare who first, among the Greeks, pointed out (the principles
of) natural philosophy. For from these especially have they furtively
taken their views who have first pro-pounded these
heresies,<sup>[20](footnote/fn2.htm#P294_42204)</sup> as we shall
subsequently prove when we come to compare them one with another.
Assigning to each of those who take the lead among philosophers their
own peculiar tenets, we shall publicly exhibit these heresiarchs as
naked and unseemly.

It is said that Thales of Miletus, one of the
seven<sup>[21](footnote/fn2.htm#P298_43046)</sup> wise men, first
attempted to frame a system of natural philosophy. This person said that
some such thing as water is the generative principle of the universe,
and its end;-for that out of this, solidified and again dissolved, all
things consist, and that all things are supported on it; from which also
arise both earthquakes and changes of the winds and atmospheric
movements,<sup>[22](footnote/fn2.htm#P299_43636)</sup> and that all
things are both produced<sup>[23](footnote/fn3)</sup> and are in a state
of flux corresponding with the nature of the primary author of
generation;-and that the
Deity<sup>[24](footnote/fn3.htm#P301_43864)</sup> is that which has
neither beginning nor end. This person, having been occupied with an
hypothesis and investigation concerning the stars, became the earliest
author to the Greeks of this kind of learning. And he, looking towards
heaven, alleging that he was carefully examining supernal objects, fell
into a well; and a certain maid, by name Thratta, remarked of him
derisively, that while intent on beholding things in heaven, he did not
know<sup>[25](footnote/fn3.htm#P302_44522)</sup> , what was at his feet.
And he lived about the time of Croesus.

But there was also, not far from these times, another philosophy which
Pythagoras originated (who some say was a native of Samos), which they
have denominated Italian, because that Pythagoras, flying from
Polycrates the king of Samos, took up his residence in a city of Italy,
and there passed the entire of his remaining years. And they who
received in succession his doctrine, did not much differ from the same
opinion. And this person, instituting an investigation concerning
natural phenomena,<sup>[26](footnote/fn3.htm#P306_45361)</sup> combined
together astronomy, and geometry, and
music.<sup>[27](footnote/fn3.htm#P307_45434)</sup> And so he proclaimed
that the Deity is a monad; and carefully acquainting himself with the
nature of number, he affirmed that the world sings, and that its system
corresponds with harmony, and he first resolved the motion of the seven
stars into rhythm and melody. And being astonished at the management of
the entire fabric, he required that at first his disciples should keep
silence, as if persons coming into the world initiated in (the secrets
of) the universe; next, when it seemed that they were sufficiently
conversant with his mode of teaching his doctrine, and could forcibly
philosophize concerning the stars and nature, then, considering them
pure, he enjoins them to speak. This man distributed his pupils in two
orders, and called the one esoteric, but the other exoteric. And to the
former he confided more advanced doctrines, and to the latter a more
moderate amount of instruction.

And he also touched on magic-as they say-and
himself<sup>[28](footnote/fn3.htm#P309_46426)</sup> discovered an art of
physiogony,<sup>[29](footnote/fn3.htm#P310_46484)</sup> laying down as a
basis certain numbers and measures, saying that they comprised the
principle of arithmetical philosophy by composition after this manner.
The first number became an originating principle, which is one,
indefinable, incomprehensible, having in itself all numbers that,
according to plurality, can go on *ad infinitum*. But the primary monad
became a principle of numbers, according to
substance.<sup>[30](footnote/fn3.htm#P311_46918)</sup> -which is a male
monad, begetting after the manner of a parent all the rest of the
numbers. Secondly, the duad is a female number, and the same also is by
arithmeticians termed even. Thirdly, the triad is a male number. This
also has been classified by arithmeticians under the denomination
uneven. And in addition to all these is the tetrad, a female number; and
the same also is called even, because it is female. Therefore all the
numbers that have been derived from the genus are four; but number is
the indefinite genus, from which was constituted, according to them, the
perfect<sup>[31](footnote/fn3.htm#P312_47550)</sup> number, viz., the
decade. For one, two, three, four, become ten, if its proper
denomination be preserved essentially for each of the numbers.
Pythagoras affirmed this to be a sacred quaternion, source of
everlasting nature,<sup>[32](footnote/fn3.htm#P313_47796)</sup> having,
as it were, roots in itself; and that from this number all the numbers
receive their originating principle. For eleven, and twelve, and the
rest, partake of the origin of
existence<sup>[33](footnote/fn3.htm#P314_48128)</sup> from ten. Of this
decade, the perfect number, there are termed four divisions,-namely,
number, *monad*,<sup>[34](footnote/fn3.htm#P315_48253)</sup> square,
(and) cube. And the connections and blendings of these are performed,
according to nature, for the generation of growth completing the
productive number. For when the square itself is
multiplied<sup>[35](footnote/fn3.htm#P316_48711)</sup> into itself, a
biquadratic is the result. But when the square is multiplied into the
cube, the result is the product of a square and cube; and when the cube
is multiplied into the cube, the product of two cubes is the result. So
that all the numbers from which the production of existing (numbers)
arises, are seven,-namely, number, *monad*, square, cube, biquadratic,
quadratic-cube, cubo-cube.

This philosopher likewise said that the soul is immortal, and that it
subsists in successive bodies. Wherefore he asserted that before the
Trojan era he was
Aethalides,<sup>[36](footnote/fn3.htm#P318_49392)</sup> and during the
Trojan epoch Euphorbus, and subsequent to this Hermotimus of Samos, and
after him Pyrrhus of Delos; fifth, Pythagoras. And Diodorus the
Eretrian,<sup>[37](footnote/fn3.htm#P319_49847)</sup> and
Aristoxenus<sup>[38](footnote/fn3.htm#P320_50465)</sup> the musician,
assert that Pythagoras came to
Zaratas<sup>[39](footnote/fn3.htm#P321_50955)</sup> the Chaldean, and
that he explained to him that there are two original causes of things,
father and mother, and that father is light, but mother darkness; and
that of the light the parts are hot, dry, not heavy, light, swift; but
of darkness, cold, moist, weighty, slow; and that out of all these, from
female and male, the world consists. But the world, he says, is a
musical harmony;<sup>[40](footnote/fn3.htm#P322_51393)</sup> wherefore,
also, that the sun performs a circuit in accordance with harmony. And as
regards the things that are produced from earth and the cosmical system,
they maintain that Zaratas<sup>[41](footnote/fn3.htm#P323_51707)</sup>
makes the following statements: that there are two demons, the one
celestial and the other terrestrial; and that the terrestrial sends up a
production from earth, and that this is water; and that the celestial is
a fire, partaking of the nature of air, hot and
cold.<sup>[42](footnote/fn3.htm#P324_52633)</sup> And he therefore
affirms that none of these destroys or sullies the soul, for these
constitute the substance of all things. And he is reported to have
ordered his followers not to eat beans, because that Zaratas said that,
at the origin and concretion of all things, when the earth was still
undergoing its process of
solidification,<sup>[43](footnote/fn3.htm#P325_53023)</sup> and that of
putrefaction had set in, the bean was
produced.<sup>[44](footnote/fn3.htm#P326_53325)</sup> And of this he
mentions the following indication, that if any one, after having chewed
a bean without the husk, places it opposite the sun for a certain
period,-for this immediately will aid in the result,-it yields the smell
of human seed. And he mentions also another clearer instance to be this:
if, when the bean is blossoming, we take the bean and its flower, and
deposit them in a jar, smear this over, and bury it in the ground, and
after a few days uncover it, we shall see it wearing the appearance,
first of a woman's *pudendum*, and after this, when closely examined, of
the head of a child growing in along with it. This person, being burned
along with his disciples in Croton, a town of Italy, perished. And this
was a habit with him, whenever one repaired to him with a view of
becoming his follower, (the candidate disciple was compelled) to sell
his possessions, and lodge the money sealed with Pythagoras, and he
continued in silence to undergo instruction, sometimes for three, but
sometimes for five years. And again, on being released, he was permitted
to associate with the rest, and remained as a disciple, and took his
meals along with them; if otherwise, however, he received back his
property, and was rejected. These persons, then, were styled Esoteric
Pythagoreans, whereas the rest, Pythagoristae.

Among his followers, however, who escaped the conflagration were Lysis
and Archippus, and the servant of Pythagoras,
Zamolxis,<sup>[45](footnote/fn3.htm#P328_54898)</sup> who also is said
to have taught the Celtic Druids to cultivate the philosophy of
Pythagoras. And they assert that Pythagoras learned from the Egyptians
his system of numbers and measures; and I being struck by the plausible,
fanciful, and not easily revealed wisdom of the priests, he himself
likewise, in imitation of them, enjoined silence, and made his disciples
lead a solitary life in underground
chapels.<sup>[46](footnote/fn3.htm#P329_55329)</sup>

But Empedocles, born after these, advanced likewise many statements
respecting the nature of demons, to the effect that, being very
numerous, they pass their time in managing earthly concerns. This person
affirmed the originating principle of the universe to be discord and
friendship, and that the intelligible fire of the *monad* is the Deity,
and that all things consist of fire, and will be resolved into fire;
with which opinion the Stoics likewise almost agree, expecting a
conflagration. But most of all does he concur with the tenet of
transition of souls from body to body, expressing himself thus:-

And shrub, and bird,<sup>[47](footnote/fn3.htm#P335_56167)</sup> and
fish, from ocean stray'd."<sup>[48](footnote/fn3.htm#P336_56335)</sup>

This (philosopher) maintained the transmutation of all souls into any
description of animal. For Pythagoras, the instructor of these
(sages),<sup>[49](footnote/fn3.htm#P338_56580)</sup> asserted that
himself had been Euphorbus, who sewed in the expedition against Ilium,
alleging that he recognised his shield.The foregoing are the tenets of
Empedocles.

But Heraclitus, a natural philosopher of Ephesus, surrendered himself to
universal grief, condemning the ignorance of the entire of life, and of
all men; nay, commiserating the (very) existence of mortals, for he
asserted that he himself knew everything, whereas the rest of mankind
nothing.<sup>[50](footnote/fn3.htm#P342_57177)</sup> But he also
advanced statements almost in concert with Empedocles, saying that the
originating principle of all things is discord and friendship, and that
the Deity is a fire endued with intelligence, and that all things are
borne one upon another, and never are at a standstill; and just as
Empedocles, he affirmed that the entire locality about us is full of
evil things, and that these evil things reach as far as the moon, being
extended from the quarter situated around the earth, and that they do
not advance further, inasmuch as the entire space above the moon is more
pure. So also it seemed to Heraclitus.

After these arose also other natural philosophers, whose opinions we
have not deemed it necessary to declare, (inasmuch as) they present no
diversity to those already specified. Since, however, upon the whole, a
not inconsiderable school has sprung (from thence), and many natural
philosophers subsequently have arisen from them, each advancing
different accounts of the nature of the universe, it seems also to us
advisable, that, explaining the philosophy that has come down by
succession from Pythagoras, we should recur to the opinions entertained
by those living after the time of Thales, and that, furnishing a
narrative of these, we should approach the consideration of the ethical
and logical philosophy which Socrates and Aristotle originated, the
former ethical, and the latter
logical.<sup>[51](footnote/fn3.htm#P344_58772)</sup>

Anaximander, then, was the hearer of Thales. Anaximander was son of
Praxiadas, and a native of Miletus. This man said that the originating
principle of existing things is a certain constitution of the Infinite,
out of which the heavens are generated, and the worlds therein; and that
this principle is eternal and undecaying, and comprising all the worlds.
And he speaks of time as something of limited generation, and
subsistence, and destruction. This person declared the Infinite to be an
originating principle and element of existing things, being the first to
employ such a denomination of the originating principle. But, moreover,
he asserted that there is an eternal motion, by the agency of which it
happens that the heavens<sup>[52](footnote/fn3.htm#P348_59698)</sup> are
generated; but that the earth is poised aloft, upheld by nothing,
continuing (so) on account of its equal distance from all (the heavenly
bodies); and that the figure of it is curved,
circular,<sup>[53](footnote/fn3.htm#P349_59913)</sup> similar to a
column of stone.<sup>[54](footnote/fn3.htm#P350_59961)</sup> And one of
the surfaces we tread upon, but the other is
opposite.<sup>[55](footnote/fn3.htm#P351_60054)</sup> And that the stars
are a circle of fire, separated from the fire which is in the vicinity
of the world, and encompassed by air. And that certain atmospheric
exhalations arise in places where the stars shine; wherefore, also, when
these exhalations are obstructed, that eclipses take place. And that the
moon sometimes appears full and sometimes waning, according to the
obstruction or opening of its (orbital) paths. But that the circle of
the sun is twenty-seven
times<sup>[56](footnote/fn3.htm#P352_60636)</sup> larger than the moon,
and that the sun is situated in the highest (quarter of the firmament);
whereas the orbs of the fixed stars in the lowest. And that animals are
produced (in moisture<sup>[57](footnote/fn3.htm#P353_60872)</sup> ) by
evaporation from the sun. And that man was, originally, similar to a
different animal, that is, a fish. And that winds are caused by the
separation of very rarified exhalations of the atmosphere, and by their
motion after they have been condensed. And that rain arises from earth's
giving back (the vapours which it receives) from the
(clouds<sup>[58](footnote/fn3.htm#P354_61386)</sup> ) under the sun. And
that there are flashes of lightning when the wind coming down severs the
clouds. This person was born in the third year of the XLII.
Olympiad.<sup>[59](footnote/fn3.htm#P355_61610)</sup>

But Anaximenes, who himself was also a native of Miletus, and son of
Eurystratus, affirmed that the originating principle is infinite air,
out of which are generated things existing, those which have existed,
and those that will be, as well as gods and divine (entities), and that
the rest arise from the offspring of this. But that there is such a
species of air, when it is most even, which is imperceptible to vision,
but capable of being manifested by cold and heat, and moisture and
motion, and that it is continually in motion; for that whatsoever things
undergo alteration, do not change if there is not motion. For that it
presents a different appearance according as it is condensed and
attenuated, for when it is dissolved into what is more attenuated that
fire is produced, and that when it is moderately condensed again into
air that a cloud is formed from the air by virtue of the
contraction;<sup>[60](footnote/fn3.htm#P359_62677)</sup> but when
condensed still more, water, (and) that when the condensation is carried
still further, earth is formed; and when condensed to the very highest
degree, stones. Wherefore, that the dominant principles of generation
are contraries,-namely, heat and cold. And that the expanded earth is
wafted along upon the air, and in like manner both sun and moon and the
rest of the stars; for all things being of the nature of fire, are
wafted about through the expanse of space, upon the air. And that the
stars are produced from earth by reason of the mist which arises from
this *earth*; and when this is attenuated, that fire is produced, and
that the stars consist of the fire which is being borne aloft. But also
that there are terrestrial natures in the region of the stars carried on
along with them. And he says that the stars do not move under the earth,
as some have supposed, but around the
earth,<sup>[61](footnote/fn3.htm#P360_63613)</sup> just as a cap is
turned round our head; and that the sun is hid, not by being under the
earth, but because covered by the higher portions of the earth, and on
account of the greater distance that he is from us. But that the stars
do not emit heat on account of the length of distance; and that the
winds are produced when the condensed air, becoming rarified, is borne
on; and that when collected and thickened still further, clouds are
generated, and thus a change made into water. And that hail is produced
when the water borne down from the clouds becomes congealed; and that
snow is generated when these very clouds, being more moist, acquire
congelation; and that lightning is caused when the clouds are parted by
force of the winds; for when these are sundered there is produced a
brilliant and fiery flash. And that a rainbow is produced by reason of
the rays of the sun failing on the collected air. And that an earthquake
takes place when the earth is altered into a larger (bulk) by heat and
cold. These indeed, then, were the opinions of Anaximenes. This
(philosopher) flourished about the first year of the LVIII.
Olympiad.<sup>[62](footnote/fn3.htm#P361_64900)</sup>

After this (thinker) comes
Anaxagoras,<sup>[63](footnote/fn3.htm#P365_65061)</sup> son of
Hegesibulus,<sup>[64](footnote/fn3.htm#P366_65279)</sup> a native of
Clazomenae. This person affirmed the originating principle of the
universe to be mind and matter; mind being the efficient cause, whereas
matter that which was being formed. For all things coming into existence
simultaneously, mind supervening introduced order. And material
principles, he says, are infinite; even the smaller of these are
infinite.<sup>[65](footnote/fn3.htm#P367_65666)</sup> And that all
things partake of motion by being moved by mind, and that similar bodies
coalesce. And that celestial bodies were arranged by orbicular motion.
That, therefore, what was thick and moist, and dark and cold, and all
things heavy, came together into the centre, from the solidification of
which earth derived support; but that the things opposite to
these-namely, heat and brilliancy, and dryness and lightness-hurried
impetuously into the farther portion of the atmosphere. And that the
earth is in figure plane; and that it continues suspended aloft, by
reason of its magnitude, and by reason of there being no vacuum, and by
reason of the air, which was most powerful, bearing along the wafted
earth. But that among moist substances on earth, was the sea, and the
waters in it; and when these evaporated (from the sun), or had settled
under, that the ocean was formed in this manner, as well as from the
rivers that from time to time flow into it. And that the rivers also
derive support from the rains and from the actual waters in the earth;
for that this is hollow, and contains water in its caverns. And that the
Nile is inundated in summer, by reason of the waters carried down into
it from the snows in northern
(latitudes).<sup>[66](footnote/fn3.htm#P368_67332)</sup> And that the
sun and moon and all the stars are fiery stones, that were rolled round
by the rotation of the atmosphere. And that beneath the stars are sun
and moon, and certain invisible bodies that are carried along with us;
and that we have no perception of the heat of the stars, both on account
of their being so far away, and on account of their distance from the
earth; and further, they are not to the same degree hot as the sun, on
account of their occupying a colder situation. And that the moon, being
lower than the sun, is nearer us. And that the sun surpasses the
Peloponnesus in size. And that the moon has not light of its own, but
from the sun. But that the revolution of the stars takes place under the
earth. And that the moon is eclipsed when the earth is interposed, and
occasionally also those (stars) that are underneath the moon. And that
the sun (is eclipsed) when, at the beginning of the month, the moon is
interposed. And that the solstices are caused by both sun and moon being
repulsed by the air. And that the moon is often turned, by its not being
able to make head against the cold. This person was the first to frame
definitions regarding eclipses and illuminations. And he affirmed that
the moon is earthy, and has in it plains and ravines. And that the milky
way is a reflection of the light of the stars which do not derive their
radiance from the sun;<sup>[67](footnote/fn3.htm#P369_68785)</sup> and
that the stars, coursing (the firmament) as shooting sparks, arise out
of the motion of the pole. And that winds are caused when the atmosphere
is rarified by the sun, and by those burning orbs that advance under the
pole, and are borne from (it). And that thunder and lightning are caused
by heat falling on the clouds. And that earthquakes are produced by the
air above falling on that under the earth; for when this is moved, that
the earth also, being wafted by it, is shaken. And that animals
originally came into
existence<sup>[68](footnote/fn3.htm#P370_69422)</sup> in moisture, and
after this one from another; and that males are procreated when the seed
secreted from the right parts adhered to the right parts of the womb,
and that females are born when the contrary took place. This philosopher
flourished in the first year of the LXXXVIII.
Olympiad,<sup>[69](footnote/fn3.htm#P371_69738)</sup> at which time they
say that Plato also was born. They maintain that Anaxagoras was likewise
prescient.

Archelaus was by birth an Athenian, and son of
Apollodorus.<sup>[70](footnote/fn3.htm#P375_70043)</sup> This person,
similarly with Anaxagoras, asserted the mixture of matter, and
enunciated his first principles in the same manner. This philosopher,
however, held that there is inherent immediately in mind a certain
mixture; and that the originating principle of motion is the mutual
separation of heat and cold, and that the heat is moved, and that the
cold remains at rest. And that the water, being dissolved, flows towards
the centre, where the scorched air and earth are produced, of which the
one is borne upwards and the other remains beneath. And that the earth
is at rest, and that on this account it came into existence; and that it
lies in the centre, being no part, so to speak, of the universe,
delivered from the conflagration; and that from this, first in a state
of ignition, is the nature of the stars, of which indeed the largest is
the sun, and next to this the moon; and of the rest some less, but some
greater. And he says that the heaven was inclined at an angle, and so
that the sun diffused light over the earth, and made the atmosphere
transparent, and the ground dry; for that at first it was a sea,
inasmuch as it is lofty at the horizon and hollow in the middle. And he
adduces, as an indication of the hollowness, that the sun does not rise
and set to all at the same time, which ought to happen if the earth was
even. And with regard to animals, he affirms that the earth, being
originally fire in its lower part, where the heat and cold were
intermingled, both the rest of animals made their appearance, numerous
and dissimilar,<sup>[71](footnote/fn3.htm#P376_71619)</sup> all having
the same food, being nourished from mud; and their existence was of
short duration, but afterwards also generation from one another arose
unto them; and men were separated from the rest (of the animal
creation), and they appointed rulers, and laws, and arts, and cities,
and the rest. And he asserts that mind is innate in all animals alike;
for that each, according to the difference of their physical
constitution, employed (mind), at one time slower, at another
faster.<sup>[72](footnote/fn3.htm#P377_72216)</sup>

Natural philosophy, then, continued from Thales until Archelaus.
Socrates was the hearer of this (latter philosopher). There are,
however, also very many others, introducing various opinions respecting
both the divinity and the nature of the universe; and if we were
disposed to adduce all the opinions of these, it would be necessary to
compose a vast quantity of books. But, reminding the reader of those
whom we especially ought-who are deserving of mention from their fame,
and from being, so to speak, the leaders to those who have subsequently
framed systems of philosophy, and from their supplying them with a
starting-point towards such undertakings-let us hasten on our
investigations towards what remains for consideration.

For Parmenides<sup>[73](footnote/fn3.htm#P382_73274)</sup> likewise
supposes the universe to be one, both eternal and unbegotten, and of a
spherical form. And neither did he escape the opinion of the great body
(of speculators), affirming fire and earth to be the originating
principles of the universe-the earth as matter, but the fire as cause,
even an efficient one. He asserted that the world would be destroyed,
but in what way he does not
mention.<sup>[74](footnote/fn3.htm#P383_73686)</sup> The same
(philosopher), however, affirmed the universe to be eternal, and not
generated, and of spherical form and homogeneous, but not having a
figure in itself, and immoveable and limited.

But Leucippus,<sup>[75](footnote/fn3.htm#P387_73990)</sup> an associate
of Zeno, did not maintain the same opinion, but affirms things to be
infinite, and always in motion, and that generation and change exist
continuously. And he affirms plenitude and vacuum to be elements. And he
asserts that worlds are produced when many bodies are congregated and
flow together from the surrounding space to a common point, so that by
mutual contact they made substances of the same figure and similar in
form come into connection; and when thus
intertwined,<sup>[76](footnote/fn3.htm#P388_74497)</sup> there are
transmutations into other bodies, and that created things wax and wane
through necessity. But what the nature of necessity is, (Parmenides) did
not define.

And Democritus<sup>[77](footnote/fn3.htm#P392_74867)</sup> was an
acquaintance of Leucippus. Democritus, son of Damasippus, a native of
Abdera,<sup>[78](footnote/fn3.htm#P393_75005)</sup> conferring with many
gymnosophists among the Indians, and with priests in Egypt, and with
astrologers and magi in Babylon, (propounded his system). Now he makes
statements similarly with Leucippus concerning elements, viz. plenitude
and vacuum, denominating plenitude entity, and vacuum nonentity; and
this he asserted, since existing things are continually moved in the
vacuum. And he maintained worlds to be infinite, and varying in bulk;
and that in some there is neither sun nor moon, while in others that
they are larger than with us, and with others more numerous. And that
intervals between worlds are unequal; and that in one quarter of space
(worlds) are more numerous, and in another less so; and that some of
them increase in bulk, but that others attain their full size, while
others dwindle away and that in one quarter they are coming into
existence, whilst in another they are failing; and that they are
destroyed by clashing one with another. And that some worlds are
destitute of animals and plants, and every species of moisture. And that
the earth of our world was created before that of the stars, and that
the moon is underneath; next (to it) the sun; then the fixed stars. And
that (neither) the planets nor these (fixed stars) possess an equal
elevation. And that the world flourishes, until no longer it can receive
anything from without. This (philosopher) turned all things into
ridicule, as if all the concerns of humanity were deserving of laughter.

But Xenophanes, a native of
Colophon,<sup>[79](footnote/fn3.htm#P397_76633)</sup> was son of
Orthomenes. This man survived to the time of
Cyrus.<sup>[80](footnote/fn3.htm#P398_76717)</sup> This (philosopher)
first asserted that there is no possibility of comprehending anything,
expressing himself thus:-

And he affirms that nothing is generated or perishes, or is moved; and
that the universe, being one, is beyond change. But he says that the
deity is eternal, and one and altogether homogeneous and limited, and of
a spherical form, and endued with perception in all parts. And that the
sun exists during each day from a conglomeration of small sparks, and
that the earth is infinite, and is surrounded neither by an atmosphere
nor by the heaven. And that there are infinite suns and moons, and that
all things spring from earth. This man affirmed that the sea is salt, on
account of the many mixtures that flow into it. Metrodorus, however,
from the fact of its being filtered through earth, asserts that it is on
account of this that it is made salt. And Xenophanes is of opinion that
there had been a mixture of the earth with the sea, and that in process
of time it was disengaged from the moisture, alleging that he could
produce such proofs as the following: that in the midst of earth, and in
mountains, shells are discovered; and also in Syracuse he affirms was
found in the quarries the print of a fish and of seals, and in Paros an
image of a laurel<sup>[81](footnote/fn4)</sup> in the bottom of a stone,
and in Melita<sup>[82](footnote/fn4.htm#P403_78274)</sup> parts of all
sorts of marine animals. And he says that these were generated when all
things originally were embedded in mud, and that an impression of them
was dried in the mud, but that all men had
perished<sup>[83](footnote/fn4.htm#P404_78502)</sup> when the earth,
being precipitated into the sea, was converted into mud; then, again,
that it originated generation, and that this overthrow occurred to all
worlds.

One Ecphantus, a native of Syracuse, affirmed that it is not possible to
attain a true knowledge of things. He defines, however, as he thinks,
primary bodies to be
indivisible,<sup>[84](footnote/fn4.htm#P408_78983)</sup> and that there
are three variations of these, viz., bulk, figure, capacity, from which
are generated the objects of sense. But that there is a determinable
multitude of these, and that this is
infinite.<sup>[85](footnote/fn4.htm#P409_79467)</sup> And that bodies
are moved neither by weight nor by impact, but by divine power, which he
calls mind and soul; and that of this the world is a representation;
wherefore also it has been made in the form of a sphere by divine
power.<sup>[86](footnote/fn4.htm#P410_79805)</sup> And that the earth in
the middle of the cosmical system is moved round its own centre towards
the east.<sup>[87](footnote/fn4.htm#P411_79936)</sup>

Hippo, a native of Rhegium, asserted as originating principles,
coldness, for instance water, and heat, for instance fire. And that
fire, when produced by water, subdued the power of its generator, and
formed the world. And the soul, he said,
is<sup>[88](footnote/fn4.htm#P415_80287)</sup> sometimes brain, but
sometimes water; for that also the seed is that which appears to us to
arise out of moisture, from which, he says, the soul is produced.

So far, then, we think we have sufficiently adduced (the opinions of)
these; wherefore, inasmuch as we have adequately gone in review through
the tenets of physical speculators, it seems to remain that we now turn
to Socrates and Plato, who gave especial preference to moral philosophy.

Socrates, then, was a hearer of Archelaus, the natural philosopher; and
he, reverencing the rule, "Know thyself," and having assembled a large
school, had Plato (there), who was far superior to all his pupils.
(Socrates) himself left no
writings<sup>[89](footnote/fn4.htm#P420_81051)</sup> after him. Plato,
however, taking notes<sup>[90](footnote/fn4.htm#P421_81418)</sup> of all
his (lectures on) wisdom, established a school, combining together
natural, ethical, (and) logical (philosophy). But the points Plato
determined are these following.

Plato (lays down) that there are three originating principles of the
universe, (namely) God, and matter, and exemplar; God as the Maker and
Regulator of this universe, and the Being who exercises providence over
it; but matter, as that which underlies all (phenomena), which (matter)
he styles both receptive and a nurse, out of the arrangement of which
proceeded the four elements of which the world consists; (I mean) fire,
air, earth, water, from which all the rest of what are denominated
concrete substances, as well as animals and plants, have been formed.
And that the exemplar, which he likewise calls ideas, is the
intelligence of the Deity, to which, as to an image in the soul, the
Deity attending, fabricated all things. God, he says, is both
incorporeal and shapeless, and comprehensible by wise men solely;
whereas matter is body potentially, but with potentiality not as yet
passing into action, for being itself without form and without quality,
by assuming forms and qualities, it became body. That matter, therefore,
is an originating principle, and coeval with the Deity, and that in this
respect the world is uncreated. For (Plato) affirms that (the world) was
made out of it. And that (the attribute of) imperishableness necessarily
belongs to (literally "follows") that which is uncreated. So far forth,
however, as body is supposed to be compounded out of both many qualities
and ideas, so far forth it is both created and perishable. But some of
the followers of Plato mingled both of these, employing some such
example as the following: That as a waggon can always continue
undestroyed, though undergoing partial repairs from time to time, so
that even the parts each in turn perish, yet itself remains always
complete; so after this manner the world also, although in parts it
perishes, yet the things that are removed, being repaired, and
equivalents for them being introduced, it remains eternal.

Some maintain that Plato asserts the Deity to be one, ingenerable and
incorruptible, as he says in *The Laws:*
<sup>[91](footnote/fn4.htm#P426_84198)</sup> "God, therefore, as the
ancient account has it, possesses both the beginning, and end, and
middle of all things." Thus he shows God to be one, on account of His
having pervaded all things. Others, however, maintain that Plato affirms
the existence of many gods indefinitely, when he uses these words: "God
of gods, of whom I am both the Creator and
Father."<sup>[92](footnote/fn4.htm#P427_84612)</sup> But others say that
he speaks of a definite number of deities in the following passage:
"Therefore the mighty Jupiter, wheeling his swift chariot in heaven;
"and when he enumerates the offspring of the children of heaven and
earth. But others assert that (Plato) constituted the gods as generable;
and on account of their having been produced, that altogether they were
subject to the necessity of corruption, but that on account of the will
of God they are immortal, (maintaining this) in the passage already
quoted, where, to the words, "God of gods, of whom I am Creator and
Father," he adds, "indissoluble through the fiat of My will; "so that if
(God) were disposed that these should be dissolved, they would easily be
dissolved.

And he admits natures (such as those) of demons, and says that some of
them are good, but others worthless. And some affirm that he states the
soul to be uncreated and immortal, when he uses the following words,
"Every soul is immortal, for that which is always moved is immortal;
"and when he demonstrates that the soul is self-moved, and capable of
originating motion. Others, however, (say that Plato asserted that the
soul was) created, but rendered imperishable through the will of God.
But some (will have it that he considered the soul) a composite
(essence), and generable and corruptible; for even he supposes that
there is a receptacle for
it,<sup>[93](footnote/fn4.htm#P429_86231)</sup> and that it possesses a
luminous body, but that everything generated involves a necessity of
corruption.<sup>[94](footnote/fn4.htm#P430_86584)</sup> Those, however,
who assert the immortality of the soul are especially strengthened in
their opinion by those
passages<sup>[95](footnote/fn4.htm#P431_86786)</sup> (in Plato's
writings), where he says, that both there are judgments after death, and
tribunals of justice in Hades, and that the virtuous (souls) receive a
good reward, while the wicked (ones) suitable punishment. Some
notwithstanding assert, that he also acknowledges a transition of souls
from one body to another, and that different souls, those that were
marked out for such a purpose, pass into different
bodies,<sup>[96](footnote/fn4.htm#P432_87439)</sup> according to the
desert of each, and that
after<sup>[97](footnote/fn4.htm#P433_87536)</sup> certain definite
periods they are sent up into this world to furnish once more a proof of
their choice. Others, however, (do not admit this to be his doctrine,
but will have it that Plato affirms that the souls) obtain a place
according to the desert of each; and they employ as a testimony the
saying of his, that some good men are with Jove, and that others are
ranging abroad (through heaven) with other gods; whereas that others are
involved in eternal punishments, as many as during this life have
committed wicked and unjust deeds.

And people affirm that Plato says, that some things are without a mean,
that others have a mean, that others are a mean. (For example, that)
waking and sleep, and such like, are conditions without an intermediate
state; but that there are things that had means, for instance virtue and
vice; and there are means (between extremes), for instance grey between
white and black, or some other colour. And they say, that he affirms
that the things pertaining to the soul are absolutely alone good, but
that the things pertaining to the body, and those external (to it), are
not any longer absolutely good, but reputed blessings. And that
frequently he names these means also, for that it is possible to use
them both well and ill. Some virtues, therefore, he says, are extremes
in regard of intrinsic worth, but in regard of their essential nature
means, for nothing is more estimable than virtue. But whatever excels or
falls short of these terminates in vice. For instance, he says that
there are four virtues-prudence, temperance, justice, fortitude-and that
on each of these is attendant two vices, according to excess and defect:
for example, on prudence, recklessness according to defect, and knavery
according to excess; and on temperance, licentiousness according to
defect, stupidity according to excess; and on justice, foregoing a claim
according to defect, unduly pressing it according to excess; and on
fortitude, cowardice according to defect, foolhardiness according to
excess. And that these virtues, when inherent in a man, render him
perfect, and afford him happiness. And happiness, he says, is
assimilation to the Deity, as far as this is possible; and that
assimilation to God takes place when any one combines holiness and
justice with prudence. For this he supposes the end of supreme wisdom
and virtue. And he affirms that the virtues follow one another in
turn,<sup>[98](footnote/fn4.htm#P435_89975)</sup> and are uniform, and
are never antagonistic to each other; whereas that vices are multiform,
and sometimes follow one the other, and sometimes are antagonistic to
each other. He asserts that fate exists; not, to be sure, that all
things are produced according to fate, but that there is even something
in our power, as in the passages where he says, "The fault is his who
chooses, God is blameless; "and "the following
law<sup>[99](footnote/fn4.htm#P436_90521)</sup> of
Adrasteia."<sup>[100](footnote/fn4.htm#P437_90651)</sup> And thus some
(contend for his upholding) a system of fate, whereas others one of
free-will. He asserts, however, that sins are involuntary. For into what
is most glorious of the things in our power, which is the soul, no one
would (deliberately) admit what is vicious, that is, transgression, but
that from ignorance and an erroneous conception of virtue, supposing
that they were achieving something honourable, they pass into vice. And
his doctrine on this point is most clear in *The
Republic*,<sup>[101](footnote/fn4.htm#P438_91234)</sup> where he says,
"But, again, you presume to assert that vice is disgraceful and abhorred
of God; how then, I may ask, would one choose such an evil thing? He,
you reply, (would do so) who is worsted by
pleasures.<sup>[102](footnote/fn4.htm#P439_91514)</sup> Therefore this
also is involuntary, if to gain a victory be voluntary; so that, in
every point of view, the committing an act of turpitude, reason
proves<sup>[103](footnote/fn4.htm#P440_91839)</sup> to be involuntary."
Some one, however, in opposition to this (Plato), advances the contrary
statement, "Why then are men punished if they sin involuntary? "But he
replies, that he himself also, as soon as possible, may be emancipated
from vice, and undergo punishment. For that the undergoing punishment is
not an evil, but a good thing, if it is likely to prove a purification
of evils; and that the rest of mankind, hearing of it, may not
transgress, but guard against such an error. (Plato, however, maintains)
that the nature of evil is neither created by the Deity, nor possesses
subsistence of itself, but that it derives existence from contrariety to
what is good, and from attendance upon it, either by excess and defect,
as we have previously affirmed concerning the virtues. Plato
unquestionably then, as we have already stated, collecting together the
three departments of universal philosophy, in this manner formed his
speculative system.

Aristotle, who was a pupil of this (Plato), reduced philosophy into an
art, and was distinguished rather for his proficiency in logical
science, supposing as the elements of all things substance and accident;
that there is one substance underlying all things, but nine
accidents,-namely, quantity, quality, relation, where, when, possession,
posture, action, passion; and that substance is of some such description
as God, man, and each of the beings that can fall under a similar
denomination. But in regard of accidents, quality is seen in, for
instance, white, black; and quantity, for instance two cubits, three
cubits; and relation, for instance father, son; and where, for instance
at Athens, Megara; and when, for instance during the tenth Olympiad; and
possession, for instance to have acquired; and action, for instance to
write, and in general to evince any practical powers; and posture, for
instance to lie down; and passion, for instance to be struck. He also
supposes that some things have means, but that others are without means,
as we have declared concerning Plato likewise. And in most points he is
in agreement with Plato, except the opinion concerning soul. For Plato
affirms it to be immortal, but Aristotle that it involves permanence;
and after these things, that this also vanishes in the fifth
body,<sup>[104](footnote/fn4.htm#P444_94279)</sup> which he supposes,
along with the other four (elements),-viz., fire, and earth, and water,
and air,-to be a something more subtle (than these), of the nature of
spirit. Plato therefore says, that the only really good things are those
pertaining to the soul, and that they are sufficient for happiness;
whereas Aristotle introduces a threefold classification of good things,
and asserts that the wise man is not perfect, unless there are present
to him both the good things of the body and those extrinsic to
it.<sup>[105](footnote/fn4.htm#P445_94965)</sup> The former are beauty,
strength, vigour of the senses, soundness; while the things extrinsic
(to the body) are wealth, nobility, glory, power, peace,
friendship.<sup>[106](footnote/fn4.htm#P446_95314)</sup> And the inner
qualities of the soul he classifies, as it was the opinion of Plato,
under prudence, temperance, justice, fortitude. This (philosopher) also
affirms that evils arise according to an opposition of the things that
are good, and that they exist beneath the quarter around the moon, but
reach no farther beyond the moon; and that the soul of the entire world
is immortal, and that the world itself is eternal, but that (the soul)
in an individual, as we have before stated, vanishes (in the fifth
body). This (speculator), then holding discussions in the Lyceum, drew
up from time to time his system of philosophy; but Zeno (held his
school) in the porch called *Poecilé*. And the followers of Zeno
obtained their name from the place-that is, from *Stoa*-(i.e., a porch),
being styled Stoics; whereas Aristotle's followers (were denominated)
from their mode of employing themselves while teaching. For since they
were accustomed walking about in the Lyceum to pursue their
investigations, on this account they were called Peripatetics. These
indeed, then, were the doctrines of Aristotle.

The Stoics themselves also imparted growth to philosophy, in respect of
a greater development of the art of syllogism, and included almost
everything under definitions, both Chrysippus and Zeno being coincident
in opinion on this point. And they likewise supposed God to be the one
originating principle of all things, being a body of the utmost
refinement, and that His providential care pervaded everything; and
these speculators were positive about the existence of fate everywhere,
employing some such example as the following: that just as a dog,
supposing him attached to a car, if indeed he is disposed to follow,
both is drawn,<sup>[107](footnote/fn4.htm#P450_97195)</sup> or follows
voluntarily, making an exercise also of free power, in combination with
necessity, that is, fate; but if he may not be disposed to follow, he
will altogether be coerced to do so. And the same, of course, holds good
in the case of men. For though not willing to follow, they will
altogether be compelled to enter upon what has been decreed for them.
(The Stoics), however, assert that the soul abides after
death,<sup>[108](footnote/fn4.htm#P451_98025)</sup> but that it is a
body, and that such is formed from the refrigeration of the surrounding
atmosphere; wherefore, also, that it was called *psyche* (i.e., soul).
And they acknowledge likewise, that there is a transition of souls from
one body to another, that is, for those souls for whom this migration
has been destined. And they accept the doctrine, that there will be a
conflagration, a purification of this world, some say the entire of it,
but others a portion, and that (the world) itself is undergoing partial
destruction; and this all but corruption, and the generation from it of
another world, they term purgation. And they assume the existence of all
bodies, and that body does not pass through
body,<sup>[109](footnote/fn4.htm#P452_98916)</sup> but that a
refraction<sup>[110](footnote/fn4.htm#P453_99026)</sup> takes place, and
that all things involve plenitude, and that there is no vacuum. The
foregoing are the opinions of the Stoics also.

Epicurus, however, advanced an opinion almost contrary to all. He
supposed, as originating principles of all things, atoms and
vacuity.<sup>[111](footnote/fn4.htm#P457_99490)</sup> He considered
vacuity as the place that would contain the things that will exist, and
atoms the matter out of which all things could be formed; and that from
the concourse of atoms both the Deity derived existence, and all the
elements, and all things inherent in them, as well as animals and other
(creatures); so that nothing was generated or existed, unless it be from
atoms. And he affirmed that these atoms were composed of extremely small
particles, in which there could not exist either a point or a sign, or
any division; wherefore also he called them atoms. Acknowledging the
Deity to be eternal and incorruptible, he says that God has providential
care for nothing, and that there is no such thing at all as providence
or fate, but that all things are made by chance. For that the Deity
reposed in the intermundane spaces, (as they) are thus styled by him;
for outside the world he determined that there is a certain habitation
of God, denominated "the intermundane spaces," and that the Deity
surrendered Himself to pleasure, and took His ease in the midst of
supreme happiness; and that neither has He any concerns of business, nor
does He devote His attention to
them.<sup>[112](footnote/fn4.htm#P458_100999)</sup> As a consequence on
these opinions, he also propounded his theory concerning wise men,
asserting that the end of wisdom is pleasure. Different persons,
however, received the term "pleasure" in different acceptations; for
some (among the Gentiles<sup>[113](footnote/fn4.htm#P459_101358)</sup>
understood) the passions, but others the satisfaction resulting from
virtue. And he concluded that the souls of men are dissolved along with
their bodies, just as also they were produced along with them, for that
they are blood, and that when this has gone forth or been altered, the
entire man perishes; and in keeping with this tenet, (Epicurus
maintained) that there are neither trials in Hades, nor tribunals of
justice; so that whatsoever any one may commit in this life, that,
provided he may escape detection, he is altogether beyond any liability
of trial (for it in a future state). In this way, then, Epicurus also
formed his opinions.

And another opinion of the philosophers was called that of the
Academics,<sup>[114](footnote/fn4.htm#P463_102486)</sup> on account of
those holding their discussions in the Academy, of whom the founder
Pyrrho, from whom they were called Pyrrhonean philosophers, first
introduced the notion of the incomprehensibility of all things, so as to
(be ready to) attempt an argument on either side of a question, but not
to assert anything for certain; for that there is nothing of things
intelligible or sensible true, but that they appear to men to be so; and
that all substance is in a state of flux and change, and never continues
in the same (condition). Some followers, then, of the Academics say that
one ought not to declare an opinion on the principle of anything, but
simply making the attempt to give it up; whereas others subjoined the
formulary "not rather"<sup>[115](footnote/fn4.htm#P464_103334)</sup>
(this than that), saying that the fire is not rather fire than anything
else. But they did not declare what this is, but what sort it
is.<sup>[116](footnote/fn4.htm#P465_103553)</sup>

But there is also with the Indians a sect composed of those
philosophizing among the Brachmans. They spend a contented existence,
abstain both from living creatures and all cooked food, being satisfied
with fruits; and not gathering these from the trees, but carrying off
those that have fallen to the earth. They subsist upon them, drinking
the water of the river
Tazabena.<sup>[117](footnote/fn4.htm#P469_104135)</sup> But they pass
their life naked, affirming that the body has been constituted a
covering to the soul by the Deity. These affirm that God is light, not
such as one sees, nor such as the sun and fire; but to them the Deity is
discourse, not that which finds expression in articulate sounds, but
that of the knowledge through which the secret mysteries of
nature<sup>[118](footnote/fn4.htm#P470_104570)</sup> are perceived by
the wise. And this light which they say is discourse, their god, they
assert that the Brachmans only know on account of their alone rejecting
all vanity of opinion which is the soul's ultimate
covering.<sup>[119](footnote/fn4.htm#P471_104903)</sup> These despise
death, and always in their own peculiar
language<sup>[120](footnote/fn4.htm#P472_105155)</sup> call God by the
name which we have mentioned previously, and they send up hymns (to
him). But neither are there women among them, nor do they beget
children. But they who aim at a life similar to these, after they have
crossed over to the country on the opposite side of the river, continue
to reside there, returning no more; and these also are called Brachmans.
But they do not pass their life similarly, for there are also in the
place women, of whom those that dwell there are born, and in turn beget
children. And this discourse
which<sup>[121](footnote/fn4.htm#P473_105815)</sup> they name God they
assert to be corporeal, and enveloped in a body outside himself, just as
if one were wearing a sheep's skin, but that on divesting himself of
body that he would appear clear to the eye. But the Brachmans say that
there is a conflict in the body that surrounds them, (and they consider
that the body is for them full of
conflicts);<sup>[122](footnote/fn4.htm#P474_106983)</sup> in opposition
to which, as if marshalled for battle against enemies, they contend, as
we have already explained. And they say that all men are captive to
their own congenital struggles, viz., sensuality and inchastity,
gluttony, anger, joy, sorrow, concupiscence, and such like. And he who
has reared a trophy over these, alone goes to God; wherefore the
Brachmans deify Dandamis, to whom Alexander the Macedonian paid a visit,
as one who had proved victorious in the bodily conflict. But they bear
down on Calanus as having profanely withdrawn from their philosophy. But
the Brachmans, putting off the body, like fishes jumping out of water
into the pure air, behold the sun.

And the Celtic Druids investigated to the very highest point the
Pythagorean philosophy, after
Zamolxis,<sup>[123](footnote/fn4.htm#P478_107913)</sup> by birth a
Thracian,<sup>[124](footnote/fn4.htm#P479_108016)</sup> a servant of
Pythagoras, became to them the originator of this discipline. Now after
the death of Pythagoras, Zamolxis, repairing thither, became to them the
originator of this philosophy. The Celts esteem these as prophets and
seers, on account of their foretelling to them certain (events), from
calculations and numbers by the Pythagorean art; on the methods of which
very art also we shall not keep silence, since also from these some have
presumed to introduce heresies; but the Druids resort to magical rites
likewise.

But Hesiod the poet asserts himself also that he thus heard from the
Muses concerning nature, and that the Muses are the daughters of
Jupiter. For when for nine nights and days together, Jupiter, through
excess of passion, had uninterruptedly lain with Mnemosyne, that
Mnemosyne conceived in one womb those nine Muses, becoming pregnant with
one during each night. Having then summoned the nine Muses from Pieria,
that is, Olympus, he exhorted them to undergo instruction:-

And all the rest of the giants from Cronus, Hesiod enumerates, and
somewhere afterwards that Jupiter was born of Rhea. All these, then,
made the foregoing statements in their doctrine regarding both the
nature and generation of the universe. But all, sinking below what is
divine, busied themselves concerning the substance of existing
things,<sup>[127](footnote/fn5.htm#P516_111766)</sup> being astonished
at the magnitude of creation, and supposing that it constituted the
Deity, each speculator selecting in preference a different portion of
the world; failing, however, to discern the God and maker of these.

The opinions, therefore, of those who have attempted to frame systems of
philosophy among the Greeks, I consider that we have sufficiently
explained; and from these the heretics, taking occasion, have
endeavoured to establish the tenets that will be after a short time
declared. It seems, however, expedient, that first explaining the
mystical rites and whatever imaginary doctrines some have laboriously
framed concerning the stars, or magnitudes, to declare these; for
heretics likewise, taking occasion from them, are considered by the
multitude to utter prodigies. Next in order we shall elucidate the
feeble opinions advanced by these.

Books II. And III. Are Awanting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV.](0050007)
