[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050136)  [Next](0050138.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Introductory Notice to Novatian, a Roman Presbyter

------------

\[a.d. 210-280.\] When we reflect upon the history of Solomon, and his
marvellous contributions to the sacred canon of Scripture, we must not
be surprised to find a Tatian, a Tertullian, and a Novatian among the
Fathers. We deplore the lapse of such characters, but after death they
are not subject to human judgment. Let us cherish the gratitude we owe
to them for their good works, and use their testimony so far as it was
faithful; covering their shame with the mantle of charity, and praying
for grace never to imitate their faults. "If any teacher have wandered
from the faith, it is permitted," says St. Vincent
of<sup>[1](footnote/fn100.htm#P10052_3116333.md)</sup> , "by Divine
Providence *for our trial*, whether we love God or not, with all our
heart and with all our soul."

We find Novatian apparently exercising jurisdiction, *sede vacante*, in
Rome, with his co-presbyters, and as *vicar-general* (to use a later
term) corresponding with Cyprian. This was about a.d. 250, after the
death of Fabian. His marked abilities and real services had fitted him
to preside thus over the Roman presbytery, and to be their "secretary
for foreign affairs." But he laboured under the impediment of clinic
baptism, and had not an unblemished record, if we credit
Eusebius,<sup>[2](footnote/fn100.htm#P10054_3117108.md)</sup> in his
conduct during persecution.

He was not called, therefore, to the episcopate. Cornelius was made
bishop June 4, a.d. 251; and, apparently, disappointed ambition soon
bore its thorny fruits. "Emulation of the episcopal office is the mother
of schisms," said
Tertullian;<sup>[3](footnote/fn100.htm#P10056_3117395.md)</sup> even in
that period when to be a bishop was so often to be a martyr. And we find
Novatian grasping a shadowy titular bishopric, which, wholly irregular
and universally disowned, could have been to such a man the source of
nothing but misery. I say, "to such a man," for, *without hearing the
other side*, I cannot accept what was unquestionably supposed to be fact
amid the excitements of the times. And Novatian was not a common or a
vulgar character. The arguments of
Lardner<sup>[4](footnote/fn100.htm#P10057_3117913.md)</sup> teach us at
least to be Christians,-to accept the facts, but "forbear to judge,"
seeing, as that writer observes, "we have not one remaining line of his
in self-defence or against his adversaries."

Now as to his orthodoxy, so far as his extant writings are concerned, I
think any scholar, not anxious to make out a case, will abide by the
candid judgment of Bull, who defends his reputation against
Petavius.<sup>[5](footnote/fn100.htm#P10059_3118472.md)</sup> "By no
means," he says, "should we tolerate that injustice of the Jesuit Petau
towards the ancient writers, against their manifest mind and purpose;
twisting, as he everywhere does, their sound and Catholic sayings into a
sense alien and heretical."

The work upon the Trinity, which is a most valuable contribution to
ante-Nicene theology, is said by Cave to have been written about a.d.
257; and that upon the Jewish meats seems to have been composed during
the Decian persecution. His heresy, such as it was, turned upon
unrelenting discipline, and was a sin against charity, which is greater
than faith itself. It violated the "seventy times seven" maxim of our
Lord, and the comprehensive precept, "Forgive, and ye shall be
forgiven." It wounded Christian unity at a perilous period, and when
every breach in the wall of the fold was sure to let in the wolves.

"He may have aspired to *the papal chair*," says a contemporary
writer<sup>[6](footnote/fn100.htm#P10062_3119454.md)</sup> of no mean
repute, adding, "to which he had the best claim." Then he says,
"Novatian was elected *anti-pope* by a minority, and consecrated by
three Italian bishops." Is this history? What impression must it give to
the young student? The learned writer whom I quote shows clearly enough
that there was no "papacy" in primitive times, as that word is
universally understood. Why, then, put a face upon Antiquity so utterly
misleading? Neither Novatian, nor his consecrators, nor Cornelius,
against whom he rebelled, ever dreamed of anything more than of an
episcopal chair; venerable, indeed, for its succession of pastors from
the times of SS. Peter and Paul, but as yet hardly felt in the Christian
brotherhood; which for two centuries had produced many pious but few
eminent men, and in which Novatian himself was the earliest contributor
to the "Latin Christianity," already founded and flourishing, not in
Italy, but in Northern Africa.

The following is the Introductory Notice of the Edinburgh translator,
the Rev. Dr. Wallis, who, I am glad to observe, is tender towards our
author's memory :-

The biography of Novatian belongs to the ecclesiastical history of the
third century. He was, or is reputed to have been, the founder of a sect
which claimed for itself the name of
"Puritan"<sup>[7](footnote/fn100.htm#P10065_3120804)</sup> (kaqaroi/.md).
For a long time he was in determined opposition to Cornelius, bishop of
Rome, in regard to the admission of the lapsed and penitent into the
Church; but the facts of the controversy and much of our information in
regard to Novatian are to be got only from his enemies, the Roman bishop
and his adherents. Accordingly, some have believed all the accusations
that have been brought against him, while others have been inclined to
doubt them all.<sup>[8](footnote/fn100.htm#P10066_3121350.md)</sup>

It is not known where Novatian was born. Some have appealed to
Philostorgius<sup>[9](footnote/fn100.htm#P10068_3121498.md)</sup> in behalf
of the opinion that he was a Phrygian; but others maintain that,
supposing this to be a statement of the historian, it is a mere
conjecture of his, based on the character of Novatian's teaching. It is
also stated by Cyprian, that he was a Stoic before he passed over to the
Christian Church; but this also has been doubted. While amongst the
catechumens, he was seized by a violent disease, attributed to demoniac
agency; and, being near death, he received baptism. He was ordained
presbyter by Fabian, bishop of Rome, against the wishes of the rest of
the clergy, who objected thereto because he had received clinic
baptism.<sup>[10](footnote/fn100.htm#P10069_3122227.md)</sup> The
subsequent circumstances of his schism and his contest with Cornelius,
are stated at length with no friendly spirit in a letter to Antonianus
by Cyprian.<sup>[11](footnote/fn100.htm#P10070_3122419.md)</sup>
Socrates<sup>[12](footnote/fn100.htm#P10071_3122825.md)</sup> states that
he suffered martyrdom; but his authority, amid the silence of all
others, is not sufficient to guarantee the fact.

Novatian composed many works. The following are extant:-

I. *De Trinitate*, formerly attributed by some to Tertullian, by others
to Cyprian; but now on all hands allowed to be the work of Novatian, to
whom Jerome expressly assigns
it.<sup>[13](footnote/fn100.htm#P10074_3123217.md)</sup> It was written
after the heresy of Sabellius, which appeared 256 a.d.

II\. *De Cibis Judaicis*: at first also attributed by some to Tertullian
or Cyprian; but now assigned to Novatian on the testimony of Jerome. It
was written during the time of the Decian persecution, about 250 a.d.

III\. Novatian was the author of the
letter<sup>[14](footnote/fn100.htm#P10077_3123576.md)</sup> addressed by
the Roman clergy to Cyprian. So Cyprian himself
states.<sup>[15](footnote/fn100.htm#P10078_3123674.md)</sup> Some have also
attributed to him Ep. xxix. without any authority.

IV\. Jerome attributes to him writings on Circumcision, on the Sabbath,
on the Passover, on the Priesthood, on Prayer, on Attalus, on the
Present Crisis, and Letters.

The best editions of Novatian are by Welchman, Oxford, 1724; and by
Jackson, London, 1728.

--------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Treatise of Novatian Concerning the Trinity.](0050138.md)
