[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050132)  [Next](0050134.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Introductory Notice to Caius, Presbyter of Rome

------------

\[a.d. 180-217.\] During the episcopate of Zephyrinus, Caius, one of his
presbyters, acquired much credit by his refutation of Proclus, a
Montanist. He became known as an eloquent and erudite doctor, and to him
has often been ascribed the *Philosophumena* of Hippolytus, and also
*The Labyrinth*. He wrote in Greek, and finally seems to have been
promoted to an episcopal See, possibly among the
Easterns.<sup>[1](footnote/fn99.htm#P9938_3091819.md)</sup> To him also has
been ascribed the celebrated "Muratorian Canon," which is therefore
given in this volume, with other fragments less dubiously associated
with his name. He has been supposed by some to have been a pupil of
Irenaeus, but of this there is no conclusive evidence. If his reputation
suffers somewhat from his supposed rejection of the Apocalypse, it is
apologized for by Wordsworth, in a paragraph that deserves to be quoted
entire: "Let it be remembered that the church of Rome was not eminent
for learning at that time. It was induced, by fear of erroneous
consequences, to surrender another l book,-the Hebrews 1. The learning
of the Church was then mainly in the East. It was by the influence of
the East, in the West, that the church of Rome was enabled to recover
that epistle. It was also the influence of the Apocalyptic churches of
Asia that preserved the Revelation 1 as an inspired work of St. John to
the church of Rome." By the deference with which the author of the
*Refutation* speaks of the Apocalypse, we are able, among other
evidences, to decide that it is not the work of Caius.

In an interesting chapter of his *Hippolytus*, Bishop Wordsworth
considers the possibility of the authorship of that work as his, and
discusses it with ability and learning, Nearly all that is known or
conjectured concerning Caius is there condensed and elucidated. But
Lardner devotes a yet more learned chapter to him; and to that the
inquirer is referred, as a sufficient elucidation of all that was known
or conjectured about him before the present century. He is quoted by
Eusebius;<sup>[2](footnote/fn99.htm#P9940_3093680.md)</sup> and the
traveller is reminded, when he visits the gorgeous Church of St. Paul on
the Ostian Road, that so early an author as Caius may be cited as
evidence that it probably stands very near the spot where St. Paul
fulfilled his prophecy, "I am now ready to be offered, and the time of
my departure is at hand." We can only conjecture the time of his birth
by the age he must have attained in the time of Zephyrinus; but of his
death, the secret is with the Master in whom he believed, as we may
trust, until he fell asleep.

Here follows, from the Edinburgh series, the learned editor's
Introductory Notice:-

Eusebius states that Caius lived in the time of
Zephyrinus.<sup>[3](footnote/fn99.htm#P9943_3094586.md)</sup> He speaks of
him as a member of the Catholic
Church,<sup>[4](footnote/fn99.htm#P9944_3094671.md)</sup> and as being most
learned. And he mentions that a dialogue of his was extant in his time,
in which he argued with Proclus, the leader of the Cataphrygian heresy;
and that Caius in this dialogue spoke of only thirteen epistles of the
Apostle Paul, "not counting the Epistle to the Hebrews with the
rest."<sup>[5](footnote/fn99.htm#P9945_3094999.md)</sup>

Eusebius mentions no other work of Caius. He makes extracts from a work
against the heresy of Artemon in the fifth book of his *Ecclesiastical
History*, but he states distinctly that the work was anonymous. He
evidently did not know who was the author. Theodoret and Nicephorus
affirm that the work from which Eusebius made these extracts bore the
title of *The little Labyrinth*. Photius has the following notice of
Caius: "Read the work of Josephus on the universe, bearing in some
manuscripts the inscription *On the Cause of the Universe*, and in
others, *On the Substance of the Universe*.... But I found that this
treatise is not the work of Josephus, but of one Gains a presbyter, who
lived in Rome, who they say composed *The Labyrinth* also, and whose
dialogue with Proclus, the champion of the Montanistic heresy, is in
circulation. ... They say also that he composed another treatise
specially directed against the heresy of Artemon." Photius here ascribes
four works to Caius: 1. *On the Universe*; 2. *The Labyrinth*; 3. *The
Dialogue between himself and Proclus*; 4. *The Treatise against the
Heresy of Artemon*. He does not say that he read any of them but the
first. This treatise is now assigned to Hippolytus. The information of
Photius in regard to the other three, derived as it is from the
statements of others, cannot be trusted.

Note by the American Editor.

It is to be observed that the Fragment of *Muratori proves that the
Apocalypse* was received in the church at Rome in the times of Pius,
a.d. 160. It is quoted in *Hermas* freely. Also, see the Epistle of
Roman clergy to Cyprian (p. 303, note 5, *supra*), about a.d. 250. But
the *Fragment* aforesaid is the earliest direct evidence on the subject.
Note, that its author says, "*We* receive the Apocalypse," etc. "*Some
amongst us* will not have," etc. (see p. 602, infra). Thus, the
comprovincials have a voice, as in the cases cited by Hippolytus. See
(pp. 157, 159, *supra*) Elucidations VI. and XI. The Bishop of Rome
seems, by this *Fragment*, to have received the *Apocalypse of Peter*
(Eusebius, *H. E.*, book iii. cap. 25), but it was thrown out as
spurious by the Church nevertheless.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fragments of Caius](0050134.md)
