[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050029)  [Next](0050031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle V.<sup>[1](footnote/fn48.htm#P4802_1453873.md)</sup>

To the Presbyters and Deacons.

1\. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I had
wished indeed, beloved brethren, with this my letter to greet the whole
of my clergy in health and safety. But since the stormy time which has
in a great measure overwhelmed my people, has, moreover, added this
enhancement to my sorrows, that it has touched with its desolation even
a portion of the clergy, I pray the Lord that, by the divine mercy, I
may hereafter greet you at all events as safe, who, as I have learned,
stand fast both in faith and virtue. And although some reasons might
appear to urge me to the duty of myself hastening to come to you,
firstly, for instance, because of my eagerness and desire for you, which
is the chief consideration in my prayers, and then, that we might be
able to consult together on those matters which are required by the
general advantage, in respect of the government of the Church, and
having carefully examined them with abundant counsel, might wisely
arrange them;-yet it seemed to me better, still to preserve my retreat
and my quiet for a while, with a view to other advantages connected with
the peace and safety of us all:-which advantages an account will be
given you by our beloved brother Tertullus, who, besides his other care
which he zealously bestows on divine labours, was, moreover, the author
of this counsel; that I should be cautious and moderate, and not rashly
trust myself into the sight of the public; and especially that I should
beware of that place where I had been so often inquired for and sought
after.

2\. Relying, therefore, upon your love and your piety, which I have
abundantly known, in this letter I both exhort and command you, that
those of you whose presence there is least suspicious and least
perilous, should in my stead discharge my duty, in respect of doing
those things which are required for the religious administration. In the
meantime let the poor be taken care of as much and as well as possible;
but especially those who have stood with unshaken faith and have not
forsaken Christ's flock, that, by your diligence, means be supplied to
them to enable them to bear their poverty, so that what the troublous
time has not effected in respect of their faith, may not be accomplished
by want in respect of their afflictions. Let a more earnest care,
moreover, be bestowed upon the glorious confessors. And although I know
that very many of those have been maintained by the
vow<sup>[2](footnote/fn48.htm#P4808_1456695.md)</sup> and by the love of
the brethren, yet if there be any who are in want either of clothing or
maintenance, let them be supplied, with whatever things are necessary,
as I formerly wrote to you, while they were still kept in prison,-only
let them know from you and be instructed, and learn what, according to
the authority of Scripture, the discipline of the Church requires of
them, that they ought to be humble and modest and peaceable, that they
should maintain the honour of their name, so that those who have
achieved glory by what they have testified, may achieve glory also by
their characters, and in all things seeking the Lord's approval, may
show themselves worthy, in consummation of their praise, to attain a
heavenly crown. For there remains more than what is yet seen to be
accomplished, since it is written "Praise not any man before his death;
"<sup>[3](footnote/fn48.htm#P4809_1457753.md)</sup> and again, "Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life."<sup>[4](footnote/fn48.htm#P4810_1457882.md)</sup> And the Lord also
says, "He that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved."<sup>[5](footnote/fn48.htm#P4811_1457979.md)</sup> Let them imitate
the Lord, who at the very time of His passion was not more proud, but
more humble. For then He washed His disciples' feet, saying, "If I, your
Lord and Master, have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one
another's feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do as I
have done to you."<sup>[6](footnote/fn48.htm#P4812_1458312.md)</sup> Let
them also follow the example of the Apostle Paul, who, after
often-repeated imprisonment, after scourging, after exposures to wild
beasts, in everything continued meek and humble; and even after his
rapture to the third heaven and paradise, he did not proudly arrogate
anything to himself when he said, "Neither did we eat any man's bread
for nought, but wrought with labour and travail night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of
you."<sup>[7](footnote/fn48.htm#P4813_1458834.md)</sup>

3\. These several matters, I pray you, suggest to our brethren. And as
"he who humbleth himself shall be
exalted,"<sup>[8](footnote/fn48.htm#P4815_1458968.md)</sup> now is the time
when they should rather fear the ensnaring adversary, who more eagerly
attacks the man that is strongest, and becoming more virulent, for the
very reason that he is conquered, strives to overcome his conqueror. The
Lord grant that I may soon both see them again, and by salutary
exhortation may establish their minds to preserve their glory. For I am
grieved when I hear that some of them run about wickedly and proudly,
and give themselves up to follies or to discords; that members of
Christ, and even members that have confessed Christ, are defiled by
unlawful concubinage, and cannot be ruled either by deacons or by
presbyters, but cause that, by the wicked and evil characters of a
few,<sup>[9](footnote/fn48.htm#P4816_1459694.md)</sup> the honourable
glories of many and good confessors are
tarnished;<sup>[10](footnote/fn48.htm#P4817_1459963.md)</sup> whom they
ought to fear, lest, being condemned by their testimony and judgment,
they be excluded from their fellowship. That, finally, is the
illustrious and true confessor, concerning whom afterwards the Church
does not blush, but boasts.

4\. In respect of that which our fellow-presbyters, Donatus and
Fortunatus, Novatus and Gordius, wrote to me, I have not been able to
reply by myself, since, from the first commencement of my episcopacy, I
made up my mind to do nothing on my own private opinion, without your
advice and without the consent of the
people.<sup>[11](footnote/fn48.htm#P4819_1460624.md)</sup> But as soon as,
by the grace of God, I shall have come to you, then we will discuss in
common, as our respective dignity requires, those things which either
have been or are to be done. I bid you, brethren beloved and dearly
longed-for, ever heartily farewell, and be mindful of me. Greet the
brotherhood that is with you earnestly from me, and tell them to
remember me. Farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle VI.](0050031.md)
