[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050090)  [Next](0050092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle LXVI.<sup>[1](footnote/fn60)</sup>

To Father Stephanus, Concerning Marcianus of Arles, Who Had Joined
Himself to Novatian.

1\. Cyprian to his brother Stephen, greeting. Faustinus our colleague,
abiding at Lyons, has once and again written to me, dearest brother,
informing me of those things which also I certainly know to have been
told to you, as well by him as by others our fellow-bishops established
in the same province, that Marcianus, who abides at Aries, has
associated himself with Novatian, and has departed from the unity of the
Catholic Church, and from the agreement of our body and priesthood,
holding that most extreme depravity of heretical presumption, that the
comforts and aids of divine love and paternal tenderness are closed to
the servants of God who repent, and mourn, and knock at the gate of the
Church with tears, and groans, and grief; and that those who are wounded
are not admitted for the soothing of their wounds, but that, forsaken
without hope of peace and communion, they must be thrown to become the
prey of wolves and the booty of the devil; which matter, dearest
brother, it is our business to advise for and to aid in, since we who
consider the divine clemency, and hold the balance in governingthe
Church, do thus exhibit the rebuke of vigour to sinners in such a way as
that, nevertheless, we do not refuse the medicine of divine goodness and
mercy in raising the lapsed and healing the wounded.

2\. Wherefore it behoves
you<sup>[2](footnote/fn60.htm#P6089_1920351)</sup> to write a very
copious letter to our fellow-bishops appointed in Gaul, not to suffer
any longer that Marcian, froward and haughty, and hostile to the divine
mercy and to the salvation of the brotherhood, should insult our
assembly, because he does not yet seem to be excommunicated by
us;<sup>[3](footnote/fn60.htm#P6090_1920863)</sup> in that he now for a
long time boasts and announces that, adhering to Novatian, and following
his frowardness, he has separated himself from our communion; although
Novatian himself, whom he follows, has formerly been excommunicated, and
judged an enemy to the Church; and when he sent ambassadors to us into
Africa, asking to be received into our communion, he received back word
from a council of several priests who were here present, that he himself
had excluded himself, and could not by any of us be received into
communion, as he had attempted to erect a profane altar, and to set up
an adulterous throne, and to offer sacrilegious sacrifices opposed to
the true priest; while the Bishop Cornelius was ordained in the Catholic
Church by the judgment of God, and by the suffrages of the clergy and
people. Therefore, if he were willing to return to a right mind, and to
come to himself, he should repent and return to the Church as a
suppliant. How vain it is, dearest brother, when Novatian has lately
been repulsed and rejected, and excommunicated by God's priests
throughout the whole world, for us still to suffer his flatterers now to
jest with us, and to judge of the majesty and dignity of the Church!

3\. Let letters be directed by you into the province and to the people
abiding at Arles, by which, Marcian being excommunicated, another may be
substituted in his place, and Christ's flock, which even to this day is
contemned as scattered and wounded by him, may be gathered together. Let
it suffice that many of our brethren have departed in these late years
in those parts without peace; and certainly let the rest who remain be
helped, who groan both day and night, and beseeching the divine and
fatherly mercy, entreat the comfort of our succour. For, for that
reason, dearest brother, the body of priests is abundantly large, joined
together by the bond of mutual concord, and the link of unity; so that
if any one of our college should try to originate heresy, and to
lacerate and lay waste Christ's flock, others may help, and as it were,
as useful and merciful shepherds, gather together the Lord's sheep into
the flock. For what if any harbour in the sea shall begin to be
mischievous and dangerous to ships, by the breach of its defences; do
not the navigators direct their ships to other neighbouring ports where
there is a safe<sup>[4](footnote/fn60.htm#P6092_1923293)</sup> and
practicable entrance, and a secure station? Or if, on the road, any inn
should begin to be beset and occupied by robbers, so that whoever should
enter would be caught by the attack of those who lie in wait there; do
not the travellers, as soon as this its character is discovered, seek
other houses of entertainment on the road, which shall be safer, where
the lodging is trustworthy, and the inns safe for the travellers? And
this ought now to be the case with us, dearest
brother,<sup>[5](footnote/fn60.htm#P6093_1923823)</sup> that we should
receive to us with ready and kindly humanity our brethren, who, tossed
on the rocks of Marcian,<sup>[6](footnote/fn60.htm#P6094_1924040)</sup>
are seeking the secure harbours of the Church; and that we afford such a
place of entertainment for the travellers as is that in the Gospel, in
which those who are wounded and maimed by robbers may be received and
cherished, and protected by the host.

4\. For what is a greater or a more worthy care of overseers, than to
provide by diligent solicitude and wholesome medicine for cherishing and
preserving the sheep? since the Lord speaks, and says, "The diseased
have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick,
neither have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have ye brought
again that which was driven away, neither have ye sought that which was
lost. And my sheep were scattered because there is no shepherd; and they
became meat to all the beasts of the field, and none did search or seek
after them. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Behold, I am against the
shepherds, and I will require my flock at their hands, and cause them to
cease from feeding the flock; neither shall they feed them any more: for
I will deliver them from their mouth, and I will feed them with
judgment."<sup>[7](footnote/fn60.htm#P6096_1925222)</sup> Since
therefore the Lord thus threatens such shepherds by whom the Lord's
sheep are neglected and perish, what else ought we to do, dearest
brother, than to exhibit full diligence in gathering together and
restoring the sheep of Christ, and to apply the medicine of paternal
affection to cure the wounds of the lapsed, since the Lord also in the
Gospel warns, and says, "They that be whole need not a physician, but
they that are sick? "<sup>[8](footnote/fn60.htm#P6097_1925689)</sup> For
although we are many shepherds, yet we feed one
flock,<sup>[9](footnote/fn60.htm#P6098_1925765)</sup> and ought to
collect and cherish all the sheep which Christ by His blood and passion
sought for; nor ought we to suffer our suppliant and mourning brethren
to be cruelly despised and trodden down by the haughty presumption of
some, since it is written, "But the man that is proud and boastful shall
bring nothing at all to perfection, who has enlarged his soul as
hell."<sup>[10](footnote/fn60.htm#P6099_1926252)</sup> And the Lord, in
His Gospel, blames and condemns men of that kind, saying, "Ye are they
which justify yourselves before men, but God knoweth your hearts: for
that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight Of
God."<sup>[11](footnote/fn61.htm#P6100_1926504)</sup> He says that those
are execrable and detestable who please themselves, who, swelling and
inflated, arrogantly assume anything to themselves. Since then Marcian
has begun to be of these, and, allying himself with Novatian, has stood
forth as the opponent of mercy and love, let him not pronounce sentence,
but receive it; and let him not so act as if he himself were to judge of
the college of priests, since he himself is judged by all the priests.

5\. For the glorious honour of our predecessors, the blessed martyrs
Cornelius and Lucius, must be maintained, whose memory as we hold in
honour, much more ought you, dearest brother, to honour and cherish with
your weight and authority, since you have become their vicar and
successor.<sup>[12](footnote/fn61.htm#P6102_1927257)</sup> For they,
full of the Spirit of God, and established in a glorious martyrdom,
judged that peace should be granted to the lapsed, and that when
penitence was undergone, the reward of peace and communion was not to be
denied; and this they attested by their letters, and we all everywhere
and entirely have judged the same thing. For there could not be among us
a diverse feeling in whom there was one spirit; and therefore it is
manifest that he does not hold the truth of the Holy Spirit with the
rest, whom we observe to think differently. Intimate plainly to us who
has been substituted at Arles in the place of Marcian, that we may know
to whom to direct our brethren, and to whom we ought to write. I bid
you, dearest brother, ever heartily farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXVII.](0050092)
