[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050027)  [Next](0050029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle III.

To the Presbyters and Deacons Abiding at Rome. a.d.
250.<sup>[1](footnote/fn47.htm#P4779_1448635)</sup>

1\. Cyprian to the elders and deacons, brethren abiding at Rome, sends,
greeting. When the report of the departure of the excellent man, my
colleague,<sup>[2](footnote/fn47.htm#P4783_1449041)</sup> was still
uncertain among us, my beloved brethren, and I was wavering doubtfully
in my opinion on the matter, I received a letter sent to me from you by
Crementius the sub-deacon, in which I was most abundantly informed of
his glorious end; and I rejoiced greatly that, in harmony with the
integrity of his administration, an honourable consummation also
attended him. Wherein, moreover, I greatly congratulate you, that you
honour his memory with a testimony so public and so illustrious, so that
by your means is made known to me, not only what is glorious to you in
connection with the memory of your bishop, but what ought to afford to
me also an example of faith and virtue. For in proportion as the fall of
a bishop is an event which tends ruinously to the fall of his followers,
so on the other hand it is a useful and helpful thing when a bishop, by
the firmness of his faith, sets himself forth to his brethren as an
object of imitation.

2\. I have, moreover, read another
epistle,<sup>[3](footnote/fn47.htm#P4785_1450220)</sup> in which neither
the person who wrote nor the persons to whom it was written were plainly
declared; and inasmuch as in the same letter both the writing and the
matter, and even the paper itself, gave me the idea that something had
been taken away, or had been changed from the original, I have sent you
back the epistle as it actually came to hand, that you may examine
whether it is the very same which you gave to Crementius the sub-deacon,
to carry. For it is a very serious thing if the truth of a clerical
letter is corrupted by any falsehood or deceit. In order, then, that we
may know this, ascertain whether the writing and subscription are yours,
and write me again what is the truth of the matter. I bid you, dearest
brethren, ever heartily farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle IV.](0050029)
