[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050045)  [Next](0050047.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXI.<sup>[1](footnote/fn50.md)</sup>

Lucian Replies to Celerinus.

1\. Lucian to Celerinus, his lord, and (if I shall be worthy to be
called so) colleague in Christ, greeting. I have received your letter,
most dearly beloved lord and brother, in which you have so laden me with
expressions of kindness, that by reason of your so burdening me I was
almost overcome with such excessive joy; so that I exulted in reading,
by the benefit of your so great humility, the letter, which I also
earnestly desired after so long a time to read, in which you deigned to
call me to remembrance, saying to me in your writing, "if I may be
worthy to be called your brother," of a man such as I am who confessed
the name of God with trembling before the inferior magistrates. For you,
by God's will, when you confessed, not only frightened back the great
serpent himself, the pioneer of
Antichrist,<sup>[2](footnote/fn50.htm#P5098_1545296)</sup> (but.md) have
conquered him, by that voice and those divine words, whereby I know how
you love the faith, and how zealous you are for Christ's discipline, in
which I know and rejoice that you are actively
occupied.<sup>[3](footnote/fn50.htm#P5099_1545531.md)</sup> Now beloved,
already to be esteemed among the martyrs, you have wished to overload me
with your letter, in which you told us concerning our sisters, on whose
behalf I wish that we could by possibility mention them without
remembering also so great a crime committed. Assuredly we should not
then think of them with so many tears as we do now.

2\. You ought to know what has been done concerning us. When the blessed
martyr Paulus was still in the body, he called me and said to me:
"Lucian, in the presence of Christ I say to you, If any one, after my
being called away, shall ask for peace from you, grant it in my name."
Moreover, all of us whom the Lord has condescended in such tribulation
to call away, by our letters, by mutual agreement, have given peace to
all. You see, then, brother, how (I have done this) in part of what
Paulus bade me, as what we in all cases decreed when we were in this
tribulation, wherein by the command of the emperor we were ordered to be
put to death by hunger and thirst, and were shut up in two cells, that
so they might weaken us by hunger and thirst. Moreover, the fire from
the effect of our torture was so
intolerable<sup>[4](footnote/fn51.htm#P5101_1546729.md)</sup> that nobody
could bear it. But now we have attained the brightness itself. And
therefore, beloved brother, greet Numeria and Candida, who (shall have
peace<sup>[5](footnote/fn51.htm#P5102_1546977)</sup> .md) according to the
precept of Paulus, and the rest of the martyrs whose names I subjoin:
viz., Bassus in the dungeon of the
perjured,<sup>[6](footnote/fn51.htm#P5103_1547199.md)</sup> Mappalicus at
the torture, Fortunio in prison, Paulus after torture, Fortunata,
Victorinus, Victor, Herennius, Julia, Martial, and Aristo, who by God's
will were put to death in the prison by hunger, of whom in a few days
you will hear of me as a companion. For now there are eight days, from
the day in which I was shut up again, to the day in which I wrote my
letter to you. For before these eight days, for five intervening days, I
received a morsel of bread and water by measure. And therefore, brother,
as here, since the Lord has begun to give peace to the Church itself,
according to the precept of Paulus, and our tractate, the case being set
forth before the bishop, and confession being made, I ask that not only
these may have peace, but also (all) those whom you know to be very near
to our heart.

3\. All my colleagues greet you. Do you greet the confessors of the Lord
who are there with you, whose names you have intimated, among whom also
are Saturninus, with his companions, but who also is my colleague, and
Maris, Collecta, and Emerita, Calphurnius and Maria, Sabina, Spesina,
and the sisters, Januaria, Dativa, Donata. We greet Saturus with his
family, Bassianus and all the clergy, Uranius, Alexius, Quintainus,
Colonica, and all whose names I have not written, because I am already
weary. Therefore they must pardon me. I bid you heartily farewell, and
Alexius, and Getulicus, and the money-changers, and the sisters. My
sisters Januaria and Sophia, whom I commend to you, greet
you.<sup>[7](footnote/fn51.htm#P5105_1548847.md)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXII.](0050047.md)
