[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050022)  [Next](0050024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Introductory Notice to Cyprian

------------

\[a.d. 200-258.\] If Hippolytus reflects the spirit of Irenaeus in all
his writings, it is not remarkable. He was the spiritual son of the
great Bishop of Lyons, and deeply imbued with the family character
imparted to his disciples by the blessed presbyter of Patmos and
Ephesus. But while Cyprian is the spiritual son and pupil of Tertullian,
we must seek his characteristics and the key to his whole ministry in
the far-off See and city where the disciples were first called
Christians. Cyprian is the Ignatius of the West. We see in his works how
truly historical are the writings of Ignatius, and how diffused was his
simple and elementary system of organic unity. It embodies no
hierarchical assumption, no "lordship over God's heritage," but is
conceived in the spirit of St. Peter when he disclaimed all this, and
said, "The *presbyters* who are among you I exhort, who am also a
*presbyter*." Cyprian was indeed a strenuous asserter of the
responsibilities of his office; but he built upon that system
universally recognised by the Great Councils, which the popes and their
adherents have ever laboured to destroy. Nothing can be more delusive
than the idea that the mediaeval system derives any support from
Cyprian's theory of the episcopate or of Church organization. His was
the system of the universal parity and community of bishops. In his
scheme the apostolate was perpetuated in the episcopate, and the
*presbyterate* was an apostolic institution, by which others were
associated with bishops in all their functions as *co-presbyters*, but
not in those reserved to the presidency of the churches. Feudal ideas
imposed a very different system upon the simple framework of original
Catholicity. But a careful study of that primitive framework, and of the
history of papal development, makes evident the following propositions:-

1\. That Cyprian's maxim, *Ecclesia in Episcopo*, whatever else he may
have meant by it, is an aphoristic statement of the Nicene
Constitutions. These were embedded in the Ignatian theory of an
episcopate without a trace of a papacy; and Cyprian's maxims had to be
practically destroyed in the West before it was possible to raise the
portentous figure of a supreme pontiff, and to subject the Latin
churches to the entirely novel principle of *Ecclesia in Papa*. To this
novelty Cyprian's system is essentially antagonistic.

2\. It will be seen that Cyprian, far from being the patron of
ecclesiastical despotism, is the expounder of early canons and
constitutions, in the spirit of order and discipline, indeed, but with
the largest exemplification of that "liberty" which is manifested
wherever "the Spirit of the Lord" is operative. Cyprian is the patron
and defender of the presbytery and of lay co-operation, as well as of
the regimen of the episcopate. His letters illustrate the Catholic
system as it was known to the Nicene Fathers; but, of all the Christian
Fathers, he is the most clear and comprehensive in his conception of the
body of Christ as an organic whole, in which every member has an
honourable function.<sup>[1](footnote/fn46.htm#P4642_1361111)</sup>
Popular government and representative government, the legitimate power
and place of the laity, the organization of the Christian *plebs* into
their faculty as the antilhyeij of St.
Paul,<sup>[2](footnote/fn46.htm#P4643_1361451)</sup> the development of
synods, *omni plebe adstante*,-all this is embodied in the Catholic
system as Cyprian understood it.

3\. The Orientals<sup>[3](footnote/fn46.htm#P4645_1361606)</sup> in
large degree, even under their yoke of bondage and the superstitions
engendered by their decay, have ever adhered to this Ignatian theory, of
which Cyprian was the great expounder in the West; while the terrible
schism of the ninth century, which removed the West from the Nicene
basis, and placed the Latin churches upon the foundation of the forged
Decretals,<sup>[4](footnote/fn46.htm#P4646_1362007)</sup> was effected
by ignoring the Cyprianic maxims, and then by a practical pulverizing of
their fundamental principle of unity. This change involved a subversion
of the primitive episcopate, an annihilation of the rights of the
presbytery, and a total abasement of the laity; in a word, the
destruction of synodical constitutions and of constitutional freedom.

4\. The constitutional *primacy*, of which Cyprian was an early
promotor, had to be entirely destroyed by decretalism before the papacy
could exist. Gregory the Great stood upon the Cyprianic base when he
pronounced the author of a scheme for a "universal bishopric" to be a
forerunner of Antichrist. It was the spirit of the Decretals to
substitute the fictitious idea of a divine supremacy in one bishop and
one See, for the canonical presidency of a bishop who was only *primus
inter pares*.

5\. Hence the Cyprianic system has ever been the great resource of the
"Gallicans against the Ultramontanes" in the cruel but most interesting
history of the West. From the Council of Frankfort to our own times
Cyprian's spirit is reflected in Hincmar, in Gerbert, in the Gallican
canonists, in De Marca, in Bossuet, in Launoy, in Dupin, in Pascal, in
the Jansenists (Augustinians), and by the Old Catholics in their late
uprising against the dogmatic triumph of Ultramontanism. Nobody can
understand the history of Latin Christianity without mastering the
system of Cyprian, and comprehending the entirely hostile and uncatholic
system of the Decretals.

6\. I am not anxious to conceal the fact that I profoundly sympathize
with the free spirit, the true benignity, and the moral purity which are
everywhere rejected in the writings of Cyprian. If ever American
Romanism becomes sufficiently enlightened and purified to comprehend
this great Carthaginian Father, and to speak in his tones to the Bishop
of Rome, a glorious reformation of this alien religion will be the
result; and then we may comprehend the mysterious Providence which has
transferred to these shores so many subjects of the despotism of the
Vatican. Meanwhile the student of the *Ante-Nicene Fathers* will not be
slow to perceive that he has, in the eight volumes of this series, all
that is needful to disarm Romanism, to refute its pretensions, and to
direct honest and truth-loving spirits in the Roman Obedience to the
door of escape opened by Dollinger and his associates in the "Old
Catholic" effort for the restoration of the Latin churches. Let us
"speak the truth in love," and pray the Lord to bless this and every
endeavour to promote and to sanctify the spirit of enlightened research
after the "pattern in the mount." For "thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in
the ways, and see and ask for the old paths: "ta arxaia eqh. The
following Introduction, from the Edinburgh editor, supplies further
answers to inquiry, and suffices to elucidate the subjoined narrative of
Pontius.

Little is known of the early history of Thascius Cyprian (born probably
about 200 a.d.) until the period of his intimacy with the Carthaginian
presbyter Caecilius, which led to his conversion a.d. 246. That he was
born of respectable parentage, and highly educated for the profession of
a rhetorician, is all that can be said with any degree of certainty. At
his baptism he assumed the name of his friend Caeilius, and devoted
himself, with all the energies of an ardent and vigorous mind, to the
study and practice of Christianity.

His ordination and his elevation to the episcopate rapidly followed his
conversion. With some resistance on his own part, and not without great
objections on the part of older presbyters, who saw themselves
superseded by his promotion, the popular urgency constrained him to
accept the office of Bishop of Carthage (a.d. 248), which he held until
his martyrdom (a.d. 258).

The writings of Cyprian, apart from their intrinsic worth, have a very
considerable historical interest and value, as illustrating the social
and religious feelings and usages that then prevailed among the members
of the Christian community. Nothing can enable us more vividly to
realize the intense convictions-the high-strained enthusiasm-which
formed the common level of the Christian experience, than does the
indignation with which the prelate denounces the evasions of those who
dared not confess, or the lapses of those who shrank from martyrdom.
Living in the atmosphere of persecution, and often in the immediate
presence of a lingering death, the professors of Christianity were
nerved up to a wonderful contempt of suffering and of worldly enjoyment,
and saw every event that occurred around them in the glow of their
excited imagination; so that many circumstances were sincerely believed
and honestly recorded, which will not be for a moment received as true
by the calm and critical reader. The account given by Cyprian in his
treatise on the Lapsed<sup>[5](footnote/fn46.htm#P4653_1366934)</sup>
may serve as an illustration. Of this Dean Milman observes: "In what a
high-wrought state of enthusiasm must men have been, who could relate
and believe such statements as
miraculous!"<sup>[6](footnote/fn46.htm#P4654_1367153)</sup>

Before being advanced to the episcopate, Cyprian had written his Epistle
to Donatus shortly after his baptism (a.d. 246); his treatise, or
fragment of a treatise, on the Vanity of Idols; and his three books of
Testimonies against the Jews. In the following translation the order of
Migne has been adopted, which places the letter to Donatus, as seems
most natural, first among the Epistles, instead of with the Treatises.

The breaking out of the Decian persecution (a.d. 250) induced Cyprian to
retire into concealment for a time; and his retreat gave occasion to a
sharp attack upon his conduct, in a letter from the Roman to the
Carthaginian clergy.<sup>[7](footnote/fn46.htm#P4657_1367885)</sup>
During this year he wrote many letters from his place of concealment to
the clergy and others at Rome and at Carthage, controlling, warning,
directing, and exhorting, and in every way maintaining his episcopal
superintendence in his absence, in all matters connected with the
well-being of the Church.

The first 39 of the epistles, excepting the one to Donatus, were
probably written during the period of Cyprian's retirement. He appears
to have returned to his public duties early in June, 251. Then follow
many letters between himself and Cornelius bishop of Rome, and others,
on subjects connected with the schisms of Novatian, Novatus, and
Felicissimus, and with the condition of those who had been perverted by
them. The question proposed in Epistle 52 was settled in the Council
that was held in May, 252; and the reference to that anticipated
decision limits the date of the letter to about April in the same year.
In the 53d Epistle, Cyprian is alluding to the impending persecution of
Gallus, under which Cornelius was banished in July, 252. The 56th
Epistle was a letter of congratulation to Cornelius on his banishment;
and therefore it must have been written before September 14th in that
year, the date of the death of Cornelius. Lucius, his successor, was
also banished, and was congratulated on his return by Cyprian in Epistle
57, which therefore must have been written about the end of November,
252. The 59th Epistle is referred by Bishop Pearson to the beginning of
the year 253.

There seems nothing to suggest the date of Epistles 60 and 61, except
the probability that they were written during a time of peace; and for
this reason they are referred to the beginning of Cyprian's episcopate,
before the outbreak of the Decian persecution, a.d. 249. It is usual to
assign Epistle 64 to the same year, or at least to a very early period
of Cyprian's official life; but it seems scarcely likely that his
episcopal counsel should have been sought by a brother bishop in a
matter of practice, until he had had some experience; and as it was
probably written at a time of peace, when discipline had become relaxed,
the date 253 seems preferable. The 68th Epistle is easily dated by the
reference, on page 246, to an episcopate of six years' duration; and it
must therefore have been written in a.d. 254. On the 14th September,
Cyprian was banished to Curubis by the Emperor Valerian. From his place
of exile he wrote Epistle 76, which was replied to in Epistles 77, 78,
and 79. Doubts are entertained as to the date of Epistle 80, whether it
should be referred to a.d. 250 or 257. Pamelius prefers the latter date,
on the ground that the Rogatianus to whom it is inscribed was one who
survived the Decian persecution, and a younger man than the one who, as
he supposes, was declared to have suffered martyrdom at the date of this
Epistle.<sup>[8](footnote/fn46.htm#P4660_1370752)</sup> This, however,
seems very unsatisfactory; and the weight of authority is in favour of
the earlier date. The remaining Epistles are easily limited by their
contents to the period immediately preceding Cyprian's martyrdom.

For the sake of uniformity, it has been thought well to adhere to the
arrangement of Migne, in the order of the Epistles as well as in their
divisions. For the convenience of reference, however, the number of each
Epistle in the Oxford edition is appended in a note. For a similar
reason, the general form of Migne's text has been used in the following
translation; but the use of other texts and of preceding translations
has not been rejected in the endeavour to approximate to the sense of
the author. Moreover, such various readings as might suggest different
shades of meaning in doubtful passages have been given.

The Translator has only to add, that, as a rule, an exact rendering has
been sought after, sometimes in preference to a version in fluent
English. But, except in cases where the corruption or obscurity of the
text seems insurmountable, the meaning of the writer is believed to be
given fairly and intelligibly. The style of Cyprian, like that of his
master Tertullian, is marked much more by vehemence than perspicuity,
and it is often no easy matter to give exact expression in another
language to the idea contained in the original text. Cyprian's Life, as
written by his own deacon Pontius, is subjoined.

Note by the American
Editor.<sup>[9](footnote/fn46.htm#P4666_1372253)</sup>

It is easy to speak with ridicule of such instances as Dean Milman here
treats so philosophically. But, lest believers should be charged with
exceptional credulity, let us recall what the father of English Deism
relates of his own experiences, in the conclusion of his Autobiography:
"I had no sooner spoken these words (of prayer to the Deist's deity) but
a loud though yet a gentle noise came from the heavens, for it was like
nothing on earth, which did so comfort and cheer me, that I took my
petition as granted, and that I had the sign I demanded. ... This, how
strange soever it may seem, I protest, before the eternal God, is true,"
etc. *Life of Herbert*, p. 52, Popular Authors (no date). London. From
Horace Walpole's edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Life and Passion of Cyprian, Bishop and Martyr](0050024)
