[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050101)  [Next](0050103.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle LXXVII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn65.htm#P6563_2125917.md)</sup>

The Reply of Nemesianus, Dativus, Felix, and Victor, to Cyprian.

1\. Nemesianus, Dativus, Felix, and Victor, to their brother Cyprian, in
the Lord eternal salvation. You speak, dearly beloved Cyprian, in your
letters always with deep meaning, as suits the condition of the time, by
the assiduous reading of which letters both the wicked are corrected and
men of good faith are confirmed. For while you do not cease in your
writings to lay bare the hidden mysteries, you thus make us to grow in
faith, and men from the world to draw near to belief. For by whatever
good things you have introduced in your many books, unconsciously you
have described yourself to us. For you are greater than all men in
discourse, in speech more eloquent, in counsel wiser, in patience more
simple, in works more abundant, in abstinence more holy, in obedience
more humble, and in good deeds more innocent. And you yourself know,
beloved, that our eager wish was, that we might see you, our teacher and
our lover, attain to the crown of a great confession.

2\. For, in the proceedings before the proconsul; as a good and true
teacher you first have pronounced that which we your disciples,
following you, ought to say before the president. And, as a sounding
trumpet, you have stirred up God's soldiers, furnished with heavenly
arms, to the close encounter; and fighting in the first rank, you have
slain the devil with a spiritual sword: you have also ordered the troops
of the brethren, on the one hand and on the other, with your words, so
that snares were on all sides laid for the enemy, and the severed sinews
of the very carcase of the public foe were trodden under
foot.<sup>[3](footnote/fn65.htm#P6570_2128120.md)</sup> Believe us,
dearest, that your innocent spirit is not far from the hundred-fold
reward, seeing that it has feared neither the first onsets of the world,
nor shrunk from going into exile, nor hesitated to leave the city, nor
dreaded to dwell in a desert place; and since it furnished many with an
example of confession, itself first spoke the martyr-witness. For it
provoked others to acts of martyrdom by its own example; and not only
began to be a companion of the martyrs already departing from the world,
but also linked a heavenly friendship with those who should be so.

3\. Therefore they who were condemned with us give you before God the
greatest thanks, beloved Cyprian, that in your letter you have refreshed
their suffering breasts; have healed their limbs wounded with clubs;
have loosened their feet bound with fetters; have smoothed the hair of
their half-shorn head; have illuminated the darkness of the dungeon;
have brought down the mountains of the mine to a smooth surface; have
even placed fragrant flowers to their nostrils, and have shut out the
foul odour of the smoke.<sup>[4](footnote/fn65.htm#P6572_2129322.md)</sup>
Moreover, your continued gifts, and those of our beloved Quirinus, which
you sent to be distributed by Herennianus the sub-deacon, and Lucian,
and Maximus, and Amantius the acolytes, provided a supply of whatever
had been wanting for the necessities of their bodies. Let us, then, be
in our prayers helpers of one another: and let us ask, as you have
bidden us, that we may have God and Christ and the angels as supporters
in all our actions. We bid you, lord and brother, ever heartily
farewell, and have us in mind. Greet all who are with you. All ours who
are with us love you, and greet you, and desire to see you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXXVIII.](0050103.md)
