[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050060)  [Next](0050062.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXXVI.<sup>[1](footnote/fn53.htm#P5343_1629076.md)</sup>

To the Clergy, Bidding Them Show Every Kindness to the Confessors in
Prison.

1\. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting.
Although I know, dearest brethren, that you have frequently been
admonished in my letters to manifest all care for those who with a
glorious voice have confessed the Lord, and are confined in prison; yet,
again and again, I urge it upon you, that no consideration be wanting to
them to whose glory there is nothing wanting. And I wish that the
circumstances of the place and of my station would permit me to present
myself at this time with them; promptly and gladly would I fulfil all
the duties of love towards our most courageous brethren in my appointed
ministry. But I beseech you, let your diligence be the representative of
my duty, and do all those things which behove to be done in respect of
those whom the divine condescension has rendered illustrious in such
merits of their faith and virtue. Let there be also a more zealous
watchfulness and care bestowed upon the bodies of all those who,
although they were not tortured in prison, yet depart thence by the
glorious exit of death. For neither is their virtue nor their honour too
little for them also to be allied with theblessed martyrs. As far as
they could, they bore whatever they were prepared and equipped to bear.
He who under the eyes of God has offered himself to tortures and to
death, has suffered whatever he was willing to suffer; for it was not he
that was wanting to the tortures, but the tortures that were wanting to
him. "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess
before my Father which is in
heaven,"<sup>[2](footnote/fn53.htm#P5348_1631102.md)</sup> saith the Lord.
They have confessed Him "He that endureth to the end, the same shall be
saved,"<sup>[3](footnote/fn53.htm#P5349_1631214.md)</sup> saith the Lord.
They have endured and have carried the uncorrupted and unstained merits
of their virtues through, even unto the end. And, again, it is written,
"Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life."<sup>[4](footnote/fn53.htm#P5350_1631459.md)</sup> They have
persevered in their faithfulness, and stedfastness, and invincibleness,
even unto death. When to the willingness and the confession of the name
in prison and in chains is added also the conclusion of dying, the glory
of the martyr is consummated.

2\. Finally, also, take note of their days on which they depart, that we
may celebrate their commemoration among the memorials of the
martyrs,<sup>[5](footnote/fn53.htm#P5352_1631873.md)</sup> although
Tertullus, our most faithful and devoted brother, who, in addition to
the other solicitude and care which he shows to the brethren in all
service of labour, is not wanting besides in that respect in any care of
their bodies, has written, and does write and intimate to me the days,
in which our blessed brethren in prison pass by the gate of a glorious
death to their immortality; and there are celebrated here by us
oblations and sacrifices for their commemorations, which things, with
the Lord's protection, we shall soon celebrate with you. Let your care
also (as I have already often written) and your diligence not be wanting
to the poor,-to such, I mean, as stand fast in the faith and bravely
fight with us, and have not left the camp of Christ; to whom, indeed, we
should now show a greater love and care, in that they are neither
constrained by poverty nor prostrated by the tempest of persecution, but
faithfully serve with the Lord, and have given an example of faith to
the other poor. I bid you, brethren beloved, and greatly longed-for,
ever heartily farewell; and remember me. Greet the brotherhood in my
name. Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXVII.](0050062.md)
