[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050058)  [Next](0050060.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XXXIV.<sup>[1](footnote/fn53.htm#P5322_1625106.md)</sup>

To the Same, About the Ordination of Numidicus as Presbyter.

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, and to the whole people, his
brethren, very dear and longed-for, greeting. That which belongs,
dearest brethren, both to the common joy and to the greatest glory of
our Church ought to be told to you; for you must know that I have been
admonished and instructed by divine condescension, that Numidicus the
presbyter should be appointed in the number of Carthaginian presbyters,
and should sit with us among the clergy,-a man illustrious by the
brightest light of confession, exalted in the honour both of virtue and
of faith; who by his exhortation sent before himself an abundant number
of martyrs, slain by stones and by the flames, and who beheld with joy
his wife abiding by his side, burned (I should rather say, preserved)
together with the rest. He himself, half consumed, overwhelmed with
stones, and left for dead,-when afterwards his daughter, with the
anxious consideration of affection, sought for the corpse of her
father,-was found half dead, was drawn out and revived, and remained
unwillingly<sup>[2](footnote/fn53.htm#P5327_1626375.md)</sup> from among
the companions whom he himself had sent before. But the reason of his
remaining behind, as we see, was this: that the Lord might add him to
our clergy, and might adorn with glorious priests the number of our
presbyters that had been desolated by the lapse of
some.<sup>[3](footnote/fn53.htm#P5328_1626680.md)</sup> And when God
permits, he shall be advanced to a larger office in his region, when, by
the Lord's protection, we have come into your presence once more. In the
meantime, let what is revealed be done, that we receive this gift of God
with thanksgiving, hoping from the Lord's mercy more ornaments of the
same kind, that so the strength of His Church being renewed, He may make
men so meek and lowly to flourish in the honour of our assembly. I bid
you, brethren, very dear and longed-for, ever heartily farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXV.](0050060.md)
