[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050037)  [Next](0050039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XIII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn49.htm#P4982_1513442)</sup>

To the Clergy, Concerning Those Who are in Haste to Receive Peace. a.d.
250.

1\. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I
have read your letter, beloved brethren, wherein you wrote that your
wholesome counsel was not wanting to our brethren, that, laying aside
all rash haste, they should manifest a religious patience to God, so
that when by His mercy we come together, we may debate upon all kinds of
things, according to the discipline of the Church, especially since it
is written, "Remember from whence thou hast fallen, and
repent."<sup>[2](footnote/fn49.htm#P4987_1514351)</sup> Now he repents,
who, remembering the divine precept, with meekness and patience, and
obeying the priests of God, deserves well of the Lord by his obedience
and his righteous works.

2\. Since, however, you intimate that some are petulant, and eagerly
urge their being received to communion, and have desired in this matter
that some rule should be given by me to you, I think I have sufficiently
written on this subject in the last letter that was sent to you, that
they who have received a certificate froth the martyrs, and can be
assisted by their help with the Lord in respect of their sins, if they
begin to be oppressed with any sickness or risk; when they have made
confession, and have received the imposition of hands on them by you in
acknowledgment of their penitence, should be remitted to the Lord with
the peace promised to them by the martyrs. But others who, without
having received any certificate from the martyrs, are
envious<sup>[3](footnote/fn49.htm#P4989_1515308)</sup> (since this is
the cause not of a few, nor of one church, nor of one province, but of
the whole world), must wait, in dependence on the protection of the
Lord, for the public peace of the Church itself. For this is suitable to
the modesty and the discipline, and even the life of all of us, that the
chief officers meeting together with the clergy in the presence also of
the people who stand fast, to whom themselves, moreover, honour is to be
shown for their faith and fear, we may be able to order all things with
the religiousness of a common
consultation.<sup>[4](footnote/fn49.htm#P4990_1516221)</sup> But how
irreligious is it, and mischievous, even to those themselves who are
eager, that while such as are exiles, and driven from their country, and
spoiled of all their property, have not yet returned to the Church, some
of the lapsed should be hasty to anticipate even confessors themselves,
and to enter into the Church before them! If they are so over-anxious,
they have what they require in their own power, the times themselves
offering them freely more than they ask. The struggle is still going
forward, and the strife is daily celebrated. If they truly and with
constancy repent of what they have done, and the fervour of their faith
prevails, he who cannot be delayed may be
crowned.<sup>[5](footnote/fn49.htm#P4991_1516937)</sup> I bid you,
beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell; and have me in remembrance.
Greet all the brotherhood in my name, and tell them to be mindful of me.
Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XIV.](0050039)
