[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050104)  [Next](0050106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle LXXX.<sup>[1](footnote/fn66.htm#P6601_2134762)</sup>

Cyprian to Sergius, Rogatianus, and the Other Confessors in Prison.

1\. Cyprian to Sergius and Rogatianus, and the rest of the confessors in
the Lord, everlasting health. I salute you, dearest and most blessed
brethren, myself also desiring to enjoy the sight of you, if the state
in which I am placed would permit me to come to you. For what could
happen to me more desirable and more joyful than to be now close to you,
that you might embrace me with those hands, which, pure and innocent,
and maintaining the faith of the Lord, have rejected the profane
obedience? What more pleasant and sublime than now to kiss your lips,
which with a glorious voice have confessed the Lord, to be looked upon
even in presence by your eyes, which, despising the world, have become
worthy<sup>[2](footnote/fn66.htm#P6606_2135817)</sup> of looking upon
God? But since opportunity is not afforded me to share in this joy, I
send this letter in my stead to your ears and to your eyes, by which I
congratulate and exhort you that you persevere strongly and steadily in
the confession of the heavenly glory; and having entered on the way of
the Lord's condescension, that you go on in the strength of the Spirit,
to receive the crown, having the Lord as your protector and guide, who
said, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the end of the
world."<sup>[3](footnote/fn66.htm#P6607_2136459)</sup> O blessed prison,
which your presence has enlightened! O blessed prison, which sends the
men of God to heaven! O darkness, more bright than the sun itself, and
clearer than the light of this world, where now are placed temples of
God, and your members are to be sanctified by divine confessions!

2\. Nor let anything now be revolved in your hearts and minds besides
the divine precepts and heavenly commands, with which the Holy Spirit
has ever animated you to the endurance of suffering. Let no one think of
death, but of immortality; nor of temporary punishment, but of eternal
glory; since it is written, "Precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of His saints; "<sup>[4](footnote/fn66.htm#P6609_2137152)</sup>
and again, "A broken spirit is a sacrifice to God: a contrite and humble
heart God doth not
despise."<sup>[5](footnote/fn66.htm#P6610_2137271)</sup> And again,
where the sacred Scripture speaks of the tortures which consecrate God's
martyrs, and sanctify them in the very trial of suffering: "And if they
have suffered torments in the sight of men, yet is their hope full of
immortality; and having been a little chastised, they shall be greatly
rewarded: for God proved them, and found them worthy of Himself. As gold
in the furnace hath He tried them, and received them as a sacrifice of a
burnt-offering, and in due time regard shall be had unto them. The
righteous shall shine, and shall run to and fro like sparks among the
stubble. They shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the
people; and their Lord shall reign for
ever."<sup>[6](footnote/fn66.htm#P6611_2137978)</sup> When, therefore,
you reflect that you shall judge and reign with Christ the Lord, you
must needs exult and tread under foot present sufferings, in the joy of
what is to come; knowing that from the beginning of the world it has
been so appointed that righteousness should suffer there in the conflict
of the world, since in the beginning, even at the first, the righteous
Abel was slain, and thereafter all righteous men, and prophets, and
apostles who were sent. To all of whom the Lord also in Himself has
appointed an example, teaching that none shall attain to His kingdom but
those who have followed Him in His own way, saying, "He that loveth his
life in this world shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this
world shall keep it unto life
eternal."<sup>[7](footnote/fn66.htm#P6612_2138759)</sup> And again:
"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul:
but rather fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in
hell."<sup>[8](footnote/fn66.htm#P6613_2138930)</sup> Paul also exhorts
us that we who desire to attain to the Lord's promises ought to imitate
the Lord in all things. "We are," says he, "the sons of God: but if
sons, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if so be
that we suffer with Him, that we may also be glorified
together."<sup>[9](footnote/fn66.htm#P6614_2139240)</sup> Moreover, he
added the comparison of the present time and of the future glory,
saying, "The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the coming glory which shall be revealed in
us."<sup>[10](footnote/fn66.htm#P6615_2139471)</sup> Of which
brightness, when we consider the glory, it behoves us to bear all
afflictions and persecutions; because, although many are the afflictions
of the righteous, yet those are delivered from them all who trust in
God.

3\. Blessed women also, who are established with you in the same glory
of confession, who, maintaining the Lord's faith, and braver than their
sex, not only themselves are near to the crown of glory, but have
afforded an example to other women by their constancy! And lest anything
should be wanting to the glory of your number, that each sex and every
age also might be with you in honour, the divine condescension has also
associated with you boys<sup>[11](footnote/fn66.htm#P6617_2140162)</sup>
in a glorious confession; representing to us something of the same kind
as once did Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, the illustrious youths to
whom, when shut up in the furnace, the fires gave way, and the flames
gave refreshment, the Lord being present with them, and proving that
against His confessors and martyrs the heat of hell could have no power,
but that they who trusted in God should always continue unhurt and safe
in all dangers. And I beg you to consider more carefully, in accordance
with your religion, what must have been the faith in these youths which
could deserve such full acknowledgment from the Lord. For, prepared for
every fate, as we ought all to be, they say to the king, "O king
Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter; for
our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace; and He will deliver us out of thine hand, O king! But if not,
be it known unto thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor
worship the golden image which thou hast set
up."<sup>[12](footnote/fn66.htm#P6618_2141227)</sup> Although they
believed, and, in accordance with their faith, knew that they might even
be delivered from their present punishment, they still would not boast
of this, nor claim it for themselves, saying, "But if not." Lest the
virtue of their confession should be less without the testimony of their
suffering, they added that God could do all things; but yet they would
not trust in this, so as to wish to be delivered at the moment; but they
thought on that glory. of eternal liberty and security.

4\. And you also, retaining this faith, and meditating day and night,
with your whole heart prepared for God, think of the future only, with
contempt for the present, that you may be able to come to the fruit of
the eternal kingdom, and to the embrace and kiss, and the sight of the
Lord, that you may follow in all things Rogatianus the presbyter, the
glorious old man who, to the glory of our time, makes a way for you by
his religious courage and divine condescension, who, with Felicissimus
our brother, ever quiet and temperate, receiving the attack of a
ferocious people, first prepared for you a dwelling in the prison, and,
marking out the way<sup>[13](footnote/fn66.htm#P6620_2142400)</sup> for
you in some measure, now also goes before you. That this may be
consummated in you, we beseech the Lord in constant prayers, that from
beginnings going on to the highest results, He may cause those whom He
has made to confess, also to be crowned. I bid you, dearest and most
beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell in the Lord; and may you attain
to the crown of heavenly glory. Victor the deacon, and those who are
with me, greet you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXXXI.](0050106)
