[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050035)  [Next](0050037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XI.<sup>[1](footnote/fn49.htm#P4952_1506124)</sup>

To the People.

1\. Cyprian to his brethren among the people who stand
fast,<sup>[2](footnote/fn49.htm#P4957_1506458)</sup> greeting. That you
bewail and grieve over the downfall of our brethren I know from myself,
beloved brethren, who also bewail with you and grieve for each one, and
suffer and feel what the blessed apostle said: "Who is weak," said he,
"and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?
"<sup>[3](footnote/fn49.htm#P4958_1506813)</sup> And again he has laid
it down in his epistle, saying, "Whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it; or one member rejoice, all the members rejoice
with it."<sup>[4](footnote/fn49.htm#P4959_1507002)</sup> I sympathize
with you in your suffering and grief, therefore, for our brethren, who,
having lapsed and fallen prostrate under the severity of the
persecution, have inflicted a like pain on us by their wounds, inasmuch
as they tear away part of our bowels with them,-to these the divine
mercy is able to bring healing. Yet I do not think that there must be
any haste, nor that anything must be done incautiously and immaturely,
lest, while peace is grasped at, the divine indignation be more
seriously incurred. The blessed martyrs have written to me about certain
persons, requesting that their wishes may be examined into. When, as
soon as peace is given to us all by the Lord, we shall begin to return
to the Church, then the wishes of each one shall be looked into in your
presence, and with your
judgment.<sup>[5](footnote/fn49.htm#P4960_1507831)</sup>

2\. Yet I hear that certain of the presbyters, neither mindful of the
Gospel nor considering what the martyrs have written to me, nor
reserving to the bishop the honour of his priesthood and of his dignity,
have already begun to communicate with the lapsed, and to offer on their
behalf, and to give them the eucharist, when it was fitting that they
should attain to these things in due course. For, as in smaller sins
which are not committed against God, penitence may be fulfilled in a set
time, and confession may be made with investigation of the life of him
who fulfils the penitence, and no one can come to communion unless the
hands of the bishop and clergy be first imposed upon him; how much more
ought all such matters as these to be observed with caution and
moderation, according to the discipline of the Lord, in these gravest
and extremest sins! This warning, indeed, our presbyters and deacons
ought to have given you, that they might cherish the sheep committed to
their care, and by the divine authority might instruct them in the way
of obtaining salvation by prayer. I am aware of the peacefulness as well
as the fear of our people, who would be watchful in the satisfaction and
the deprecation of God's anger, unless some of the presbyters, by way of
gratifying them, had deceived them.

3\. Even you, therefore, yourselves, guide them each one, and control
the minds of the lapsed by counsel and by your own moderation, according
to the divine precepts. Let no one pluck the unripe fruit at a time as
yet premature. Let no one commit his ship, shattered and broken with the
waves, anew to the deep, before he has carefully repaired it. Let none
be in haste to accept and to put on a rent tunic, unless he has seen it
mended by a skilful workman. and has received it arranged by the fuller.
Let them bear with patience my advice, I beg. Let them look for my
return, that when by God's mercy I come to you, I, with many of my
co-bishops, being called together according to the Lord's
discipline,<sup>[6](footnote/fn49.htm#P4963_1509935)</sup> and in the
presence of the confessors, and with your opinion also, may be able to
examine the letters and the wishes of the blessed martyrs. Concerning
this matter I have written both to the clergy and to the martyrs and
confessors, both of which letters I have directed to be read to you. I
bid you, brethren beloved and most longed-for, ever heartily farewell in
the Lord; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XII.](0050037)
