[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050067)  [Next](0050069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XLIII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn54.htm#P5458_1665639)</sup>

To the Roman Confessors, that They Should Return to Unity.

Cyprian to Maximus and Nicostratus, and the other confessors, greeting.
As you have frequently gathered from my letters, beloved, what honour I
have ever observed in my mode of speaking for your confession, and what
love for the associated brotherhood; believe, I entreat you, and
acquiesce in these my letters, wherein I both write and with simplicity
and fidelity consult for you, and for your doings, and for your praise.
For it weighs me down and saddens me, and the intolerable grief of a
smitten, almost prostrate, spirit seizes me, when I find that you there,
contrary to ecclesiastical order, contrary to evangelical law, contrary
to the unity of the Catholic institution, had consented that another
bishop should be made.<sup>[2](footnote/fn54.htm#P5463_1666585)</sup>
That is what is neither right nor allowable to be done; that another
church should be set up; that Christ's members should be torn asunder;
that the one mind and body of the Lord's flock should be lacerated by a
divided emulation. I entreat that in you, at all events, that unlawful
rending of our brotherhood may not continue; but remembering both your
confession and the divine tradition, you may return to the Mother whence
you have gone forth; whence you came to the glory of confession with the
rejoicing of the same Mother. And think not that you are thus
maintaining the Gospel of Christ when you separate yourselves from the
flock of Christ, and from His peace and concord; since it is more
fitting for glorious and good soldiers to sit down within their own
camp, and so placed within to manage and provide for those things which
are to be dealt with in common. For as our unanimity and concord ought
by no means to be divided, and because we cannot forsake the Church and
go outside her to come to you, we beg and entreat you with what
exhortations we can, rather to return to the Church your Mother, and to
our brotherhood. I bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily farewell.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XLIV.](0050069)
