[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050041)  [Next](0050043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XVII.

To the Presbyters and Deacons About the Foregoing and the Following
Letters.<sup>[1](footnote/fn50.htm#P5035_1530541)</sup>

Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. The Lord
speaketh and saith, "Upon whom shall I look, but upon him that is humble
and quiet, and that trembleth at my words?
"<sup>[2](footnote/fn50.htm#P5039_1530877)</sup> Although we ought all
to be this, yet especially those ought to be so who must labour, that,
after their grave lapse, they may, by true penitence and absolute
humility, deserve well of the Lord. Now I have read the letter of the
whole body of confessors, which they wish to be made known by me to all
my colleagues, and in which they requested that the peace given by
themselves should be assured to those concerning whom the account of
what they have done since their crime has been, in our estimation,
satisfactory; which matter, as it waits for the counsel and judgment of
all of us,<sup>[3](footnote/fn50.htm#P5040_1531481)</sup> I do not dare
to prejudge, and so to assume a common cause for my own decision. And
therefore, in the meantime, let us abide by the letters which I lately
wrote to you, of which I have now sent a copy to many of my
colleagues,<sup>[4](footnote/fn50.htm#P5041_1531728)</sup> who wrote in
reply, that they were pleased with what I had decided, and that there
must be no departure therefrom, until, peace being granted to us by the
Lord, we shall be able to assemble together into one place, and to
examine into the cases of individuals. But that you may know both what
my colleague Caldonius wrote to me, and what I replied to him, I have
enclosed with my letter a copy of each letter, the whole of which I beg
you to read to our brethren, that they may be more and more settled down
to patience, and not add another fault to what had hitherto been their
former fault, not being willing to obey either me or the Gospel, nor
allowing their cases to be examined in accordance with the letters of
all the confessors. I bid you, beloved brethren, ever heartily farewell;
and have me in remembrance. Salute all the brotherhood. Fare ye well!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XVIII.](0050043)
