[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050119)  [Next](0050121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Treatise X.<sup>[1](footnote/fn76)</sup> On Jealousy and Envy.

1\. To be jealous of what you see to be good, and to be envious of those
who are better than yourself, seems, beloved brethren, in the eyes of
some people to be a slight and petty wrong; and, being thought trifling
and of small account, it is not feared; not being feared, it is
contemned; being contemned, it is not easily shunned: and it thus
becomes a dark and hidden mischief, which, as it is not perceived so as
to be guarded against by the prudent, secretly distresses incautious
minds. But, moreover, the Lord bade us be prudent, and charged us to
watch with careful solicitude, lest the adversary, who is always on the
watch and always lying in wait, should creep stealthily into our breast,
and blow up a flame from the sparks, magnifying small things into the
greatest; and so, while soothing the unguarded and careless with a
milder air and a softer breeze, should stir up storms and whirlwinds,
and bring about the destruction of faith and the shipwreck of salvation
and of life. Therefore, beloved brethren, we must be on our guard, and
strive with all our powers to repel, with solicitous and full
watch-fulness, the enemy, raging and aiming his darts against every part
of our body in which we can be stricken and wounded, in accordance with
what the Apostle Peter, in his epistle, forewarns and teaches, saying,
"Be sober, and watch; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring
lion, goeth about seeking any one to
devour."<sup>[3](footnote/fn76.htm#P7665_2575451)</sup>

2\. He goeth about every one of us; and even as an enemy besieging those
who are shut up (in a city), he examines the walls, and tries whether
there is any part of the
walls<sup>[4](footnote/fn76.htm#P7667_2575640)</sup> less firm and less
trustworthy, by entrance through which he may penetrate to the inside.
He presents to the eyes seductive forms and easy pleasures, that he may
destroy chastity by the sight. He tempts the ears with harmonious music,
that by the hearing of sweet sounds he may relax and enervate Christian
vigour.<sup>[5](footnote/fn76.htm#P7668_2575995)</sup> He provokes the
tongue by reproaches; he instigates the hand by exasperating wrongs to
the wrecklessness of murder; to make the cheat, he presents dishonest
gains; to take captive the soul by money, he heaps together mischievous
hoards; he promises earthly honours, that he may deprive of heavenly
ones; he makes a show of false things, that he may steal away the true;
and when he cannot hiddenly deceive, he threatens plainly and openly,
holding forth the fear of turbulent persecution to vanquish God's
servants-always restless, and always hostile, crafty in peace, and
fierce in persecution.

3\. Wherefore, beloved brethren, against all the devil's deceiving
snares or open threatenings, the mind ought to stand arrayed and armed,
ever as ready to repel as the foe is ever ready to attack. And since
those darts of his which creep on us in concealment are more frequent,
and his more hidden and secret hurling of them is the more severely and
frequently effectual to our wounding, in proportion as it is the less
perceived, let us also be watchful to understand and repel these, among
which is the evil of jealousy and envy. And if any one closely look into
this, be will find that nothing should be more guarded against by the
Christian, nothing more carefully watched, than being taken captive by
envy and malice, that none, entangled in the blind snares of a deceitful
enemy, in that the brother is turned by envy to hatred of his brother,
should himself be unwittingly destroyed by his own sword. That we may be
able more fully to collect and more plainly to perceive this, let us
recur to its fount and origin. Let us consider whence arises jealousy,
and when and how it begins. For so mischievous an evil will be more
easily shunned by us, if both the source and the magnitude of that same
evil be known.<sup>[6](footnote/fn76.htm#P7670_2577972)</sup>

4\. From this source, even at the very beginnings of the world, the
devil was the first who both perished (himself) and destroyed (others).
He who<sup>[7](footnote/fn76.htm#P7672_2578241)</sup> was sustained in
angelic majesty, he who was accepted and beloved of God, when he beheld
man made in the image of God, broke forth into jealousy with malevolent
envy-not hurling down another by the instinct of his jealousy before he
himself was first hurled down by jealousy, captive before he takes
captive, ruined before he ruins others. While, at the instigation of
jealousy, he robs man of the grace of immortality conferred, he himself
has lost that which he had previously been. How great an evil is that,
beloved brethren, whereby an angel fell, whereby that lofty and
illustrious grandeur could be defrauded and overthrown, whereby he who
deceived was himself deceived! Thenceforth envy rages on the earth, in
that he who is about to perish by jealousy obeys the author of his ruin,
imitating the devil in his jealousy; as it is written, "But through envy
of the devil death entered into the
world."<sup>[8](footnote/fn76.htm#P7673_2579173)</sup> Therefore they
who are on his side imitate
him.<sup>[9](footnote/fn76.htm#P7674_2579312)</sup>

5\. Hence, in fine, began the primal hatreds of the new brotherhood,
hence the abominable fratricides, in that the unrighteous Cain is
jealous of the righteous Abel, in that the wicked persecutes the good
with envy and jealousy. So far prevailed the rage of envy to the
consummation of that deed of wickedness, that neither the love of his
brother, nor the immensity of the crime, nor the fear of God, nor the
penalty of the sin, was
considered.<sup>[10](footnote/fn76.htm#P7676_2579881)</sup> He was
unrighteously stricken who had been the first to show righteousness; he
endured hatred who had not known how to hate; he was impiously slain,
who, dying, did not resist. And that Esau was hostile to his brother
Jacob, arose from jealousy also. For because the latter had received his
father's blessing, the former was inflamed to a persecuting hatred by
the brands of jealousy. And that Joseph was sold by his brethren, the
reason of their selling him proceeded from envy. When in simplicity, and
as a brother to brethren, he set forth to them the prosperity which had
been shown to him in visions, their malevolent disposition broke forth
into envy. Moreover, that Saul the king hated David, so as to seek by
often repeated persecutions to kill him-innocent, merciful, gentle,
patient in meekness-what else was the provocation save the spur of
jealousy? Because, when Goliath was slain, and by the aid and
condescension of God so great an enemy was routed, the wondering people
burst forth with the suffrage of acclamation into praises of David, Saul
through jealousy conceived the rage of enmity and persecution. And, not
to go to the length of numbering each one, let us observe the
destruction of a people that perished once for
all.<sup>[11](footnote/fn76.htm#P7677_2581156)</sup> Did not the Jews
perish for this reason, that they chose rather to envy
Christ<sup>[12](footnote/fn76.htm#P7678_2581271)</sup> than to believe
Him? Disparaging those great works which He did, they were deceived by
blinding jealousy, and could not open the eyes of their heart to the
knowledge of divine things.

6\. Considering which things, beloved brethren, let us with vigilance
and courage fortify our hearts dedicated to God against such a
destructiveness of evil. Let the death of others avail for our safety;
let the punishment of the unwise confer health upon the prudent.
Moreover, there is no ground for any one to suppose that evil of that
kind is confined in one form, or restrained within brief limits in a
narrow boundary. The mischief of jealousy, manifold and fruitful,
extends widely. It is the root of all evils, the fountain of disasters,
the nursery of crimes, the material of transgressions. Thence arises
hatred, thence proceeds animosity. Jealousy inflames avarice, in that
one cannot be content with what is his own, while he sees another more
wealthy. Jealousy stirs up ambition, when one sees another more exalted
in honours.<sup>[13](footnote/fn76.htm#P7680_2582316)</sup> When
jealousy darkens our perceptions, and reduces the secret agencies of the
mind under its command, the fear of God is despised, the teaching of
Christ is neglected, the day of judgment is not anticipated. Pride
inflates, cruelty embitters, faithlessness prevaricates, impatience
agitates, discord rages, anger grows hot; nor can he who has become the
subject of a foreign authority any longer restrain or govern himself. By
this the bond of the Lord's peace is broken; by this is violated
brotherly charity; by this truth is adulterated, unity is divided; men
plunge into heresies and schisms when priests are disparaged, when
bishops are envied, when a man complains that he himself was not rather
ordained, or disdains to suffer that another should be put over
him.<sup>[14](footnote/fn76.htm#P7681_2583303)</sup> Hence the man who
is haughty through jealousy, and perverse through envy, kicks, hence he
revolts, in anger and malice the opponent, not of the man, but of the
honour.

7\. But what a gnawing worm of the soul is it, what a plague-spot of our
thoughts, what a rust of the heart, to be jealous of another, either in
respect of his virtue or of his happiness; that is, to hate in him
either his own deservings or the divine benefits-to turn the advantages
of others into one's own mischief-to be tormented by the prosperity of
illustrious men-to make other people's glory one's own penalty, anti, as
it were, to apply a sort of executioner to one's own breast, to bring
the tormentors to one's own thoughts and feelings, that they may tear us
with intestine pangs, and may smite the secret recesses of the heart
with the hoof of malevolence. To such, no food is joyous, no drink can
be cheerful. They are ever sighing, and groaning, and grieving; and
since envy is never put off by the envious, the possessed heart is rent
without intermission day and night. Other ills have their limit; and
whatever wrong is done, is bounded by the completion of the crime. In
the adulterer the offence ceases when the violation is perpetrated; in
the case of the robber, the crime is at rest when the homicide is
committed; and the possession of the booty puts an end to the rapacity
of the thief; and the completed deception places a limit to the wrong of
the cheat. Jealousy has no limit; it is an evil continually enduring,
and a sin without end. In proportion as he who is envied has the
advantage of a greater success, in that proportion the envious man burns
with the fires of jealousy to an increased
heat.<sup>[15](footnote/fn76.htm#P7683_2585062)</sup>

8\. Hence the threatening countenance, the lowering aspect, pallor in
the face, trembling on the lips, gnashing of the teeth, mad words,
unbridled revilings, a hand prompt for the violence of slaughter; even
if for the time deprived of a sword, yet armed with the hatred of an
infuriate mind. And accordingly the Holy Spirit says in the Psalms: "Be
not jealous against him who walketh prosperously in his
way."<sup>[16](footnote/fn76.htm#P7685_2585572)</sup> And again: "The
wicked shall observe the righteous, and shall gnash upon him with his
teeth. But God shall laugh at him; for He seeth that his day is
coming."<sup>[17](footnote/fn76.htm#P7686_2585751)</sup> The blessed
Apostle Paul designates and points out these when he says, "The poison
of asps is under their lips, and their mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness. Their feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and misery
are in their ways, who have not known the way of peace; neither is the
fear of God before their
eyes."<sup>[18](footnote/fn76.htm#P7687_2586101)</sup>

9\. The mischief is much more trifling, and the danger less, when the
limbs are wounded with a sword. The cure is easy where the wound is
manifest; and when the medicament is applied, the sore
that<sup>[19](footnote/fn76.htm#P7689_2586320)</sup> is seen is quickly
brought to health. The wounds of jealousy are hidden and secret; nor do
they admit the remedy of a healing cure, since they have shut themselves
in blind suffering within the lurking-places of the conscience. Whoever
you are that are envious and malignant, observe how crafty, mischievous,
and hateful you are to those whom you hate. Yet you are the enemy of no
one's well-being more than your own. Whoever he is whom you persecute
with jealousy, can evade and escape you. You cannot escape
yourself.<sup>[20](footnote/fn76.htm#P7690_2586964)</sup> Wherever you
may be, your adversary is with you; your enemy is always in your own
breast; your mischief is shut up within; you are tied and bound with the
links of chains from which yon cannot extricate yourself; you are
captive under the tyranny of jealousy; nor will any consolations help
you. It is a persistent evil to persecute a man who belongs to the grace
of God. It is a calamity without remedy to hate the happy.

10\. And therefore, beloved brethren, the Lord, taking thought for this
risk, that none should fall into the snare of death through jealousy of
his brother, when His disciples asked Him which among them should be the
greatest, said, "Who soever shall be least among you all, the same shall
be great."<sup>[21](footnote/fn76.htm#P7692_2587809)</sup> He cut off
all envy by His reply.<sup>[22](footnote/fn76.htm#P7693_2587879)</sup>
He plucked out and tore away every cause anti matter of gnawing envy. A
disciple of Christ must not be jealous, must not be envious. With us
there can be no contest for exaltation; from humility we grow to the
highest attainments; we have learnt in what way we may be pleasing. And
finally, the Apostle Paul, instructing and warning, that we who,
illuminated by the light of Christ, have escaped from the darkness of
the conversation of night, should walk in the deeds and works of light,
writes and says, "The night has passed over, and the day is approaching:
let us therefore cast away the works of darkness, and let us put upon us
the armour of light. Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting
and drunkenness, not in lusts and wantonness, not in strifes and
jealousy."<sup>[23](footnote/fn76.htm#P7694_2588902)</sup> If the
darkness has departed from your breast, if the night is scattered
therefrom, if the gloom is chased away, if the brightness of day has
illuminated your senses, if you have begun to be a man of light, do
those things which are Christ's, because Christ is the Light and the
Day.

11\. Why do you rush into the darkness of jealousy? why do you enfold
yourself in the cloud of malice? why do you quench all the light of
peace and charity in the blindness of envy? why do you return to the
devil, whom you had renounced? why do you stand like Cain? For that he
who is jealous of his brother, and has him in hatred, is bound by the
guilt of homicide, the Apostle John declares in his epistle, saying,
"Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer; and ye know that no
murderer hath life abiding in
him."<sup>[24](footnote/fn76.htm#P7696_2589726)</sup> And again: "He
that saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness
even until now, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he
goeth, because that darkness hath blinded his
eyes."<sup>[25](footnote/fn76.htm#P7697_2589953)</sup> Whosoever hates,
says he, his brother, walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he
goeth. For he goeth unconsciously to Gehenna, in ignorance and
blindness; he is hurrying into punishment, departing, that is, from the
light of Christ, who warns and says, "I am the light of the world. He
that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
of life."<sup>[26](footnote/fn76.htm#P7698_2590348)</sup> But he follows
Christ who stands in His precepts, who walks in the way of His teaching,
who follows His footsteps and His ways, who imitates that which Christ
both did and taught; in accordance with what Peter also exhorts and
warns, saying, "Christ suffered for us, leaving you an example that ye
should follow His
steps."<sup>[27](footnote/fn76.htm#P7699_2590692)</sup>

12\. We ought to remember by what name Christ calls His people, by what
title He names His flock. He calls them sheep, that their Christian
innocence may be like that of sheep; He calls them lambs, that their
simplicity of mind may imitate the simple nature of lambs. Why does the
wolf lurk under the garb of sheep? why does he who falsely asserts
himself to be a Christian, dishonour the flock of Christ? To put on the
name of Christ, and not to go in the way of Christ, what else is it but
a mockery of the divine name, but a desertion of the way of salvation;
since He Himself teaches and says that he shall come unto life who keeps
His commandments, and that he is wise who hears and does His words; that
he, moreover, is called the greatest doctor in the kingdom of heaven who
thus does and teaches;<sup>[28](footnote/fn77.htm#P7701_2591516)</sup>
that, then, will be of advantage to the preacher what has been well and
usefully preached, if what is uttered by his mouth is fulfilled by deeds
following? But what did the Lord more frequently instil into His
disciples, what did He more charge to be guarded and observed among His
saving counsels and heavenly precepts, than that with the same love
wherewith He Himself loved the disciples, we also should love one
another? And in what manner does he keep either the peace or the love of
the Lord, who, when jealousy intrudes, can neither be peaceable nor
loving?

13\. Thus also the Apostle Paul, when he was urging the merits of peace
and charity, and when he was strongly asserting and teaching that
neither faith nor alms, nor even the passion itself of the confessor and
the martyr,<sup>[29](footnote/fn77.htm#P7703_2592322)</sup> would avail
him, unless he kept the requirements of charity entire and inviolate,
added, and said: "Charity, is magnanimous, charity is kind, charity
envieth not; "<sup>[30](footnote/fn77.htm#P7704_2592662)</sup> teaching,
doubtless, and showing that whoever is magnanimous, and kind, and averse
from jealousy and rancour, such a one can maintain charity. Moreover, in
another place, when he was advising that the man who has already become
filled with the Holy Spirit, and a son of God by heavenly birth, should
observe nothing but spiritual and divine things, he lays it down, and
says: "And I indeed, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I have fed
you with milk, not with
meat:<sup>[31](footnote/fn77.htm#P7705_2593219)</sup> for ye were not
able hitherto; moreover, neither now are ye able. For ye are yet carnal:
for whereas there are still among you jealousy, and contention, and
strifes, are ye not carnal, and walk as men?
"<sup>[32](footnote/fn77.htm#P7706_2593493)</sup>

14\. Vices and carnal sins must be trampled down, beloved brethren, and
the corrupting plague of the earthly body must be trodden under foot
with spiritual vigour, lest, while we are turned back again to the
conversation of the old man, we be entangled in deadly snares, even as
the apostle, with foresight and wholesomeness, forewarned us of this
very thing, and said: "Therefore, brethren, let us not live after the
flesh; for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall begin to die; but if ye,
through the Spirit, mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. For
as many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the sons of
God."<sup>[33](footnote/fn77.htm#P7708_2594144)</sup> If we are the sons
of God, if we are already beginning to be His temples, if, having
received the Holy Spirit, we are living holily and spiritually, if we
have raised our eyes from earth to heaven, if we have lifted our hearts,
filled with God and Christ, to things above and divine, let us do
nothing but what is worthy of God and Christ, even as the apostle
arouses and exhorts us, saying: "If ye be risen with Christ, seek those
things which are above, where Christ is sitting at the right hand of
God; occupy your minds with things that are above, not with things which
are upon the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God. But when Christ, who is your life, shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with Him in
glory."<sup>[34](footnote/fn77.htm#P7709_2594914)</sup> Let us, then,
who in baptism have both died and been buried in respect of the carnal
sins of the old man, who have risen again with Christ in the heavenly
regeneration, both think upon and do the things which are Christ's, even
as the same apostle again teaches and counsels, saying: "The first man
is of the dust of the earth; the second man is from heaven. Such as he
is from the earth, such also are they who are froth the earth and such
as He the heavenly is, such also are they who are heavenly. As we have
borne the image of him who is of the earth, let us also bear the image
of Him who is from
heaven."<sup>[35](footnote/fn77.htm#P7710_2595545)</sup> But we cannot
bear the heavenly image, unless in that condition wherein we have
already begun to be, we show forth the likeness of Christ.

15\. For this is to change what you had been, and to begin to be what
you were not, that the divine birth might shine forth in you, that the
godly discipline might respond to God, the Father, that in the honour
and praise of living, God may be glorified in man; as He Himself
exhorts, and warns, and promises to those who glorify Him a reward in
their turn, saying, "Them that glorify me I will glorify, and he who
despiseth me shall be
despised."<sup>[36](footnote/fn77.htm#P7712_2596153)</sup> For which
glorification the Lord, forming and preparing us, and the Son of God
instilling<sup>[37](footnote/fn77.htm#P7713_2596263)</sup> the likeness
of God the Father, says in His Gospel: "Ye have heard that it hath been
said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine enemy. But I say
unto you, Love your enemies, and pray for them which persecute you; that
ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven, who maketh His
sun to rise on the good and on the evil, and sendeth rain upon the just
and on the unjust."<sup>[38](footnote/fn77.htm#P7714_2596710)</sup> If
it is a source of joy and glory to men to have children like to
themselves-and it is more agreeable to have begotten an offspring then
when the remaining<sup>[39](footnote/fn77.htm#P7715_2596888)</sup>
progeny responds to the parent with like lineaments-how much greater is
the gladness in God the Father, when any one is so spiritually born that
in his acts and praises the divine eminence of
race<sup>[40](footnote/fn77.htm#P7716_2597108)</sup> is announced! What
a palm of righteousness is it, what a crown to be such a
one<sup>[41](footnote/fn77.htm#P7717_2597209)</sup> as that the Lord
should not say of you, "I have begotten and brought up children, but
they have despised me!"<sup>[42](footnote/fn77.htm#P7718_2597390)</sup>
Let Christ rather applaud you, and invite you to the reward, saying,
"Come, ye blessed of my Father, receive the kingdom which is prepared
for you from the beginning of the
world."<sup>[43](footnote/fn77.htm#P7719_2597587)</sup>

16\. The mind must be strengthened, beloved brethren, by these
meditations. By exercises of this kind it must be confirmed against all
the darts of the devil. Let there be the divine reading in the
hands,<sup>[44](footnote/fn77.htm#P7721_2597811)</sup> the Lord's
thoughts in the mind; let constant prayer never cease at all; let saving
labour persevere. Let us be always busied in spiritual actions, that so
often as the enemy approaches, however often he may try to come near, he
may find the breast closed and armed against him. For a Christian man's
crown is not only that which is received in the time of persecution:
peace<sup>[45](footnote/fn77.htm#P7722_2598305)</sup> also has its
crowns, wherewith the victors, from a varied and manifold engagement,
are crowned, when their adversary is prostrated and subdued. To have
overcome lust is the palm of continency. To have resisted against anger,
against injury, is the crown of patience. It is a triumph over avarice
to despise money. It is the praise of faith, by trust in the future, to
suffer the adversity of the world. And he who is not haughty in
prosperity, obtains glory for his humility; and he who is disposed to
the mercifulness of cherishing the poor, obtains the retribution of a
heavenly treasure; and he who knows not to be jealous, and who with one
heart and in meekness loves his brethren, is honoured with the
recompense of love and peace. In this course of virtues we daily run; to
these palms and crowns of justice we attain without intermission of
time.

17\. To these rewards that you also may come who had been possessed with
jealousy and rancour, cast away all that malice wherewith you were
before held fast, and be reformed to the way of eternal life in the
footsteps of salvation. Tear out from your breast thorns and thistles,
that the Lord's seed may enrich you with a fertile produce, that the
divine and spiritual cornfield may abound to the plentifulness of a
fruitful harvest. Cast out the poison of gall, cast out the virus of
discords. Let the mind which the
malice<sup>[46](footnote/fn77.htm#P7724_2599744)</sup> of the serpent
had infected be purged; let all bitterness which had settled within be
softened by the sweetness of Christ. If you take both meat and drink
from the sacrament of the cross, let the wood which at
Mara<sup>[47](footnote/fn77.htm#P7725_2600030)</sup> availed in a figure
for sweetening the taste, avail to you in in reality for soothing your
softened breast; and you shall not strive for a medicine for your
increasing health. Be cured by that whereby you had been
wounded.<sup>[48](footnote/fn77.htm#P7726_2600327)</sup> Love those whom
you previously had hated; favour those whom you envied with unjust
disparagements. Imitate good men, if you are able to follow them; but it
you are not able to follow them, at least rejoice with them, and
congratulate those who are better than you. Make yourself a
sharer<sup>[49](footnote/fn77.htm#P7727_2600682)</sup> with them in
united love; make yourself their associate in the alliance of charity
and the bond of brotherhood. Your debts shall be remitted to you when
you yourself shall have forgiven. Your sacrifices shall be received when
you shall come in peace to God. Your thoughts and deeds shall be
directed from above, when you consider those things which are divine and
righteous, as it is written: "Let the heart of a man consider righteous
things, that his steps may be directed by the
Lord."<sup>[50](footnote/fn77.htm#P7728_2601226)</sup>

18\. And you have many things to consider. Think of paradise, whither
Cain does not enter,<sup>[51](footnote/fn77.htm#P7730_2601339)</sup> who
by jealousy slew his brother. Think of the heavenly kingdom, to which
the Lord does not admit any but those who are of one heart and mind.
Consider that those alone can be called sons of God who are peacemakers,
who in heavenly<sup>[52](footnote/fn77.htm#P7731_2601611)</sup> birth
and by the divine law are made one, and respond to the likeness of God
the Father and of Christ. Consider that we are standing under the eyes
of God, that we are pursuing the course of our conversation and our
life, with God Himself looking on and judging, that we may then at
length be able to attain to the result of beholding Him, if we now
delight Him who sees us, by our actions, if we show ourselves worthy of
His favour and indulgence; if we, who are always to please Him in His
kingdom, previously please Him in the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Treatise XI. Exhortation to Martyrdom, Addressed to
Fortunatus.](0050121)
