[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050033)  [Next](0050035.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle IX.<sup>[1](footnote/fn49.htm#P4914_1492583.md)</sup>

To the Clergy, Concerning Certain Presbyters Who Had Rashly Granted
Peace to the Lapsed Before the Persecution Had Been Appeased, and
Without the Privity of the Bishops.

1\. Cyprian to the presbyters and deacons, his brethren, greeting. I
have long been patient, beloved brethren, hoping that my forbearing
silence would avail to quietness. But since the unreasonable and
reckless presumption of some is seeking by its boldness to disturb both
the honour of the martyrs, and the modesty of the confessors, and the
tranquility of the whole people, it behoves me no longer to keep
silence, lest too much reticence should issue in danger both to the
people and to ourselves. For what danger ought we not to fear from the
Lord's displeasure, when some of the presbyters, remembering neither the
Gospel nor their own place, and, moreover, considering neither the
Lord's future judgment nor the bishop now placed over them, claim to
themselves entire
authority,<sup>[2](footnote/fn49.htm#P4919_1493910.md)</sup> -a thing which
was never in any wise done under our predecessors,-with discredit and
contempt of the bishop?

2\. And I wish, if it could be so without the sacrifice of our
brethren's safety, that they could make good their claim to all things;
I could dissemble and bear the discredit of my episcopal authority, as I
always have dissembled and borne it. But it is not now the occasion for
dissimulating when our brotherhood is deceived by some of you, who,
while without the means of restoring salvation they desire to please,
become a still greater stumbling-block to the lapsed, For that it is a
very great crime which persecution has compelled to be committed, they
themselves know who have committed it; since our Lord and Judge has
said, "Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I also confess
before my Father which is in heaven; but whosoever shall deny me, him
will I also deny."<sup>[3](footnote/fn49.htm#P4921_1494957.md)</sup> And
again He has said, "All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and
blasphemies; but he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost shall
not have forgiveness, but is guilty of eternal
sin."<sup>[4](footnote/fn49.htm#P4922_1495177.md)</sup> Also the blessed
apostle has said, "Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of
devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table and of the table of
devils."<sup>[5](footnote/fn49.htm#P4923_1495365.md)</sup> He who withholds
these words from our brethren deceives them, wretched that they are; so
that they who truly repenting might satisfy God, both as the Father and
as merciful, with their prayers and works, are seduced more deeply to
perish; and they who might raise themselves up fall the more deeply. For
although in smaller sins sinners may do penance for a set time, and
according to the rules of discipline come to public
confession,<sup>[6](footnote/fn49.htm#P4924_1495818.md)</sup> and by
imposition of the hand of the bishop and clergy receive the right of
communion: now with their time still unfulfilled, while persecution is
still raging, while the peace of the Church itself is not vet restored,
they are admitted to communion, and their name is presented; and while
the penitence is not yet performed, confession is not yet made, the
hands Of the bishop and clergy are not yet laid upon them, the eucharist
is given to them; although it is written, "Whosoever shall eat the bread
and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord."<sup>[7](footnote/fn49.htm#P4925_1496435.md)</sup>

3\. But now they are not guilty who so little observe the law of
Scripture; but they will be guilty who are in office and do not suggest
these things to brethren, so that, being instructed by those placed
above them, they may do all things with the fear of God, and with the
observance given and prescribed by Him. Then, moreover, they lay the
blessed martyrs open to ill-will, and involve the glorious servants of
God with the priest of God; so that although they, mindful of my place,
have directed letters to me, and have asked that their wishes should
theft be examined, and peace granted them,-when our Mother, the Church
herself, should first have received peace for the Lord's mercy, and the
divine protection. have brought me back to His Church,-yet these,
disregarding the honour which the blessed martyrs with the confessors
maintain for me, despising the Lord's law and that observance, which the
same martyrs and confessors bid to be maintained, before the fear of
persecution is quenched, before my return, almost even before the
departure of the martyrs, communicate with the lapsed, and offer and
give them the eucharist: when even if the martyrs, in the heat of their
glory, were to consider less carefully the Scriptures, and to desire
anything more, they should be admonished by the presbyters' and deacons'
suggestions, as was always done in time
past.<sup>[8](footnote/fn49.htm#P4927_1497824.md)</sup>

4\. For this reason the divine rebuke does not cease to chastise us
night nor day. For besides the visions of the night, by day also, the
innocent age of boys is among us filled with the Holy Spirit, seeing in
an ecstasy with their eyes, and hearing and speaking those things
whereby the Lord condescends to warn and instruct
us.<sup>[9](footnote/fn49.htm#P4929_1498209.md)</sup> And you shall hear
all things when the Lord, who bade me withdraw, shall bring me back
again to you. In the meanwhile, let those certain ones among you who are
rash and incautious and boastful, and who do not regard man, at least
fear God, knowing that, if they shall persevere still in the same
course, I shall use that power of admonition which the Lord bids me use;
so that they may meanwhile be withheld from
offering,<sup>[10](footnote/fn49.htm#P4930_1498720.md)</sup> and have to
plead their cause both before me and before the confessors themselves
and before the whole people, when, with God's permission, we begin to be
gathered together once more into the bosom of the Church, our Mother.
Concerning this matter, I have written to the martyrs and confessors,
and to the people, letters; both of which I have bidden to be read to
you. I wish you, dearly beloved brethren and earnestly longed-for, ever
heartily farewell in the Lord; and have me in remembrance. Fare ye well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle X.](0050035.md)
