[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050039)  [Next](0050041.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle XV.<sup>[1](footnote/fn50.htm#P5010_1522104.md)</sup>

To Moyses and Maximus, and the Rest of the Confessors.

1\. Cyprian to Moyses and Maximus, the presbyters and the other
confessors, his brethren, greeting. Celerinus, a companion both of your
faith and virtue, and God's soldier in glorious engagements, has come to
me, beloved brethren, and represented all of you, as well as each
individual, forcibly to my affection. I beheld in him, when he came, the
whole of you; and when he spoke sweetly and often of your love to me, in
his words I heard you. I rejoice very greatly when such things are
brought to me from you by such men as he. In a certain manner I am also
there with you in prison. I think that I who am thus bound to your
hearts, enjoy with you the delights of the divine approval. Your
individual love associates me with your honour; the Spirit does not
allow our love to be separated.
Confession<sup>[3](footnote/fn50.htm#P5016_1523875.md)</sup> shuts *you* up
in prison; affection shuts *me* up there. And I indeed, remembering you
day and night, both when in the sacrifices I offer prayer with many, and
when in retirement I pray with private petition, beseech of the Lord a
full acknowledgment to your crowns and your praises. But my poor ability
is too weak to recompense you; you give more when you remember me in
prayer, since, already breathing only celestial things, and meditating
only divine things, you ascend to loftier heights, even by the delay of
your suffering; and by the long lapse of time, are not wasting, but
increasing your glory. A first and single confession makes blessed; you
confess as often as, when asked to retire from prison, you prefer the
prison with faith and virtue; your praises are as numerous as the days;
as the months roll onward, ever your merits increase. He conquers once
who suffers at once; but he who continues always battling with
punishments, and is not overcome with suffering, is daily crowned.

2\. Now, therefore, let magistrates and consuls or proconsuls go by; let
them glory in the ensigns of their yearly dignity, and in their twelve
fusees. Behold, the heavenly dignity in you is sealed by the brightness
of a year's honour, and already, in the continuance of its victorious
glory, has passed over the rolling circle of the returning year. The
rising sun and the waning moon enlightened the world; but to you, He who
made the sun and moon was a greater light in your dungeon, and the
brightness of Christ glowing in your hearts and minds, irradiated with
that eternal and brilliant light the gloom of the place of punishment,
which to others was so horrible and deadly. The winter has passed
through the vicissitudes of the months; but you, shut up in prison, were
undergoing, instead of the inclemencies of winter, the winter of
persecution. To the winter succeeded the mildness of spring, rejoicing
with roses and crowned with flowers; but to you were present roses and
flowers from the delights of paradise, and celestial garlands wreathed
your brows. Behold, the summer is fruitful with the fertility of the
harvest, and the threshing-floor is filled with grain; but you who have
sown glory, reap the fruit of glory, and, placed in the Lord's
threshing-floor, behold the chaff burnt up with unquenchable fire; yon
yourselves as grains of wheat, winnowed and precious corn, now purged
and garnered, regard the dwelling-place of a prison as your granary. Nor
is there wanting to the autumn spiritual grace for discharging the
duties of the season. The vintage is pressed out of doors, and the grape
which shall hereafter flow into the cups is trodden in the presses. You,
rich bunches out of the Lord's vineyard, and branches with fruit already
ripe, trodden by the tribulation of worldly pressure, fill your
wine-press in the torturing prison, and shed your blood instead of wine;
brave to bear suffering, you willingly drink the cup of martyrdom. Thus
the year rolls on with the Lord's servants,-thus is celebrated the
vicissitude of the seasons with spiritual deserts, and with celestial
rewards.

3\. Abundantly blessed are they who, from your number, passing through
these footprints of glory, have already departed from the world; and,
having finished their journey of virtue and faith, have attained to the
embrace and the kiss of the Lord, to the joy of the Lord Himself. But
yet your glory is not less, who are still engaged in contest, and, about
to follow the glories of your comrades, are long waging the battle, and
with an unmoved and unshaken faith standing fast, are daily exhibiting
in your virtues a spectacle in the sight of God. The longer is your
strife, the loftier will be your crown. The struggle is one, but it is
crowded with a manifold multitude of contests; you conquer hunger, and
despise thirst, and tread under foot the squalor of the dungeon, and the
horror of the very abode of punishment, by the vigour of your courage.
Punishment is there subdued; torture is worn out; death is not feared
but desired, being overcome by the reward of immortality, so that he who
has conquered is crowned with eternity of life. What now must be the
mind in you, how elevated, how large the heart, when such and so great
things are resolved, when nothing but the precepts of God and the
rewards of Christ are considered! The will is then only God's will; and
although you are still placed in the flesh, it is the life not of the
present world, but of the future, that you now live.

4\. It now remains, beloved brethren, that you should be mindful of me;
that, among your great and divine considerations, you should also think
of me in your mind and spirit; and that I should be in your prayers and
supplications, when that voice, which is illustrious by the purification
of confession, and praiseworthy for the continual tenor of its honour,
penetrates to God's ears, and heaven being open to it, passes from these
regions of the world subdued, to the realms above, and obtains from the
Lord's goodness even what it asks. For what do you ask from the Lord's
mercy which you do not deserve to obtain?-you who have thus observed the
Lord's commands, who have maintained the Gospel discipline with the
simple vigour of your faith, who, with the glory of your virtue
uncorrupted, have stood bravely by the Lord's commands, and by His
apostles, and have confirmed the wavering faith of many by the truth of
your martyrdom? Truly, Gospel witnesses, and truly, Christ's martyrs,
resting upon His roots, founded with strong foundation upon the Rock,
you have joined discipline with virtue, you have brought others to the
fear of God, you have made your martyrdoms, examples. I bid you,
brethren, very brave and beloved, ever heartily farewell; and remember
me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XVI](0050041.md)
