[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0050076)  [Next](0050078.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Epistle LII.<sup>[1](footnote/fn56.htm#P5662_1742029.md)</sup>

To Fortunatus and His Other Colleagues, Concerning Those Who Had Been
Overcome by Tortures.

1\. Cyprian to Fortunatus, Ahymnus, Optatus, Privatianus, Donatulus, and
Felix, his brethren, greeting, You have written to me, dearest brethren,
that when you were in the city of Capsa for the purpose of ordaining a
bishop, Superius, our brother and colleague brought before you, that
Ninus, Clementianus, and Florus, our brethren, who had been previously
laid hold of in the persecution, and confessing the name of the Lord,
had overcome the violence of the magistracy, and the attack of a raging
populace, afterwards, when they were tortured before the proconsul with
severe sufferings, were vanquished by the acuteness of the torments, and
fell, through their lengthened agonies, from the degree of glory to
which in the full virtue of faith they were tending, and after this
grave lapse, incurred not willingly but of necessity, had not yet ceased
their repentance for the space of three years: of whom you thought it
right to consult whether it was well to receive them now to communion.

2\. And indeed, in respect of my own opinion, I think that the Lord's
mercy will not be wanting to those who are known to have stood in the
ranks of battle, to have confessed the
name,<sup>[2](footnote/fn56.htm#P5668_1743728.md)</sup> to have overcome
the violence of the magistrates and the rush of the raging populace with
the persistency of unshaken faith, to have suffered imprisonment, to
have long resisted, amidst the threats of the proconsul and the warring
of the surrounding people, torments that wrenched and tore them with
protracted repetition; so that in the last moment to have been
vanquished by the infirmity of the flesh, may be extenuated by the plea
of preceding deserts. And it may be sufficient for such to have lost
their glory, but that we ought not, moreover, to close the place of
pardon to them, and deprive them of their Father's love and of our
communion; to whom we think it may be sufficient for entreating the
mercy of the Lord, that for three years continually and sorrowfully, as
you write, they have lamented with excessive penitential mourning.
Assuredly I do not think that peace is incautiously and over-hastily
granted to those, who by the bravery of their warfare, have not, we see,
been previously wanting to the battle; and who, if the struggle should
come on anew, might be able to regain their glory. For when it was
decided in the council that penitents in peril of sickness should be
assisted, and have peace granted to them, surely those ought to precede
in receiving peace whom we see not to have fallen by weakness of mind,
but who, having engaged in the conflict, and being wounded, have not
been able to sustain the crown of their confession through weakness of
the flesh; especially since, in their desire to die, they were not
permitted to be slain, but the tortures wrenched their wearied frames
long enough, not to conquer their faith, which is unconquerable, but to
exhaust the flesh, which is weak.

3\. Since, however, you have written for me to give full consideration
to this matter with many of my colleagues; and so great a subject claims
greater and more careful counsel from the conference of many; and as now
almost all, during the first celebrations of Easter, are dwelling at
home with their brethren: when they shall have completed the solenmity
to be celebrated among their own people, and have begun to come to me, I
will consider it more at large with each one, so that a decided opinion,
weighed in the council of many priests, on the subject on which you have
consulted me, may be established among us, and may be written to you. I
bid you, dearest brethren, ever heartily
farewell.<sup>[3](footnote/fn56.htm#P5670_1746201.md)</sup>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LIII.](0050078.md)
