[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm054)  [Next](zdm056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE OCCULTISM OF SACRIFICES

There is yet another subject the knowledge of which is only imparted to
those who are conversant with the teachings and wisdom of the Secret
Doctrine. From all others I am prohibited and forbidden to discourse
thereon. "What may that be?" asked Rabbi Jose. "I cannot," said the
stranger, divulge it unless I am assured of your fitness to receive it."
Travelling on together in silence, he turned to them and said: "When the
moon approaches the sun, the Holy One by his power revives the North and
attracts it to himself to himself in love; whilst the South revives
itself. When the influences of these two combine and blend together;
then occurs the conjunction of the two luminaries. When the sun rises in
the east it attracts the influences of these two cardinal quarters and
reflects them upon the moon at full. The approximation and conjunction
of the sun and moon are analogous to that of the male and female. The
law of attraction prevails throughout the universe, in the world above
as in the world below and is expressed in the aphorism--"as above so
below." As the right side of the sephirotic tree stands for love, the
attractive principle, so does the left stand

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

for rigour or the principle of repulsion personified by the serpent from
whom emanate all impurity and corruption and death. It draws and
attracts all who are receptive of its evil influence.

Now when the North is not revived by the Holy One, the moon becomes
drawn to the left side and in order to prevent this, Israel is obliged
to sacrifice a goat in which the serpent delighted, lets go his hold of
that luminary that then begins to shine and daily increase in light and
splendour. Thus on the day of atonement when the serpent or Evil One is
engaged with the goat offered unto it, the moon freed from its evil
influence undertakes to defend and protect Israel as a mother watches
over the safety and welfare of her child. Then it is that the Holy One
grants his blessings with remission and pardon of sins. During the Feast
of Tabernacles the influence of the right side of the Sephirotic tree so
attracts the moon that she attains its fulness and heavenly blessings
are showered upon the tutelary guardians of pagan nations on earth in
order to preclude them from imagining they have any right to share in
those that are reserved and allotted to Israel. During its rise and fall
the visible disk of the moon symbolises those blessings that are
bestowed upon Israel, but the obscured part, those of idolatrous
nations. When the moon however is at the full, Israel receives and
profits from the full tide of blessings from heaven and therefore it is
written "On the eighth day<span class="margnote">64a-64b  
Num. 29:35</span> there shall be an "abzereth" amongst you (Num. XXVIII.
15) the word abzereth here meaning as the Targum translates it "a
reunion" in order that the divine in all their fulness and extent may
descend upon Israel as a whole. On this day, Israel prays to the Holy
One for the blessing of rain not only for themselves but also all other
nations. This feast peculiar to Israel is referred to in the words of
scripture "My beloved is mine and I am his"<span class="margnote">Cant.
2:16</span> or its attendant blessings are shared in by no other nation;
in the dispensing of which the Holy One is like unto a King who invites
his friends to a banquet on a certain day. After reflection, the monarch
says to himself, "I wish to enjoy myself with the company of my friends
but in sending invitations to my governors, and chiefs and rulers of
provinces I am afraid these will be so numerous as to interfere with and
lessen my enjoyment." What did the King do? He first regaled his
official guests with the usual meats and vegetables, and after their
departure well filled and satisfied, he sat down at the table laden with
the best and most delicious viands and after his friends had feasted

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

thereon, he further added to their pleasure by granting the requests
they made unto him and so the banquet passed off pleasantly and without
any exhibition of ill-feeling or discontent. In a similar manner the
Holy One acts with Israel and therefore scripture saith, "on the eighth
day shall be your abzereth (coming together) that is, for the reception
of blessings to be participated in only by yourselves." Amongst the
requisites used during the Feast of Tabernacles, were the palm and the
citron. During every day of the feast, Jews with a citron in their left
hand and in their right a bundle of branches viz.: one of the palm tree
and two of the willow and myrtle, pass around the altar exclaiming seven
times,<span class="margnote">64b</span> in memory of the conquest of
Jericho and hence called the Great Hosanna. In preparing the Loulab, the
stem of the branches was covered over with palm leaves. If it was dry or
withered, crooked or split in the least, it was considered worthless. It
must be fresh and green, smooth and without burr or blemish. It was
encircled with sprigs of willow and myrtle each of which must have three
leaves otherwise the Loulab was Posoul.

Then said Rabbi Hiya and Rabbi Jose to the stranger, "This; has indeed
been a most pleasant and interesting journey; blessed are they who
delight to study the Secret Doctrine." Then embracing him, Rabbi Jose
exclaimed, "Surely thou art of the number of those referred to in
Scripture "And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord and great
shall be the abundance of their peace" (Ps. LIV. 14). Proceeding on
their way, they at last sat down and rested themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII. A Vexata Questio In Biblical Philology](zdm056)
