[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm040)  [Next](zdm042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

SAID Rabbi Eleazar: "By these words, 'And Cain brought<span
class="margnote">54b</span> of the fruits of the ground,' we learn that
Cain and Abel offered sacrifices of a character corresponding to their
own state and nature. According to the actions or works of a man, so is
his offering. It is pure or impure, acceptable or otherwise, as it is
written, 'Say unto the righteous, it shall be well with him, for he
shall eat of the fruit of his doings, but woe unto the wicked, it shall
be ill with him, for he shall eat of the fruit of his doings.' (Is.
iii., 10 to 11.) Cain brought the fruits of his doings and met the death
angel. Abel brought the firstlings of his flocks and found they were
acceptable and pleasing unto God; as it is written, 'And the Lord had
respect unto Abel and to his offerings, but unto Cain and his offerings
he had no respect,' wherefore the wrath of Cain was aroused and he was
greatly incensed and so we read that when they were in the field, he
fell upon his brother Abel and slew him. From other words in scripture
we infer that a quarrel arose between them respecting Abel's twin
sister, which is further confirmed by the traditional rendering of the
words, 'And she brought forth again with her brother Abel,' showing that
Abel was born with a twin sister. It is written, 'If thou doest well
shall thou not he accepted' (Gen. iv., 7). These words have already been
explained but there is another signification given of them by Rabbi
Abba, thus, 'If thou doest well,' thy soul shall ascend on high and
never fall again below (sath). That is, if thou livest according to the
dictates of thy Higher Self, thou shalt become united with it; but if
not, thou shalt sink lower unto the dust of the earth from which thou
hast come forth."

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

Said Rabbi Jose: "This interpretation of the word 'sath' is very good
and excellent, but I have heard another interpretation, which is, God
said to Cain: 'If thou doest well, the impure spirit will not abide with
thee nor cleave unto thee, but if thou doest not well, sin or evil lieth
at the door' (ready to overtake thee). By the word 'door' (lepathach) is
meant justice or punishment from on high, for the great tribunal of
divine justice is designated by this same word, door or gate, as it is
written, 'Open unto me the gates of justice' (Ps. cxviii., 19). By 'sin
lieth at the door' is meant the impure spirit which if thou fallest into
its power, will bring thy soul before the tribunal of divine justice,
when it will be hurled to destruction and become dissolved into the
original element out of which it has been formed and produced."

Said Rabbi Isaac: "At the time that Cain killed Abel he knew not how to
separate or disjoin body and soul, but bit him like a serpent. From that
moment he became accursed and wandered about in the world, an outcast
shunned and abhorred, until at last repenting of his sin, he became
reconciled with the Lord and found a habitation on a lower earth or
world."

Said Rabbi Jose: "It was not on a lower, but on our present earth that
Cain after his repentance was admitted into human society, as it is
written, 'And the Lord set a mark upon Cain'" (Gen. iv., 15).

Said Rabbi Isaac: "From these words we gather that it was from this
earth which is called Adamah that Cain was driven, and that it was on
the earth called Arqa that he afterwards became a dweller, as it is
written, 'And Cain said thou hast driven me this day from the face of
Adamah' (earth). After his repentance, however, it was granted him to
live on a lower earth (arqa) of whose inhabitants it is written, 'They
shall perish<span class="margnote">54b</span> from the earth (aqua) and
from under these heavens' (Jer. x., 11). It was here that he lived and
dwelt as scripture states, 'and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of
Eden' (Gen. iv., 16). Moreover, when Cain had killed Abel, Adam
separated from his wife and cohabitated with two female elementals, and
from his intercourse with them was begotten a great and numerous progeny
of demons and elementaries who at night time appear in attractive forms
and thus give rise to offspring like unto themselves. In scripture, they
are termed 'the plagues of the children of men.' Though human in
appearance, they are void of hair and of them scripture speaks. 'I will
chasten him with

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

the rod of men and with the plagues of the children of men' (Sam. vii.,
14), they visit both men and women alike. After a hundred and thirty
years he became united again with Eve and brought forth a son and called
his name Seth,<span class="margnote">54b-55a</span> signifying thereby
that as the two letters S and Th are the last of the alphabet, so this
son was the ending of the terrible experience through which Eve and Adam
had passed and undergone.

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "He was called Seth because he was a reincarnation of
Abel, as it is written, 'For God hath appointed me another seed in place
of Abel, whom Cain slew' (Gen, iv., 25). Furthermore, we read that Adam
begat a son in his own likeness, after his image, and called his name
Seth (Gen, v., 3), denoting that the first children of Adam had no
resemblance to him either physically or morally. This was the opinion of
Rabbi Yeba the aged as given by Rabbi Simeon. The first children brought
forth by Eve were begotten by Somoal who appeared to her riding on the
back of a serpent, and were therefore not endowed with the human body.
If the question be asked: seeing that Abel came from a different side of
the tree of life to that of Cain, wherefore had not Cain a human body?
The reason was, because neither of them were begotten in a state of
absolute purity."

Said Rabbi Jose: "But scripture states that though Adam knew Eve, his
wife, and she conceived and brought forth Cain, yet it does not say that
Adam begat Cain. Speaking of the birth of Abel it further states, 'She
brought forth again his brother Abel.' Therefore, of each of them it is
not said that they were begotten after the likeness and image of Adam,
as it is expressly said of Seth."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "Adam as stated was separated from his wife a hundred
and thirty years, during which time he begat demons and elementals that
swarmed throughout the world. Whilst under the influence of the impure
spirit he felt no desire to become associated with Eve, but after
repenting and overcoming his animal propensities, he became again united
to her and then it is said, 'he begat a son in his own likeness.'
Observe that when a man begins walking in the wrong and downward path
his thoughts and inclinations become impure and carnal, all love of
virtue and purity leaves him through the impure elementals he attracts
into his aura. Happy and blessed are they who find and walk in the path
of light that shineth more and more unto the perfect day, for then are
their lives truly clean

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

and real lives and their offspring is like unto them; and of them
scripture saith, 'For the upright shall dwell in the land.'" (Prov. ii.,
21).

Said Rabbi Hiya: "What signify the words 'And the sister of Tubal Cain
was Naamah' (gentleness), and wherefore was this name given her? Was it
to indicate that she possessed the power of seducing both human and
angelic beings?"

Said Rabbi Isaac: "She overcame Aza and Azael who in scripture are
called 'sons of God.'"

Said Rabbi Simeon: "She was the procreatrix of all the demons of Cainite
origin, and she it is that along [with](errata.htm#28) Lilith afflicts
infant children with epileptic diseases."

Said Rabbi Abba to Rabbi Simeon: "Master, you have stated she was so
called because she inspired men with carnal desires."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "That is true, for though she excites lust in human
beings, yet this does not prevent her from afflicting young children and
thus she continues her operations in the world up to the present time."

Said Rabbi Abba: "Seeing that demons and elementals are subject to
death, wherefore do Naamah and Lilith continue to exist through the
ages?"

Rabbi Simeon replied: "All demons and elementaries do indeed die, but
Naamah and Lilith together with Agereth, daughter of Mahlath their
offspring, abide in the world until the day that the Holy One will
banish and drive all evil and impure spirits out of the world; as it is
written, 'And I will cause the unclean spirit to pass out of the land'
(Zach. xiii., 2). Woe unto those who are ignorant and therefore unable
to avert and ward off the influence of these defiling elemental beings
that swarm in their myriads throughout the world. If it were permitted
to behold them, we should be amazed and confounded and wonder how the
world could continue to exist. Observe that Naamah being the exciter of
human concupiscence and carnality, it is obligatory on everyone to
practice and perform acts and rites of purification, so that he may
become and preserve himself pure and undefiled."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII. Traditions Concerning Adam](zdm042)
