[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm021)  [Next](zdm023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

NOW the serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field which the
Lord God had made" (Gen. iii. 1). "Beast of the field" signifies the
idolatrous nations who are the offspring and progeny of the old serpent
who tempted and seduced Eve to do evil by exciting selfishness and other
animal propensities within her. Under their influence she conceived and
brought forth Cain, who killed<span class="margnote">28b</span> Abel his
brother, the shepherd of whom the scripture terms "*beschagam*,"
"because he is flesh." This word also is used of Moses, who killed the
Egyptian. Moses may also be regarded as the eldest son of Adam. When the
children went up out of Egypt, a great multitude of strangers went with
them and became intermingled with them. Also, during their sojourn in
the wilderness and on their journey to the promised land, strangers
belonging to another nation, such as the Kenites of whom Jethro, the
father-in-law of Moses, was the head, flung in their lot with and dwelt
amongst the Israelites. These strangers or aliens Moses wished to
convert and make one with the children of Israel. The Holy One who
counts a good intention as a good action, said unto him: "Thou desirest
what is impossible. Through them thy descendants will suffer. It was
such as they who caused Adam to sin and disobey after it had been said
unto him: 'From the tree of knowledge of good and evil shalt thou not
eat,' and it will be they who will cause the children of Israel

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

to go into captivity, and also through them thou wilt not be able<span
class="margnote">28b</span> to enter into the promised land."

The failure of Moses to enter along with the Israelites into the Holy
land was owing to the murmurings and cries of these strangers causing
him, in a moment of anger, to strike the rock with the rod God had given
him, instead of speaking to the rock as he had been commanded (Nunn. xx.
8). Like Adam, in his disobedience, so Moses too had to suffer the
penalty for his act of disobedience. But as the Holy One rewards the
good intention equally as the good deed, therefore He said to Moses: "I
will make of thee a greater nation and mightier than they" (Num. xiv.
12). The Holy One said: "Whoso hath sinned against me, him will I blot
out of my book" (Ex. xxxii. 33), which words apply to the descendants of
Amalek, of whom it is written: "Thou shalt blot out the remembrance of
Amalek, for they it was that caused the tables of the law to be broken."

"And their eyes were opened and they saw they were naked" (Gen. iii. 7)
refers to Israel when they were living amidst the mud and clay of Egypt
and had no knowledge of the secret doctrine. Therefore spake the prophet
concerning them: "Thou art naked and bare" (Ezek. xvi. 7). This is also
why Job repeated the word "naked." "Naked came I out of my mother's womb
and *naked* shall I return thither" (Job i. 21.). He used the word
*shameh* (thither), which has the same letters as *Moseh* (Moses), to
show that he, Moses, wished to convert the strangers and that hereafter
he will reincarnate and appear again to Israel in order to proclaim and
make known the Schekina. These words of Job also refer to the time when
Israel in captivity would perceive they were naked or devoid of the
secret doctrine, and therefore said: "Jehovah hath given, Jehovah hath
taken away, may the name of Jehovah be blessed."

And they sewed figleaves together and made themselves aprons" (Gen. iii.
7). The meaning of these words is, that man will cloak himself with the
frail coverings of his own sinful propensities when he perceives himself
naked and has nothing to hide and cover what should be hidden. The
garment with which Israel covers himself is the legal robe with its
fringes and borders and also the phylacteries and sandals, and therefore
scripture saith: "And the Lord God made unto Adam and his wife coats of
skins and clothed them" (Gen. iii. 21). The *hagoroth* (coats or
coverings) is here used in order to distinguish the

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

legal robe, and therefore it is written "*hagor*." "Gird thy sword upon
thy thigh and make thy glory and majesty appear" (Ps. xlv. 3), referring
to the Shema repeated when each one is arrayed in the legal robe when
"the high praises of God are in their mouth and a two-edged sword in
their hand" (Ps. cxlix. 6).

"And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden" (Gen.
iii. 8). These words allude to the voice of God heard by Israel when at
Mount Sinai, and as scripture saith: "Did ever a people hear the voice
of God speaking out of the midst of the fire?" (Deuter. iv. 33). On
hearing this voice the strangers or aliens (Ereb. Rah) in Israel
perished, for they it was who said: "Let not God speak with us lest we
die" (Ex. xx. 19). After their death the law was given. The ignorant of
the present time who know not and recognize no other law than that of
selfishness, are incarnations of these strangers and are indicated by
the words: "Cursed is he that lieth with any manner of beast" (Deuter.
xxvii. 21), because they derive their origin from the serpent to whom it
was said:<span class="margnote">28b-29a</span> "Cursed art thou above
all cattle and above every beast of the field" (Gen. iii. 14).

Many impurities exist in Israel and are as dangerous and noxious as
snakes and serpents. There are those that originated at first from the
tempter, also those of idolators who resemble the wild animals and
savage beasts of the field. There is also the impurity arising from
wrongdoing in daily life and still more, the impurity of the
evil-minded. All these are found afflicting Israel, yet is there no
greater impurity than that of Amalek or that personified evil called and
known as "The God of this world." It is that "which poisons all within
and hardens all the feeling." It causes the death of the soul and
transforms it into an idolater, a worshipper of the world and its golden
image of wealth. Its occult name is Samael, "The poison God." Though
Samael was the name of the serpent that tempted and seduced Adam and
Eve, yet are they one and the same and are both cursed alike.

"And the Lord God called the man and said 'Where art thou?'" (*aicha*).
In this verse God showed to Adam the destruction of the temple or holy
place, causing great sorrow and anguish of heart, as alluded to in the
verse of scripture beginning with this word "*aicha*." "How doth the
city sit solitary that was full of people" (Lam. i. 1). In both these
passages of scripture this word "*aicha*" is as a mournful note in a bar
of music. It will not, however, always be so. The time will arrive

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

when the Holy One shall banish and destroy all evil in the world as it
is written: "Death is swallowed up forever and the Lord God will wipe
away tears from all faces and the rebuke of his people (humanity) shall
be taken away from off all the earth"<span class="margnote">29a</span>
(Is. xxv. 8), and in that day Jehovah shall be One and His name
One.<span class="margnote">Zech. 14:9</span>

We are taught by tradition that all which Solomon wrote in the "Song of
Songs" has reference to the King of Peace who, though he rules below,
yet has his kingdom on high and thus is king of both worlds. This is
occultly signified by the letter B, whose numerical value is two, placed
at the beginning of the word *hochma* in the Scripture, "be-hochma, by
wisdom is the house built" (Prov. xxiv. 3), and also in the verse "King
Solomon made himself a sedan of the wood of Lebanon" (Cant. iii. 9). By
the word sedan (*thequna*) is meant the renovation of the lower world by
the action, and influence of the higher world, the action of the Higher
Self on the lower nature. Before the creation the existence of the
Divine Being was unknown and his attributes nameless and unrecognized,
and, as there was no speech or tongue to express his glory and being,
His name was hidden and concealed in Himself. When the Holy One created
the universe He impressed upon it marks of design and formed worlds
which did not endure, but perished and passed away. Then the Divine, Ain
Soph (the boundless One) surrounded or enveloped Himself with a garment
of light of transcendent brilliance, from which emanated and came forth
the great and lofty trees of Lebanon, and the twenty-two letters became
the sedan or chariot of God. The law by which the world was created (the
ten words) was established and confirmed so that it changeth not. This
is the meaning of the above verse, as also of the words "The trees of
the field together with the cedars of Lebanon which the Lord hath
planted, are full of sap" (Ps. civ. 16), for they have been planted by
the King of Peace for his glory in order that every one may know and
recognize that He is One and His name is One--that His name is Jehovah
the most High above all the earth.

By this manifestation of the Divine a way of access has been opened and
the light thereof has become visible throughout the universe and is the
light that enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world. It is
circumambient as the air and, like the ocean, rolls all round the world.
From it hath proceeded all things and unto it all things shall return as
it is written: "All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not
full--unto the place

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

whence the rivers come, thither shall they return again" (Eccles. i. 7).
The light divine attracts and draws all other lights, so that they
become at last blended and unified with it. This final consummation is
alluded to in the words "I am the rose of Sharon and the lily of the
valley" (Cant. ii. 1), the word Sharon signifying field or rather the
ocean that absorbs all the rivers) of the world which proceed from and
return into it again.

*Be-hochma*, "by wisdom the house has been built." The letter Beth or B,
whose numerical value, as we have stated, is two, signifies the two
kingdoms, celestial and terrestrial, of heaven and earth (the lower and
Higher Self). It is by the establishment of the celestial on the
terrestrial, or of heaven upon earth, that the house of the King
(humanity) will become united and the King will rejoice thereat, for
then the two kingdoms will become one and then the new and living way
will become opened to those who make themselves susceptible and
receptive of the Higher and Diviner life. Therefore is it written
"*Brashith, bra Alhim*" (Gen. i. 1). The two kingdoms created by Alhim
(B--two, *rashit*--kingdoms) for the kingdom is called reshith
(beginning) according to the words "*Reshith Hochma*." Before the
manifestation of Alhim, the celestial or primal light resembled a great
frozen ocean and rivers could not flow into it, as they like it were
frozen also. It was this great congealed<span
class="margnote">29a-29b</span> ocean to which Job referred: "Out of
whose womb came the ice?" (Job xxxviii. 29). As long as the ocean
remained frozen, so long was it of no benefit to man, and the rivers
ceased running their courses into it. When the north sea is frozen it
continues so until the advent of the south wind with its heat and
warmth. The rivers and streams then begin to flow again towards the
south and from their waters, the beasts of the field, as scripture
saith, do quench their thirst.

Thus will it be when the Higher Self of humanity rules over its lower
nature. The ice will dissolve and melt away, the waters of divine life
will flow continuously, and every voice shall sing and give thanks to
heaven for its deliverance from Self. This glorious consummation is
symbolized by the sounding of the *shophar* or trumpet, the prelude of
the great deliverance. There is a further allusion to this union of the
higher and lower kingdoms (the human with the divine life) in the words
"As long as the son of Jesse liveth upon the earth" (I. Sam. xx. 31),
for divine life upon the earth is only possible through the Messiah, the
son of Jesse. He it is who is master and lord over all, and

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

from him the earth (humanity and individual life) receiveth its
nourishment and sustenance.

This is why the scripture says, *ve-ath haaretz* (and the earth).<span
class="margnote">29b-30a</span> The letter V joined to *ath* designates
the nourishment of the world which comes from Alhim. The *ath*, composed
of the first and last letters of the Hebrew alphabet, denotes also the
Alhim who dwelleth in the heavens as it is written "Go forth ye
daughters of Sion and behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his
mother crowned him on the day of his marriage" (Cant. iii. 11). As
*Alhim*, by the operation of the two supreme sephiroth, the one male and
the other female, descended below, therefore is he lord of the heaven
and earth by conjoining and making them one, He it was who, attracted
heaven to earth whilst the King on high attracts the earth to heaven,
each of which has its own special way or path, that of the earth being
broad and wide and referred to in scripture as "The path of the just is
as the shining light" (Prov. iv. 18), whilst that leading to the Kingdom
of heaven (the higher life) is referred to in the words "There is a path
which no fowl knoweth and which the vulture's eye haft not seen, the
lion's whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it"
(Job xxviii. 7, 8).

The mystery of these two different ways is expressed thus: "Who maketh a
way in the sea and a path in the mighty waters (Is. xliii. 16), and also
by the Psalmist: "Thy way is in the sea and thy path in the great
waters" (Ps. lxxvii. 19). When these two worlds become united and
blended together they are symbolized by the union of the male and
female, the one being then the complement of the other. It is also
written: "Lift up your eyes on high and behold! *Mi* (who) hath created
*aleh* (these)" (Is. xl. 26). In these words is expressed the whole work
of creation, for by *Mi* above and *Aleh* below everything has been
formed and made. And this is why at the very beginning of the book of
Genesis, the letter B is repeated twice, as also the letter A in the
consecutive words "*Brashith Bra, Alhim, Ath*;" B representing the
female and A the male principle. It is from these two letters that all
the other letters have proceeded, the total of which is denoted by the
*Hashamayim* (the heavens). The letter V prefixed to the word *ve-ath
haaretz* (and the earth) shows that the H gives birth to heaven, and a
way to it, whilst V gives birth to earth, and provides it with
nourishment and everything that

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

it needs to sustain it. The word *ve-ath* also indicates that the V<span
class="margnote">30a</span> takes the A and Th, symbolical of the
beginning and end, and by their conjunction the earth is fed and
supported. The occult mystery of this is expressed in the words "All the
rivers run into the sea" (Eccles. i. 7).

There is no effect without a cause, is a truth that cannot be denied.
Yet our judgments concerning effects are often erroneous. For instance,
the sound we hear when an anvil is struck by a hammer does not proceed
from the anvil, as imagined, but is the result of their concussion which
causes vibration in the air. Also volcanic flames are not due to the
earth from which they come forth, but to the fire in the interior of it.
When scripture saith: "And Mount Sinai was enveloped in smoke, because
the Lord descended thereon in the midst of the fire" (Ex. xix., 18), it
signifies the conjunction of heaven and earth, the bringing together and
union of the spiritual and material. Everything that takes place on
earth has its cause in the invisible and noumenal world, which in
scripture is described as, and said to be, the *right hand* of God,
while the earth or world of effects is described as the *left hand*.
"Mine hand also hath laid the foundations of the earth, and my right
hand hath spanned the heavens. I will call them and they shall stand up
before me" (Is. xlviii. 13), the heavens representing the male principle
on the right hand, earth the female principle, on the left hand, both of
them found together before Him.

Such is also the meaning of the words "Lift up your eyes and behold *Mi*
(who) hath made *Aleh* (these)," *Mi* and *Aleh* being the complement of
each other. Before creation it was impossible to form any conception of
the creator, as *hochma* (wisdom) was hidden and unrevealed as the
Primal Being. Only after the apparition of the Divine light in the
universe and its rays beamed forth and became visible, could its
existence be cognized and perceptible, its nature and quality being
transcendently bright and pellucid. When, however, its apperception
began, then the question arose *Mi* (who or what is it?) Without this
*Mi* or Who? Aleh (these or that) could not have come into existence.
The mystery of the origin of all things is adverted to in the words,
already quoted, "Out of whose womb came the ice?" or rather "Out of the
womb of *Mi* came the ice?" that is the world. Mi therefore is the
progenitor of the earth and impregnated it with life and vitality. It
was therefore only after the creation that *Mi* became the subject of
thought.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

Again, the word *Brashith*, what does it signify? Does it mean that "by
two words," that is, by K equal to "*two*" and *rashith* equal to
"words," *Alhim* created, or by the word *Alhim* created, taking
*Brashith* as a single word? The real meaning is that before the
creation of the world there was no distinction between the Supreme
Principle and the Creative Logos or Word, they being one and the same,
and only after creation became they distinguished the one from the
other. It is written "While the King sitteth at his table, my spikenard
sendeth forth the smell thereof" (Cant. i. 12). The King signifies the
Supreme or First Principle, the spikenard sending forth its odor,
denotes the creative Word or Logos who is King below having formed the
world<span class="margnote">30a-30b</span> on the model or pattern of
the world on high and "the smell thereof" is the divine light. There
were two creations, viz., the heavens and the earth, and they were
concomitant in time with each other; the creation of the former was
effected by the right, that of the latter by the left hand, and extended
over six celestial days as it is written: "For in six days the Lord made
the heavens and the earth" (Ex. xxxi. 17). These six days correspond to
the six outlets through which the waters of life flowed into the world
and also the six channels by which they return again on high. Through
the six outlets it is that peace cometh into the world.

"And the earth was *Tohu* and *Bohu*, without form and void." The
constituents of the primal matter of the earth at first were impure and
shapeless and without form and continued in this state until, becoming
impressed with the Divine name of forty-two letters, they took upon them
different forms, qualities; and separated into the four elements of
fire, air, earth and water. After their purification and combination in
different proportions, these contributed to the formation of the
physical and natural world, the four cardinal points, and to the
infinite variety of forms and colors, existent therein and all on the
pattern of the higher world. Ere this was accomplished and before the
Divine name of forty-two letters had been impressed upon the primal
matter of the earth when in a state of chaos, the great serpent alone
and his demon hosts of elemental beings, leaving the chaotic world of
*Tohu* and *Bohu* penetrated into the higher world to the height of
1,500 cubits, but were eventually expelled and hurled headlong into the
abysmal darkness where they abode until the primal heavenly light shone
upon the earth and dispelled

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

the obscurity in which it was enshrouded, therefore is it written: "He
discovereth deep things out of darkness and bringeth out to light the
shadow of death" (Job xii. 22).

Before the advent of the light, universal darkness prevailed and the
waters were congealed so that the earth was without rivers or streams.
On the appearance of light, however, they were liquefied by its rays and
became fluidic and the arid earth refreshed by them was rendered fertile
and adapted for vegetable and animal life. The celestial light of which
scripture speaks existed from all eternity. As soon as it dawned its
splendor was visible from one extremity of the world to the other, but
foreseeing that it would he unappreciated and unregarded by mankind in
general, the Divine Being concealed it, so that it should be accessible
only to those who walk in the straight and narrow path leading to its
discovery and enjoyment. Happy they who find it, for then they become
sons of God and children of the Light.

"And God saw the light, that it was good." It has been handed down from
our forefathers that dreams in connection with a good object are
presages of peace and blessings, especially when letters composing words
are seen by the dreamer in their right order and sequence. For instance,
the letters T, O, bh of the word *Tobh* seen in their order denote good,
so that he who<span class="margnote">30b</span> sees the initial letter
T may take it as a favorable sigma or token, and as a synonym of *Tab*,
signifying peace. The numerical value of T, initial letter of the word
T-v-b, is nine and symbolizes the ninth *Sephira Malcuth*, which
receives its light from the first *Sephira Kether* (crown). The letter V
is a symbol of the light proceeding from the first two sephiroth and B
is the symbol of the first sephira and therefore it is the first letter
with which scripture commences, *Brashith*. Thus each of the letters in
this word T-v-b are symbols of the three highest sephiroth and designate
the just and upright in the world who unite in themselves the heaven and
the earth, therefore it is written: "Say unto the righteous it is good"
(Is. iii. 10), as the divine light and life dwelleth within them,
manifesting as goodness from above and mercy and compassion or
unselfishness from below as saith scripture: "The lord is good to all,
and His tender mercies are over all his works" (Ps. cxlv. 9). In the
words "to all" is expressed the prophecy that the day will dawn upon the
world when every man's eyes shall be opened and the light he seen by

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

all. Such is the mystic meaning of these words. "Brashith bra Alhim," in
the beginning.

The occult meaning of these first words of scripture is adverted to in
the verse: "When ye come into the land whither bring you, it shall be
when ye eat of the fruit of the land, ye shall offer up as a
sheave-offering to the Lord your first fruits" (Num. xv. 19, 20). The
first fruits are a symbol of *Hochma*, the divine wisdom, the first
sephira or manifestation of the Divine Being on the earth plane, and
thus may be considered the first fruits. *Brashith* signifies then, "by
the first fruits," and B, its initial letter, denotes the world watered
and refreshed by the mystic river mentioned in the verse: "And a river
went out of Eden to water the garden" (Gen. ii. 10). This river,
proceeding out of the secret place of the Most High, never ceases to
flow down upon the world or the garden, as it is termed. This secret
place of its origin or fount is symbolized by B, the first letter in the
book of Genesis. It includes in itself all the other letters and
symbolizes also the river which gives life to all things. The secret
place resembles a narrow path most difficult to discover and walk
therein, yet bestudded with many priceless gems. From it proceed two
great life forces, indicated by the word *ha-shamayim* (the two heavens)
and used in scripture to denote the source of this mystic river. The
words that follow after, viz., "*veath haaretzs*" (and the earth)
possess a mystical meaning, implying that the mystic river flowing down
from the heavens on to the earth will bring with its waters peace and
salvation to mankind, which will in their realization be the first
fruits when heaven and earth become united and blended together.

At the time of creation there was no distinction, no dark deep gulf or
rent between heaven and the earth.<span class="margnote">30a-31b</span>
When, however, they became separated, the earth fell into the state of
chaos and confusion (*Tohu* and *Bohu*) and only by the action and
silent operation of the heavenly light can they again become united.
When the light from the right hand of God fell upon the earth, darkness
from the left hand also went forth and encompassed it. Thus they became
blended together, the light being hidden within the darkness. In order,
however, that the earth might be blessed and become fertile and
fruitbearing, God divided and separated them, only to unite them again
eventually as they are the complement of each other and from the evening
and the morning shall be an eternal day. There is no day without night

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

and no night without day in this world, and this sequence of the<span
class="margnote">31a</span> great law of the universe (growth and decay,
life and death) will endure until the accomplishment and realization of
the Psalmist's prophecy: "The darkness and the light shall be both
alike" (Ps. cxxxix. 12).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. A Kabbalistic Symposium by Rabbi Simeon's
Students](zdm023)
