[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm083)  [Next](zdm085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COMPARISON BETWEEN ADAM AND THE POSTDILUVIANS.

It is written, "And the Lord came down to see<span class="margnote">71a,
75a</span> the city and the tower which the children of men builded"
(Gen. XI. 8). This is one of the ten manifestations and descents of the
Schekina in the world. If it be asked what need was there for descending
on this occasion, seeing that the erection of the city must have been
well known on high? we reply, it was to pass and execute judgment upon
the presumption of these Postdiluvians. The word "liroth" (to see) is
sometimes taken in this sense as in the words, "The Lord look upon you
and judge" (Ex. V. 20). The esoteric meaning of the words "to see the
city and the tower" is this. It was not with the object of seeing *them*
but the *men* who were engaged in their erection. When the Holy One is
about to execute judgments upon men for their evil deeds, he begins with
those who are first and foremost in wrongdoing,

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

and afterwards, turns attention to their ignorant and misguided<span
class="margnote">75a-75b</span> followers. But why are these builders of
Babel here mentioned and referred to not as men, but as the children of
Adam? It was because they acted similarly to our first ancestor who
revolted against his Lord and caused death to enter into the world. Even
so did they denounce allegiance to the rule of the Lord and by their
audacious and [presumptuous](errata.htm#63) project thought to scale the
heights and invade the domain of heaven itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVI. Rabbi Simeon on the Closing of the
Sanctuary](zdm085)
