[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm096)  [Next](zdm098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ABRAHAM'S INITIATORY PROBATION.

AGAIN Rabbi Simeon spake and said: "Observe further what is written,
'And he went on his journeys' (Gen. XII. 3),<span
class="margnote">83b-84a</span> signifying that after the termination of
his trials and probation he lived the perfect life. By the term journeys
(masaav) is implied the various ulterior stages through which Abraham
had to pass ere arriving at perfection. There had been a descent from
the time the Lord first appeared unto him; that is, a putting off or a
ridding himself of affections and propensities and attachments of the
lower self to the sensual and phenomenal, resulting in purification of
the soul which, when attained, prepared and enabled him to commence
ascending onward and upward through the various states and stages of the
divine life after coming out of Egypt; that is after his probation. It
is stated, 'He went on his journeys from the south even into Bethel, the
place where he had pitched his tent at the beginning'; he progressed and
advanced in the divine life so that by the mental and spiritual
illumination which he ultimately attained, he became fully initiated
into the comprehension and understanding of the mysteries of the Hidden
Wisdom and graduated to that degree termed 'teleiaor,' perfection, when
it is written, 'And there Abraham called on the name of the Lord' (Gen.
XIII. 4) and became a just man made perfect. Blessed are they who attain
unto this degree of righteousness, for they become invested with an
aureole of light and are jewels in the crown of the Holy One. Blessed
are they in this world and in. the world to come. Of these it is
written, 'The path of the just is as the shining light that shineth more
and more unto the perfect day' (Prov. IV. 18)."

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

As Rabbi Simeon ceased speaking, they came to a shady grove where they
all sat down to rest themselves. After a while Rabbi Simeon began
speaking again.

"It is written," said he, "'O turn thou unto me and have mercy upon me'
(Ps. LXXXVI. 16). Though these words have been commented on, they
possess an esoteric meaning that has not as yet been given forth. They
are occult words. What caused David to give expression to them? David
was longing and desiring to reach unto that state in the divine life
which would be as a crown unto him; therefore, he said, 'Give thy
strength unto thy servant.' That is, the power that descends into the
soul when it becomes receptive of the divine; as it is written, 'he
shall give strength unto his king' (I Sam. II. 10), alluding to King
Messiah, 'and save the son of thy handmaid.' Why did he designate
himself as 'the son of thy handmaid' and not as the son of his father,
Jesse? Because when a man enters on the higher and diviner life he
becomes as one born again of the Schekina or Holy Spirit, through whom
as through a mother all supplications and prayers are made and offered.
Tradition states that David in this petition makes reference to King
Messiah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXXIX. The Esoteric Explanation of Lot's Parting from
Abraham](zdm098)
