[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm050)  [Next](zdm052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

SAID Rabbi Hiya, after listening to these comments of his fellow
students: "These different expositions really amount to one and the same
meaning. The generations of Noah signify the present human race in the
world, the offspring and work of the Holy One."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "When the Holy One arrays himself, it is in the
ornaments from both the celestial and terrestrial worlds,<span
class="margnote">60a-60b</span> from the former with that heavenly light
on high that no human being can approach unto; from the latter with the
souls of the righteous who the more they approximate themselves to this
divine light the more receptive and filled with it do they become, so
that through them it expands in all directions and the world like a
cistern or ocean is filled with it. It is written, 'Drink water out of
thy cistern (meborecha) and running waters out of thy well' (beareche)
(Prov. v., 15). Why does scripture use these two terms cistern and well,
beginning with bar (cistern) and ending with bear (well or fount).
Because the one contains; the other produces or sends forth water, and
scripture wishes to teach us that the cistern will eventually become a
well. Like a poverty stricken and poor man, the souls of the righteous
or just are possessed of nothing in themselves, and are as a cistern
into which water is poured. Every worldly minded and unjust man bears on
him the mark of the letter D (daleth meaning poor) and is like a cistern
without water. But the souls of the just become founts or wells sending
forth water in all directions. Who operates and produces this change? It
is he, the source and origin of celestial light, who causes it to now
into human souls on the earth plane as we have stated before. Another
signification of these words is, that they apply to David, whom
scripture makes to say, 'Who (mi) will give me

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span class="margnote">60b</span>

to drink water of the cistern in Bethlehem?'<span class="margnote">2
Sam. 23:15</span> The term 'running water' also designates Abraham, 'out
of' (bethokh) Jacob and 'thy well' Isaac who is called a 'fount of
springing or living water' (Gen. xxvi., 9). In this same verse is
contained the holy and profound mystery of the patriarchs, amongst whom
King David is included. The desire of union between the opposite sexes
is only excited when the female becomes receptive and filled with the
female spirit or principle which, becoming conjoined with the male
principle from on high, causes fertility. So is it with the synod or
congregation of Israel (or the pure and initiated in the secret
doctrine). It experiences a desire after the Holy One only when it
becomes filled with the spirit of righteousness and then is made
fruitful in goodness and then union with the Divine is a source of the
greatest joy and delight, that has been thus expressed by a writer. 'The
Holy One then comes forth and takes delight in the company of the souls
of just men made perfect.' Observe that the children of the garden of
Eden, or the Edenic race of beings, became human only after Noah, the
Just One, had entered the ark, or in other words had become
incorporated. Until that happened, they were invisible and unmanifested
as humanity which would never have been able to exist as at present on
the earth plane unless Noah had entered the ark (of incarnation) and
given birth and origin to offspring, subjected to the laws of evolution
and development that generate alike both in the celestial and
terrestrial worlds by which it was rendered competent to multiply and
replenish the earth. Such is the occult meaning of the oracular words
'Drink waters out of thy cistern and running waters or streams out of
thy well.'"

"And the earth also was corrupt before God" (Alhim) (Gen. vi., 11). Said
Rabbi Jehuda, "Scripture states that the earth was also corrupt and then
adds, 'before the Alhim.' Why so? It was in order to show the men of
that generation then existent on the earth lived in violation both of
natural and moral law,--that their wickedness was flagrant and open
before man and God."

Said Rabbi Jose: "I think otherwise. The words signify, that men
committed crimes secretly and known only to Alhim and that only by their
enormity and heinousness did they manifest to everyone. The words 'these
are the generations of Noah' apply equally to mankind who before the
advent of Noah lived in open wickedness and to his posterity whose sin
was in secret."

Said Rabbi Abba: "From the time of Adam's transgression of the divine
commands all his descendents were called

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

sons or children of Adam, not as a term of honor, but as a
characteristic of birth from an ancestor who by his disobedience had
broken the divine law. When Noah appeared in the world, men were termed
the sons of Noah, an honorable distinction, as being the offspring of
him who preserved the human race from extinction and not of Adam whose
sin caused it to disappear by bringing death into the world to every
soul."

Said Rabbi Jose in objection to this statement: "If this were really
true, wherefore is it written 'And the Lord came down to see the city
and the tower which the children of Adam builded' (Gen. xi., 5), the
sons or children of Adam and not of Noah and who were living after the
time of the deluge.'"<span class="margnote">60b-61a</span>

Said Rabbi Abba in reply: "Through his disobedience it would have been
better for Adam had he not been created, as all who like him become
transgressors of the law are denominated 'sons of Adam,' not because
deriving their birth from him but as being transgressors as he was, and
such were the builders of the tower of Babel. Now may we gather why
scripture uses the word Aleh (these are the generations) to distinguish
the difference existing [between](errata.htm#30) the Adamic and Noachic
races of mankind. The generations of Noah were now no longer termed the
sons of Adam, but the sons of Noah who introduced into and brought them
forth out of the ark in order to re-people the world. Adam did not bring
forth children or sons out of the garden of Eden, for had he done so
they would have been immortal or extra human. Then also would not the
light of the moon have become diminished and the work of creation would
have endured everlastingly. Even the highest angels themselves would not
have equalled man in the endowment of celestial light, beauty of form
and wisdom as it is written, 'In the image of Alhim created He him'
(Gen. 1. 27). But the children of Adam, begotten after his expulsion
from the garden of Eden, were both mortal and unworthy."

Said Rabbi Hezekiah: "How was it possible for Adam to beget offspring in
the garden of Eden, as it is certain, the tempter would have had no
power over him and he would have remained childless in the world, even
as Israel if they had not sinned by worshipping the golden calf, would
have remained unique as a race and would not have given birth to another
generation?" Said Rabbi Abba in reply: "My contention is this. If Adam
had not sinned he would not have engendered and begotten offspring under
the influence of the tempter (sexual desire), but of the Holy Spirit
(the Higher Self). After the fall, his offspring

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

begotten under the influence of animal sexual propensities, were mortal,
not being pure and unalloyed in their origin and constitution but
compounded of the animal and spiritual. If however he had not fallen and
remained in the garden of Eden, he would have begot offspring entirely
spiritual and who in their constitution would have been as pure and
immortal as the angels and other celestial beings. The children born
after his expulsion from Eden enjoyed only a temporary and ephemeral
existence up to the appearance of Noah who, after entering the<span
class="margnote">61a</span> ark (of incarnation) and by his righteous
living becoming united with his Higher Self, was then able to produce
offspring that eventually spread themselves throughout all parts of the
earth, leaving behind a posterity that will survive to the end of the
world.

Said Rabbi Hiya: "It is written, 'And God saw their works, that they
turned from their evil way' ([Jonah](errata.htm#31) III. 10). Observe,
when men become upright and obey the dictates of the good law, the earth
itself changes and acquires a virtue to administer to the enjoyment and
happiness of mankind, as then the Schekina or that divine something
termed life that operates in all organic and inorganic creatures and by
its attractive power binds together the mundane and heavenly sphere, the
harmony between which, results in peace and joy. On the contrary, when
sin and wrongdoing prevail, this divine life and influence is banished
from the earth, which becomes itself infected and desolate and infertile
through the evil influence that then pervades it. But if Israel sins,
which God forbid, scripture states that then Alhim quits the earth and
ascends into heaven (Ps. [LXII](errata.htm#32) 6) and also gives the
reason thereof, 'because they have prepared a net for my feet. My soul
is bowed down through their iniquity; which words are expressive of a
degree of wickedness similar to that of the antediluvians. If it be
asked, do they apply equally to Jerusalem? Doth the Schekina forsake it
when men become corrupted? for we have been taught that it is under the
special care and protection of the Holy One who has chosen it for his
habitation, so that no other spirit or celestial chief reigns and rules
in the land of Israel. Notwithstanding this, we affirm that it comes to
pass that an evil spirit or influence visits it and corrupts the
dwellers therein. How know we this? From King David of whom it is
written, 'And David beheld the angel of the Lord standing between' the
earth and the heaven having a drawn sword in his hand stretched over
Jerusalem' (I. Chron. XXI. 16), owing to the land of Israel having
become corrupted by evil."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII.](zdm052)
