[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm004)  [Next](zdm006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote">3b</span>

### THE INITIATION OF RABBI HIYA.

Bereshith, "In the beginning," said Rabbi Ionda, "what is the
signification of this mystical word? It is hochma--wisdom, that wisdom
by which the world was formed and still subsists. Like a globe it
includes the six directions of space, viz., north, south, east and west,
high and low, from which emanate six streams of existence, all of which
flow at last into the great ocean of primal life. Another occult
signification of Bereshith is this, Bara sith (he created six) and who
was he? Though not mentioned, it was the mysterious though ineffable,
the great unknown."

Rabbi Hiya and Rabbi Jose were walking together in the country and when
they reached their destination, said Rabbi Hiya: "This occult meaning of
bereshith is undoubtedly correct, since we find in the Book of Genesis
that the creation of all things occurred and took place in six days and
not more. In an ancient occult work on Genesis we have found many
references to this account. Thus, the holy one at first formed a point
in which was included and concealed, as in a palace, the forms or
prototypes of all created things. Now though the palace contains them,
the key of it is the most essential thing which closes and opens it.
This palace, the world, is the receptacle or casket in which are
enclosed many wonderful and secret mysteries, it has fifty gateways, ten
on each of its four sides, nine opening heavenward and one, of which
nothing definite is known about it, and it is therefore termed '*The
Mysterious Gate*.' There is also one kind of lock to all these gates and
one key alone opens and closes them and gives entrance into the palace
and the treasures therein. Bereshith, bara Alhim, these words are the
palace, and Bereshith is the key that conceals or opens up their
mysterious meanings. It opens and shuts, it reveals or obscures.
Bereshith contains an opening word, shith, and a closing word, bara."

Said Rabbi Jose: "Truly this is so, and I have myself heard the master,
Rabbi Simeon, say that this occult word bara closes but does not open,
and thus explained it.

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

"Ere the world became fixed and established, it was wrapped and
enshrouded in darkness and chaos reigned supreme <span
class="margnote">3b-4a</span> and as long as it endured, the world was
Tohu (without form and solidity). When this key opened the gates, it
became adapted for the generation and production of living beings. When
was this? When Abraham came, as it is written: '*These (Aleh) are the
generations of the heavens and the earth, behibaram*'<span
class="margnote">Gen. 2:4</span> (when they were created) which word is
au anagram of beabraham (by Abraham). The creation was brought about by
the transposing of the letters of the concealing word, bara, into Abar,
the sacred principle on which the world was founded and continues to
subsist. Mi was the first aspect of the mysterious unknown who, when
bara was transposed into Abr, created Alh (these). To Abr he took and
joined the letter H, forming Abrh, to Alh. He took and joined I, forming
Alhi, then of the two component letters of Mi, he took and added M to
each of them and thus were formed Alhim and Abraham. Another explanation
of the forming of these names is as follows:

"The holy one took Mi and joined it to Alh and this formed Alhim. He
also took Mah, and joining it to Abr, formed Abraham. Now the name Mi
(50) has reference to the fifty gates of Binah, the third sephira, and
in it is also I, the first letter in the Shem Hamphorah or holy name
IHVH, and Mah has also reference to the divine name, for the H thereof
is the second letter in it. So the two worlds were formed, by I the
world to come through H the present world through Mi, the world on high,
through Mah the world below. But until the name of Abraham was formed,
there was no generation of living creatures and things, and this
explains what is written, Aleh produced the generations of the heaven
and the earth bi-Abraham; that is, when the name of Abraham was formed,
as it is written '*In that day the Lord God made the earth and the
heavens*.'"

Rabbi Hiya prostrated himself on the earth and kissing it, exclaimed:
"Oh, earth, earth! how hard and unfeeling art thou! In thee lies buried
everything delighting the eyes. All the lights of learning and wisdom
thou causest to disappear and vanish from the world. How unfeeling thou
art. The great master and teacher, the one shining light of the world,
by which it was enlightened, has returned to the dust and now lies
concealed in thee, even Rabbi Simeon thou hidest him and all things
become subject to thee at last. Overwhelmed with emotion, for a moment
he became speechless. Again he cried, earth! earth! exult

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

thou not, for now I see the great masters of light are not delivered
into thy hands, for Rabbi Simeon yet lives, and with eyes filled with
tears of joy, Rabbi Hiya went on his way and Rabbi Jose was with him.
For forty days he fasted that he might see Rabbi Simeon, but it was said
to him: "It is not possible for thee to behold him." Then fasted he
other forty days, at the end of which he saw as in a vision Rabbi
Simeon, with Rabbi Eleazar his son, studying and meditating upon the
words upon which Rabbi Jose had discoursed. They were surrounded by a
multitude of listening and attentive students. <span
class="margnote">4a</span> Anon he observed mighty angelic beings, who
descended from on high, taking Rabbi Simeon, and Eleazar, his son, with
them, wended their way again upwards to the celestial school, where,
when they arrived, they all became arrayed with garments of dazzling
splendor, whiter and more glittering than the light of the sun.

Then spake Rabbi Simeon, and said: "Let Rabbi Hiya come up hither and
behold how great joys the holy one hath prepared for the just and
upright in the world to come. Blessed the lot of him who cometh hither
with a pure heart and mind, blessed also are they who in the world abide
steadfast and firm and unmoved as pillars of right and truth." Rabbi
Hiya then ascended and after making obeisance to Rabbi Eleazar and the
masters who were standing to receive and welcome him, went and sat down
at the feet of Rabbi Simeon. A voice resounded and said: "Close thy eyes
and bow thy head, so that thy mind may not be distracted or disturbed."
He closed his eyes and there was, as it were, a great light shining afar
off and another voice was heard saying: "Ye heavenly beings, high and
exalted ones, who unseen and invisible to mortal vision, visit the
world, attend ye! Teachers of the mysteries who in your
[lonely](errata.htm#4) hermitages are sleeping, awaken ye! attend, as
also those who before coming hither, have turned darkness into light and
made bitter to become sweet, waiting and longing for the dawning of the
day when the king should visit his loved ones, in and by whom he shall
be glorified and hailed as the King of kings and Lord of lords. Such
only have the right and privilege to be present here."

Then Rabbi Hiya saw his fellow students standing around the, masters and
they wended their way to the celestial school. Some were ascending and
others descending thither, and at their head was the great winged angel
of the presence (Metatron), who was saying he had heard in the palace on
high that the king,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

visits everyday and does not forget his lone and loved ones who are
struggling towards the higher life unnoticed and unregarded by the
world. At that moment three hundred and ninety worlds trembled and shook
as with an earthquake. Stars as of fire descended from on high and fell
into the great sea, whose ruler then stood up and swore by him that
lives forever, that he would dry up all the waters of creation if ever
the world and its powers should gather themselves against the children
of light to destroy them.

As he ceased speaking, Rabbi Hiya heard a voice from heaven exclaiming:
"Fall back! make room for the King Messiah coming to the school of Rabbi
Simeon, whose students are all initiates and master teachers of the
secret doctrine." Then came Messiah and visited all the celestial
schools and confirmed the teachings and expositions of the mysteries
given by their appointed instructors. As he entered the great assembly
crowned with many crowns, all the great masters rose up and saluted.
Turning to Rabbi Simeon, the emanation of whose light reached up to
heaven, Messiah spake and said: "Blessed art thou, Rabbi Simeon, for thy
mystic teachings are of the highest worth and valued and cherished by
all. They only, along with those of Hesekiah, King of Judah, and Achiya,
the Solonite, are marked and sealed with the approval of the holy one. I
have come hither because I know that the angel of the presence visits no
other school save yours."

As he ceased speaking, Rabbi Simeon raised his hand and repeated the vow
of the angel of the great sea. Then spake Messiah words which made the
heavens, the ocean and Great Leviathan tremble, fearing that the world
was about to be destroyed and annihilated. Beholding Rabbi Hiya at the
feet of Rabbi Simeon, "Who!" said he, "who has brought hither one clad
in garments of the lower world?" "It is Rabbi Hiya," replied Rabbi
Simeon, "a student skilled in the science of the mysteries." "Let him
then, together with his son, be enrolled as members of thy school." "I
pray thee," said Rabbi Simeon again, "that time may be granted for due
preparation." The request was granted and Rabbi Hiya overwhelmed with
feelings of joy, went forth exclaiming: "Blessed is the lot of the just
in heaven, blessed also the lot of Rabbi Simeon ben Jochai, to whom<span
class="margnote">4a-4b</span> the words of the scripture may be applied:
'*I cause those that love me to be blest with substance, and I will fill
their treasures*.'"<span class="margnote">Prov. 8:21</span>

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

The following affecting and descriptive account of Rabbi Hiya's decease
is not found in some of the early editions of the Zohar and is probably
an interpolation from an ancient Kabbalistic work no longer extant.

Rabbi Hiya, perceiving the end of life approaching, exclaimed: "Return,
my soul to thy home on high! Thou spark divine of heavenly flame, quit
thou this mortal frame. Fearing, trembling, hoping the time has come for
thee to mount up to the mansions of light and life. Sweet angelic voices
are calling me. My strength is failing, my eyes grow dim; I cease to
breathe; the earth is disappearing and heaven opens on my eyes.
Me-thinks I hear the fluttering of angel wings. Ah! what do I see'? The
tree of life radiating a perfume that fills the azure vault of heaven
itself. I see descending the mystic heavenly dove. I recognize King
Messiah, whom I saw in Rabbi Simeon's school. Oh! ye angelic beings,
lend me your wings, that I may mount on high to meet him. Oh, my soul!
can this be death'? How vain the fear and dread of the transports of
ecstatic bliss and joys its presence brings! Oh, grave! where is thy
victory? Oh, death! where is thy sting?"

A moment, and his soul had taken its flight--the life of Rabbi Hiya had
ended.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Mysterious Stranger](zdm006)
