[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm045)  [Next](zdm047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "OF THE PATRIARCH HENOCH AND THE SIN OF THE ANTEDILUVIANS."

Said Rabbi Jose: "Whilst the king sitteth at his table (bimsibo) my
spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof" (Cant. i., 12). This verse
has already been explained, but there is yet another interpretation
worth noting. Whenever a man walks with and cleaves unto the Alhim as
did Henoch, the Holy One, foreseeing his liability to decline in
goodness and uprightness,

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

arranges to take him out of the world whilst the perfume of his good
deeds endures. This was the case with Henoch. The words, 'Whilst the
king,' refer to the Holy One; 'at his table,' allude to the man who
walks and cleaves unto him; whilst the words 'my spikenard sendeth forth
the smell thereof, denote the good deeds for which he is taken out of
the world and thus escapes and avoids falling into sin. And this is why
King Solomon said: 'There are just and upright men who suffer affliction
as if they had committed evil deeds and are taken away.' There are also
unjust men who live to a good age granted unto them by the Holy
One,<span class="margnote">56b-57a</span> that they may repent and turn
unto him. Henoch was just and walked with the Alhim and he was not, and
Alhim took him, for God foresaw that he would ultimately become a
transgressor of the law and that this might not be; he was taken from
the world before his appointed time. By the words, 'he was not,' is
meant that he died whilst he was comparatively young."

Said Rabbi Eleazar: "The Holy One took Henoch away from the evil of the
world, into the celestial regions on high, and imparted unto him the
secret knowledge of the highest mysteries and of the forty-nine keys
necessary for understanding the various combinations of the sacred
letters, and which the angels themselves make use of. It is written,
'And God saw that the wickedness of men upon the earth was great and all
the imaginations and thoughts of their hearts were only evil
continually.' (Gen. vi., 5.)

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "'Thou art not a God that hath pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee' (Ps. v., 5). Observe
that he who gives way to the temper and suffers himself to be led and
guided by it, defiles not only himself but also those with whom he comes
into personal contact. As already stated, though the wickedness of the
antediluvians was great and their evil deeds were many, yet was the Holy
One unwilling to destroy them, but long-suffering towards them,
notwithstanding, and their shameful propensities and heinous practices,
of which it is written 'that they were only evil continually.' Their
evil actions are denoted by the word (Ra) (pollution). Of Er, the eldest
son of Judah, who was guilty of this sin; it is written that 'he was
wicked in the sight of the Lord and the Lord slew him.'" (Gen.
[xxxviii](errata.htm#29)., 7.)

Said Rabbi Jose: "Is not this sin synonymous with what is termed rashang
(wickedness or wrongdoing)?"

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

"No," replied Rabbi Jehuda, "for rashang is applied to intentional<span
class="margnote">57a</span> evil ere it becomes an actuality, but Ra
refers to him who defiles himself by the dissipation of his vital powers
and thus gives himself up to the unclean spirit called Ra. He who thus
renders himself impure will never attain unto the Divine Life nor behold
the face of the Shekina, whose disappearance from the world previous to
the deluge was owing to the vice termed Ra. Woe unto him who indulges in
it, for he will never experience the joy of living in the presence of
the Holy One, but will drag on through life as a degraded captive and
miserable slave of Ra, the unclean spirit; so true are the words, 'The
fear of the Lord leadeth to life, it bringeth peaceful nights free from
visits of the impure spirit Ra' (Prov. xix., 23). And therefore it is
written, 'Evil (Ra) shall not dwell with thee' (Ps. v., 4). Only the
pure in life and thought and deed can say, 'Yea though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will not be afraid of Ra, for thou
art with me and causest me to dwell in the house of the Lord forever.'"
(Ps. xxiii., 4-6.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII. The Divine Compassion](zdm047)
