[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm001)  [Next](zdm003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

<span class="margnote">1a</span>

# THE SEPHER HA-ZOHAR;

###### OR,

## THE BOOK OF LIGHT.

Containing the doctrines of Kabbalah, together with the discourses and
teachings of its author, the Kabbalist, Rabbi ben Simeon, and now for
the first time translated into English, with notes, references and
expository remarks.

## BY NURHO DE MANHAR.

### INTRODUCTION.

#### THE LILY.

THE students of Rabbi Simeon were assembled together and sitting in
silence, waiting for the master to begin his discourse. At length Rabbi
Simeon spake, and said: "As a lily amongst the thorns."<span
class="margnote">Cant. 2:2</span> This word lily, what doth it mean and
symbolize? It symbolizes the congregation of Israel; and as lilies are
either red or white in color, so the members of this congregation are
divided into two classes, distinguished by their rigorous justice and
uprightness, or by their gentleness, kindness and compassion. These are
environed about with thirteen ways or degrees of mercy, as the lily has
thirteen leaves surrounding it on all sides. Furthermore, intervening
between the first and second Elohim or Alhim, mentioned in Genesis, are
thirteen words corresponding to these thirteen leaves of the lily and
the degrees of mercy surrounding the congregation of Israel. The divine
name Alhim is mentioned again, and wherefore? In order to show the
symbolic meaning of the five strong leaves which surround the lily, the
occult meaning of which has reference to the five ways of salvation,
corresponding to five gates of mercy. Respecting this mystery of five,
it is written: "I will take the cup of salvation,"<span
class="margnote">Ps. 116:13</span> which is the cup of blessing, and
which must stand or repose upon five fingers only, similar to the lily
supported and sustained by its five strong leaves. For this reason the
lily symbolizes the cup of blessing, as there are five words between the
second and the third Alhim

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

mentioned in the Book of Genesis. One of these words is A U R, meaning
light. This light was treated and became enclosed as an embyro in the
*Berith*, or covenant, and, entering into the lily as a principle of
life, <span class="margnote">1a-1b</span> made it fruitful, and this is
what is called in Scripture "fruit tree, yielding fruit whose seed is in
itself";<span class="margnote">Gen. 1:29</span> and as this life
principle, entering into the *Berith*, caused itself to become
manifested in forty-two kinds of second matter, so has it produced the
*Shemhamphorash*, the great and ineffable divine name of God, composed
of forty-two letters, which operated in the creation of the world.

#### THE REDEMPTION OF HUMANITY.

Rabbi Simeon spake again: "The Flowers appear on the earth."<span
class="margnote">Cant. 2:12</span> By flowers is signified the
appearance of created beings on the earth. When did they appear? On the
third day, when it is written: "The earth first brought forth." Then the
flowers appeared on that day. "The time of singing or of commingled
voices and cries and noises is come," indicates the fourth day of
creation, in which took place the excision of the Aretzim (the terrible
one, or demons). For this reason the word Moroth (lights) is found
without V and written M A R Th, meaning curse, or malediction. "The
voice of the turtle" refers to the fifth day, when it is written: "The
waters brought forth abundantly, and etc.," for the generation of
created beings. On the sixth day it was said: "Let us make man," who in
after-time would say: "Let us hear, before let us do or make." "In our
land" is meant the Sabbath, symbol or type of the land of life, the
world of spirits or souls, the world of resurrections or rising up to a
higher life. "The flowers" were the fathers or pitris whose souls
pre-existed in the Divine Thought, and, entering into the world to come,
became concealed and hidden therein. From thence they came forth,
becoming incarnated in prophets of truth. When Joseph was born they were
concealed and unrecognized in him, and when he entered into the holy
land he presided over them and ruled there; so then they became known.
When did this occur? To this question Scripture gives answer: when the
Iris, or rainbow, first appeared in the world. Then was the time of the
excision or cutting of the brutal and savage and sinful from the face of
the earth. Why, then, did they not perish? Why were they preserved?
Because the flowers then

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

appeared on the earth. If they had not appeared, they, the brutal and
sinful ones, would have become extinct and the world would have ceased
its existence. Who, then, established the world and caused the fathers
to appear? It was the voice or cry of the *little ones*, or students of
the law, and it was owing to them that the world now subsists.

#### EXPLANATORY NOTES AND REMARKS.

In these two first sections of the introduction to the Zohar are
abstruse intimations and references to the doctrine of Light, which
enters so largely as an element in the systems of ancient Eastern
philosophy, especially that of the Persians, with whom the Jews had at
one time such intimate relations. Light is the primal emanation of the
Divine, from which and by which all things visible and invisible have
originated. From out of that Light have they all come forth, and into it
will they return when the great drama of existence is completed and the
tragedy of life comes to an end. Meanwhile the Light that enlighteneth
every man that cometh into the world to play each his or her part, is
accessible to all, irrespective of artificial conditions or the
distinctions of human society. Upon our own measure of receptivity of it
depends our inner development and evolution to higher planes of life; of
loftier, clearer and more accurate views of truth that free us from the
influence of external contaminations by purifying and spiritualizing the
animal or lower nature within us. It is the one heritage common alike to
king or peasant, noble or ignoble, learned or illiterate, rich or poor,
and he who is endowed with and knows most of it ranks higher in the
scale of existence and approximates nearer and closer to the Divine, in
whom we all live and move and have life, whether we use it for the good
and happiness of others or trifle and fritter it away as foolish
spendthrifts who are ignorant of the value and worth of money. It was
this Light that the great German, Goethe, in his last words, craved and
desired: "Light! More Light!" And this is the Light that Rabbi Simeon
refers to all through the pages of this remarkable book, in which we
shall meet with many allusions to it of great interest, both to the
general and the theosophic reader. Kabbalists affirm that there were
thirty-two Alhim engaged in the work of creation as executors of the
divine will. They correspond to the Dhyan Chohans

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

in Hindu philosophy. By the lily, with thirteen leaves, is occultly
meant the twelve avatars, or incarnations, of divine messengers, six of
whom are Cabiri, ministers of karmic justice for the chastisement of
nations; and six of them are Messiahs; their emblem is a lily, whose
color is white, as seen in ancient paintings of The Annunciation, in
which the Angel Gabriel holds a lily in his hand. The thirteenth is
their great chief and lord, by whom they have been trained and
commissioned and sent forth on the great work of spiritual enlightenment
of the nations. In Eastern philosophy he is known as the "Great
Sacrifice," the "Silent Watcher," who will not vacate his post until the
last scion of humanity, agonizing and struggling with its weakness and
infirmities to overcome self and accomplish its destiny, finds its way
to him at last. We have also here hints of the state of mankind in its
primary stages, when the cry of the Atzerim, the terrible or terrorizing
ones, resounded on the earth, and which lasted until the *fathers*, or
divine teachers, came and led humanity on to the upward track of light
and civilization. Then the world became steadied or established, and
students of the divine law of the universe and of the divine government
of humanity became numerous, their voices and teachings going out unto
the ends of the world; and then, as it is written: "Great was the
company of the preachers" of truth and righteousness.

By the "little ones" are meant student initiates, of which class St.
Paul was one. Before his initiation his name was called Saul, but after
his initiateship be became known as Paulus--the little one. There are
various other expositions of these two sections by Kabbalists, but so
abstrusely worded and expressed in metaphysical terms and language that
none but those who have a wide and extended knowledge of Hebrew and its
cognate language would be able to understand and appreciate them.

For greater elucidation and a clearer understanding of the Briatic or
creative Alhim, we give them in their order as set forth in Kabbalistic
writings:

\(1\) In the beginning Alhim created. (2) And the spirit of Alhim
hovered or brooded. (3) And Alhim said: "Let there be light." (4) And
Alhim saw the light. (5) And Alhim divided between the light. (6) And
Alhim called the light *Day*. (7) And Alhim said: "Let there be a
firmament." (S) And Alhim made the firmament. (9) And Alhim called the
firmament *Heaven*. (10) Alhim said: "Let the waters he gathered
together."

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (11) Alhim called
the dry land *Earth*. (12) And Alhim saw it was good. (13) Alhim said:
"Let the earth bring forth." (14) And Alhim saw it was good. (15) And
Alhim said: "Let there be lights." (16) Alhim made two lights. (17) And
Alhim placed them in the firmament of the heavens. (18) And Alhim saw it
was good. (19) Alhim said: "Let the waters bring forth." (20) Alhim
created the whales. (21) And Alhim saw it was good. (22) And Alhim
blessed them, saying: "Be fruitful and multiply." (23) Alhim said: "Let
the earth bring forth." (24) Alhim made the beasts of the earth. (25)
And Alhim saw it was good. (26) Alhim said: "Let us make man." (27) And
Alhim created the man. (28) In the form or image of Alhim created he
him. (29) Alhim blessed them. (30) Alhim said: "Be fruitful and
multiply." (31) Alhim said: "Behold! l have given to you." (32) And
Alhim saw all that he had made.

The English equivalents of the thirteen words intervening between the
first and second Alhim are as follows: The heavens, the earth, earth was
Tohu vabohu, darkness upon face, abyss (or great deep) Spirit. The five
words between the second and third Alhim are: "Hovered, upon, face,
waters, said."

The expression, "Congregation of Israel," in the first instance, refers
to the first born sons of Light, or, as they are termed in the Book of
Job, the morning stars, who, along with the Sons of Alhim, sang their
song of praise at the creation of the world. In an extended sense, it
includes the true children of light who have attained unto the Divine
Life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Occult Origin of Alhim](zdm003)
