[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm055)  [Next](zdm057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "A VEXATA QUESTIO IN BIBLICAL PHILOLOGY."

The stranger began speaking again. "Know you," said he, "why the sacred
name I. H. V. H. is found mentioned in the verse, "Then Jehovah rained
upon Sodom and Gomorrah brimstone and fire from heaven" (Gen. XIX. 24)
instead of the divine name Alhim which is exclusively used in connection
with the account of the deluge? Listen to the explanation handed down by
tradition through the masters of the Secret Doctrine. Wherever the name
Jehovah is found in Scripture it designates the Holy One sitting and
presiding over the members of his executive tribunal of justice. But
when Alhim is used, it refers to his tribunal only. At the destruction
of these two cities involving but a small part of the world, Jehovah
acted along

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

with his judicial executive whilst at the deluge when the whole world
perished only the members of it were concerned in carrying out the
divine decrees. If it is objected, that the whole world of human beings
was not destroyed, inasmuch as Noah and his family were preserved from
perishing, what differentiates the punishment of the deluge from that
inflicted upon Sodom and Gomorrah. Our reply is, that Noah by his entry
and inclusion in the ark became sequestered from mankind as a whole
which was destroyed by the operation of the Alhim, whilst the overthrow
of the cities of the plain was accomplished openly by Jehovah in concert
with His celestial tribunal.

The mystery of this difference is referred to in the words "the Lord was
seated at the time of the flood" (Ps. XXIX. 10). What does the word
yeshab (was seated) really mean? but that He was alone and by himself at
the time the deluge occurred; which interpretation unless corroborated
by other texts in scripture, we would not have dared to apply to the
Divine Being and therefore conclude that the Holy One was not conjoined
with the members of his justiciary tribunal, the Alhim in the
destruction of the world by the deluge. That this view is correct is
further proved by the use of the word yasheb in Lev. XIII, 46. "He shall
dwell alone (yasheb) without the camp shall be his habitation." Thus it
was that Noah hidden in the ark, escaped the general destruction and
after divine justice had been appeased, we read that then the Alhim
remembered or thought of Noah (Gen. VIII. 1). From these remarks we
infer that the Holy One punishes sometimes openly and sometimes in
secret, openly when acting with and through the Alhim whose jurisdiction
extends over and throughout the world--secretly when sitting in that
celestial sphere whence descends all the blessings of heaven. Knowing
this we can understand why the precious goods a man hides are sources of
blessings, whilst those that are visible and perceived by all excite
envy and covetousness through the influence of the demon known as
*Ra-ain* (evil eye)." <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6)

As the stranger ceased speaking Rabbi Jose was delighted and exclaimed,
"blessed are we students of Rabbi Simeon through whose teachings and
instruction we have been able to understand and comprehend what has just
been imparted to us. Truly this stranger has been divinely directed and
sent to<span class="margnote">64b</span> instruct us in the Secret
Doctrine concerning truths and teachings

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

the most ennobling and sublime." On reaching the dwelling of Rabbi
Simeon they related to him all that the stranger has said unto them
whereon after listening to them he replied, "well and truly hath the
stranger spoken."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[271:1](zdm056.htm#fr_6) This opinion is
frequently expressed in the Talmud: see [Tract Baba](errata.htm#40)
Bathra fol. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII. Kabbalistic Explanation of the Goat
Azazel](zdm057)
