[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm074)  [Next](zdm076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

### "THE MYSTERY OF THE LOGOS."

The three [primordial](errata.htm#52) elements of nature are fire, air
and water.<span class="margnote">this section omitted from
Soncino</span> Really they are one in use and substance and are able to
change the one into the other. It is the same with Thought and Speech
and Logos, they are one and the same in themselves. Their seeming
duality arises from the different aspects in which they are observed and
cognized. That Jacob might become a perfect man it was necessary that
the Divine Being should manifest himself to him by the Word or Logos,
even as a man in order to make known his thoughts and ideas to another
is obliged to clothe them with words in order that the sound produced by
the motion of his lips may make them known to his listener, otherwise
they would remain unknown and he incommunicable, so in order that the
sanctuary of God might exist upon earth, it needed manifestation by
means of a Word or Logos, through which it might communicate and speak
to mankind. Scripture therefore states, whilst the house was building
itself, and not whilst it was building, alluding mystically to the
manner of divine manifestation by the Logos in the world. The mystery of
the erection of the temple is hinted at in the words, 'Go forth ye
daughters of Zion and behold King Solomon with the crown wherewith his
mother crowned him on the day of his espousals' (Cant. III. 11).
Respecting the stones used in building the sanctuary, it is said of them
they were 'prepared' (massang) which also signifies 'carried or
transported thither or taken from one place to another.' As thought
existing in the Sphere of Mind becomes transformed into vocal speech by
descending into the larynx, the ultimate stage for its manifestation in
its downward flight from on high, so is it with the Divine Word or Logos
and its silent entrance in the mind and soul of man, descending from on
high through inferior degrees and states or worlds of being, each
working and operating in harmony with it under the control of the great
supreme ruler and architect of the universe, and each obedient to the
law of evolution for the accomplishment of its destiny, unification with
the Divine. Slowly and in silence, the innumerable majestic worlds
careering in their orbits throughout the boundless realms of space under
the dominance and guidance of an almighty principle of unity, are
progressing and approximating to one Divine center, so that unified and
conjoined in harmony, they may form an universal temple wherein all
souls may worship

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

and serve the one true God, the Almighty Father, the great All,<span
class="margnote">74b</span> and within all who then shall reign forever
and ever and to his Kingdom there shall be no end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVII. The Idolatry Of The Postdiluvians](zdm076)
