[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm009)  [Next](zdm011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

# THE BOOK OF LIGHT.

Containing the doctrines of the Kabbalah, together with the discourses
and teachings of its author, the great Kabbalist, Rabbi Simeon ben
Jochai, and now for the first time translated into English with notes,
references, and expository remarks.

## BY NURHO DE MANHAR.

### SECTION I. GENESIS. (CREATION)

"BRASHITH." "In the beginning" was En Soph,<span
class="margnote">15a</span> the Divine, the self-existent infinite
begin, without likeness or reflection, the incomprehensible, the
unknowable One, the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords. who only hath immortality, dwelling in Light which no man
can approach unto, whom no man hath seen or can see, before whom the
great archangel with face beneath his wings bends in lowly reverence and
adoration, crying, "Holy! Holy! Holy! who art and was and evermore shall
be."

Tune had begun. Its great pendulum, whose beats are the ages, commenced
to vibrate. The era of creation or manifestation had at last arrived.
The nekuda reshima, primal point or nucleus, appeared. From it emanated
and expanded the primary substance, the illimitable phosphorescent
ether, of the nature of light, formless, colorless, being neither black
nor green nor red. In it, latent yet potentially as in a mighty womb,
lay the myriad prototypes and numberless forms of all created things as
yet indiscernible, indistinguishable. By the secret and silent action of
the divine will, from this primal luminous point radiated forth the
vital life-giving spark which, pervading and operating in the great,
enteric ocean of forms, became the soul of the universe, the fount and
origin of all mundane life and motion and terrestrial existence, and in
its nature and essence and secret operation remains ineffable,
incomprehensible and indefinable. It has been conceived of as the divine
Logos, the Word, and called Brashith, for the same was in the beginning
with God.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (All things were
made by him, and without him was not anything made that was made. In him
was life, and the life became the light of man.)

"They that understand (the secret doctrine) shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament; and they who turn or lead many into the
might path (of knowledge) as the stars forever and ever." (Dan. xii. 3.)
The word zohar (brightness) designates that nekuda reshima, the central
ray or point of light which was the primal manifestation of the Divine,
En Soph. From it proceeded vibrations which made luminous the
illimitable ether, from which was formed the universe that became the
glorious temple or palace of the great Unknown. It was in a manner the
holy seed or germ that gave origin and birth to the world, and is
occultly referred to in the words: "The holy seed shall be the substance
thereof." (Is. vi. 13.) Its analogue in nature is the silkworm which,
unseen and in secret, elaborates and prepares a product that ultimately
constitutes the material of the monarch's purple robe of splendor.
Furthermore, for the manifestation of the glory of the divine Unknown to
humanity, making use of verbal terms and letters, it has built for it
the name<span class="margnote">15a-15b</span> alhim, or lord, as
evidenced in the mystic sense of brashith bara alhim. "In the beginning,
alhim created"; or, as it should be rendered by rushith, that is the
primal zohar, the origin of all words, "God created alhim." The use of
the word bara (created) need not excite surprise, for it occurs again in
the words: "And he created alhim, the man, in his image." (Gen. i. 27.)
This zohar, their, denotes the mysterious. One called brashith because
the beginning of all things. In answer to the desire of Moses to know
the name of the divine Being, it was given AHIH ASHR AHIH, "I am that or
who I am." The sacred name AHIH is as a two-sided figure, whilst the
name alhim is as a crown; and asher formed of the same letters as the
word rash (head or crown) is a synonym of alhim and proceeds or comes
forth from brashith. Whilst the primal zohar or divine ray of life was
quiescent and unmanifested it was impossible for it to become known by
any word or term whatsoever. But after operating in the boundless ether,
the receptacle of all forms and prototypes of created things in the
universe that was to be, then asher, representing the divine essence,
took upon itself the form of a head or crown (rash) between the two
AHIH's of the divine appellation, AHIH asher AHIH. Observe now, that the
word brashith is composed of rash (crown), synonym of asher, and beth
(house

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

or palace). Hence the occult signification or rendering of the words
"Brashith bara Alhim" is this: When rash the divine germ from which
emanated and expanded the boundless ether appeared, and this ether
became differentiated into form and color giving rise to the universe or
palace of the great king, then was created alhim the great secret
fructifying principle of nature, which was and is as a point that gives
rise to lines which produce surfaces, or as the letter yod I, whence
proceed all the other letters of the alphabet.

Again, from another aspect, when zohar the primal luminous point or ray
gave rise to the emanating ether, it took. upon itself the form of the
vowels holem (  ‏ֹ‎  ) shurek (  ‏ּ‎  ) and hirek (  ‏ִ‎  ) which are
different dispositions of the one and same elementary point in their
esoteric meaning.

When the primal vibration of the divine word took place it produced and
impressed a wavelike motion throughout the boundless ether in which were
contained all the sounds of the alphabet from A to Th. This operation
and effect is symbolized by the union of these two letters forming the
word ath as it is found written ath ha-shamayim (the heavens). Thus:
Brashith bara Alhim ath hashamayim signify: He, the unknown mysterious
One, created alhim the fructifying and generative principle of the
heavens, one in origin but dual in operation. Hence it is seen that the
divine word and essence designated by the word asher is found between
the fecundative and generative principles, both of which are symbolized
by the same name AHIH in the divine appellation AHIH asher AHIH.

The Zohar (brightness) also denotes the generative essence and includes
all the letters taken as types and forms of creatures and things in its
operation. Such also is the signification of the verse: "Jehovah, our
God is one Jehovah"<span class="margnote">15b</span> (Deut. vi. 4),
containing three names expressive of the three gradations of the divine
essence, as exhibited in the three first words of Genesis. "Brashith
balm Alhim ath hashamayim." Brashith specifies the mysterious divine
Being; bara, the mystery of creation: alhim, the mystery of
preservation: ath hashamayim, the fructifying and generative principles
considered as one. If to the word ath be added h from the following word
hashamayim (heavens) we get the pronominal term athah (thou)--Alhim, the
divine Being to which the scripture alludes. "Thou ( Athah) givest life
to all creatures." (Nehem. ix. 6). In this deeply mysterious ath,
therefore, is comprehended the divine essence in its fructifying

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

and generative form, and Alhim the point of union between them; and it
may thus be regarded as a mystic analogue, though dimly and obscurely,
of that majestic unknown Being that operated in the creation and
production of the illimitable universe, whose goodness and beneficence
are manifested in the preservation of the world with its myriads of
creatures, who in their fructifying and generative powers and functions
are finite replica of Himself, the "I am that I am." In concluding these
remarks on this first verse in Genesis,<span
class="margnote">15b-16a</span> observe that brashith (in the beginning)
is equivalent to bra-shith (he created six) and refers to the scriptural
words: "From one side of the heaven to the other," that is, to the six
directions of space (north, south, east, west, above, and below), all
converging to the three points representing the divine essence, which
are one and the same, the mystery of which is included and hidden in the
divine name composed of forty-two letters.

"They that are wise shall shine,"<span class="margnote">Dan. 12:3</span>
i.e., those who are initiated into the secret doctrine. They are like
the notes and accents in music by which musicians and singers are guided
and led in their playing and chanting, as troops that follow their
leader and chief. The consonants and vowels are the chief elements in
the formation of words, but the wise alone by their understanding give
life and meaning to them. "Those who turn many into the right way (of
knowledge) shall shine as the stars forever and ever." By the word stars
is meant the signs of punctuation used to separate the parts of a
sentence and render the words intelligible, and thus are teachers and
students of the secret doctrine. who, by their intellectual and
spiritual enlightenment and knowledge of esoteric science. cause earth's
ofttimes weary wandering and belated pilgrims to find the true path of
light that leads them to the higher and diviner life. happy are they
engaged in the work of guiding others into the right way! Around them is
a halo which the prophet Ezekiel beheld in vision encircling the heads
of cherubim, the brightness and refulgence of which shall never become
faded or dimmed but endure forever.

"And the earth was tohu and bohu" (Gen. i. 2), that is, without form and
void. The word "was" relating to the past, is here used to indicate the
primeval state of the earth at the time of its creation. The water
covering the earth was cold as snow and impregnated and contaminated
with mud and debris which by the action of a strong fire congested and
hardened and

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the space or place it occupied in becoming separated from the water was
called Tohu, or the place of waste and dregs, and corresponded to the
evil demons that made it their abode. Bohu, on the contrary, was that
part or portion of the earth that became purified. If it be asked: by
the action of what power was this purification accomplished, the
scripture answers:<span class="margnote">16a</span> "Darkness was upon
the face of the deep." The term darkness refers to the fire or light
which, though of divine origin, existed like a nebulous dark cloud at
the beginning of creation. "And the spirit of God proceeded from the
lord of life and hovered or moved upon the face of the waters." (Gen. i.
2). After impregnating them with the breath of life, and causing them to
become purified and fructified, then from out of the state of Tohu came
forth a great and mighty wind that overthrew mountains and broke into
pieces the rocks, similar in its effects to the sight beheld by the
prophet Elijah, as it is written; "after the wind, an earthquake" (I.
Kings xix. 12), that dispelled the darkness in which was the hidden and
concealed fire that transformed the world from tohu into Bohu, and from
a state of chaos made it receptive of seeds and germs of life. This is
expressed in the words; "and after the fire a still small voice" (I.
Kings xix., 12).

Tohu was thus a state of chaos in which the world existed for ages after
its first creation, enshrouded in darkness and immersed in water. By the
action of fire, in its qualities of heat and flame, and the concomitant
operation of the divine spirit, the constituent elements became
differentiated and each imbued with energies and powers of attraction
and cohesion, as also of repulsion, and thus prepared to be taken up and
used in the elaboration of material forms and bodies in which
pre-existing spiritual entities or beings might incarnate and manifest
themselves in accordance with laws regulating and governing their birth,
growth and development. This preparatory and
[progressive](errata.htm#10) stage in the world's physical history was
what is termed bohu, a state of darkness which was at the same time an
allotrophic form of the divine light that in its infinite modes of
energy and operation pervaded the vast expanse, making it pregnant with
the germs of life that eventually came forth out of the earth's mighty
womb and began their ascent on the spiral curve of evolutionary
existence; until, after aeons of upward struggle and ceaseless endeavor,
they attained their destiny, becoming children of Light, assimilated in
the grandeur of their expanded faculties of mind and heart with the
great Father of Light, the

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy One (blessed
be He), whose love and beneficence to all his creatures are as great as
his power, and who knows neither measure nor end.

"And the spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters"; and then went
forth the fiat of the divine word: "Let there be light and light was"
(Gen. i. 3), light radiant and glittering with a thousand different
colors and rays, fringing and embellishing all objects with a halo and
sheen of beauty and splendor, entering into and informing each atom and
evoking its latent life and energy and exciting it to the display and
exercise of its inherent properties and functions in the great economy
of nature.

In all the various phases of development from tohu to bohu,<span
class="margnote">16a-16b</span> through countless ages of silent, secret
and ceaseless progression from lower to higher stages and states of
being, the Divine has manifested itself under many and different aspects
or characters corresponding to and symbolical of them. Thus, whilst the
earth was in a state of chaos, it manifested itself as Shaddai, the
Almighty; and when it passed from the state of tohu to bohu, as Sabaoth,
or Hosts. When darkness disappeared, then became it known as Alhim. But
not until the life-giving word was spoken, did it become known as
Jehovah, the "I am that I am." This is wherefore the scripture states in
the vision of Elijah: "Jehovah was not in the earthquake" (I. Kings xix.
2), but Shaddai. Jehovah was not in the fire (I. Kings, xix. 12), but
was "Sabaoth." "After the fire a darkness made visible," it manifested
as Alhim; then was heard the still small voice and the name Jehovah was
complete, the four letters of which serve as symbols of the divine
essence as the hands and feet represent the human frame.

Taking now the tetragrammaton or holy name, AHIH, manifested in these
three aspects or forms of cosmic development, we find the divine
appellation of twelve letters, AHIH asher AHIH, the name revealed to the
prophet Elijah. "And God said: Let there be light and light was."

Proceed we now to investigate and acquaint ourselves with the hidden
mysteries and teachings of the secret doctrine regarding creation which
have just been outlined in a general manner. Hitherto we have dwelt upon
the secret operation of En Soph or the unknown infinite and eternal
Being in preparing the earth and impregnating its substance with a
mysterious divine virtue or power which rendered it capable of becoming
the medium for the enfoldment and manifestation of pre-existing

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

spiritual entities and beings. These effects achieved, there was needed
the omnific, life-giving Logos or Word to originate and utter the
symphonal vibration that should impart life and breath and motion to the
universe. Then and not till then was it spoken; then and not till then
the celestial and terrestrial worlds becoming bound and associated
together by a reciprocal influence, a new and a living way was opened
for the incarnation and exhibition of life upon the earth. This is why
in the antecedent primal stages of development in the world's history
the expression "God said," is not found in scripture. At first he
willed, as the Arabic version gives it, and his will operated silently,
slowly, yet surely and effectively. The primary substance of the earth
being thus prepared, it was through the mysterious action of the Word
that it became endowed with vital properties and attributes through the
divine vibration imparted to it. This is what scripture affirms: "And
God said," that is, Alhim manifested himself by and through the divine
Logos; and thus by and through the Word, produced motion or vibration
under the laws of which created matter, or substance, resolved itself
into an infinitude of different forms.

"Let light be." Now the word yehe (he) is composed of<span
class="margnote">16b</span> three letters, IHI, yod being the first and
third letter and H coming between them. The yod, or I, represents the
male and the female principle. The full word is therefore a symbol of
the divine Father and Mother, the final yod being the same as the first
in order to show that all the three aspects or forms as stated, under
which En Soph operated in the creation and production of the universe,
were only the manifestations of one and the same divine Being. The first
yod also designates the Father, the engenderer of light; the second
letter H denotes the Logos; the third letter *yod*, the primal light.
The divine aspects are further symbolized by the three vowel points,
*holem* (  ‏ֹ‎  ) *shurek* (  ‏ּ‎  ) and *hirek* (  ‏ִ‎  ) the Father,
the Word and the Light. Before the manifestation of the Logos seven
other letters were formed, but the primal light proceeding from the
Father was too ethereal and empyreal to receive and become impressed
with their forms and signatures. When, however, the state, of tohu gave
place to that of bohu, other seven letters were formed; but, again, as
matter was not sufficiently condensed, it could not retain them. At the
manifestation of the creative Logos, eight others completing the letters
of the alphabet were formed, which endured because by the action of the
Logos, the barrier between the spiritual and

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

earthly was done away and they began to exercise a reciprocal influence
on each other. This is the occult meaning of the words: "Let there be a
firmament" and thus form a medium, a point of union between the higher
and lower worlds. This taking place was the prelude to the appearance of
life upon the earth.

"God saw the light that it was good" (Gen. i. 4), for then the universe
became lighted up and pervaded throughout with the divine life which
preserves it for the common weal and happiness of created and animated
beings.<span class="margnote">16b-17a</span>

"And God called the light Day" (Gen. i. 5). Why is it written: "He
called"? Because Alhim wished or willed an emanation distinct from the
Logos, which should constitute the world-soul, the foundation root of
universal life. This light emanation, the life of the world, is termed
Day, representing and corresponding to the first AHIH in the divine
appellation "I am that I am." "And the darkness he called Night." That
is, He produced from out of the primal darkness a passive or reflected
light like that of the moon and called it Night.

It was by the union of Day and Night, symbolizing light and darkness,
the male and female principles, that the Logos or creative Word
proceeded. This mystery is also symbolized by the vowel points (  ‏ֹ‎  )
(  ‏ּ‎  ) (  ‏ִ‎  ). When the creative and passive light blend and
unite, that is, when the active male principle unites with the passive
female principle, an equilibrium is established and procreation takes
place. The union of these two lights or principles gives rise to a sense
of pleasure and delight which has been personified as the goddess Venus,
and is known and termed in the secret doctrine as "Musaph" (something
additional, augmentation) without which life would not be worth living.
This it was that caused all as yet unembodied spirits and holy souls to
be filled with a joyous longing and desire for incarnation on the earth
plane and thereby attain to higher states and stages of existence and
thus approximate nearer to the great Being who in scripture is termed
Jehovah, Zebaoth, the Lord of Hosts, God of all the countless myriads of
created souls and Lord of all the earth. From what has just been said it
will be perceived that the words Day and Night in scripture are symbols
of the heavenly or divine lights from the synthesis of which creation,
as it exists, has resulted.

"And God said let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters" (Gen.
i. 6). In these words the scripture begins to unfold and display in
detail the various processes in mundane creation

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

which began by dividing the waters above from the waters below. Amongst
the many antinomies of existence by which we are able to distinguish
their nature and thus attain unto truth, the conception of right and
left will hest assist us in understanding and grasping the secret
doctrine contained in these words, the right corresponding to light,
goodness, harmony; the left, to darkness, evil, discord, from which has
proceeded that state called Gehenna or Hell, a subject upon which Moses
himself pondered and thought deeply and long in his studies on this part
of Genesis. In the work of creation there was a differentiation of the
divine essence resulting in two states of the primal substance,<span
class="margnote">17a-17b</span> called light and darkness, connoted also
by the terms right and left. When Alhim, the creative mean, or word,
appeared and became a point of union between them, they began to blend
harmoniously together and thus gave occasion for the appearance of
vegetable and animated existences. Discord vanished and peace
universally prevailed. This primal discord between the light and
darkness, the right and left, may be illustrated by the quarrel and
contention that arose between Korah, and his associates, and Aaron, the
high priest. After his studies on the great problem of the origin of
Gehenna, Moses thus reasoned to himself: I must adjust and harmonize
this difference and discord between Korah and Aaron on the principle of
reconciliation that prevailed and operated between light and darkness at
the time of creation, that is, I must become a mediator between them.
Finding, however, that the contention on the part of Korah was of a
stubborn and inflexible character, he said truly: This opposition and
difference between the two parties, Korah and Aaron, is altogether
different from what prevailed between primeval light and darkness, and
though willing to mediate and make peace and harmony between them, Korah
and his company have rejected and refused my counsels and thus have
instituted and made a Gehenna or Hell into which they must eventually
fall. In refusing to accept and comply with the proposition of Moses,
Korah demonstrated that his fend and dispute had not for its object the
advancement of the divine glory. He thus became an apostate and renegade
to the divine rule or principle of reconciliation, by which opposites
blend and work harmoniously together. In this consisted the sin of Korah
and his company, which caused Moses, though of great meekness of
character, to be filled with wrath and anger, not because of their
rejection of him as a mediator, but on account of their adverse
opposition

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

and antagonism to the principles of reconciliation, the existence of
which they failed to perceive or ignored as operating in the
preservation of the world.

The following remarks are from an ancient occult work entitled *Liber
Adami*, or, The Book of Adam. "When the passive light, termed in
scripture 'darkness,' became blended and unified with the active
light,<span class="margnote">17b</span> there were myriads of spiritual
beings or existences, part of whom were fully developed and ready for
incarnation, the rest but imperfectly so. Believing that the light and
darkness were antagonistic in nature and principle, there arose a
division of opinion amongst them, some declaring themselves partisans of
light, others its opponents and advocates of darkness. When the
mediating Logos had blended light and darkness and thus symbolized the
perfect unity of the divine essence, the advanced and enlightened
amongst them embraced and received the fact, whilst those only partially
developed remained obdurate in their ideas and opinions and thus by
their contrariety and differences of thought and the contentions and
quarrels that arose therefrom, Gehenna or Hell came into existence."
This discord and dissension has found an entrance and reflection in the
world and is distinguished by the object in view, whether it be actuated
by desire for truth or motived by selfishness and a hankering and
craving to rule and dominate over others. Examples and instances of
these two classes of individuals are found in the history of mankind. Of
the first class, were the famed teacher Hillel (nasior president of the
school of Jerusalem at the beginning of the Christian era) with his
colleague Schammai. Their only object was the research of truth and the
advancement of the divine glory, and though their disputes were very
keen and sharp, yet friendship and good will always existed between
them. Of the second class, an example has just been given in the case of
Korah and his party in their contention with Aaron for supremacy, which
resulted in their destruction and descent into Hell, the limbo and
native place of dissension and discord.

We can now discern the reason why God made the firmament and separated
the waters that were above from the waters that were beneath, that is,
he caused a clear distinction to be made between those who, entertaining
different views and opinions, were actuated by the desire for truth, and
those whose object, through crass, self-willed ignorance, was the
rejection of and antagonism towards it. In connection with Korah and his
company,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

cut off or separated from the congregation of Israel, the same word,
yabdel (separated), is used by Alhim in dividing the waters above and
the waters beneath the firmament, as also by Moses when he spake: <span
class="margnote">Deut. 10:8</span>"Seemeth it to you a small thing that
the God of Israel hath separated yon from the congregation," etc., and
further, "the Lord separated the tribe of Levi to bear the ark of the
covenant of the Lord."<span class="margnote">17b-18a</span>

Here the question may arise: If on the second day of creation the
separation between light and darkness occurred, how was it that the
quarrel arose with Levi the third tribe of the children of Israel?
Should it not have been in connection with Simeon, the second tribe? The
fact of the case is this: the tribe of Levi though reckoned the third,
in the eye of Jacob, was accounted as second. The form of service called
separation recited by the children of Israel at the close of the sabbath
has for its object the separation of the spirit ruling during weeks days
from the spirit that rules and presides over the sabbath day. When the
sabbath closes, the wicked spirit is filled with the desire to acquire
ascendency over Israel, but as soon as it hears the recitation of the
verse: "Let the beauty of the Lord our God he upon us; and establish
thou the work of our hands upon us; yea the work of our hands establish
thou it" (Ps. xc. 17), it betakes itself to flight, and when with the
sprig of myrtle and cup of wine in hand the word of "separation" is
spoken, it hurries away and returns to Gehenna whence it came, its own
place, where dwell Korah and his company as it is written: "They and the
accomplices went down alive into the pit" (Num. xvi. 33). They were not,
however, swallowed up until the congregation of Israel had separated
itself from them, even as the descent into hell of the wicked and
contentious angels occurs only after the repetition of the formula of
separation at the close of the sabbath. There are two Gehennas; one
above, where are the wicked and rebellions spirits; and the other,
whither Korah descended and is the pattern of the former.

"Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters" (Gen. i. 6). The
word Alhim, God, is composed of two words AL-HIM, which signify God,
water, or sea. This last word has the same letters as yamah, by which
the scripture teaches that all division of opinion, symbolized by the
term sea, is right and just when its object is the glory of the divine,
as then AL becomes united to HIM. When, however, this is not so, AL
remains separated and detached and yamah, or HIM, then symbolizes the
great

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

ocean or abyss of darkness in which Hell is enshrouded<span
class="margnote">18a</span> and concealed. When the waters became
separated, then Alhim interposed and became the point of union between
them, and harmony prevailed and dissension ceased. The waters above the
firmament, the male part; those below, the female. Those above were
designated Alhim, and distinguished by the first H in the divine name
IHVH; those below were called Adonai, and characterized by the second H.
Although the mediation of Alhim took place on the second day, unity and
harmony did not begin to prevail only on the third day when, as the
scripture states: "God saw that it was good," which is not affirmed of
either the first or second day of the work of creation. It was then the
letter V entered in the divine name and took up its position between the
two H's. This interposition and mediation of Alhim, between the waters
above and those below the firmament, is further symbolized by the waters
of the river Jordan<span class="margnote">Josh. 3:16</span> when they
became separated to allow of the passage of the children of Israel into
the promised land. The waters flowing down to the place of passage
formed into a heap, whilst those below flowed into the sea and the
children of Israel passed over between them. In order to distinguish and
emphasize the separation of the waters which, had not Alhim become
mediator between them. would never have proved fruitful and brought
forth abundantly the living creature, the scripture repeats five times
the word raqiang (firmament).

Now the time essential for this correlative union was a period of five
hundred years, during which the waters above and those below flowed
unitedly by the tree of life, serving as a point of contact and
junction, so that by their reciprocal action they might give rise to
vegetable and animal life upon the earth plane. This union or blending
together was thus necessary ere their proper distribution could take
place, as it is recorded of David after gathering together food and
provisions, he afterwards distributed them<span class="margnote">2 Sam.
6:19</span> to all the congregation of Israel. It is also written: "That
thou givest them, they gather" (Ps. civ. 28), and again, "She riseth
also whilst it is night, and giveth meat to her household" (Prov. xxxi.
15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](zdm011)
