[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm085)  [Next](zdm087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE OBJECT OF BUILDING THE TOWER OF BABEL.

Whilst sitting one day in the presence of Rabbi Simeon, this question
was asked by Rabbi Isaac: "What impelled these Postdiluvians to be so
foolish as to revolt against the Holy One, and how did they become
actuated with the idea of building a tower whose top should reach unto
heaven?"

Said Rabbi Simeon: "We learn from tradition that by the words, 'and it
came to pass as they journeyed from the east' (miquidem) scripture
informs us that they quitted the highlands for the plains, the land of
Israel, in order to fix their habitation in Babel. 'Here,' said they,
'we can live and dwell, come let us make to ourselves a name, or in
other words, let us worship and adore the god of this world, and by so
doing acquire and enjoy his favor and help; so that when
[catastrophes](errata.htm#64) and calamities occur, we shall have here a
sure refuge and means of escape from their baneful and destructive
effects. Here is abundance of food, and we may reap plentiful harvests
which in the past have cost us so great toil and labor. Nay, more, let
us make a tower reaching up to heaven, so that we may mount and wage war
in the domain of the Premier himself, and thus prevent him from again
overwhelming and destroying mankind with a deluge, as in the past.' It
is written, 'And the Lord said the people is one and they have all one
language and this they begin to do, and now nothing will be restrained
from them which they have imagined to do' (Gen. XI. 6). The meaning of
which words this is. In the celestial world when all its spheres are
harmonious, power is the result. So is it in the world of mankind when
all minds become imbued and swayed by unity of thought and feeling.
Whatever enterprise or project is undertaken, it is bound to succeed and
be accomplished whether its object be good or evil. To nullify their
impious intention and purpose of waging war against it was essential
that this unity of design should be broken and their plans be thwarted
and, therefore, as stated, 'The Lord scattered these

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

builders of Babel and dispersed them abroad upon the face<span
class="margnote">75b-76a</span> of the earth. And that they might be
compelled to cease the building of their city, he confounded their
language so that they were unable to understand each other's thoughts
and respond to them. Before this the holy language was universally
spoken.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXXVIII. The Primeval Language and the Book of
Adam](zdm087)
