[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm042)  [Next](zdm044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "MALE AND FEMALE CREATED HE THEM."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "In these words are involved and contained great
occult truths, even the greatest and most profound divine mysteries
respecting the origin and creation of man, and so beyond human
comprehension that they must remain subjects

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

of faith and not of knowledge. Of the creation of the world it is
written, 'These are the generations of the heavens and the earth *be
hibaram* (when they were created); but at the creation of<span
class="margnote">55b-56a</span> man, scripture states, 'God blessed them
and called their name Adam, be yom hibaram' (in the day when they were
created), From the terms male and female, we gather that every figure
that does not bear the form of the male or female, is not in the image
and likeness of Adam Kadmon, the primal ideal man of which we have
formerly spoken. Observe that in any place of scripture where the male
and female are not found united together, the Holy One is said not to
dwell or be present with His blessing and the name Adam is only used
when such is the case."

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "Since the destruction of the temple, Israel no
longer enjoys the blessings that descend from on high daily on the
earth. Yea, one may say that they have become lost unto Israel, as it is
written, 'The righteous perisheth and no man layeth to heart' (Is.
lvii., 1). The word perisheth here denotes the blessings from on high,
but which are now of no beneficial effect in the renovation of human
nature, for as stated, 'Truth is perished' (Jer. vii., 28); the truth
that brings with it light, frees the soul from its downward propensities
and informs us whence all blessings descend and come to man, namely,
from the Holy One of whom it is written, 'And He blessed them.' It was
through Seth that have come forth all the generations of the righteous
in the world."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXV. The Antediluvians and Their Magical Arts](zdm044)
