[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm059)  [Next](zdm061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE OCCULT MEANING OF THE SIX HUNDRED YEARS OF NOAH'S LIFE.

Referring again to the words "And Alhim said unto Noah, the end of all
flesh is before me," Rabbi Simeon spake and said: "These words mean that
the destroying angel presented himself before the Holy One, demanding
power and authority to mark for destruction the race of the
antediluvians. We further read, 'And behold! I will destroy them with
the earth' (Gen. VI. 13). make thee an ark of gopher wood wherein
entering thou mayst be preserved, and he may have no power over thee.
And Noah did according to all that Alhim commanded him, "and in the six
hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, the seventeenth day
of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great deep
broken up and the windows of heaven were opened" (Gen. VII. 11). These
words imply that only in that year of his earth life and incarnation,
did Noah attain unto human perfection and by thus becoming a just man
and perfect, was able to escape the doom impending over the wicked
generation in which he lived, whose iniquity had then reached its
climax. When Noah had attained unto this age, then the forbearance and
long suffering of the Holy One ended and the destruction so long
deferred overwhelmed the world and the race of the antediluvians was
suddenly swept out of existence from off the face of the earth. Note the
words, 'Behold I (ani) even I (hinneni) do bring a flood of waters upon
the earth.' Wherefore the repetition of the personal pronoun, the one
being the synonym of the other? It is because wherever in scripture Ani
(I) is found it is used to designate God and having the same relation to
Him as the soul has to the body. Thus it is written, 'I (ani) will make
my covenant with thee' (Gen. xvii. 4), implying

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

that God sometime or other will manifest himself and make himself known
to mankind. Again, why is it written, 'Ath hammabbul mayin' (the deluge
of waters), because thereby to show by the word 'ath' that in addition
to the waters of the deluge, Alhim sent the angel of death to destroy
the world and gave him authority to accomplish it by the element of
water. We know also from tradition that the words 'I (ani) am the Lord'
have the same meaning as, I am faithful in my promises of recompense to
the righteous, as also in my denunciations of punishment on the wicked
in the world to come, and all are made under the name of Ani. The
additional words 'to destroy all flesh' also imply that the death angel
is the real destroyer of the world and is alluded to as such in (Ex.
xii. 23). 'And He will not suffer the destroyer to come into your houses
to smite you.' That is to say, that the destroyer, who in the account of
the deluge is designated 'the end of all flesh' shall have no power over
you, nor authority to afflict and injure you. All this occult teaching
in the secret doctrine respecting the deluge was imparted to me by Rabbi
Issac."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LII. Adam Sitting at the Gate of the Garden of
Eden](zdm061)
