[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm101)  [Next](zdm103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KABBALISTIC REMARKS ON MARRIAGE.

SAID Rabbi Eleazar: "It is written, 'What shall we do for wives for them
that remain?' (Jud. XXI. 7), and further it is added, 'Therefore they
commanded the children of Benjamin saying, go and lie in wait in the
vineyards and catch you every man his wife, and see and behold if the
daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances; then come ye out of the
vineyards, and catch you<span class="margnote">91b-92a</span> every man
his wife of the daughters of Shiloh.' This incident in connection with
the tribe of Benjamin shows how a man may and can become the husband of
one who is the sister soul of another, and how as tradition teaches us,
betrothment may take place during a feast through fear lest another may
pray to obtain the betrothed herself. On further reflection you will
discover and understand the mystery or secret law that governs marriage,
which is similar to that which operates when a man marries and dying
leaves no offspring. When that happens, his widow is bound to espouse
her late husband's brother. If she brings forth a son, he is animated
with the soul of his defunct father who incarnates a second time within
him. This son finds no wife who is his sympneumata because this animates
his own mother. Therefore, esoteric students declare that it is
permissible to celebrate betrothals during feast days, lest another, by
his ardent

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

prayers addressed to heaven, may obtain her who is about to become
betrothed, as it is possible by such means to obtain a wife whose soul
is the sister or twin of another man."

Said Rabbi Jehuda: "Truly the subject of marriage must be of the
greatest anxiety to the Holy One. Blessed is the lot of Israel who
enjoys the secret doctrine that teaches them His Holy way, as also the
secrets and mysteries attending them. It is written, 'The law of the
Lord is perfect converting the soul' (Ps. XIX. 7). Blessed is he who
studies in it and rules his life thereby, for then he acquires length of
days and learns the secret of life, as it is written, 'For length of
days and long life and peace shall it add to [thee](errata.htm#75).'"
(Prov. III. 2).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XCIV. On the Study of the Secret Doctrine](zdm103)
