[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### RABBI ABBA'S PUNISHMENT

As Rabbi Abba returned homewards, the guests along with the host
accompanied him three leagues on his way.

Said they unto him: "Truly our host has been blessed by the good deed he
has done."

Then said Rabbi Abba: "What may that good deed be?"

Then replied the host: "She whom I took for my spouse was the wife of my
brother who died childless, and in obedience to the injunction of the
law I married her and the child of our union I have named after my
deceased brother."

Said Rabbi Abba: "Henceforth from this day let him be called Ydi. The
boy grew up to manhood and became afterwards famed for his learning and
known as Doctor Ydi, the son of Jacob."

In bidding adieu to the hosts and guests, Rabbi Abba gave them all his
benediction and then proceeded on his way homewards. On his arrival, he
gave an account of all he had heard and learned to Rabbi Eleazar, who
hesitated and

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

feared to inform his father of what had occurred at this feast of
circumcision.<span class="margnote">96b</span>

One day Rabbi Abba was sitting in The presence of Rabbi Simon, who asked
him the question: "What is the meaning of the words, "And Abraham fell
on his face and God talked with him, saying: 'As for me, my covenant is
with thee'? From these words we learn that whilst Abraham was
uncircumcised it was incumbent he should bow his face earthwards. Only
after he had entered into the covenant and performed the rite attached
to it, was he able to stand erect without a feeling of fear or dread.
The words, 'my covenant will I make with thee' refer to the time when it
was completed."

Then said Rabbi Abba: "With the permission of my master, I will relate
to him the many excellent discourses and wonderful things I have heard
and witnessed."

Said Rabbi Simon: "Speak on:"

Then Rabbi Abba spake and said: "I am greatly afraid that I have caused
others to suffer."

"God forbid that it should be so!" exclaimed Rabbi Simeon, "for it is
written, 'He shall not be afraid of evil tidings' (Ps. CXII. 7).

Then related Rabbi Abba to him all that had been said and witnessed
during the feast of circumcision.

After a few moments' reflection, Rabbi Simeon said: "How is it that
having listened to such excellent discourses, thou hast not mentioned
them, but kept them to thyself? For so doing, thou shalt not for thirty
days experience and find profit nor benefit in thy hours of meditation
on what thou hast learned and witnessed. Is it not written, 'Withhold
not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy
hand to do it'?" (Prov. III. 27). This was the injunction Rabbi Abba had
to endure. Moreover, Rabbi Simeon said: "I order that what thou hast
learned and witnessed be made known to the student novitiates at
[Babylon](errata.htm#89), so that they may not act as thou hast acted,
in keeping good things to thyself, and speaking on occult subjects that
should never be divulged or imparted to any save to students of the
Secret Doctrine."

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

Rabbi Simeon was greatly distressed and pained because thou hast
revealed occult teachings.<span class="margnote">96b</span>

"That is true which thou sayest," replied Rabbi Abba, "I grieve and fear
lest the students at Babylon may be tempted by my example, and act
imprudently as I have done."

Said Rabbi Simeon: "God forbid they should suffer for divulging the
mysteries of the secret doctrine, which should always be jealously
guarded and kept secret by novitiates, and never be subjects of
discourse save amongst ourselves. This the Holy One furnish them to do,
and therefore it is, only amongst ourselves they should be made known
and taught."

Said Rabbi Jose: "It is written, 'Then shall thy light break forth as
the morning' (Is. LVIII. 8). The time will come when the Holy One shall
say to every human soul, 'Thy light shall break forth as the morning,
and thy healing shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall
go before thee, and the glory of the Lord be round about thee.'"

 

END OF SECTION LEKH LEKHA

Peace to all beings.

 

 
