[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zdm108)  [Next](zdm110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span> <span class="margnote">96a</span>

AT the birth of Isaac, justice became united to mercy; these divine
attributes, symbolized by the patriarchs Isaac and Abraham, became
blended in the person of Jacob, their offspring; and, therefore, it is
written, 'Thou art my servant, oh Israel, in which I will be glorified'
(Is. XLIX. 3).

"Notwithstanding what has just been stated, we can divine why scriptures
uses the word song (sherath), and 'I will sing to my well beloved.'
These words refer to Isaac, who was so called before his birth in the
world. Another interpretation applies them to Abraham, as it is written,
'What doth my beloved in my house' (Jer. XI. 15). Now it is true,
Abraham acquired by merit what his posterity afterwards inherited and
enjoyed. The words 'the song of my beloved for his vineyard,' refer to
the Holy One who is called 'beloved,' as it is written, 'My beloved
(dodi) is white and ruddy (Cant. V.10). We observe the terms ledidi
(well beloved) and dodi (my beloved or friend) are joined together, and
from their union of the male and female principle comes forth a vineyard
planted in Qeren ben Shamen, which appellation, indicates its origin and
nature. Qeren has here the same meaning as in the words, 'And it shall
come to pass when they make a long blast with the Qeren Hayyabel (the
horn

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

of Jubilee)' (Josh. VI. 5). Thus the vineyard has for its<span
class="margnote">96a-96b</span> origin the Jubilee or the deliverance,
and this horn or trumpet of deliverance is associated with the male
principle, termed here ('Ben Shamen,' which has the same meaning as the
term 'ben horin' (son of nobles) (Eccles. X. 7). It also means 'son of
the oil,' because of the source whence the oil flows, for supplying all
the heavenly lamps whose light becomes more intense in proportion to its
abundance. Furthermore, at the coronation of kings, this oil is poured
into a horn, called the horn of Jubilee, and for this reason no one is
crowned except he is first anointed with oil from this horn. On account
of this the reign of David was of long duration.

"It is further added, 'And he fenced it (vajatzqchou) with a fence like
a ring on the finger.' The words, 'and gathered out the stones thereof,'
denote that he separated it and so arranged that it should not be under
the rule and government of the spiritual chiefs that hold authority over
idolatrous nations; and, having freed and delivered it from evil
demoniacal influences and force, he chose this vineyard for his own
possession, as it is written, 'He chose his people for his portion, and
took Jacob for his inheritance' (Deuter. XXXII. 9) . 'And he planted it
with the choicest vine.' 'Which words have the same meaning as the
verse, 'I have planted thee a choice (soreq) vine, wholly (couloh) a
right seed' (Jer. II. 21). The word couloh is here written with a final
H, symbol of the grade on the divine life to which Abraham attained and
then gave rise to offspring to whom was imparted divine truth which made
them righteous. The words, 'Thus (coh) shall thy seed be,' have the same
esoteric meaning. Blessed is the lot of Israel who possess such a holy
inheritance.

"The second part of the verse is, 'And he built a tower in the midst of
it.' What is here the mystical meaning of the word tower? It is the same
as that of the words, 'The name of the Lord is a strong tower, the
righteous runneth, into it and is safe' (Prov. XVIII. 9). It is further
added, 'and also made a wine-press therein,' referring to the gate of
the Just, as it is written, 'Open unto me the gates of righteousness'
(Ps. CXVIII. 19). How know we that at the time of circumcision

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

every Israelite enters into the tower of the Just and the gates of
righteousness? Or how know we that whoever offers his son as a
sacrifice, that is, causes him to undergo the rite of the covenant,
initiates him into the mystery of the sacred name on which heaven and
earth are both founded? We are assured of it from the words, 'Thus saith
the Lord, if my covenant had not been made with day and night, I should
not have prescribed the laws that govern heaven and earth' (Jer. XXXIII.
25). Blessed is the master of this house, who by his obedience to the
law and rite of the covenant has enjoyed the presence of the Holy One
this day. [Blessed](errata.htm#88) also are we who have been present on
this occasion as witnesses of it. To this child, I shall apply the words
of scripture, 'Everyone that is called by my name, I have created him
for my glory. I have formed him, yea, I have made him' (Is. XLIII. 3),
and also the verse, 'And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord,
and great shall be the peace of thy children' (Is. LIV. 13).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter CI. Rabbi Abba's Punishment](zdm110)
