[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02006) 
[Next](daf02008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To Constantine. Part VII.

Diocletian had no sooner published his edicts against the Christians,
than, as if he had been desirous of committing to other hands the work
of persecution, he divested himself of the Imperial purple. The
character and situation of his colleagues and successors sometimes urged
them to enforce and sometimes inclined them to suspend, the execution of
these rigorous laws; nor can we acquire a just and distinct idea of this
important period of ecclesiastical history, unless we separately
consider the state of Christianity, in the different parts of the
empire, during the space of ten years, which elapsed between the first
edicts of Diocletian and the final peace of the church.

The mild and humane temper of Constantius was averse to the oppression
of any part of his subjects. The principal offices of his palace were
exercised by Christians. He loved their persons, esteemed their
fidelity, and entertained not any dislike to their religious principles.
But as long as Constantius remained in the subordinate station of
Caesar, it was not in his power openly to reject the edicts of
Diocletian, or to disobey the commands of Maximian. His authority
contributed, however, to alleviate the sufferings which he pitied and
abhorred. He consented with reluctance to the ruin of the churches; but
he ventured to protect the Christians themselves from the fury of the
populace, and from the rigor of the laws. The provinces of Gaul (under
which we may probably include those of Britain) were indebted for the
singular tranquillity which they enjoyed, to the gentle interposition of
their sovereign.  <span id="fr_185"></span>[165](#fn_185) But Datianus,
the president or governor of Spain, actuated either by zeal or policy,
chose rather to execute the public edicts of the emperors, than to
understand the secret intentions of Constantius; and it can scarcely be
doubted, that his provincial administration was stained with the blood
of a few martyrs.  <span id="fr_186"></span>[166](#fn_186) The elevation
of Constantius to the supreme and independent dignity of Augustus, gave
a free scope to the exercise of his virtues, and the shortness of his
reign did not prevent him from establishing a system of toleration, of
which he left the precept and the example to his son Constantine. His
fortunate son, from the first moment of his accession, declaring himself
the protector of the church, at length deserved the appellation of the
first emperor who publicly professed and established the Christian
religion. The motives of his conversion, as they may variously be
deduced from benevolence, from policy, from conviction, or from remorse,
and the progress of the revolution, which, under his powerful influence
and that of his sons, rendered Christianity the reigning religion of the
Roman empire, will form a very interesting and important chapter in the
present volume of this history. At present it may be sufficient to
observe, that every victory of Constantine was productive of some relief
or benefit to the church.

The provinces of Italy and Africa experienced a short but violent
persecution. The rigorous edicts of Diocletian were strictly and
cheerfully executed by his associate Maximian, who had long hated the
Christians, and who delighted in acts of blood and violence. In the
autumn of the first year of the persecution, the two emperors met at
Rome to celebrate their triumph; several oppressive laws appear to have
issued from their secret consultations, and the diligence of the
magistrates was animated by the presence of their sovereigns., After
Diocletian had divested himself of the purple, Italy and Africa were
administered under the name of Severus, and were exposed, without
defence, to the implacable resentment of his master Galerius. Among the
martyrs of Rome, Adauctus deserves the notice of posterity. He was of a
noble family in Italy, and had raised himself, through the successive
honors of the palace, to the important office of treasurer of the
private Jemesnes. Adauctus is the more remarkable for being the only
person of rank and distinction who appears to have suffered death,
during the whole course of this general persecution.  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[167](#fn_187)

The revolt of Maxentius immediately restored peace to the churches of
Italy and Africa; and the same tyrant who oppressed every other class of
his subjects, showed himself just, humane, and even partial, towards the
afflicted Christians. He depended on their gratitude and affection, and
very naturally presumed, that the injuries which they had suffered, and
the dangers which they still apprehended from his most inveterate enemy,
would secure the fidelity of a party already considerable by their
numbers and opulence.  <span id="fr_188"></span>[168](#fn_188) Even the
conduct of Maxentius towards the bishops of Rome and Carthage may be
considered as the proof of his toleration, since it is probable that the
most orthodox princes would adopt the same measures with regard to their
established clergy. Marcellus, the former of these prelates, had thrown
the capital into confusion, by the severe penance which he imposed on a
great number of Christians, who, during the late persecution, had
renounced or dissembled their religion. The rage of faction broke out in
frequent and violent seditions; the blood of the faithful was shed by
each other's hands, and the exile of Marcellus, whose prudence seems to
have been less eminent than his zeal, was found to be the only measure
capable of restoring peace to the distracted church of Rome.  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[169](#fn_189) The behavior of Mensurius, bishop of
Carthage, appears to have been still more reprehensible. A deacon of
that city had published a libel against the emperor. The offender took
refuge in the episcopal palace; and though it was somewhat early to
advance any claims of ecclesiastical immunities, the bishop refused to
deliver him up to the officers of justice. For this treasonable
resistance, Mensurius was summoned to court, and instead of receiving a
legal sentence of death or banishment, he was permitted, after a short
examination, to return to his diocese.  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[170](#fn_190) Such was the happy condition of the
Christian subjects of Maxentius, that whenever they were desirous of
procuring for their own use any bodies of martyrs, they were obliged to
purchase them from the most distant provinces of the East. A story is
related of Aglae, a Roman lady, descended from a consular family, and
possessed of so ample an estate, that it required the management of
seventy-three stewards. Among these Boniface was the favorite of his
mistress; and as Aglae mixed love with devotion, it is reported that he
was admitted to share her bed. Her fortune enabled her to gratify the
pious desire of obtaining some sacred relics from the East. She
intrusted Boniface with a considerable sum of gold, and a large quantity
of aromatics; and her lover, attended by twelve horsemen and three
covered chariots, undertook a remote pilgrimage, as far as Tarsus in
Cilicia.  <span id="fr_191"></span>[171](#fn_191)

The sanguinary temper of Galerius, the first and principal author of the
persecution, was formidable to those Christians whom their misfortunes
had placed within the limits of his dominions; and it may fairly be
presumed that many persons of a middle rank, who were not confined by
the chains either of wealth or of poverty, very frequently deserted
their native country, and sought a refuge in the milder climate of the
West.  <span id="fr_192"></span>[!\_0019](#fn_192) As long as he
commanded only the armies and provinces of Illyricum, he could with
difficulty either find or make a considerable number of martyrs, in a
warlike country, which had entertained the missionaries of the gospel
with more coldness and reluctance than any other part of the empire.
 <span id="fr_193"></span>[172](#fn_193) But when Galerius had obtained
the supreme power, and the government of the East, he indulged in their
fullest extent his zeal and cruelty, not only in the provinces of Thrace
and Asia, which acknowledged his immediate jurisdiction, but in those of
Syria, Palestine, and Egypt, where Maximin gratified his own
inclination, by yielding a rigorous obedience to the stern commands of
his benefactor.  <span id="fr_194"></span>[173](#fn_194) The frequent
disappointments of his ambitious views, the experience of six years of
persecution, and the salutary reflections which a lingering and painful
distemper suggested to the mind of Galerius, at length convinced him
that the most violent efforts of despotism are insufficient to extirpate
a whole people, or to subdue their religious prejudices. Desirous of
repairing the mischief that he had occasioned, he published in his own
name, and in those of Licinius and Constantine, a general edict, which,
after a pompous recital of the Imperial titles, proceeded in the
following manner: -

"Among the important cares which have occupied our mind for the utility
and preservation of the empire, it was our intention to correct and
reestablish all things according to the ancient laws and public
discipline of the Romans. We were particularly desirous of reclaiming
into the way of reason and nature, the deluded Christians who had
renounced the religion and ceremonies instituted by their fathers; and
presumptuously despising the practice of antiquity, had invented
extravagant laws and opinions, according to the dictates of their fancy,
and had collected a various society from the different provinces of our
empire. The edicts, which we have published to enforce the worship of
the gods, having exposed many of the Christians to danger and distress,
many having suffered death, and many more, who still persist in their
impious folly, being left destitute of any public exercise of religion,
we are disposed to extend to those unhappy men the effects of our wonted
clemency. We permit them therefore freely to profess their private
opinions, and to assemble in their conventicles without fear or
molestation, provided always that they preserve a due respect to the
established laws and government. By another rescript we shall signify
our intentions to the judges and magistrates; and we hope that our
indulgence will engage the Christians to offer up their prayers to the
Deity whom they adore, for our safety and prosperity for their own, and
for that of the republic."  <span id="fr_195"></span>[174](#fn_195) It
is not usually in the language of edicts and manifestos that we should
search for the real character or the secret motives of princes; but as
these were the words of a dying emperor, his situation, perhaps, may be
admitted as a pledge of his sincerity.

When Galerius subscribed this edict of toleration, he was well assured
that Licinius would readily comply with the inclinations of his friend
and benefactor, and that any measures in favor of the Christians would
obtain the approbation of Constantine. But the emperor would not venture
to insert in the preamble the name of Maximin, whose consent was of the
greatest importance, and who succeeded a few days afterwards to the
provinces of Asia. In the first six months, however, of his new reign,
Maximin affected to adopt the prudent counsels of his predecessor; and
though he never condescended to secure the tranquillity of the church by
a public edict, Sabinus, his Praetorian praefect, addressed a circular
letter to all the governors and magistrates of the provinces,
expatiating on the Imperial clemency, acknowledging the invincible
obstinacy of the Christians, and directing the officers of justice to
cease their ineffectual prosecutions, and to connive at the secret
assemblies of those enthusiasts. In consequence of these orders, great
numbers of Christians were released from prison, or delivered from the
mines. The confessors, singing hymns of triumph, returned into their own
countries; and those who had yielded to the violence of the tempest,
solicited with tears of repentance their readmission into the bosom of
the church.  <span id="fr_196"></span>[175](#fn_196)

But this treacherous calm was of short duration; nor could the
Christians of the East place any confidence in the character of their
sovereign. Cruelty and superstition were the ruling passions of the soul
of Maximin. The former suggested the means, the latter pointed out the
objects of persecution. The emperor was devoted to the worship of the
gods, to the study of magic, and to the belief of oracles. The prophets
or philosophers, whom he revered as the favorites of Heaven, were
frequently raised to the government of provinces, and admitted into his
most secret councils. They easily convinced him that the Christians had
been indebted for their victories to their regular discipline, and that
the weakness of polytheism had principally flowed from a want of union
and subordination among the ministers of religion. A system of
government was therefore instituted, which was evidently copied from the
policy of the church. In all the great cities of the empire, the temples
were repaired and beautified by the order of Maximin, and the
officiating priests of the various deities were subjected to the
authority of a superior pontiff destined to oppose the bishop, and to
promote the cause of paganism. These pontiffs acknowledged, in their
turn, the supreme jurisdiction of the metropolitans or high priests of
the province, who acted as the immediate vicegerents of the emperor
himself. A white robe was the ensign of their dignity; and these new
prelates were carefully selected from the most noble and opulent
families. By the influence of the magistrates, and of the sacerdotal
order, a great number of dutiful addresses were obtained, particularly
from the cities of Nicomedia, Antioch, and Tyre, which artfully
represented the well-known intentions of the court as the general sense
of the people; solicited the emperor to consult the laws of justice
rather than the dictates of his clemency; expressed their abhorrence of
the Christians, and humbly prayed that those impious sectaries might at
least be excluded from the limits of their respective territories. The
answer of Maximin to the address which he obtained from the citizens of
Tyre is still extant. He praises their zeal and devotion in terms of the
highest satisfaction, descants on the obstinate impiety of the
Christians, and betrays, by the readiness with which he consents to
their banishment, that he considered himself as receiving, rather than
as conferring, an obligation. The priests as well as the magistrates
were empowered to enforce the execution of his edicts, which were
engraved on tables of brass; and though it was recommended to them to
avoid the effusion of blood, the most cruel and ignominious punishments
were inflicted on the refractory Christians.  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[176](#fn_197)

The Asiatic Christians had every thing to dread from the severity of a
bigoted monarch who prepared his measures of violence with such
deliberate policy. But a few months had scarcely elapsed before the
edicts published by the two Western emperors obliged Maximin to suspend
the prosecution of his designs: the civil war which he so rashly
undertook against Licinius employed all his attention; and the defeat
and death of Maximin soon delivered the church from the last and most
implacable of her enemies.  <span id="fr_198"></span>[177](#fn_198)

In this general view of the persecution, which was first authorized by
the edicts of Diocletian, I have purposely refrained from describing the
particular sufferings and deaths of the Christian martyrs. It would have
been an easy task, from the history of Eusebius, from the declamations
of Lactantius, and from the most ancient acts, to collect a long series
of horrid and disgustful pictures, and to fill many pages with racks and
scourges, with iron hooks and red-hot beds, and with all the variety of
tortures which fire and steel, savage beasts, and more savage
executioners, could inflict upon the human body. These melancholy scenes
might be enlivened by a crowd of visions and miracles destined either to
delay the death, to celebrate the triumph, or to discover the relics of
those canonized saints who suffered for the name of Christ. But I cannot
determine what I ought to transcribe, till I am satisfied how much I
ought to believe. The gravest of the ecclesiastical historians, Eusebius
himself, indirectly confesses, that he has related whatever might
redound to the glory, and that he has suppressed all that could tend to
the disgrace, of religion.  <span id="fr_199"></span>[178](#fn_199) Such
an acknowledgment will naturally excite a suspicion that a writer who
has so openly violated one of the fundamental laws of history, has not
paid a very strict regard to the observance of the other; and the
suspicion will derive additional credit from the character of Eusebius,
 <span id="fr_200"></span>[\*\_0020](#fn_200) which was less tinctured
with credulity, and more practised in the arts of courts, than that of
almost any of his contemporaries. On some particular occasions, when the
magistrates were exasperated by some personal motives of interest or
resentment, the rules of prudence, and perhaps of decency, to overturn
the altars, to pour out imprecations against the emperors, or to strike
the judge as he sat on his tribunal, it may be presumed, that every mode
of torture which cruelty could invent, or constancy could endure, was
exhausted on those devoted victims.  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[179](#fn_201) Two circumstances, however, have been
unwarily mentioned, which insinuate that the general treatment of the
Christians, who had been apprehended by the officers of justice, was
less intolerable than it is usually imagined to have been. 1. The
confessors who were condemned to work in the mines were permitted by the
humanity or the negligence of their keepers to build chapels, and freely
to profess their religion in the midst of those dreary habitations.
 <span id="fr_202"></span>[180](#fn_202) 2. The bishops were obliged to
check and to censure the forward zeal of the Christians, who voluntarily
threw themselves into the hands of the magistrates. Some of these were
persons oppressed by poverty and debts, who blindly sought to terminate
a miserable existence by a glorious death. Others were allured by the
hope that a short confinement would expiate the sins of a whole life;
and others again were actuated by the less honorable motive of deriving
a plentiful subsistence, and perhaps a considerable profit, from the
alms which the charity of the faithful bestowed on the prisoners.  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[181](#fn_203) After the church had triumphed over
all her enemies, the interest as well as vanity of the captives prompted
them to magnify the merit of their respective sufferings. A convenient
distance of time or place gave an ample scope to the progress of
fiction; and the frequent instances which might be alleged of holy
martyrs, whose wounds had been instantly healed, whose strength had been
renewed, and whose lost members had miraculously been restored, were
extremely convenient for the purpose of removing every difficulty, and
of silencing every objection. The most extravagant legends, as they
conduced to the honor of the church, were applauded by the credulous
multitude, countenanced by the power of the clergy, and attested by the
suspicious evidence of ecclesiastical history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_185"></span>[165](daf02007.htm#fr_185) Eusebius, l. viii.
c. 13. Lactantius de M. P. c. 15. Dodwell (Dissertat. Cyprian. xi. 75)
represents them as inconsistent with each other. But the former
evidently speaks of Constantius in the station of Caesar, and the latter
of the same prince in the rank of Augustus.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[166](daf02007.htm#fr_186) Datianus is
mentioned, in Gruter's Inscriptions, as having determined the limits
between the territories of Pax Julia, and those of Ebora, both cities in
the southern part of Lusitania. If we recollect the neighborhood of
those places to Cape St. Vincent, we may suspect that the celebrated
deacon and martyr of that name had been inaccurately assigned by
Prudentius, &c., to Saragossa, or Valentia. See the pompous history of
his sufferings, in the Memoires de Tillemont, tom. v. part ii. p. 58-85.
Some critics are of opinion, that the department of Constantius, as
Caesar, did not include Spain, which still continued under the immediate
jurisdiction of Maximian.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[167](daf02007.htm#fr_187) Eusebius, l. viii.
c. 11. Gruter, Inscrip. p. 1171, No. 18. Rufinus has mistaken the office
of Adauctus, as well as the place of his martyrdom.

Note: M. Guizot suggests the powerful cunuchs of the palace. Dorotheus,
Gorgonius, and Andrew, admitted by Gibbon himself to have been put to
death, p. 66.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[168](daf02007.htm#fr_188) Eusebius, l. viii.
c. 14. But as Maxentius was vanquished by Constantine, it suited the
purpose of Lactantius to place his death among those of the persecutors.

Note: M. Guizot directly contradicts this statement of Gibbon, and
appeals to Eusebius. Maxentius, who assumed the power in Italy,
pretended at first to be a Christian, to gain the favor of the Roman
people; he ordered his ministers to cease to persecute the Christians,
affecting a hypocritical piety, in order to appear more mild than his
predecessors; but his actions soon proved that he was very different
from what they had at first hoped." The actions of Maxentius were those
of a cruel tyrant,but not those of a persecutor: the Christians, like
the rest of his subjects, suffered from his vices, but they were not
oppressed as a sect. Christian females were exposed to his lusts, as
well as to the brutal violence of his colleague Maximian, but they were
not selected as Christians. - M.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[169](daf02007.htm#fr_189) The epitaph of
Marcellus is to be found in Gruter, Inscrip. p 1172, No. 3, and it
contains all that we know of his history. Marcellinus and Marcellus,
whose names follow in the list of popes, are supposed by many critics to
be different persons; but the learned Abbe de Longuerue was convinced
that they were one and the same.

Veridicus rector lapsis quia crimina flere Praedixit miseris, fuit
omnibus hostis amarus. Hinc furor, hinc odium; sequitur discordia,
lites, Seditio, caedes; solvuntur foedera pacis. Crimen ob alterius,
Christum qui in pace negavit Finibus expulsus patriae est feritate
Tyranni. Haec breviter Damasus voluit comperta referre: Marcelli populus
meritum cognoscere posset.

We may observe that Damasus was made Bishop of Rome, A. D. 366.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[170](daf02007.htm#fr_190) Optatus contr.
Donatist. l. i. c. 17, 18.

Note: The words of Optatus are, Profectus (Roman) causam dixit; jussus
con reverti Carthaginem; perhaps, in pleading his cause, he exculpated
himself, since he received an order to return to Carthage. - G.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[171](daf02007.htm#fr_191) The Acts of the
Passion of St. Boniface, which abound in miracles and declamation, are
published by Ruinart, (p. 283 - 291,) both in Greek and Latin, from the
authority of very ancient manuscripts. Note: We are ignorant whether
Aglae and Boniface were Christians at the time of their unlawful
connection. See Tillemont. Mem, Eccles. Note on the Persecution of
Domitian, tom. v. note 82. M. de Tillemont proves also that the history
is doubtful. - G.

Sir D. Dalrymple (Lord Hailes) calls the story of Aglae and Boniface as
of equal authority with our popular histories of Whittington and
Hickathrift. Christian Antiquities, ii. 64. - M.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[!\_0019](daf02007.htm#fr_192) A little after
this, Christianity was propagated to the north of the Roman provinces,
among the tribes of Germany: a multitude of Christians, forced by the
persecutions of the Emperors to take refuge among the Barbarians, were
received with kindness. Euseb. de Vit. Constant. ii. 53. Semler Select.
cap. H. E. p. 115. The Goths owed their first knowledge of Christianity
to a young girl, a prisoner of war; she continued in the midst of them
her exercises of piety; she fasted, prayed, and praised God day and
night. When she was asked what good would come of so much painful
trouble she answered, "It is thus that Christ, the Son of God, is to be
honored." Sozomen, ii. c. 6. - G.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[172](daf02007.htm#fr_193) During the four
first centuries, there exist few traces of either bishops or bishoprics
in the western Illyricum. It has been thought probable that the primate
of Milan extended his jurisdiction over Sirmium, the capital of that
great province. See the Geographia Sacra of Charles de St. Paul, p.
68-76, with the observations of Lucas Holstenius.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[173](daf02007.htm#fr_194) The viiith book of
Eusebius, as well as the supplement concerning the martyrs of Palestine,
principally relate to the persecution of Galerius and Maximin. The
general lamentations with which Lactantius opens the vth book of his
Divine Institutions allude to their cruelty.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[174](daf02007.htm#fr_195) Eusebius (l. viii.
c. 17) has given us a Greek version, and Lactantius (de M. P. c. 34) the
Latin original, of this memorable edict. Neither of these writers seems
to recollect how directly it contradicts whatever they have just
affirmed of the remorse and repentance of Galerius. Note: But Gibbon has
answered this by his just observation, that it is not in the language of
edicts and manifestos that we should search \* \* for the secre motives
of princes. - M.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[175](daf02007.htm#fr_196) Eusebius, l. ix. c.
1. He inserts the epistle of the praefect.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[176](daf02007.htm#fr_197) See Eusebius, l.
viii. c. 14, l. ix. c. 2 - 8. Lactantius de M. P. c. 36. These writers
agree in representing the arts of Maximin; but the former relates the
execution of several martyrs, while the latter expressly affirms, occidi
servos Dei vetuit.

Note: It is easy to reconcile them; it is sufficient to quote the entire
text of Lactantius: Nam cum clementiam specie tenus profiteretur, occidi
servos Dei vetuit, debilitari jussit. Itaque confessoribus effodiebantur
oculi, amputabantur manus, nares vel auriculae desecabantur. Haec ille
moliens Constantini litteris deterretur. Dissimulavit ergo, et tamen, si
quis inciderit. mari occulte mergebatur. This detail of torments
inflicted on the Christians easily reconciles Lactantius and Eusebius.
Those who died in consequence of their tortures, those who were plunged
into the sea, might well pass for martyrs. The mutilation of the words
of Lactantius has alone given rise to the apparent contradiction. - G.

Eusebius. ch. vi., relates the public martyrdom of the aged bishop of
Emesa, with two others, who were thrown to the wild beasts, the
beheading of Peter, bishop of Alexandria, with several others, and the
death of Lucian, presbyter of Antioch, who was carried to Numidia, and
put to death in prison. The contradiction is direct and undeniable, for
although Eusebius may have misplaced the former martyrdoms, it may be
doubted whether the authority of Maximin extended to Nicomedia till
after the death of Galerius. The last edict of toleration issued by
Maximin and published by Eusebius himself, Eccl. Hist. ix. 9. confirms
the statement of Lactantius. - M.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[177](daf02007.htm#fr_198) A few days before
his death, he published a very ample edict of toleration, in which he
imputes all the severities which the Christians suffered to the judges
and governors, who had misunderstood his intentions.See the edict of
Eusebius, l. ix. c. 10.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[178](daf02007.htm#fr_199) Such is the fair
deduction from two remarkable passages in Eusebius, l. viii. c. 2, and
de Martyr. Palestin. c. 12. The prudence of the historian has exposed
his own character to censure and suspicion. It was well known that he
himself had been thrown into prison; and it was suggested that he had
purchased his deliverance by some dishonorable compliance. The reproach
was urged in his lifetime, and even in his presence, at the council of
Tyre. See Tillemont, Memoires Ecclesiastiques, tom. viii. part i. p. 67.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[\*\_0020](daf02007.htm#fr_200) Historical
criticism does not consist in rejecting indiscriminately all the facts
which do not agree with a particular system, as Gibbon does in this
chapter, in which, except at the last extremity, he will not consent to
believe a martyrdom. Authorities are to be weighed, not excluded from
examination. Now, the Pagan historians justify in many places the detail
which have been transmitted to us by the historians of the church,
concerning the tortures endured by the Christians. Celsus reproaches the
Christians with holding their assemblies in secret, on account of the
fear inspired by their sufferings, "for when you are arrested," he says,
"you are dragged to punishment: and, before you are put to death, you
have to suffer all kinds of tortures." Origen cont. Cels. l. i. ii. vi.
viii. passing. Libanius, the panegyrist of Julian, says, while speaking
of the Christians. Those who followed a corrupt religion were in
continual apprehensions; they feared lest Julian should invent tortures
still more refined than those to which they had been exposed before, as
mutilation, burning alive, &c.; for the emperors had inflicted upon them
all these barbarities." Lib. Parent in Julian. ap. Fab. Bib. Graec. No.
9, No. 58, p. 283 - G.

Note: This sentence of Gibbon has given rise to several learned
dissertation: Moller, de Fide Eusebii Caesar, &c., Havniae, 1813.
Danzius, de Eusebio Caes. Hist. Eccl. Scriptore, ejusque tide historica
recte aestimanda, &c., Jenae, 1815. Kestner Commentatio de Eusebii Hist.
Eccles. conditoris auctoritate et fide, &c. See also Reuterdahl, de
Fontibus Historiae Eccles. Eusebianae, Lond. Goth., 1826. Gibbon's
inference may appear stronger than the text will warrant, yet it is
difficult, after reading the passages, to dismiss all suspicion of
partiality from the mind. - M.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[179](daf02007.htm#fr_201) The ancient, and
perhaps authentic, account of the sufferings of Tarachus and his
companions, (Acta Sincera Ruinart, p. 419 - 448,) is filled with strong
expressions of resentment and contempt, which could not fail of
irritating the magistrate. The behavior of Aedesius to Hierocles,
praefect of Egypt, was still more extraordinary. Euseb. de Martyr.
Palestin. c. 5.

Note: M. Guizot states, that the acts of Tarachus and his companion
contain nothing that appears dictated by violent feelings, (sentiment
outre.) Nothing can be more painful than the constant attempt of Gibbon
throughout this discussion, to find some flaw in the virtue and heroism
of the martyrs, some extenuation for the cruelty of the persecutors. But
truth must not be sacrificed even to well-grounded moral indignation.
Though the language of these martyrs is in great part that of calm de
fiance, of noble firmness, yet there are many expressions which betray
"resentment and contempt." "Children of Satan, worshippers of Devils,"
is their common appellation of the heathen. One of them calls the judge
another, one curses, and declares that he will curse the Emperors, as
pestilential and bloodthirsty tyrants, whom God will soon visit in his
wrath. On the other hand, though at first they speak the milder language
of persuasion, the cold barbarity of the judges and officers might
surely have called forth one sentence of abhorrence from Gibbon. On the
first unsatisfactory answer, "Break his jaw," is the order of the judge.
They direct and witness the most excruciating tortures; the people, as
M. Guizot observers, were so much revolted by the cruelty of Maximus
that when the martyrs appeared in the amphitheatre, fear seized on all
hearts, and general murmurs against the unjust judge rank through the
assembly. It is singular, at least, that Gibbon should have quoted "as
probably authentic," acts so much embellished with miracle as these of
Tarachus are, particularly towards the end. - M.

Note: Scarcely were the authorities informed of this, than the president
of the province, a man, says Eusebius, harsh and cruel, banished the
confessors, some to Cyprus, others to different parts of Palestine, and
ordered them to be tormented by being set to the most painful labors.
Four of them, whom he required to abjure their faith and refused, were
burnt alive. Euseb. de Mart. Palest. c. xiii. - G. Two of these were
bishops; a fifth, Silvanus, bishop of Gaza, was the last martyr;
another, named John was blinded, but used to officiate, and recite from
memory long passages of the sacred writings - M.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[180](daf02007.htm#fr_202) Euseb. de Martyr.
Palestin. c. 13.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[181](daf02007.htm#fr_203) Augustin. Collat.
Carthagin. Dei, iii. c. 13, ap. Tillanant, Memoires Ecclesiastiques,
tom. v. part i. p. 46. The controversy with the Donatists, has reflected
some, though perhaps a partial, light on the history of the African
church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
Constantine. Part VIII.](daf02008)
