[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02007.md) 
[Next](daf02009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To Constantine. Part VIII.

The vague descriptions of exile and imprisonment, of pain and torture,
are so easily exaggerated or softened by the pencil of an artful orator,
 <span id="fr_204"></span>[\*\_0021](#fn_204.md) that we are naturally
induced to inquire into a fact of a more distinct and stubborn kind; the
number of persons who suffered death in consequence of the edicts
published by Diocletian, his associates, and his successors. The recent
legendaries record whole armies and cities, which were at once swept
away by the undistinguishing rage of persecution. The more ancient
writers content themselves with pouring out a liberal effusion of loose
and tragical invectives, without condescending to ascertain the precise
number of those persons who were permitted to seal with their blood
their belief of the gospel. From the history of Eusebius, it may,
however, be collected, that only nine bishops were punished with death;
and we are assured, by his particular enumeration of the martyrs of
Palestine, that no more than ninety-two Christians were entitled to that
honorable appellation.  <span id="fr_205"></span>[182](#fn_205.md)  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[!\_0021](#fn_206.md) As we are unacquainted with the
degree of episcopal zeal and courage which prevailed at that time, it is
not in our power to draw any useful inferences from the former of these
facts: but the latter may serve to justify a very important and probable
conclusion. According to the distribution of Roman provinces, Palestine
may be considered as the sixteenth part of the Eastern empire:  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[183](#fn_207.md) and since there were some governors,
who from a real or affected clemency had preserved their hands unstained
with the blood of the faithful,  <span id="fr_208"></span>[184](#fn_208.md)
it is reasonable to believe, that the country which had given birth to
Christianity, produced at least the sixteenth part of the martyrs who
suffered death within the dominions of Galerius and Maximin; the whole
might consequently amount to about fifteen hundred, a number which, if
it is equally divided between the ten years of the persecution, will
allow an annual consumption of one hundred and fifty martyrs. Allotting
the same proportion to the provinces of Italy, Africa, and perhaps
Spain, where, at the end of two or three years, the rigor of the penal
laws was either suspended or abolished, the multitude of Christians in
the Roman empire, on whom a capital punishment was inflicted by a
judicia, sentence, will be reduced to somewhat less than two thousand
persons. Since it cannot be doubted that the Christians were more
numerous, and their enemies more exasperated, in the time of Diocletian,
than they had ever been in any former persecution, this probable and
moderate computation may teach us to estimate the number of primitive
saints and martyrs who sacrificed their lives for the important purpose
of introducing Christianity into the world.

We shall conclude this chapter by a melancholy truth, which obtrudes
itself on the reluctant mind; that even admitting, without hesitation or
inquiry, all that history has recorded, or devotion has feigned, on the
subject of martyrdoms, it must still be acknowledged, that the
Christians, in the course of their intestine dissensions, have inflicted
far greater severities on each other, than they had experienced from the
zeal of infidels. During the ages of ignorance which followed the
subversion of the Roman empire in the West, the bishops of the Imperial
city extended their dominion over the laity as well as clergy of the
Latin church. The fabric of superstition which they had erected, and
which might long have defied the feeble efforts of reason, was at length
assaulted by a crowd of daring fanatics, who from the twelfth to the
sixteenth century assumed the popular character of reformers. The church
of Rome defended by violence the empire which she had acquired by fraud;
a system of peace and benevolence was soon disgraced by proscriptions,
war, massacres, and the institution of the holy office. And as the
reformers were animated by the love of civil as well as of religious
freedom, the Catholic princes connected their own interest with that of
the clergy, and enforced by fire and the sword the terrors of spiritual
censures. In the Netherlands alone, more than one hundred thousand of
the subjects of Charles V. are said to have suffered by the hand of the
executioner; and this extraordinary number is attested by Grotius,
 <span id="fr_209"></span>[185](#fn_209.md) a man of genius and learning,
who preserved his moderation amidst the fury of contending sects, and
who composed the annals of his own age and country, at a time when the
invention of printing had facilitated the means of intelligence, and
increased the danger of detection. If we are obliged to submit our
belief to the authority of Grotius, it must be allowed, that the number
of Protestants, who were executed in a single province and a single
reign, far exceeded that of the primitive martyrs in the space of three
centuries, and of the Roman empire. But if the improbability of the fact
itself should prevail over the weight of evidence; if Grotius should be
convicted of exaggerating the merit and sufferings of the Reformers;
 <span id="fr_210"></span>[186](#fn_210.md) we shall be naturally led to
inquire what confidence can be placed in the doubtful and imperfect
monuments of ancient credulity; what degree of credit can be assigned to
a courtly bishop, and a passionate declaimer,  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[\*\_0022](#fn_211.md) who, under the protection of
Constantine, enjoyed the exclusive privilege of recording the
persecutions inflicted on the Christians by the vanquished rivals or
disregarded predecessors of their gracious sovereign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_204"></span>[\*\_0021](daf02008.htm#fr_204.md) Perhaps there
never was an instance of an author committing so deliberately the fault
which he reprobates so strongly in others. What is the dexterous
management of the more inartificial historians of Christianity, in
exaggerating the numbers of the martyrs, compared to the unfair address
with which Gibbon here quietly dismisses from the account all the
horrible and excruciating tortures which fell short of death? The reader
may refer to the xiith chapter (book viii.) of Eusebius for the
description and for the scenes of these tortures. - M.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[182](daf02008.htm#fr_205.md) Eusebius de Martyr.
Palestin. c. 13. He closes his narration by assuring us that these were
the martyrdoms inflicted in Palestine, during the whole course of the
persecution. The 9th chapter of his viiith book, which relates to the
province of Thebais in Egypt, may seem to contradict our moderate
computation; but it will only lead us to admire the artful management of
the historian. Choosing for the scene of the most exquisite cruelty the
most remote and sequestered country of the Roman empire, he relates that
in Thebais from ten to one hundred persons had frequently suffered
martyrdom in the same day. But when he proceeds to mention his own
journey into Egypt, his language insensibly becomes more cautious and
moderate. Instead of a large, but definite number, he speaks of many
Christians, and most artfully selects two ambiguous words, which may
signify either what he had seen, or what he had heard; either the
expectation, or the execution of the punishment. Having thus provided a
secure evasion, he commits the equivocal passage to his readers and
translators; justly conceiving that their piety would induce them to
prefer the most favorable sense. There was perhaps some malice in the
remark of Theodorus Metochita, that all who, like Eusebius, had been
conversant with the Egyptians, delighted in an obscure and intricate
style. (See Valesius ad loc.)

<span id="fn_206"></span>[!\_0021](daf02008.htm#fr_206.md) This calculation
is made from the martyrs, of whom Eusebius speaks by name; but he
recognizes a much greater number. Thus the ninth and tenth chapters of
his work are entitled, "Of Antoninus, Zebinus, Germanus, and other
martyrs; of Peter the monk. of Asclepius the Maroionite, and other
martyrs." \[Are these vague contents of chapters very good authority? -
M.\] Speaking of those who suffered under Diocletian, he says, "I will
only relate the death of one of these, from which, the reader may divine
what befell the rest." Hist. Eccl. viii. 6. \[This relates only to the
martyrs in the royal household. - M.\] Dodwell had made, before Gibbon,
this calculation and these objections; but Ruinart (Act. Mart. Pref p.
27, et seq.) has answered him in a peremptory manner: Nobis constat
Eusebium in historia infinitos passim martyres admisisse. quamvis revera
paucorum nomina recensuerit. Nec alium Eusebii interpretem quam ipsummet
Eusebium proferimus, qui (l. iii. c. 33) ait sub Trajano plurimosa ex
fidelibus martyrii certamen subiisse (l. v. init.) sub Antonino et Vero
innumerabiles prope martyres per universum orbem enituisse affirmat. (L.
vi. c. 1.) Severum persecutionem concitasse refert, in qua per omnes
ubique locorum Ecclesias, ab athletis pro pietate certantibus, illustria
confecta fuerunt martyria. Sic de Decii, sic de Valeriani,
persecutionibus loquitur, quae an Dodwelli faveant conjectionibus
judicet aequus lector. Even in the persecutions which Gibbon has
represented as much more mild than that of Diocletian, the number of
martyrs appears much greater than that to which he limits the martyrs of
the latter: and this number is attested by incontestable monuments. I
will quote but one example. We find among the letters of St. Cyprian one
from Lucianus to Celerinus, written from the depth of a prison, in which
Lucianus names seventeen of his brethren dead, some in the quarries,
some in the midst of tortures some of starvation in prison. Jussi sumus
(he proceeds) secundum prae ceptum imperatoris, fame et siti necari, et
reclusi sumus in duabus cellis, ta ut nos afficerent fame et siti et
ignis vapore. - G.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[183](daf02008.htm#fr_207.md) When Palestine was
divided into three, the praefecture of the East contained forty-eight
provinces. As the ancient distinctions of nations were long since
abolished, the Romans distributed the provinces according to a general
proportion of their extent and opulence.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[184](daf02008.htm#fr_208.md) Ut gloriari possint
nullam se innocentium poremisse, nam et ipse audivi aloquos gloriantes,
quia administratio sua, in hac paris merit incruenta. Lactant. Institur.
Divin v. 11.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[185](daf02008.htm#fr_209.md) Grot. Annal. de
Rebus Belgicis, l. i. p. 12, edit. fol.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[186](daf02008.htm#fr_210.md) Fra Paola (Istoria
del Concilio Tridentino, l. iii.) reduces the number of the Belgic
martyrs to 50,000. In learning and moderation Fra Paola was not inferior
to Grotius. The priority of time gives some advantage to the evidence of
the former, which he loses, on the other hand, by the distance of Venice
from the Netherlands.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[\*\_0022](daf02008.htm#fr_211.md) Eusebius and
the author of the Treatise de Mortibus Persecutorum. It is deeply to be
regretted that the history of this period rest so much on the loose and,
it must be admitted, by no means scrupulous authority of Eusebius.
Ecclesiastical history is a solemn and melancholy lesson that the best,
even the most sacred, cause will eventually the least departure from
truth! - M.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII: Foundation Of Constantinople. Part I.](daf02009.md)
