[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Gibbon](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](daf02005) 
[Next](daf02007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001VEIE66/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Vol. 2*, by Edward Gibbon,
\[1781\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To Constantine. Part VI.

Although the policy of Diocletian and the humanity of Constantius
inclined them to preserve inviolate the maxims of toleration, it was
soon discovered that their two associates, Maximian and Galerius,
entertained the most implacable aversion for the name and religion of
the Christians. The minds of those princes had never been enlightened by
science; education had never softened their temper. They owed their
greatness to their swords, and in their most elevated fortune they still
retained their superstitious prejudices of soldiers and peasants. In the
general administration of the provinces they obeyed the laws which their
benefactor had established; but they frequently found occasions of
exercising within their camp and palaces a secret persecution,  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[144](#fn_160) for which the imprudent zeal of the
Christians sometimes offered the most specious pretences. A sentence of
death was executed upon Maximilianus, an African youth, who had been
produced by his own father  <span id="fr_161"></span>[\*\_0015](#fn_161)
before the magistrate as a sufficient and legal recruit, but who
obstinately persisted in declaring, that his conscience would not permit
him to embrace the profession of a soldier.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[145](#fn_162) It could scarcely be expected that any
government should suffer the action of Marcellus the Centurion to pass
with impunity. On the day of a public festival, that officer threw away
his belt, his arms, and the ensigns of his office, and exclaimed with a
loud voice, that he would obey none but Jesus Christ the eternal King,
and that he renounced forever the use of carnal weapons, and the service
of an idolatrous master. The soldiers, as soon as they recovered from
their astonishment, secured the person of Marcellus. He was examined in
the city of Tingi by the president of that part of Mauritania; and as he
was convicted by his own confession, he was condemned and beheaded for
the crime of desertion.  <span id="fr_163"></span>[146](#fn_163)
Examples of such a nature savor much less of religious persecution than
of martial or even civil law; but they served to alienate the mind of
the emperors, to justify the severity of Galerius, who dismissed a great
number of Christian officers from their employments; and to authorize
the opinion, that a sect of enthusiastics, which avowed principles so
repugnant to the public safety, must either remain useless, or would
soon become dangerous, subjects of the empire.

After the success of the Persian war had raised the hopes and the
reputation of Galerius, he passed a winter with Diocletian in the palace
of Nicomedia; and the fate of Christianity became the object of their
secret consultations.  <span id="fr_164"></span>[147](#fn_164) The
experienced emperor was still inclined to pursue measures of lenity; and
though he readily consented to exclude the Christians from holding any
employments in the household or the army, he urged in the strongest
terms the danger as well as cruelty of shedding the blood of those
deluded fanatics. Galerius at length extorted  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[!!\_0016](#fn_165) from him the permission of
summoning a council, composed of a few persons the most distinguished in
the civil and military departments of the state. The important question
was agitated in their presence, and those ambitious courtiers easily
discerned, that it was incumbent on them to second, by their eloquence,
the importunate violence of the Caesar. It may be presumed, that they
insisted on every topic which might interest the pride, the piety, or
the fears, of their sovereign in the destruction of Christianity.
Perhaps they represented, that the glorious work of the deliverance of
the empire was left imperfect, as long as an independent people was
permitted to subsist and multiply in the heart of the provinces. The
Christians, (it might specially be alleged,) renouncing the gods and the
institutions of Rome, had constituted a distinct republic, which might
yet be suppressed before it had acquired any military force; but which
was already governed by its own laws and magistrates, was possessed of a
public treasure, and was intimately connected in all its parts by the
frequent assemblies of the bishops, to whose decrees their numerous and
opulent congregations yielded an implicit obedience. Arguments like
these may seem to have determined the reluctant mind of Diocletian to
embrace a new system of persecution; but though we may suspect, it is
not in our power to relate, the secret intrigues of the palace, the
private views and resentments, the jealousy of women or eunuchs, and all
those trifling but decisive causes which so often influence the fate of
empires, and the councils of the wisest monarchs.  <span
id="fr_166"></span>[148](#fn_166)

The pleasure of the emperors was at length signified to the Christians,
who, during the course of this melancholy winter, had expected, with
anxiety, the result of so many secret consultations. The twenty-third of
February, which coincided with the Roman festival of the Terminalia,
 <span id="fr_167"></span>[149](#fn_167) was appointed (whether from
accident or design) to set bounds to the progress of Christianity. At
the earliest dawn of day, the Praetorian praefect,  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[150](#fn_168) accompanied by several generals,
tribunes, and officers of the revenue, repaired to the principal church
of Nicomedia, which was situated on an eminence in the most populous and
beautiful part of the city. The doors were instantly broke open; they
rushed into the sanctuary; and as they searched in vain for some visible
object of worship, they were obliged to content themselves with
committing to the flames the volumes of the holy Scripture. The
ministers of Diocletian were followed by a numerous body of guards and
pioneers, who marched in order of battle, and were provided with all the
instruments used in the destruction of fortified cities. By their
incessant labor, a sacred edifice, which towered above the Imperial
palace, and had long excited the indignation and envy of the Gentiles,
was in a few hours levelled with the ground.  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[151](#fn_169)

The next day the general edict of persecution was published;  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[152](#fn_170) and though Diocletian, still averse to
the effusion of blood, had moderated the fury of Galerius, who proposed,
that every one refusing to offer sacrifice should immediately be burnt
alive, the penalties inflicted on the obstinacy of the Christians might
be deemed sufficiently rigorous and effectual. It was enacted, that
their churches, in all the provinces of the empire, should be demolished
to their foundations; and the punishment of death was denounced against
all who should presume to hold any secret assemblies for the purpose of
religious worship. The philosophers, who now assumed the unworthy office
of directing the blind zeal of persecution, had diligently studied the
nature and genius of the Christian religion; and as they were not
ignorant that the speculative doctrines of the faith were supposed to be
contained in the writings of the prophets, of the evangelists, and of
the apostles, they most probably suggested the order, that the bishops
and presbyters should deliver all their sacred books into the hands of
the magistrates; who were commanded, under the severest penalties, to
burn them in a public and solemn manner. By the same edict, the property
of the church was at once confiscated; and the several parts of which it
might consist were either sold to the highest bidder, united to the
Imperial domain, bestowed on the cities and corporations, or granted to
the solicitations of rapacious courtiers. After taking such effectual
measures to abolish the worship, and to dissolve the government of the
Christians, it was thought necessary to subject to the most intolerable
hardships the condition of those perverse individuals who should still
reject the religion of nature, of Rome, and of their ancestors. Persons
of a liberal birth were declared incapable of holding any honors or
employments; slaves were forever deprived of the hopes of freedom, and
the whole body of the people were put out of the protection of the law.
The judges were authorized to hear and to determine every action that
was brought against a Christian. But the Christians were not permitted
to complain of any injury which they themselves had suffered; and thus
those unfortunate sectaries were exposed to the severity, while they
were excluded from the benefits, of public justice. This new species of
martyrdom, so painful and lingering, so obscure and ignominious, was,
perhaps, the most proper to weary the constancy of the faithful: nor can
it be doubted that the passions and interest of mankind were disposed on
this occasion to second the designs of the emperors. But the policy of a
well-ordered government must sometimes have interposed in behalf of the
oppressed Christians;  <span id="fr_171"></span>[\*\_0017](#fn_171) nor
was it possible for the Roman princes entirely to remove the
apprehension of punishment, or to connive at every act of fraud and
violence, without exposing their own authority and the rest of their
subjects to the most alarming dangers.  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[153](#fn_172)

This edict was scarcely exhibited to the public view, in the most
conspicuous place of Nicomedia, before it was torn down by the hands of
a Christian, who expressed at the same time, by the bitterest
invectives, his contempt as well as abhorrence for such impious and
tyrannical governors. His offence, according to the mildest laws,
amounted to treason, and deserved death. And if it be true that he was a
person of rank and education, those circumstances could serve only to
aggravate his guilt. He was burnt, or rather roasted, by a slow fire;
and his executioners, zealous to revenge the personal insult which had
been offered to the emperors, exhausted every refinement of cruelty,
without being able to subdue his patience, or to alter the steady and
insulting smile which in his dying agonies he still preserved in his
countenance. The Christians, though they confessed that his conduct had
not been strictly conformable to the laws of prudence, admired the
divine fervor of his zeal; and the excessive commendations which they
lavished on the memory of their hero and martyr, contributed to fix a
deep impression of terror and hatred in the mind of Diocletian.  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[154](#fn_173)

His fears were soon alarmed by the view of a danger from which he very
narrowly escaped. Within fifteen days the palace of Nicomedia, and even
the bed-chamber of Diocletian, were twice in flames; and though both
times they were extinguished without any material damage, the singular
repetition of the fire was justly considered as an evident proof that it
had not been the effect of chance or negligence. The suspicion naturally
fell on the Christians; and it was suggested, with some degree of
probability, that those desperate fanatics, provoked by their present
sufferings, and apprehensive of impending calamities, had entered into a
conspiracy with their faithful brethren, the eunuchs of the palace,
against the lives of two emperors, whom they detested as the
irreconcilable enemies of the church of God. Jealousy and resentment
prevailed in every breast, but especially in that of Diocletian. A great
number of persons, distinguished either by the offices which they had
filled, or by the favor which they had enjoyed, were thrown into prison.
Every mode of torture was put in practice, and the court, as well as
city, was polluted with many bloody executions.  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[155](#fn_174) But as it was found impossible to
extort any discovery of this mysterious transaction, it seems incumbent
on us either to presume the innocence, or to admire the resolution, of
the sufferers. A few days afterwards Galerius hastily withdrew himself
from Nicomedia, declaring, that if he delayed his departure from that
devoted palace, he should fall a sacrifice to the rage of the
Christians. The ecclesiastical historians, from whom alone we derive a
partial and imperfect knowledge of this persecution, are at a loss how
to account for the fears and dangers of the emperors. Two of these
writers, a prince and a rhetorician, were eye- witnesses of the fire of
Nicomedia. The one ascribes it to lightning, and the divine wrath; the
other affirms, that it was kindled by the malice of Galerius himself.
 <span id="fr_175"></span>[156](#fn_175)

As the edict against the Christians was designed for a general law of
the whole empire, and as Diocletian and Galerius, though they might not
wait for the consent, were assured of the concurrence, of the Western
princes, it would appear more consonant to our ideas of policy, that the
governors of all the provinces should have received secret instructions
to publish, on one and the same day, this declaration of war within
their respective departments. It was at least to be expected, that the
convenience of the public highways and established posts would have
enabled the emperors to transmit their orders with the utmost despatch
from the palace of Nicomedia to the extremities of the Roman world; and
that they would not have suffered fifty days to elapse, before the edict
was published in Syria, and near four months before it was signified to
the cities of Africa.  <span id="fr_176"></span>[157](#fn_176) This
delay may perhaps be imputed to the cautious temper of Diocletian, who
had yielded a reluctant consent to the measures of persecution, and who
was desirous of trying the experiment under his more immediate eye,
before he gave way to the disorders and discontent which it must
inevitably occasion in the distant provinces. At first, indeed, the
magistrates were restrained from the effusion of blood; but the use of
every other severity was permitted, and even recommended to their zeal;
nor could the Christians, though they cheerfully resigned the ornaments
of their churches, resolve to interrupt their religious assemblies, or
to deliver their sacred books to the flames. The pious obstinacy of
Felix, an African bishop, appears to have embarrassed the subordinate
ministers of the government. The curator of his city sent him in chains
to the proconsul. The proconsul transmitted him to the Praetorian
praefect of Italy; and Felix, who disdained even to give an evasive
answer, was at length beheaded at Venusia, in Lucania, a place on which
the birth of Horace has conferred fame.  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[158](#fn_177) This precedent, and perhaps some
Imperial rescript, which was issued in consequence of it, appeared to
authorize the governors of provinces, in punishing with death the
refusal of the Christians to deliver up their sacred books. There were
undoubtedly many persons who embraced this opportunity of obtaining the
crown of martyrdom; but there were likewise too many who purchased an
ignominious life, by discovering and betraying the holy Scripture into
the hands of infidels. A great number even of bishops and presbyters
acquired, by this criminal compliance, the opprobrious epithet of
Traditors; and their offence was productive of much present scandal and
of much future discord in the African church.  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[159](#fn_178)

The copies as well as the versions of Scripture, were already so
multiplied in the empire, that the most severe inquisition could no
longer be attended with any fatal consequences; and even the sacrifice
of those volumes, which, in every congregation, were preserved for
public use, required the consent of some treacherous and unworthy
Christians. But the ruin of the churches was easily effected by the
authority of the government, and by the labor of the Pagans. In some
provinces, however, the magistrates contented themselves with shutting
up the places of religious worship. In others, they more literally
complied with the terms of the edict; and after taking away the doors,
the benches, and the pulpit, which they burnt as it were in a funeral
pile, they completely demolished the remainder of the edifice.  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[160](#fn_179) It is perhaps to this melancholy
occasion that we should apply a very remarkable story, which is related
with so many circumstances of variety and improbability, that it serves
rather to excite than to satisfy our curiosity. In a small town in
Phrygia, of whose names as well as situation we are left ignorant, it
should seem that the magistrates and the body of the people had embraced
the Christian faith; and as some resistance might be apprehended to the
execution of the edict, the governor of the province was supported by a
numerous detachment of legionaries. On their approach the citizens threw
themselves into the church, with the resolution either of defending by
arms that sacred edifice, or of perishing in its ruins. They indignantly
rejected the notice and permission which was given them to retire, till
the soldiers, provoked by their obstinate refusal, set fire to the
building on all sides, and consumed, by this extraordinary kind of
martyrdom, a great number of Phrygians, with their wives and children.
 <span id="fr_180"></span>[161](#fn_180)

Some slight disturbances, though they were suppressed almost as soon as
excited, in Syria and the frontiers of Armenia, afforded the enemies of
the church a very plausible occasion to insinuate, that those troubles
had been secretly fomented by the intrigues of the bishops, who had
already forgotten their ostentatious professions of passive and
unlimited obedience.  <span id="fr_181"></span>[162](#fn_181) The
resentment, or the fears, of Diocletian, at length transported him
beyond the bounds of moderation, which he had hitherto preserved, and he
declared, in a series of cruel edicts,  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[!\_0018](#fn_182) his intention of abolishing the
Christian name. By the first of these edicts, the governors of the
provinces were directed to apprehend all persons of the ecclesiastical
order; and the prisons, destined for the vilest criminals, were soon
filled with a multitude of bishops, presbyters, deacons, readers, and
exorcists. By a second edict, the magistrates were commanded to employ
every method of severity, which might reclaim them from their odious
superstition, and oblige them to return to the established worship of
the gods. This rigorous order was extended, by a subsequent edict, to
the whole body of Christians, who were exposed to a violent and general
persecution.  <span id="fr_183"></span>[163](#fn_183) Instead of those
salutary restraints, which had required the direct and solemn testimony
of an accuser, it became the duty as well as the interest of the
Imperial officers to discover, to pursue, and to torment the most
obnoxious among the faithful. Heavy penalties were denounced against all
who should presume to save a prescribed sectary from the just
indignation of the gods, and of the emperors. Yet, notwithstanding the
severity of this law, the virtuous courage of many of the Pagans, in
concealing their friends or relations, affords an honorable proof, that
the rage of superstition had not extinguished in their minds the
sentiments of nature and humanity.  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[164](#fn_184)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_160"></span>[144](daf02006.htm#fr_160) Eusebius, l. viii.
c. 4, c. 17. He limits the number of military martyrs, by a remarkable
expression, of which neither his Latin nor French translator have
rendered the energy. Notwithstanding the authority of Eusebius, and the
silence of Lactantius, Ambrose, Sulpicius, Orosius, &c., it has been
long believed, that the Thebaean legion, consisting of 6000 Christians,
suffered martyrdom by the order of Maximian, in the valley of the
Pennine Alps. The story was first published about the middle of the 5th
century, by Eucherius, bishop of Lyons, who received it from certain
persons, who received it from Isaac, bishop of Geneva, who is said to
have received it from Theodore, bishop of Octodurum. The abbey of St.
Maurice still subsists, a rich monument of the credulity of Sigismund,
king of Burgundy. See an excellent Dissertation in xxxvith volume of the
Bibliotheque Raisonnee, p. 427-454.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[\*\_0015](daf02006.htm#fr_161) M. Guizot
criticizes Gibbon's account of this incident. He supposes that
Maximilian was not "produced by his father as a recruit," but was
obliged to appear by the law, which compelled the sons of soldiers to
serve at 21 years old. Was not this a law of Constantine? Neither does
this circumstance appear in the acts. His father had clearly expected
him to serve, as he had bought him a new dress for the occasion; yet he
refused to force the conscience of his son. and when Maximilian was
condemned to death, the father returned home in joy, blessing God for
having bestowed upon him such a son. - M.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[145](daf02006.htm#fr_162) See the Acta
Sincera, p. 299. The accounts of his martyrdom and that of Marcellus,
bear every mark of truth and authenticity.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[146](daf02006.htm#fr_163) Acta Sincera, p.
302.

Note: M. Guizot here justly observes, that it was the necessity of
sacrificing to the gods, which induced Marcellus to act in this manner.
- M.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[147](daf02006.htm#fr_164) De M. P. c. 11.
Lactantius (or whoever was the author of this little treatise) was, at
that time, an inhabitant of Nicomedia; but it seems difficult to
conceive how he could acquire so accurate a knowledge of what passed in
the Imperial cabinet.

Note: Lactantius, who was subsequently chosen by Constantine to educate
Crispus, might easily have learned these details from Constantine
himself, already of sufficient age to interest himself in the affairs of
the government, and in a position to obtain the best information. - G.
This assumes the doubtful point of the authorship of the Treatise. - M.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[!!\_0016](daf02006.htm#fr_165) This permission
was not extorted from Diocletian; he took the step of his own accord.
Lactantius says, in truth, Nec tamen deflectere potuit (Diocletianus)
praecipitis hominis insaniam; placuit ergo amicorum sententiam experiri.
(De Mort. Pers. c. 11.) But this measure was in accordance with the
artificial character of Diocletian, who wished to have the appearance of
doing good by his own impulse and evil by the impulse of others. Nam
erat hujus malitiae, cum bonum quid facere decrevisse sine consilio
faciebat, ut ipse laudaretur. Cum autem malum. quoniam id reprehendendum
sciebat, in consilium multos advocabat, ut alioram culpao adscriberetur
quicquid ipse deliquerat. Lact. ib. Eutropius says likewise, Miratus
callide fuit, sagax praeterea et admodum subtilis ingenio, et qui
severitatem suam aliena invidia vellet explere. Eutrop. ix. c. 26. - G.

The manner in which the coarse and unfriendly pencil of the author of
the Treatise de Mort. Pers. has drawn the character of Diocletian, seems
inconsistent with this profound subtilty. Many readers will perhaps
agree with Gibbon. - M.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[148](daf02006.htm#fr_166) The only
circumstance which we can discover, is the devotion and jealousy of the
mother of Galerius. She is described by Lactantius, as Deorum montium
cultrix; mulier admodum superstitiosa. She had a great influence over
her son, and was offended by the disregard of some of her Christian
servants.

Note: This disregard consisted in the Christians fasting and praying
instead of participating in the banquets and sacrifices which she
celebrated with the Pagans. Dapibus sacrificabat poene quotidie ac
vicariis suis epulis exhibebat. Christiani abstinebant, et illa cum
gentibus epulante, jejuniis hi et oratiomibus insisteban; hine concepit
odium Lact de Hist. Pers. c. 11. - G.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[149](daf02006.htm#fr_167) The worship and
festival of the god Terminus are elegantly illustrated by M. de Boze,
Mem. de l'Academie des Inscriptions, tom. i. p. 50.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[150](daf02006.htm#fr_168) In our only MS. of
Lactantius, we read profectus; but reason, and the authority of all the
critics, allow us, instead of that word, which destroys the sense of the
passage, to substitute proefectus.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[151](daf02006.htm#fr_169) Lactantius, de M. P.
c. 12, gives a very lively picture of the destruction of the church.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[152](daf02006.htm#fr_170) Mosheim, (p. 922 -
926,) from man scattered passages of Lactantius and Eusebius, has
collected a very just and accurate notion of this edict though he
sometimes deviates into conjecture and refinement.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[\*\_0017](daf02006.htm#fr_171) This wants
proof. The edict of Diocletian was executed in all its right during the
rest of his reign. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l viii. c. 13. - G.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[153](daf02006.htm#fr_172) Many ages
afterwards, Edward J. practised, with great success, the same mode of
persecution against the clergy of England. See Hume's History of
England, vol. ii. p. 300, last 4to edition.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[154](daf02006.htm#fr_173) Lactantius only
calls him quidam, et si non recte, magno tamer animo, &c., c. 12.
Eusebius (l. viii. c. 5) adorns him with secular honora Neither have
condescended to mention his name; but the Greeks celebrate his memory
under that of John. See Tillemont, Memones Ecclesiastiques, tom. v. part
ii. p. 320.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[155](daf02006.htm#fr_174) Lactantius de M. P.
c. 13, 14. Potentissimi quondam Eunuchi necati, per quos Palatium et
ipse constabat. Eusebius (l. viii. c. 6) mentions the cruel executions
of the eunuchs, Gorgonius and Dorotheus, and of Anthimius, bishop of
Nicomedia; and both those writers describe, in a vague but tragical
manner, the horrid scenes which were acted even in the Imperial
presence.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[156](daf02006.htm#fr_175) See Lactantius,
Eusebius, and Constantine, ad Coetum Sanctorum, c. xxv. Eusebius
confesses his ignorance of the cause of this fire. Note: As the history
of these times affords us no example of any attempts made by the
Christians against their persecutors, we have no reason, not the
slightest probability, to attribute to them the fire in the palace; and
the authority of Constantine and Lactantius remains to explain it. M. de
Tillemont has shown how they can be reconciled. Hist. des Empereurs, Vie
de Diocletian, xix. - G. Had it been done by a Christian, it would
probably have been a fanatic, who would have avowed and gloried in it.
Tillemont's supposition that the fire was first caused by lightning, and
fed and increased by the malice of Galerius, seems singularly
improbable. - M.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[157](daf02006.htm#fr_176) Tillemont, Memoires
Ecclesiast. tom. v. part i. p. 43.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[158](daf02006.htm#fr_177) See the Acta Sincera
of Ruinart, p. 353; those of Felix of Thibara, or Tibiur, appear much
less corrupted than in the other editions, which afford a lively
specimen of legendary license.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[159](daf02006.htm#fr_178) See the first book
of Optatus of Milevis against the Donatiste, Paris, 1700, edit. Dupin.
He lived under the reign of Valens.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[160](daf02006.htm#fr_179) The ancient
monuments, published at the end of Optatus, p. 261, &c. describe, in a
very circumstantial manner, the proceedings of the governors in the
destruction of churches. They made a minute inventory of the plate, &c.,
which they found in them. That of the church of Cirta, in Numidia, is
still extant. It consisted of two chalices of gold, and six of silver;
six urns, one kettle, seven lamps, all likewise of silver; besides a
large quantity of brass utensils, and wearing apparel.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[161](daf02006.htm#fr_180) Lactantius
(Institut. Divin. v. 11) confines the calamity to the conventiculum,
with its congregation. Eusebius (viii. 11) extends it to a whole city,
and introduces something very like a regular siege. His ancient Latin
translator, Rufinus, adds the important circumstance of the permission
given to the inhabitants of retiring from thence. As Phrygia reached to
the confines of Isauria, it is possible that the restless temper of
those independent barbarians may have contributed to this misfortune.
Note: Universum populum. Lact. Inst. Div. v. 11. - G.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[162](daf02006.htm#fr_181) Eusebius, l. viii.
c. 6. M. de Valois (with some probability) thinks that he has discovered
the Syrian rebellion in an oration of Libanius; and that it was a rash
attempt of the tribune Eugenius, who with only five hundred men seized
Antioch, and might perhaps allure the Christians by the promise of
religious toleration. From Eusebius, (l. ix. c. 8,) as well as from
Moses of Chorene, (Hist. Armen. l. ii. 77, &c.,) it may be inferred,
that Christianity was already introduced into Armenia.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[!\_0018](daf02006.htm#fr_182) He had already
passed them in his first edict. It does not appear that resentment or
fear had any share in the new persecutions: perhaps they originated in
superstition, and a specious apparent respect for its ministers. The
oracle of Apollo, consulted by Diocletian, gave no answer; and said that
just men hindered it from speaking. Constantine, who assisted at the
ceremony, affirms, with an oath, that when questioned about these men,
the high priest named the Christians. "The Emperor eagerly seized on
this answer; and drew against the innocent a sword, destined only to
punish the guilty: he instantly issued edicts, written, if I may use the
expression, with a poniard; and ordered the judges to employ all their
skill to invent new modes of punishment. Euseb. Vit Constant. l. ii c
54." - G.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[163](daf02006.htm#fr_183) See Mosheim, p. 938:
the text of Eusebius very plainly shows that the governors, whose powers
were enlarged, not restrained, by the new laws, could punish with death
the most obstinate Christians as an example to their brethren.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[164](daf02006.htm#fr_184) Athanasius, p. 833,
ap. Tillemont, Mem. Ecclesiast. tom v part i. 90.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI: Conduct Towards The Christians, From Nero To
Constantine. Part VII.](daf02007)
