[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc126)  [Next](ffcc240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

# SECTION I

## THE LIVING FAIRY FAITH

## CHAPTER III

### AN ANTHROPOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF THE EVIDENCE

Anthropology is concerned with man and what is in man--*humani* *nihil
a* *se alienum putat*.--ANDREW LANG.

The Celtic Fairy-Faith as part of a World-wide Animism--Shaping
Influence of Social Psychology--Smallness of Elvish Spirits and Fairies,
according to Ethnology, Animism, and Occult Sciences--The Changeling
Belief and its explanation according to the Kidnap, Human-Sacrifice,
Soul-Wandering, and Demon-Possession Theory--Ancient and Modern Magic
and Witchcraft shown to be based on definite psychological
laws--Exorcisms--Taboos, of Name, Food, Iron, Place--Taboos among
Ancient Celts--Food-Sacrifice--Legend of the Dead--Conclusion: The
background of the modern belief in Fairies is animistic.

### THE CELTIC FAIRY-FAITH AS PART OF A WORLD-WIDE ANIMISM

THE modern belief in fairies, with which until now we have been
specifically concerned, is Celtic only in so far as it reflects Celtic
traditions and customs, Celtic myth and religion, and Celtic social and
environmental conditions. Otherwise, as will be shown throughout this
and succeeding chapters, it is in essence a part of a world-wide
animism, which forms the background of all religions in whatever stage
of culture religions exist or to which they have attained by evolution,
from the barbarism of the Congo black man to the civilization of the
Archbishop of Canterbury; and as far back as we can go into human
origins there is some corresponding belief in a fairy or spirit realm,
as there is to-day among contemporary civilized and uncivilized races of
all countries. We may therefore very profitably begin

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

our examination of the living Fairy-Faith of the Celts by comparing it
with a few examples, taken almost at random, from the animistic beliefs
current among non-Celtic peoples.

To the Arunta tribes of Central Australia, furthest removed in space
from the Celts and hence least likely to have been influenced by them,
let us go first, in order to examine their doctrine of ancestral
*Alcheringa* beings and of the *Iruntarinia*, which offers an almost
complete parallel to the Celtic belief in fairies. These *Alcheringa*
beings and *Iruntarinia*--to ignore the secondary differences between
the two--are a spirit race inhabiting an invisible or fairy world. Only
certain persons, medicine-men and seers, can see them; and these
describe them as thin and shadowy, and, like the Irish *Sidhe*, as
always youthful in appearance. Precisely like their Celtic counterparts
in general, these Australian spirits are believed to haunt inanimate
objects such as stones and trees; or to frequent totem centres, as in
Ireland demons (daemons) are believed to frequent certain places known
to have been anciently dedicated to the religious rites of the
pre-Christian Celts; and, quite after the manner of the Breton dead and
of most fairies, they are said to control human affairs and natural
phenomena. All the Arunta invariably regard themselves as incarnations
or reincarnations of these ancestral spirit-beings; and, in accordance
with evidence to be set forth in our seventh chapter, ancient and modern
Celts have likewise regarded themselves as incarnations or
reincarnations of ancestors and of fairy beings. Also the Arunta think
of the *Alcheringa* beings exactly as Celts think of fairies: as real
invisible entities who must be propitiated if men wish to secure their
goodwill; and as beneficent and protecting beings when not offended, who
may attach themselves to individuals as guardian spirits. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_112)

Among the Melanesian peoples there is an equally firm faith in spiritual
beings, which they call *Vui* and *Wui*, and

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

these beings have very many of the chief attributes of the *Alcheringa*
beings. <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_113)

In Africa, the *Amatongo*, or *Abapansi* of Amazulu belief, have
essentially the same motives for action toward men and women, and
exhibit the same powers, as the Scotch and Irish peasants assign to the
'good people'. They *take* the living through death; and people so
*taken* appear afterwards as apparitions, having become
*Amatongo*. <span id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_114)

In the New World, we find in the North American Red Men a race as much
given as the Celts are to a belief in various spirits like fairies. They
believe that there are spirits in lakes, in rivers and in waterfalls, in
rocks and trees, in the earth and in the air; and that these beings
produce storms, droughts, good and bad harvests, abundance and scarcity
of game, disease, and the varying fortunes of men. Mr. Leland, who has
carefully studied these American beliefs, says that the *Un à
games-suk*, or little spirits inhabiting rocks and streams, play a much
more influential part in the social and religious life of the North
American Red Men than elves or fairies ever did among the Aryans. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[3](#fn_115)

In Asia there is the well-known and elaborate animistic creed of the
Chinese and of the Japanese, to be in part illustrated in subsequent
sections. In popular Indian belief, as found in the Panjab, there is no
essential difference between various orders of beings endowed with
immortality, such as ghosts and spirits on the one hand, and gods,
demigods, and warriors on the other; for whether in bodies in this world
or out of bodies in the invisible world, they equally live and
act--quite as fairies do. <span id="fr_132"></span>[4](#fn_116)
Throughout the Malay Peninsula, belief in many orders of good and bad
spirits, in demon-possession, in exorcism, and in the power of black
magicians is very common. <span id="fr_133"></span>[5](#fn_117) But in
the *Phi* races of Siam

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

we discover what is probably the most important and complete parallel to
the Celtic Fairy-Faith existing in Asia.

According to the Siamese folk-belief, all the stars and various planets,
as well as the ethereal spaces, are the dwelling-places of the
*Thévadas*, gods and goddesses of the old pre-Buddhist mythology, who
correspond pretty closely to the Tuatha De Danann of Irish mythology;
and this world itself is peopled by legions of minor deities called
*Phi*, who include all the various orders of good and bad spirits
continually influencing mankind. Some of these *Phi* live in forests, in
trees, in open spaces; and watercourses are full of them. Others inhabit
mountains and high places. A particular order who haunt the sacred trees
surrounding the Buddhist temples are known as *Phi nang mai*; and since
*nang* is the word for female, and *mai* for tree, they are comparable
to tree-dwelling fairies, or Greek wood-nymphs. Still another order
called *Chao phum phi* (gods of the earth) are like house-frequenting
brownies, fairies, and pixies, or like certain orders of *corrigans* who
haunt barns, stables, and dwellings; and in many curious details these
*Chao phum phi* correspond to the Penates of ancient Rome. Not only is
the worship of this order of *Phi* widespread in Siam, but to every
other order of *Phi* altars are erected and propitiatory offerings made
by all classes of the Siamese people. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_118)

Before passing westwards to Europe, in completion of our rapid folk-lore
tour of the world, we may observe that the Persians, even those who are
well educated, have a firm belief in *jinns* and *afreets*, different
orders of good and bad spirits with all the chief characteristics of
fairies. <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_119) And modern Arabs and
Egyptians and Egyptian Turks hold similar animistic beliefs. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_120)

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

In Europe, the Greek peasant as firmly believes in nymphs or nereids as
the Celtic peasant believes in fairies; and nymphs, nereids, and fairies
alike are often the survivals of an ancient mythology. Mr. J. C. Lawson,
who has very carefully investigated the folk-lore of modern Greece,
says: 'The nereids are conceived as women half-divine yet not immortal,
always young, always beautiful, capricious at best, and at their worst
cruel. Their presence is suspected everywhere. I myself had a nereid
pointed out to me by my guide, and there certainly was the semblance of
a female figure draped in white, and tall beyond human stature, flitting
in the dusk between the gnarled and twisted boles of an old olive-yard.
What the apparition was, I had no leisure to investigate; for my guide
with many signs of the cross and muttered invocations of the Virgin
urged my mule to perilous haste along the rough mountain path.' Like
Celtic fairies, these Greek nereids have their queens; they dance all
night, disappearing at cock-crow; they can cast spells on animals or
maladies on men and women; they can shift their shape; they *take*
children in death and make changelings; and they fall in love with young
men. <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_121)

Among the Roumain peoples the widespread belief in the *lele* shows in
other ways equally marked parallels with the Fairy-Faith of the Celts.
These *lele* wait at cross-roads and near dwellings, or at village
fountains or in fields and woods, where they can best cast on men and
women various maladies. Sometimes they fall in love with beautiful young
men and women, and have on such occasions even been controlled by their
mortal lovers. They are extremely fond of music and dancing, and many a
shepherd with his pipes has been favoured by them, though they have
their own music and songs too. The Albanian peoples have evil fairies,
no taller than children twelve years old, called in Modern Greek τὰ

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

ἐξωτικά, 'those without,' who correspond to the *Iele*. Young people who
have been enticed to enter their round dance afterwards waste away and
die, apparently becoming one of 'those without'. These Albanian spirits,
like the 'good people' and the Breton dead, have their own particular
paths and retreats, and whoever violates these is struck and falls
ill. <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_122) These parallels from Roumain
lands are probably due to the close Aryan relationship between the
Roumains, the Greeks, and the Celts. The *Iele* seem nothing more than
the nymphs and nereids of classical antiquity transformed under
Christian influence into beings who contradict their original good
character, as in Celtic lands the fairy-folk have likewise come to be
fallen angels and evil spirits.

There is an even closer relationship between the Italian and Celtic
fairies. For example, among the Etruscan-Roman people there are now
flourishing animistic beliefs almost identical in all details with the
Fairy-Faith of the Celts. <span id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_123) In a
very valuable study on the Neo-Latin Fay, Mr. H. C. Coote writes:--'Who
were the Fays--the *fate* of later Italy, the *fées* of mediaeval
France? For it is perfectly clear that the *fatua*, *fata*, and *fée*
are all one and the same word.' And he proceeds to show that the race of
immortal damsels whom the old natives of Italy called *Fatuae* gave
origin to all the family of *fées* as these appear in Latin countries,
and that the Italians recognized in the Greek nymphs their own
*Fatuae*. <span id="fr_140"></span>[3](#fn_124)

It is quite evident that we have here discovered in Italy, as we
discovered in Greece and Roumain lands, fairies very Celtic in
character; and should further examination be made of modern European
folk-lore yet other similar fairies would be found, such, for example,
as the elves of Germany and of Scandinavia, or as the *servans* of the
Swiss peasant. And in all cases, whether the beliefs examined be Celtic
or

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

non-Celtic, Aryan or non-Aryan, from Australia, Polynesia, Africa,
America, Asia, or Europe, they are in essence animistically the same, as
later sections in this chapter will make clear. But while the
parallelism of these beliefs is indicated it is, of course, not meant
for a moment that in all of the cases or in any one of the cases the
specific differences are not considerable. The ground of comparison
consists simply in those generic characteristics which these
fairy-faiths, as they may be called, invariably display--characteristics
which we have good precedent for summing up in the single adjective
animistic.

### SHAPING INFLUENCE OF SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

For the term animism we have to thank Dr. E. B. Tylor, whose *Primitive
Culture*, in which the animistic theory is developed, may almost be said
to mark the beginning of scientific anthropology. In this work, however,
there is a decided tendency (which indeed displays itself in most of the
leading anthropological works, as, for example, in those by Dr. Frazer)
to regard men, or at any rate primitive men, as having a mind absolutely
homogeneous, and therefore as thinking, feeling, and acting in the same
way under all conditions alike. But a decided change is beginning to
manifest itself in the interpretation of the customs and beliefs of the
ruder races. It is assumed as a working principle that each ethnic group
has or tends to have an individuality of its own, and, moreover, that
the members of such a group think, feel, and act primarily as the
representatives, so to speak, of that ethnic individuality in which they
live, move, and have their being. That is to say, a social as contrasted
with an individual psychology must, it is held, pronounce both the first
and last word regarding all matters of mythology, religion, and art in
its numerous forms. The reason is that these are social products, and as
such are to be understood only in the light of the laws governing the
workings of the collective mind of any particular ethnic group. Such a
method is, for instance, employed in Mr. William McDougall's *Social
Psychology*, in Mr. R. R. Marett's *Threshold of Religion*,

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

and in many anthropological articles to be found in *L'Année
Sociologique*.

If, therefore, we hold by this new and fruitful method of social
psychology we must be prepared to treat the Fairy-Faith of the Celtic
peoples also in and for itself, as expressive of an individuality more
or less unique. It might, indeed, be objected that these peoples are not
a single social group, but rather a number of such groups, and this is,
in a way, true. Nevertheless their folk-lore displays such remarkable
homogeneity, from whatever quarter of the Celtic world it be derived,
that it seems the soundest method to treat them as one people for all
the purposes of the student of sociology, mythology, and religion.
Granting, then, such a unity in the beliefs of the pan-Celtic race, we
are finally obliged to distinguish as it were two aspects thereof.

On the one hand there is shown, even in the mere handful of non-Celtic
parallels, which for reasons of space we have been content to cite, as
well as in their Celtic equivalents, a generic element common to all
peoples living under primitive conditions of society. It is emphatically
a social element, but at the same time one which any primitive society
is bound to display. On the other hand, in a second aspect, the Celtic
beliefs show of themselves a character which is wholly Celtic: in the
Fairy-Faith, which is generically animistic, we find reflected all sorts
of specific characteristics of the Celtic peoples--their patriotism,
their peculiar type of imagination, their costumes, amusements,
household life, and social and religious customs generally. With this
fact in mind, we may proceed to examine certain of the more specialized
aspects of the Fairy-Faith, as manifested both among Celts and
elsewhere.

### THE SMALLNESS OF ELVISH SPIRITS AND FAIRIES

Ethnological or Pygmy Theory

In any anthropological estimate of the Fairy-Faith, the pygmy stature so
commonly attributed to various orders of Celtic and of non-Celtic
fairies should be considered.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Various scholarly
champions of the Pygmy Theory have attempted to explain this smallness
of fairies by means of the hypothesis that the belief in such fairies is
due *wholly* to a folk-memory of small-statured pre-Celtic races; <span
id="fr_141"></span>[1](#fn_125) and

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

they add that these races, having dwelt in caverns like the prehistoric
Cave Men, and in underground houses like those of Lapps or Eskimos, gave
rise to the belief in a fairy world existing in caverns and under hills
or mountains. When analysed, our evidence shows that in the majority of
cases witnesses have regarded fairies either as non-human nature-spirits
or else as spirits of the dead; that in a comparatively limited number
of cases they have regarded them as the souls of prehistoric races; and
that occasionally they have regarded the belief in them as due to a
folk-memory of such races. It follows, then, from such an analysis of
evidence, that the Pygmy Theory probably does explain some ethnological
elements which have come to be almost inseparably interwoven with the
essentially animistic fabric of the primitive Fairy-Faith. But though
the theory may so account for such ethnological elements, it disregards
the animism that has made such interweaving possible; and, on the whole,
we are inclined to accept Mr. Jenner's view of the theory (see [p.
169](ffcc125.htm#page_169)). Since the Pygmy Theory thus fails entirely
to provide a basis for what is by far the most important part of the
Fairy-Faith, a more adequate theory is required.

Animistic Theory

The testimony of Celtic literature goes to show that leprechauns and
similar dwarfish beings are not due to a folk-memory of a real pygmy
race, that they are spirits like elves, and that the folk-memory of a
Lappish-like people (who may have been Picts) evidently was confused
with them, so as to result in their being anthropomorphosed. Thus, in
*Fionn's Ransom*, there is reference to an undersized apparently
Lappish-like man, who may be a Pict; and as Campbell, who records the
ancient tale, has observed, there are many similar traditional Highland
tales about little men or even about true dwarfs who are good
bowmen; <span id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_126)

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

but it is very certain that such tales have often blended with other
tales, in which supernatural figures like fairies play a role; and,
apparently, the former kind of tales are much more historical and modern
in their origin, while the latter are more mythological and extremely
archaic. This blending of the natural or ethnological and the
supernatural--in quite the same manner as in the modern Fairy-Faith--is
clearly seen in another of Campbell's collected tales, *The Lad with the
Skin Coverings*, <span id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_127) which in essence
is an other-world tale: 'a little thickset man in a russet coat,' who is
a magician, but who otherwise seems to be a genuine Lapp dressed in
furs, is introduced into a story where real fairy-like beings play the
chief parts. Again, in Irish literature, we read of a *loch luchra* or
'lake of the pygmies'. <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_128) Light is
thrown upon this reference by what is recorded about the leprechauns and
Fergus:--While asleep on the seashore one day, Fergus was about to be
carried off by the *luchorpáin*; 'whereat he awoke and caught three of
them, to wit, one in each of his two hands, and one on his breast. "Life
for life" (i.e. protection), say they. "Let my three wishes (i. e.
choices) be given," says Fergus. "Thou shalt have," says the dwarf,
"save that which is impossible for us." Fergus requested of him
knowledge of passing under loughs and linns and seas. "Thou shalt have,"
says the dwarf, "save one which I forbid to thee: thou shalt not go
under Lough Rudraide \[which\] is in thine own country." Thereafter the
*luchuirp* (little bodies) put herbs into his ears, and he used to go
with them under seas. Others say the dwarf gave his cloak to him, and
that Fergus used to put it on his head and thus go under seas. <span
id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_129) In an etymological comment on this
passage, Sir John Rhy^s says:--'The words *luchuirp* and *luchorpáin*
\[Anglo-Irish leprechaun\] appear to mean literally "small bodies", and
the word here rendered

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

dwarf is in the Irish *abac,* the etymological equivalent of the Welsh
*avanc,* the name by which certain water inhabitants of a mythic nature
went in Welsh ...' <span id="fr_146"></span>[1](#fn_130)

Besides what we find in the recorded Fairy-Faith, there are very many
parallel traditions, both Celtic and non-Celtic, about various classes
of spirits, like leprechauns or other small elvish beings, which Dr.
Tylor has called nature-spirits; <span id="fr_147"></span>[2](#fn_131)
and apparently all of these can best be accounted for by means of the
animistic hypothesis. For example, in North America (as in Celtic lands)
there is no proof of there ever having been an actual dwarf race, but
Lewis and Clark, in their *Travels to the Source of the Missouri River*,
found among the Sioux a tradition that a hill near the Whitestone River,
which the Red Men called the 'Mountain of Little People' or 'Little
Spirits', was inhabited by pygmy demons in human form, about eighteen
inches tall, armed with sharp arrows, and ever on the alert to kill
mortals who should dare to invade their domain. So afraid were all the
tribes of Red Men who lived near the mountain of these little spirits
that no one of them could be induced to visit it. <span
id="fr_148"></span>[3](#fn_132) And we may compare this American
spirit-haunted hill with similar natural hills in Scotland said to be
fairy knolls: one near the turning of a road from Reay Wick to Safester,
Isle of Unst; <span id="fr_149"></span>[4](#fn_133) one the well-known
fairy-haunted Tomnahurich, near Inverness; <span
id="fr_150"></span>[4](#fn_133) and a third, the hill at Aberfoyle on
which the 'people of peace' took the Rev. Robert Kirk when he profaned
it by walking on it; or we may equate the American bill with the
fairy-haunted Slieve Gullion and Ben Bulbin in Ireland.

The Iroquois had a belief that they could summon dwarfs, who were
similar nature-spirits, by knocking on a certain

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

large stone. <span id="fr_151"></span>[1](#fn_134) Likewise the Polong,
a Malay familiar spirit, is 'an exceedingly diminutive female figure or
mannikin'. <span id="fr_152"></span>[2](#fn_135) East Indian
nature-spirits, too, are pygmies in stature. <span
id="fr_153"></span>[3](#fn_136) In Polynesia, entirely independent of
the common legends about wild races of pygmy stature, are myths about
the spirits called *wui* or *vui*, who correspond to European dwarfs and
trolls. These little spirits seem to occupy the same position toward the
Melanesian gods or culture heroes, Qat of the Banks Islands and Tagaro
of the New Hebrides, as daemons toward Greek gods, or as good angels
toward the Christian Trinity, or as fairy tribes toward the Brythonic
Arthur and toward the Gaelic hero Cuchulainn. <span
id="fr_154"></span>[4](#fn_137) Similarly in Hindu mythology pygmies
hold an important place, being sculptured on most temples in company
with the gods; e. g. Siva is accompanied by a bodyguard of dwarfs, and
one of them, the three-legged Bhringi, is a good dancer <span
id="fr_155"></span>[5](#fn_138)--like all *corrigans*, pixies, and most
fairies.

Beyond the borders of Celtic lands--in Southern Asia with its islands,
in Melanesia with New Guinea, and in Central Africa--pygmy races,
generally called Negritos, exist at the present day; but they themselves
have a fairy-faith, just as their normal-sized primitive neighbours
have, and it would hardly be reasonable to argue that either of the two
fairy-faiths is due to a folk-memory of small-statured peoples. Ancient
and thoroughly reliable manuscript records testify to the existence of
pygmies in China during the twenty-third century B. C.; <span
id="fr_156"></span>[6](#fn_139) yet no one has ever tried to explain the
well-known animistic beliefs of modern China-men in ghosts, demons, and
in little nature-spirits like fairies, by saying that these are a
folk-memory of this ancient pygmy race. In Yezo and the Kurile Islands
of Japan still survive a few of the hairy Ainu, a Caucasian

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

like, under-sized race; and their immediate predecessors; whom they
exterminated, were a Negrito race, who, according to some traditions,
were two to three feet in stature, and, according to other traditions,
only one inch in stature. <span id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_140) Both
pygmy races, the surviving and the exterminated race, seem independently
to have evolved a belief in ghosts and spirits, so that here again, it
need not be argued that the present pre-Buddhist animism of the Japanese
is due to a folk-memory of either Ainus or Negritos.

Further examination of the animistic hypothesis designed to explain the
smallness of elvish spirits leads away from mere mythology into
psychology, and sets us the task of finding out if, after all, primitive
ideas about the disembodied human soul may not have originated or at
least have helped to shape the Celtic folk conception of fairies as
small statured beings. Mr. A. E. Crawley, in his *Idea of the Soul* (pp.
200-1, 206), shows by carefully selected evidence from ancient and
modern psychologies that 'first among the attributes of the soul in its
primary form may be placed its size', and that 'in the majority of cases
it is a miniature replica of the person, described often as a mannikin,
or homunculus, of a few inches in height'. Sometimes the soul is
described as only about three inches in stature. Dr. Frazer shows,
likewise, that by practically all contemporary primitive peoples the
soul is commonly regarded as a dwarf. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_141)

The same opinions regarding the human soul prevailed among ancient
peoples highly civilized, i.e. the Egyptians and Greeks, and may have
thence directly influenced Celtic tradition. Thus, in bas-relief on the
Egyptian temple of *Dêr el Bahri*, Queen Hatshepsû Ra\_maka is making
offerings of perfume to the gods, while just behind her stands her *Ka*
(soul) as a pygmy so little that the crown of its head is just on a
level with her waist. <span id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_142) The *Ka* is
usually represented as about half the size of an ordinary man. In the
*Book of* 

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

the Dead, the *Ba*, which like the *Ka* is one of the many separable
parts of the soul, is represented as a very little man with wings and
bird-like body.

On Greek vases the human soul is depicted as a pygmy issuing from the
body through the mouth; and this conception existed among Romans and
Teutons. <span id="fr_160"></span>[1](#fn_143) Like their predecessors
the Egyptians, the Greeks also often represented the soul as a small
winged human figure, and Romans, in turn, imagined the soul as a pygmy
with butterfly wings. These ideas reappear in mediaeval reliefs and
pictures wherein the soul is shown as a child or little naked man going
out of the dying person's mouth; <span id="fr_161"></span>[2](#fn_144)
and, according to Cædmon, who was educated by Celtic teachers, angels
are small and beautiful <span id="fr_162"></span>[3](#fn_145)--quite
like good fairies.

Alchemical and Mystical Theory

In the positive doctrines of mediaeval alchemists and mystics, e.g.
Paracelsus and the Rosicrucians, as well as their modern followers, the
ancient metaphysical ideas of Egypt, Greece, and Rome find a new
expression; and these doctrines raise the final problem--if there are
any scientific grounds for believing in such pygmy nature-spirits as
these remarkable thinkers of the Middle Ages claim to have studied as
beings actually existing in nature. To some extent this interesting
problem will be examined in our chapter entitled *Science and Fairies*;
here we shall simply outline the metaphysical theory, adding the
testimony of some of its living advocates to explain the smallness of
elvish spirits and fairies.

These mediaeval metaphysicians, inheritors of pre-Platonic, Platonic,
and neo-Platonic teachings, purposely obscured their doctrines under a
covering of alchemical terms, so as to safeguard themselves against
persecution, open discussion of occultism not being safe during the

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Middle Ages, as it
was among the ancients and happily is now again in our own generation.
But they were quite scientific in their methods, for they divided all
invisible beings into four distinct classes the Angels, who in character
and function are parallel to the gods of the ancients, and equal to the
Tuatha De Danann of the Irish, are the highest; below them are the
Devils or Demons, who correspond to the fallen angels of Christianity;
the third class includes all Elementals, sub-human Nature-Spirits, who
are generally regarded as having pygmy stature, like the Greek daemons;
and the fourth division comprises the Souls of the Dead, and the shades
or ghosts of the dead.

For us, the third class, which includes spirits of pygmy-like form, is
the most important in this present discussion. All its members are of
four kinds, according as they inhabit one of the four chief elements of
nature. <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_146) Those inhabiting the earth
are called Gnomes. They are definitely of pygmy stature, and friendly to
man, and in fairy-lore ordinarily correspond to mine-haunting fairies or
goblins, to pixies, *corrigans*, leprechauns, and to such elves as live
in rocks, caverns, or earth--an important consideration entirely
overlooked by champions of the Pygmy Theory. Those inhabiting the air
are called Sylphs. These Sylphs, commonly described as little spirits
like pygmies in form, correspond to most of the fairies who are not of
the Tuatha De Danann or 'gentry' type, and who as a race are beautiful
and graceful. They are quite like the fairies in Shakespeare's
*Midsummer-Night's Dream*; and especially like the aerials in *The
Tempest*, which, according to Mr. Morton Luce, a commentator on the
drama, seem to have been shaped by Shakespeare from his knowledge of
Rosicrucian occultism, in which such spirits hold an important place.
Those inhabiting the water are called Undines, and correspond exactly to
the fairies who live in sacred fountains, lakes, or rivers. And the
fourth kind, those inhabiting the fire, are

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

called Salamanders, and seldom appear in the Celtic Fairy-Faith: they
are supreme in the elementary hierarchies. All these Elementals, who
procreate after the manner of men, are said to have bodies of an elastic
half-material essence, which is sufficiently ethereal not to be visible
to the physical sight, and probably comparable to matter in the form of
invisible gases. Mr. W. B. Yeats has given this explanation:--'Many
poets, and all mystic and occult writers, in all ages and countries,
have declared that behind the visible are chains on chains of conscious
beings, who are not of heaven but of the earth, who have no inherent
form, but change according to their whim, or the mind that sees them.
You cannot lift your hand without influencing and being influenced by
hordes. The visible world is merely their skin. In dreams we go amongst
them, and play with them, and combat with them. They are, perhaps, human
souls in the crucible--these creatures of whim.' <span
id="fr_164"></span>[1](#fn_147) And bringing this into relation with
ordinary fairies, he says:--'Do not think the fairies are always little.
Everything is capricious about them, even their size. They seem to take
what size or shape pleases them.' <span id="fr_165"></span>[1](#fn_147)
In *The Celtic Twilight* Mr. Yeats makes the statement that the 'fairies
in Ireland are sometimes as big as we are, sometimes bigger, and
sometimes, as I have been told, about three feet high.' <span
id="fr_166"></span>[2](#fn_148)

Mrs. X, a cultured Irishwoman now living in County Dublin, who as a
percipient fulfils all the exacting requirements which psychologists and
pathologists would demand, tells me that very frequently she has had
visions of fairy beings in Ireland, and her own classification and
description of these fairy beings, chiefly according to their stature,
are as follows:--'Among the usually invisible races which I have seen in
Ireland, I distinguish five classes. (1) There are the Gnomes, who are
earth-spirits, and who seem to be a sorrowful race. I once saw some of
them distinctly on the side of Ben Bulbin. They had rather round heads
and dark thick-set bodies, and in stature were about two and

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

one-half feet. (2) The Leprechauns are different, being full of
mischief, though they, too, are small. I followed a leprechaun from the
town of Wicklow out to the *Carraig Sidhe*, "Rock of the Fairies," a
distance of half a mile or more, where he disappeared. He had a very
merry face, and beckoned to me with his finger. (3) A third class are
the Little People, who, unlike the Gnomes and Leprechauns, are quite
good-looking; and they are very small. (4) The Good People are tall
beautiful beings, as tall as ourselves, to judge by those I saw at the
*rath* in Rosses Point. They direct the magnetic currents of the earth.
(5) The Gods are really the Tuatha De Danann, and they are much taller
than our race. There may be many other classes of invisible beings which
I do not know.' (Recorded on October 16, 1910.)

And independently of the Celtic peoples there is available very much
testimony of the most reliable character from modern disciples of the
mediaeval occultists, e. g. the Rosicrucians, and the Theosophists, that
there exist in nature invisible spiritual beings of pygmy stature and of
various forms and characters, comparable in all respects to the little
people of Celtic folk-lore. How all this is parallel to the Celtic
Fairy-Faith is perfectly evident, and no comment of ours is
necessary. <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_149)

This point of view, presented by mediaeval and modern occult sciences
and confirmed by Celtic and non-Celtic percipients, when considered in
relation to its non-Celtic sources and then at once contrasted with
ancient and modern Celtic beliefs of the same character which constitute
it--to be seen in the above Gaelic and Brythonic manuscript and other
evidence, and in Cædmon's theory that angels are small beings--plunges
us into the very complex and extremely difficult problem how far fairies
as pygmy spirits may be purely Celtic, and how far they may reflect
beliefs not Celtic. The problem, however, is far too complicated to be
discussed here; and one may briefly say that there seems to have been a
time in the evolution of

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

animism when the ancient Celts of Britain, of Ireland, and of
Continental Europe too, held, in common with the ancient Greeks, Romans,
and Teutons, an original Aryan doctrine. This doctrine, after these four
stocks separated in possession of it, began to evolve its four
specialized aspects which we now can study; and in the Irish
Universities of the early Christian centuries, when Ireland was the
centre of European learning, the classical and Celtic aspects of it met
for the first time since their prehistoric divorcement. There, as is
clearly seen later among the mediaeval alchemists and occultists, a new
influence--from Christian theology--was superadded to the ancient
animistic beliefs of Europe as they had evolved up to that time.

Conclusion

The ethnological argument, after allowing for all its shortcomings,
suggests that small-statured races like Lapps and Eskimos (though not
necessarily true pygmy races, of whose existence in Europe there is no
proof available) did once inhabit lands where there are Celts, and that
a Celtic folk-memory of these could conceivably have originated a belief
in certain kinds of fairies, and thus have been a shaping influence in
the animistic traditions about other fairies. The animistic argument
shows that pygmies described in Celtic literature and in Celtic and
non-Celtic mythologies are nearly always to be thought of as non-human
spirits; and that there is now and was in past ages a world-wide belief
that the human soul is in stature a pygmy. The philosophical argument of
alchemists and mystics, in a way, draws to itself the animistic
argument, and sets up the hypothesis that the smallness of elves and
fairies is due to their own nature, because they actually exist as
invisible tribes of non-human beings of pygmy size and form.

### THE CHANGELING BELIEF

The smallness of fairies, which has just been considered, and the belief
in changelings are the two most prominent characteristics of the
Fairy-Faith, according to our evidence

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

in chapter ii; and we are now to consider the second. The prevalent and
apparently the only important theories which are current to explain this
belief in changelings may be designated as the Kidnap Theory and the
Human-Sacrifice Theory. These we shall proceed to estimate, after which
there will be introduced newer and seemingly more adequate theories.

Kidnap Theory

Some writers have argued that the changeling belief merely reflects a
time when the aboriginal pre-Celtic peoples held in subjection by the
Celts, and forced to live in mountain caverns and in secret retreats
underground, occasionally kidnapped the children of their conquerors,
and that such kidnapped children sometimes escaped and told to their
Celtic kinsmen highly romantic tales about having been in an underground
fairy-world with fairies. Frequently this argument has taken a slightly
different form: that instead of unfriendly pre-Celtic peoples it was
magic-working Druids who--either through their own choice or else,
having been driven to bay by the spread of Christianity, through force
of circumstances--dwelt in secret in chambered mounds or souterrains, or
in dense forests, and then stole young people for recruits, sometimes
permitting them, years afterwards, when too old to be of further use, to
return home under an inviolable vow of secrecy. <span
id="fr_168"></span>[1](#fn_150) And Mr. David MacRitchie in supporting
his own Pygmy Theory has made interesting modern elaborations of these
two slightly different theories concerning changelings. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[2](#fn_151)

As already pointed out, there are definite ethnological elements blended
in the other parts of the complex Fairy-Faith; and so in this part of
it, the changeling belief, there are conceivably more of such elements
which lend some support

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

to the Kidnap Theory. In itself, however, as we hope to show
conclusively, the Theory, failing to grasp the essential and underlying
character of this belief, does not adequately explain it.

Human-Sacrifice Theory

Alfred Nutt advanced a theory, which anticipated one part of our own,
that 'the changeling story is found to be connected with the antique
conception of life and sacrifice'. And he wrote:--'It is at least
possible that the sickly and ailing would be rejected when the time came
for each family to supply its quota of victims, and this might easily
translate itself in the folk-memory into the statement that the fairies
had carried off the healthy' (alone acceptable as sacrifice) 'and left
in exchange the sickly.' <span id="fr_170"></span>[1](#fn_152) Though
our evidence will not permit us to accept the theory (why it will not
will be clear as we proceed) that some such sacrificial customs among
the ancient Celts entirely account for the changeling story, yet we
consider it highly probable that the theory helps to explain particular
aspects of the complex tradition, and that the underlying philosophy of
sacrifice extended in an animistic way, as we shall try to extend it,
probably offers more complete explanation.

Thus, the Mexicans believed that the souls of all sacrificed children
went to live with the god Tlaloc in his heaven-world. <span
id="fr_171"></span>[2](#fn_153) Among the Greeks, a sacrificed victim
appears to have been sent as a messenger, bearing a message repeated to
him before death to some god. <span id="fr_172"></span>[3](#fn_154) On
the funeral pile of Patroclus were laid Trojan captives, together with
horses and hounds, a practice corresponding to that of American Red Men;
the idea being that the sacrificed Trojans and the horses and hounds as
well, were thus sent to serve the slain warriors in the otherworld.
Among ourselves in Europe and in America it is not uncommon to read in
the daily newspaper about a suicide as resulting from the belief that

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

death alone can bring union with a deceased sweetheart or loved one.
These examples, and very many parallel ones to be found the world over,
seem to furnish the key to the theory of sacrifice: namely, that by
extinguishing life in this world it is transmitted to the world of the
gods, spirits, and the dead.

Both Sir John Rhy^s and D'Arbois de Jubainville have shown that the
Irish were wont to sacrifice the first-born of children and of
flocks. <span id="fr_173"></span>[1](#fn_155) O'Curry points out a clear
case of human sacrifice at an ancient Irish funeral <span
id="fr_174"></span>[2](#fn_156):--'Fiachra then brought fifty hostages
with him from Munster'; and, when he died, 'the hostages which he
brought from the south were buried alive around the *Fert* (burial
mound) of Fiachra.' More commonly the ancient Celts seem to have made
sacrifices to appease place-spirits before the erection of a new
building, by sending to them through death the soul of a youth (see [p.
436](ffcc309.htm#page_436)).

It is in such animistic beliefs as these, which underlie sacrifice, that
we find a partial solution of the problem of changeling belief. But the
sacrifice theory is also inadequate; for, though changelings may in some
cases in ancient times have conceivably been the sickly children
discarded by priests as unfit for sending to the gods or fairies, how
can we explain actual changelings to be met with to-day in all Celtic
lands? Some other hypothesis is evidently necessary.

Soul-Wandering Theory

Comparative study shows that non-Celtic changeling beliefs parallel to
those of the Celts exist almost everywhere,-- that they centre round the
primitive idea that the human soul can be abstracted from the body by
disembodied spirits and by magicians, and that they do not depend upon
the sacrifice theory, though animistically closely related to it. For
example, according to the Lepers' Islanders, ghosts steal men--as
fairies do--'to add them to their company;

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

and if a man has left children when he died, one of whom sickens
afterwards, it is said that the dead father takes it.' <span
id="fr_175"></span>[1](#fn_157) In Banks Island, Polynesia, the ghost of
a woman who has died in childbirth is greatly dreaded: as long as her
child is on earth she cannot proceed to Panoi, the otherworld; and the
relatives take her child to another house, 'because they know that the
mother will come back to take its soul.' <span
id="fr_176"></span>[2](#fn_158) When a Motlav child sneezes, the mother
will cry, 'Let him come back into the world! let him remain.' Under
similar circumstances in Mota, the cry is, 'Live; roll back to us!' 'The
notion is that a ghost is drawing a child's soul away.' If the child
falls ill the attempt has succeeded, and a wizard throws himself into a
trance and goes to the ghost-world to bring the child's soul back. <span
id="fr_177"></span>[3](#fn_159) In the islands of Kei and Kisar a belief
prevails that the spirits of the dead can take to themselves the souls
of the living who go near the graves. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[4](#fn_160) Sometimes a Polynesian mother insists on
being buried with her dead child; or a surviving wife with her dead
husband, so that there will be no separation. <span
id="fr_179"></span>[5](#fn_161) These last practices help to illustrate
the Celtic theory behind the belief that fairies can abduct adults.

Throughout Melanesia sickness is generally attributed to the soul's
absence from the body, and this state of disembodiment is believed to be
due to some ghost's or spirit's interference, <span
id="fr_180"></span>[6](#fn_162) just as among Celts sickness is often
thought to be due to fairies having taken the soul to Fairyland. An old
Irish piper who came up to Lady Gregory's home at Coole Park told us
that a certain relative of his, a woman, had lain in a semi-conscious
state of illness for months, and that when she recovered full
consciousness she declared she had been with the 'good people'.

Folk-beliefs like all the above, which more adequately explain the
changeling idea than the Human-Sacrifice Theory, are world-wide, being
at once Celtic and non-Celtic. <span id="fr_181"></span>[7](#fn_163)

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

Demon-Possession Theory

There has been among many peoples, primitive and civilized, a
complementary belief to the one that evil spirits or ghosts may steal a
soul and so cause in the vacated body illness if the abduction is
temporary, and death if it is permanent: namely, a belief that demons,
who sometimes may be souls of the dead, can possess a human body while
the soul is out of it during sleep, or else can expel the soul and
occupy its place. <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_164) When complete
possession of this character takes place there is--as in 'mediumship'--a
change of personality, and the manner, thoughts, actions, language, and
the whole nature of the possessed person are radically changed.
Sometimes a foreign tongue, of which the subject is ignorant, is
fluently spoken. When the possession is an evil one, as Dr. Nevius has
observed in China, where the phenomena are common, the change of
character is in the direction of immorality, frequently in strong
contrast with the character of the subject under normal conditions, and
is often accompanied by paroxysms and contortions of the body, as I have
often been solemnly assured by Celts is the case in a changeling. (See
M. Le Scour's account on page 198, of three changelings that he saw in
one family in Finistère; and compare what is said about fairy
changelings in Ireland, Scotland, Isle of Man, Wales, and Cornwall.)

A conception like that among the Chinese, of how an evil spirit may
dispossess the soul inhabiting a child's or adult's body, seems to be
the basis and original conception behind the fairy-changeling belief in
all Celtic and other countries. When a child has been changed by
fairies, and an old fairy left in its place, the child has been,
according to this theory, dispossessed of its body by an evil fairy,
which a Chinaman calls a demon, while the leaving behind of the old
fairy accounts for the changed personality and changed facial expression
of the demon-possessed infant. The Chinese demon enters into

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

and takes complete possession of the child's body while the child's soul
is out of it during sleep--and all fairies make changelings when a babe
is asleep in its cradle at night, or during the day when it is left
alone for a short time. The Chinese child-soul is then unable to return
into its body until some kind of magical ceremony or exorcism expels the
possessing demon; and through precisely similar methods, often aided by
Christian priests, Celts cure changelings made by fairies, pixies, and
*corrigans*. In the following account, therefore, apparently lies the
root explanation of the puzzling beliefs concerning fairy changelings so
commonly met with in the Celtic Fairy-Faith:--'To avert the calamity of
nursing a demon, dried banana-skin is burnt to ashes, which are then
mixed with water. Into this the mother dips her finger and paints a
cross upon the sleeping babe's forehead. In a short time the demon soul
returns--for the soul wanders from the body during sleep and is
free--but, failing to recognize the body thus disguised, flies off. The
true soul, which has been waiting for an opportunity, now approaches the
dormant body, and, if the mark has been washed off in time, takes
possession of it; but if not, it, like the demon, failing to recognize
the body, departs, and the child dies in its sleep.' <span
id="fr_183"></span>[1](#fn_165)

In relation to this Demon-Possession Theory, the writer has had the
opportunity of observing carefully some living changelings among the
Celts, and is convinced that in many such cases there is an undoubted
belief expressed by the parents and friends that fairy-possession has
taken place. This belief often translates itself naturally into the
folk-theory that the body of the child has also been changed, when
examination proves only a change of personality as recognized by
psychologists; or, in a distinct type of changelings, those who exhibit
great precocity in childhood

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

combined with an old and wizened countenance, there is neither a changed
personality nor demon-possession, but simply some abnormal physical or
mental condition, in the nature of cretinism, atrophy, marasmus, or
arrested development. One of the most striking examples of a changeling
exists at Plouharnel-Carnac, Brittany, where there is now living a dwarf
Breton whom I have photographed and talked with, and who may possibly
combine in himself both the abnormal psychical and the abnormal
pathological conditions. He is no taller than a normal child ten years
old, but being over thirty years old he is thick-set, though not
deformed. All the peasants who know him call him 'the Little
*Corrigan*', and his own mother declares that he is not the child she
gave birth to. He once said to me with a kind of pathetic protest, 'Did
M.------ tell you that I am a demon?'

Conclusion.

The Kidnap Theory, resting entirely upon the ethnological and social or
psychological elements which we have elsewhere pointed out as existing
in the superficial aspects of the essentially animistic Fairy-Faith as a
whole, is accordingly limited in its explanation of this specialized
part of the Fairy-Faith, the changeling belief, to these same elements
which may exist in the changeling belief. And, on the showing of
anthropology, the other theories undoubtedly offer a more adequate
explanation.

By means of sacrifice, according to its underlying philosophy, man is
able to transmit souls from this world to the world where dwell the gods
and fairy-folk both good and evil. Thus, had Abraham sacrificed Isaac,
the soul of Isaac would have been taken to heaven by Jehovah as fairies
take souls to Fairyland through death. But the difference is that in
human sacrifice men do voluntarily and for specific religious ends what
various kinds of fairies or spirits would do without human intervention
and often maliciously, as our review of ancient and modern theories of
sacrifice has shown. Gods and fairies are spiritual beings; hence only
the spiritual part of man can be delivered over to them.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

Melanesians and other peoples whose changeling beliefs have now been
examined, regard all illness and death as the result of spirit
interference; while Celts regard strange maladies in children and in
adults as the result of fairy interference. And to no Celt is death in
early life a natural thing: if it comes to a child or to a beautiful
youth in any way whatsoever, the fairies have taken what they coveted.
In all mythologies gods have always enjoyed the companionship of
beautiful maidens, and goddesses the love of heroic youths; and they
have often taken them to their world as the Tuatha De Danann took the
great heroes of the ancient Celts to the Otherworld or Avalon, and as
they still in the character of modern fairies abduct brides and young
mothers, and bridegrooms or other attractive young men whom they wish to
have with them in Fairyland (see our chapters iv--vi).

Where sacrifice or death has not brought about such complete transfer or
abduction of the soul to the fairy world, there is only a temporary
absence from human society; and, meanwhile, the vacated body is under a
fairy spell and lies ill, or unconscious if there is a trance state. If
the body is an infant's, a fairy may possess it, as in the Chinese
theory of demon-possession. In such cases the Celts often think that the
living body is that of another child once *taken* but since grown too
old for Fairyland; though the rational explanation frequently is purely
pathological. Looked at philosophically, a fairy exchange of this kind
is fair and evenly balanced, and there has been no true robbery. And in
this aspect of the changeling creed--an aspect of it purely
Celtic--there seems to be still another influence apart from human
sacrifice, soul-abductions, demon or fairy-possession, and disease;
namely, a greatly corrupted folk-memory of an ancient re-birth doctrine:
the living are taken to the dead or the fairies and then sent back
again, after the manner of Socrates' argument that the living come from
the dead and the dead: from the living (cf. our chapter vii). In all
such exchanges, the economy of Nature demands that the balance between
the two worlds be maintained: hence there arose the theories of human
sacrifice, of soul abduction, of

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

demon or fairy-possession; and in all these collectively is to be found
the complete psychological explanation of the fairy-changeling and
fairy-abduction beliefs among ancient and modern Celts as these show
themselves in the Fairy-Faith. All remaining classes of changelings,
which fall outside the scope of this clearly defined psychological
theory, are to be explained pathologically.

### MAGIC AND WITCHCRAFT

The evidence from each Celtic country shows very clearly that magic and
witchcraft are inseparably blended in the Fairy-Faith, and that human
beings, i.e.' charmers,' *dynion hysbys*, and other magicians, and
sorceresses, are often enabled through the aid of fairies to perform the
same magical acts as fairies; or, again, like Christian priests who use
exorcisms, they are able, acting independently, to counteract fairy
power, thereby preventing changelings or curing them, saving churnings,
healing man or beast of 'fairy-strokes', and, in short, nullifying all
undesirable influences emanating from the fairy world. A correct
interpretation of these magical elements so prominent in the Fairy-Faith
is of fundamental importance, because if made it will set us on one of
the main psychical highways which traverse the vast territory of our
anthropological inquiry. Let us, then, undertake such an interpretation,
first setting up, as we must, some sort of working hypothesis as to what
magic is, witchcraft being assumed to be a part of magic.

Theories of Modern Anthropologists

We may define magic, as understood by ancients and moderns, civilized or
non-civilized, apart from conjuring, which is mere jugglery and
deception of the senses, as the art of controlling for particular ends
various kinds of invisible forces, often, and, as we hold, generally
thought of as intelligent spirits. This is somewhat opposed to Mr.
Marett's point of view, which emphasizes 'pre-animistic influences',
i.e. 'powers to which the animistic form is very vaguely attributed if
at all.' And, in dealing with the anthropological

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

aspects of spell-casting in magical operations, Mr. Marett conceives
such a magical act to be in relation to the magician 'generically, a
projection of imperative will, and specifically one that moves on a
supernormal plane', and the victim's position towards this invisible
projected force to be 'a position compatible with *rapport*'. <span
id="fr_184"></span>[1](#fn_166) He also thinks it probable that the
essence of the magician's supernormal power lies in what Melanesians
call *mana*. <span id="fr_185"></span>[1](#fn_166) In our opinion *mana*
may be equated with what William James, writing of his attitude toward
psychical phenomena, called a universally diffused 'soul-stuff' leaking
through, so to speak, and expressing itself in the human
individual. <span id="fr_186"></span>[2](#fn_167) On this view, Mr.
Marett's theory would amount to saying that magicians are able to
produce magical effects because they are able to control this
'soul-stuff'; and our evidence would regard all spirits and fairies as
portions of such universally diffused *mana*, 'soul-stuff', or, as
Fechner might call it, the 'Soul of the World'. Moreover, in essence,
such an idea of magic coincides, when carefully examined, with what
ancient thinkers like Plato, Iamblichus, the Neo-Platonists generally,
and mediaeval magicians like Paracelsus and Eliphas Levi, called magic;
and agrees with ancient Celtic magic--judging from what Roman historians
have recorded concerning it, and from Celtic manuscripts themselves.

Other modern anthropologists have set up far less satisfactory
definitions of magic. According to Dr. Frazer, for example, magic
assumes, as natural science does, that 'one event follows another
necessarily and invariably without the intervention of any spiritual or
personal agency'. <span id="fr_187"></span>[3](#fn_168) Such a theory is
not supported by the facts of anthropology; and does not even apply to
those specialized and often superficial kinds of magic classed under it
by Dr. Frazer as 'sympathetic and imitative magic', i.e. that through
which like produces like, or part produces whole. To our

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

mind, sympathetic and imitative magic (to leave out of account many
fallacious and irrational ritualistic practices, which Dr. Frazer
includes under these loose terms), *when genuine*, in their varied
aspects are directly dependent upon hypnotic states, upon telepathy,
mind-reading, mental suggestion, association of ideas, and similar
processes; in short, are due to the operation of mind on mind and will
on will, and, moreover, are recognized by primitive races to have this
fundamental character. Or, according to the Fairy-Faith, they are caused
by a fairy or disembodied spirit acting upon an embodied one, a man or
woman; and not, as Dr. Frazer holds, through 'mistaken applications of
one or other of two great fundamental laws of thought, namely, the
association of ideas by similarity and the association of ideas by
contiguity in space or time'. <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_169)

The mechanical causation theory of magic, as thus set forth in *The
Golden Bough*, does not imply *mana* or willpower, as Mr. Marett's more
adequate theory does in part: Dr. Frazer wishes us to regard animistic
religious practices as distinct from magic. <span
id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_170) Nevertheless, in direct opposition to
Dr. Frazer's view, the weight of the evidence from the past and from the
present, which we are about to offer, is decidedly favourable to our
regarding magic and religion as complementary to one another and, for
all ordinary purposes of the anthropologist, as in principle the same.
The testimony touching magicians in all ages, Celtic magic and
witchcraft as well, besides that resulting from modern psychical
research, tends to establish an almost exclusively animistic hypothesis
to account for fairy magical phenomena and like phenomena among human
beings; and with these phenomena we are solely concerned.

Among the Ancients <span id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_171)

Among the more cultured Greeks and Romans--and the same can be said of
most great nations of antiquity--it was

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

an unquestioned belief that innumerable gods, placed in hierarchies,
form part of an unbroken spiritual chain at the lowest end of which
stands man, and at the highest the incomprehensible Supreme Deity. These
gods, having their abodes throughout the Universe, act as the agents of
the Unknown God, directing the operation of His cosmic laws and
animating every star and planet. Inferior to these gods, and to man
also, the ancients believed there to be innumerable hosts of invisible
beings, called by them daemons, who, acting as the servants of the gods,
control, and thus in a secondary sense create, all the minor phenomena
of inanimate and animate nature, such as tempests, atmospheric
disturbances generally, the failure of crops or their abundance,
maladies and their cure, good and evil passions in men, wars and peace,
and all the blessings and curses which affect the purely human life.

Man, being of the god-race and thus superior to these lower, servile
entities, could, like the gods, control them if adept in the magical
sciences; for ancient Magic, about which so much has been written and
about which so little has been understood by most people in ancient,
mediaeval, and modern times, is according to the wisest ancients nothing
more than the controlling of daemons, shades, and all sorts of secondary
spirits or elementals by men specially trained for that purpose.
Sufficient records are extant to make it evident that the fundamental
training of Egyptian, Indian, Assyrian, Greek, Roman, and Druid priests
was in the magical or occult sciences. Pliny, in his *Natural History*,
says:--'And to-day Britain practises the art \[of magic\] with religious
awe and with so many ceremonies that it might seem to have made the art
known to the Persians.' <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_172) Herein,
then, is direct evidence that the Celtic Fairy-Faith, considered in its
true psychic nature, has been immediately shaped by the ancient Celtic
religion; and, as our witness

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

from the Isle of Skye so clearly set forth, that it originated among a
cultured class of the Celts more than among the peasants. And, in
accordance with this evidence, Professor Georges Dottin, who has made a
special study of the historical records concerning Druidism,
writes:--'The Druids of Ireland appear to us above all as magicians and
prophets. They foretell the future, they interpret the secret will of
the *fées* (fairies), they cast lots.' <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_173) Thus, in spite of the popular and
Christian reshaping which the belief in fairies has had to endure, its
origin is easily enough discerned even in its modern form, covered over
though this is with accretions foreign to its primal character.

Magic was the supreme science because it raised its adepts out of the
ordinary levels of humanity to a close relationship with the gods and
creative powers. Nor was it a science to be had for the asking, 'for
many were the wand-bearers and few the chosen.' Roman writers tell us
that neophytes for the druidic priesthood often spent twenty years in
severe study and training before being deemed fit to be called Druids.
We need not, however, in this study enter into an exposition of the
ordeals and trials of candidates seeking magical training, or else
initiation into the Mysteries. There were always two schools to which
they could apply, directly opposed in their government and policy--the
school of white magic and the school of black magic; the former being a
school in which magical powers were used in religious rites and always
for good ends, the latter a school in which all magical powers were used
for wholly selfish and evil ends. In both schools the preliminary
training was the same; that is to say, the first thing taught to the
neophyte was self-control. When he proved himself absolutely his own
master, when his teachers were certain that he could not be dominated by
another will or by any outside or psychic influence, then for the first
time he was permitted to exercise his own iron will in controlling
daemons, ghosts, and all the elemental hosts of the air--either as a
white magician or as a black magician. <span
id="fr_193"></span>[2](#fn_174)

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

The magical sciences taught (an idea which still holds its ground, as
one can discover in modern India) that by formulas of invocation, by
chants, by magic sounds, by music, these invisible beings can be made to
obey the will of the magician even as they obey the will of the gods.
The calling up of the dead and talking with them is called necromancy;
the foretelling through spiritual agency and otherwise of coming events
or things hidden, like the outcome of a battle, is called divination;
the employment of charms against children so as to prevent their growing
is known as fascination; to cause any ill fortune or death to fall upon
another person by magic is sorcery; to excite the sexual passions of man
or woman, magical mixtures called philtres are used. Almost all these
definitions apply to the practices of black magic. But the great schools
known as the Mysteries were of white magic, in so far as they practised
the art; and such men as Pythagoras, Plato, and Aeschylus, who are
supposed to have been initiated into them, always held them in the
highest reverence, though prohibited from directly communicating
anything of their esoteric teachings concerning the origin and destiny
of man, the nature of the gods, and the constitution of the universe and
its laws.

In Plato's *Banquet* the power or function of the daemonic element in
nature is explained. Socrates asks of the prophetess Diotima what is the
power of the daemonic element (personified as Love for the purposes of
the argument), and she replies:--'He interprets between gods and men,
conveying and taking across to the gods the prayers and sacrifices

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

of men, and to men the commands and replies of the gods; he is the
mediator who spans the chasm which divides them, and therefore in him
all is bound together, and through him the arts of the prophets and
priests, their sacrifices and mysteries and charms, and all prophecy and
incantation find their way. For God mingles not with man; but through
the daemonic element (or Love) all the intercourse and converse of God
with man, whether awake or asleep, is carried on. The wisdom which
understands this is spiritual.' <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_175)

Among the Ancient Celts

If we turn now directly to Celtic magic in ancient times, we discover
that the testimony of Pliny is curiously confirmed by Celtic
manuscripts, chiefly Irish ones, and that then, as now, witchcraft and
fairy powers over men and women are indistinguishable in their general
character. Thus, in the *Echtra Condla*, 'the Adventures of Connla,' the
fairy woman says of Druidism and magic:--'Druidism is not loved, little
has it progressed to honour on the Great Strand. When his law shall come
it will scatter the charms of Druids *from journeying on the lips of
black, lying demons*'--so characterized by the Christian
transcribers. <span id="fr_195"></span>[2](#fn_176) In *How Fionn Found
his Missing Men*, an ancient tale preserved by oral tradition until
recorded by Campbell, it is said that 'Fionn then went out with Bran
(his fairy dog). There were millions of people (apparitions) out before
him, called up by some sleight of hand'. <span
id="fr_196"></span>[3](#fn_177) In the *Leabhar na h-Uidre*, or 'Book of
the Dun Cow' (p. 43 a), compiled from older manuscripts about A. D.
1100, there is a clear example of Irish fetishism based on belief in the
power of demons:--'. . . for their swords used to turn against them (the
Ulstermen) when they made a false trophy. Reasonable \[was\] this; for
demons used to speak to them from their arms, so that hence their arms
were safeguards.' <span id="fr_197"></span>[4](#fn_178)

Shape-shifting quite after the fairy fashion is very

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

frequently met with in old Celtic literature. Thus, in the Rennes
*Dinnshenchas* there is this passage showing that spirits or fairies
were regarded as necessary for the employment of magic:--'Folks were
envious of them (Faifne the poet and his sister Aige): so they loosed
elves at them who transformed Aige into a fawn' (the form assumed by the
fairy mother of Oisin, see p. 299 n.),' and sent her on a circuit all
round Ireland, and the fians of Meilge son of Cobthach, king of Ireland,
killed her.' <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_179) A fact which ought to
be noted in this connexion is that kings or great heroes, rather than
ordinary men and women, are very commonly described as being able to
shift their own shape, or that of other people; e. g. 'Mongan took on
himself the shape of Tibraide, and gave Mac an Daimh the shape of the
cleric, with a large tonsure on his head.' <span
id="fr_199"></span>[2](#fn_180) And when this fact is coupled with
another, namely the ancient belief that such kings and great heroes were
incarnations and reincarnations of the Tuatha De Danann, who form the
supreme fairy hierarchy, we realize that, having such an origin, they
were simply exercising in human bodies powers which their divine race
exercise over men from the fairy world (see our chapter iv).

In Brythonic literature and mythology, magic and witchcraft with the
same animistic character play as great or even a greater role than in
Gaelic literature and mythology. This is especially true with respect to
the Arthurian Legend, and to the *Mabinogion*, some of which tales are
regarded by scholars as versions of Irish ones. Sir John Rhy^s and
Professor J. Loth, who have been the chief translators of the
*Mabinogion*, consider their chief literary machinery to be magic (see
our chapter v).

So far it ought to be clear that Celtic magic contains much animism in
its composition, and that these few illustrations of it, selected from
numerous illustrations in the ancient Fairy-Faith, confirm Pliny's
independent testimony that in his age the Britons seemed capable of
instructing even the Persians themselves in the magical arts.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

European and American Witchcraft

In a general way, the history of witchcraft in Europe and in the
American colonies is supplementary to what has already been said, seeing
that it is an offshoot of mediaeval magic, which in turn is an offshoot
of ancient magic. Witchcraft in the West, in probably a majority of
cases, is a mere fabric of absurd superstitions and practices--as it is
shown to be by the evidence brought out in so many of the horrible legal
and ecclesiastical processes conducted against helpless and eccentric
old people, and other men and women, including the young, often for the
sake of private revenge, and generally on no better foundation than
hearsay and false accusations, In the remaining instances it undoubtedly
arose, as ancient witchcraft (black magic) seems to have arisen, through
the infiltration of occult knowledge into uneducated and often
criminally inclined minds, so that what had formerly been secretly
guarded among the learned, and generally used for legitimate ends,
degenerated in the hands of the unfit into black magic. In our own age,
a parallel development, which adequately illustrates our subject of
inquiry, has taken place in the United States: fragments of magical lore
bequeathed by Mesmer and his immediate predecessors, the alchemists,
were practically and honestly applied to the practice of magnetic
healing and healing through mental suggestion by a small group of
practitioners in Massachusetts, and then with much ingenuity and real
genius were applied by Mary Baker Eddy to the interpretation of
miraculous healing by Jesus Christ. Hence arose a new religion called
Christian Science. But this religious movement did not stop at mental
healing: according to published reports, during the years 1908-9 the
leader of the New York First Church of Christ, Scientist, was deposed,
and, with certain of her close associates, was charged with having
projected daily against the late Mrs. Eddy's adjutant a current of
'malicious animal magnetism' from New York to Boston, in order to bring
about his death. The process is said to have been for the deposed

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

leader and her friends to sit together in a darkened room with their
eyes closed. 'Then one of them would say: "You all know Mr. ------. You
all know that his place is in the darkness whence he came. If his place
is six feet under ground, that is where he should be." Then all present
would concentrate their minds on the one thought--Mr. ------ and six
feet under ground.' And this practice is supposed to have been kept up
for days. Mrs. ------, who gives this testimony, is a friend of the
victim, and she asserts that these evil thought-waves slowly but surely
began his effacement, and that had the black magicians down in New York
not been discovered in time, Mr. ------ could not have withstood the
forces. <span id="fr_200"></span>[1](#fn_181) Perhaps so enlightened a
country as the United States may in time see history repeat itself, and
add a new chapter to witchcraft; for the true witches were not the kind
who are popularly supposed to ride on broomsticks and to keep a house
full of black cats, and the sooner this is recognized the better.

According to this aspect of Christian Science, 'malicious animal
magnetism' (or black magic), an embodied spirit, i. e. a man or woman,
possesses and can employ the same magical powers as a disembodied
spirit--or, as the Celts would say, the same magical powers as a
fairy--casting spells, and producing disease and death in the victim.
And this view coincides with ordinary witchcraft theories; for witches
have been variously defined as embodied spirits who have ability to act
in conjunction with disembodied spirits through the employment of
various occult forces, e.g. forces comparable to Mesmer's odic forces,
to the Melanesian *mana*, or to the 'soul-stuff' postulated by William
James, or, as Celts think, to forces focused in fairies themselves. So,
also, according to Mr. Marett's view, there is a state of *rapport*
between the victim and the magician or witch; and where such a state of
*rapport* exists there is some *mana* like force passing between the two
poles of the magical

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

circuit, whether it be only unconscious mental or electrical force
emanating from the operator, or an extraneous force brought under
control and concentrated in some such conscious unit as we designate by
the term 'spirit', 'devil', or 'fairy'.

In conformity with this psychical or animistic view of witchcraft, in
the Capital Code of Connecticut (A. D. 1642) a witch is defined as one
who 'hath or consorteth with a familiar spirit'. <span
id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_182) European codes, as illustrated by the
sixth chapter of Lord Coke's *Third Institute*, have parallels to this
definition:--'A witch is a person which hath conference with the devil;
to consult with him to do some act.'' And upon these theories, not upon
the broomstick and black-cat conception, were based the trials for
witchcraft during the seventeenth century.

The Bible, then so frequently the last court of appeal in such matters,
was found to sustain such theories about witches in the classical
example of the Witch of Endor and Saul; and the idea of witchcraft in
Europe and America came to be based--as it probably always had been in
pagan times--on the theory that living persons could control or be
controlled by disembodied spirits for evil ends. Hence all black
magicians, and what are now known as 'spirit mediums', were made liable
by law to the death penalty. <span id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_183)

In mediaeval Europe the great difficulty always was, as is shown in the
trials of Jeanne d'Arc, to decide whether the invisible agent in magical
processes, such as was imputed to the accused, was an angel or a demon.
If an angel, then the accused was a saint, and might become a candidate
for canonization; but if a demon, the accused was a witch, and liable to
a death-sentence. The wisest old doctors of the University of Paris, who
sat in judgement (or were consulted) in one of Jeanne's trials, could
not fully decide this knotty problem, nor, apparently, the learned
churchmen who also tried her; but evidently they all agreed that it

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

was better to waive the question. And, finally, an innocent peasant girl
who had heard Divine Voices, and who had thereby miraculously saved her
king and her country, was burned at the stake, under the joint direction
of English civil and ecclesiastical authorities, and, if not
technically, at least practically, with the full approval of the
corresponding French authorities, at Rouen, France, May 30, A. D.
1431. <span id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_184) In April, A. D. 1909, almost
five centuries afterwards, it has been decided with tardy justice that
Jeanne's Voices were those of angels and not of demons, and she has been
made a saint.

How the case of Jeanne d'Arc bears directly upon the Fairy-Faith is
self-evident: One of the first questions asked by Jeanne's inquisitors
was 'if she had any knowledge of those who went to the Sabbath with the
fairies? or if she had not assisted at the assemblies held at the
fountain of the fairies, near Domremy, around which dance malignant
spirits?' And another question exactly as recorded was
this:--'*Interroguée s'elle croiet point au devant de aujourduy, que les
fées feussent maulvais esperis: respond qu'elle n'en sçavoit
rien.*' <span id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_185)

Conclusion

Finally, we may say that what medicine-men are to American Indians, to
Polynesians, Australians, Africans, Eskimos, and many other contemporary
races, or what the mightier magicians of modern India are to their
people, the 'fairy-doctors' and 'charmers' of Ireland, Scotland, and Man
are to the Gaels, and the '*Dynion Hysbys*' or 'Wise Men' of Wales, the
witches of Cornwall, and the seers, sorceresses, and exorcists of
Brittany are to the Brythons. These Gaelic and Brythonic magicians and
witches, and 'fairy mediums', almost invariably claim to derive their
power from their ability to see and to communicate with fairies,
spirits, and the dead; and they generally say that they are enabled
through such spiritual agencies to reveal the past, to foretell the
future, to locate

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

lost property, to cast spells upon human beings and upon animals, to
remove such spells, to cure fairy strokes and changelings, to perform
exorcisms, and to bring people back from Fairyland.

We arrive at the following conclusion:--If, as eminent psychical
researchers now postulate (and as many of them believe), there are
active and intelligent disembodied beings able to act psychically upon
embodied men in much the same way that embodied men are known ordinarily
to act psychically upon one another, then there is every logical and
common-sense reason for extending this psychical hypothesis so as to
include the ancient, mediaeval, and modern theory of magic and
witchcraft, namely, that what embodied men and women can do in magical
ways, as for example in hypnotism, disembodied men and women can do.
Further, if fairies, in accord with reliable testimony from educated and
critical percipients, hypothetically exist (whatever their nature may
be), they may be possessed of magical powers of the same sort, and so
can cast spells upon or possess living human beings as Celts believe and
assert. And this hypothesis coincides in most essentials with the one we
used as a basis for this discussion, that, in accordance with the
Melanesian doctrine of control of ghosts and spirits with their inherent
*mana*, magical acts are possible. <span id="fr_205"></span>[1](#fn_186)
This in turn applied to the Celts amounts to a hypothetical confirmation
of the ancient druidical doctrine that through control of fairies or
demons (daemons) Druids or magicians could control the weather and
natural phenomena connected with vegetable and animal processes, could
cast spells, could divine the future, could execute all magical acts.

EXORCISMS

According to the testimony of anthropology, exorcism as a religious
practice has always flourished wherever animistic beliefs have furnished
it with the necessary environment; and not only has exorcism been a
fundamental part of religious practices in past ages, but it is so at
the present

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

day. Among Christians, Celtic and non-Celtic, among followers of all the
great historical religions, and especially among East Indians, Chinese,
American Red Men, Polynesians, and most Africans, the expelling of
demons from men and women, from animals, from inanimate objects, and
from places, is sanctioned by well-established rituals. Exorcism as
applied to the human race is thus defined in the *Dictionnaire de
Théologie* (Roman Catholic) by L'Abbé
Bergier:--'*Exorcism*--conjuration, prayer to God, and command given to
the demon to depart from the body of persons possessed.' The same
authority thus logically defends its practice by the Church:--'Far from
condemning the opinion of the Jews, who attributed to the demon certain
maladies, that divine Master confirmed it.' <span
id="fr_206"></span>[1](#fn_187) And whenever exorcism of this character
has been or is now generally practised, the professional exorcist
appears as a personage just as necessary to society as the modern
doctor, since nearly all diseases were and to some extent are still,
both among Christians and non-Christians, very often thought to be the
result of demon-possession.

When we come to the dawn of the Christian period in Ireland and in
Scotland, we see Patrick and Columba, the first and greatest of the
Gaelic missionaries, very extensively practising exorcism; and there is
every reason to believe (though the data available on this point are
somewhat unsatisfactory) that their wide practice of exorcism was quite
as much a Christian adaptation of pre-Christian Celtic exorcism, such as
the Druids practised, as it was a continuation of New Testament
tradition. We may now present certain of the data which tend to verify
this supposition, and by means of them we shall be led to realize how
fundamentally such an animistic practice as exorcism must have shaped
the Fairy-Faith of the Celts, both before and after the coming of
Christianity.

'Once upon a time,' so the tale runs about Patrick, 'his foster-mother
went to milk the cow. He also went with her to drink a draught of new
milk. Then the cow goes mad in

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

the byre and killed five other kine: a demon, namely, entered her. There
was great sadness on his foster-mother, and she told him to bring the
kine back to life. Then he brought the kine to life, so that they were
whole, and he cured the mad one. So God's name and Patrick's were
magnified thereby." On another occasion, when demons came to Ireland in
the form of black birds, quite after the manner of the Irish belief that
fairies assume the form of crows (see pp.
[302](ffcc240.htm#page_302)-5), the Celtic ire of Patrick was so aroused
in trying to exorcize them out of the country that he threw his bell at
them with such violence that it was cracked, and then he wept:--'Now at
the end of those forty days and forty nights' \[of Patrick's long fast
on the summit of Cruachan Aigle or Croagh Patrick, Ireland's Holy
Mountain\] 'the mountain was filled with black birds, so that he knew
not heaven or earth. He sang maledictive psalms at them. They left him
not because of this. Then his anger grew against them. He strikes his
bell at them, so that the men of Ireland heard its voice, and he flung
it at them, so that a gap broke out of it, and that \[bell\] is
"Brigit's Gapling". Then Patrick weeps till his face and his chasuble in
front of him were wet. No demon came to the land of Erin after that till
the end of seven years and seven months and seven days and seven nights.
Then the angel went to console Patrick and cleansed the chasuble, and
brought white birds round the Rick, and they used to sing sweet melodies
for him.' <span id="fr_207"></span>[1](#fn_188) In Adamnan's *Life of S.
Columba* it is said that 'according to custom', which in all probability
was established in pagan times by the Druids and then maintained by
their Christian descendants, it was usual to exorcize even a milk vessel
before milking, and the milk in it afterwards. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[2](#fn_189) Thus Adamnan tells us that one day a
youth, Columban by name, when he had finished milking, went to the door
of St. Columba's cell carrying the pail full of new milk that,
*according to* 

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

custom, the saint might exorcize it. When the holy man had made the sign
of the cross in the air, the air 'was greatly agitated, and the bar of
the lid, driven through its two holes, was shot away to some distance;
the lid fell to the ground, and most of the milk was spilled on the
soil.' Then the saint chided the youth, saying:--'Thou hast done
carelessly in thy work to-day; for thou hast not cast out the demon that
was lurking in the bottom of the empty pail, by tracing on it, before
pouring in the milk, the sign of the Lord's cross; and now not enduring,
thou seest, the virtue of the sign, he has quickly fled away in terror,
while at the same time the whole of the vessel has been violently
shaken, and the milk spilled. Bring then the pail nearer to me, that I
may bless it.' When the half-empty pail was blessed, in the same moment
it was refilled with milk. At another time, the saint, to destroy the
practice of sorcery, commanded Silnan, a peasant sorcerer, to draw a
vessel full of milk from a bull; and by his diabolical art Silnan drew
the milk. Then Columba took it and said:--'Now it shall be proved that
this, which is supposed to be true milk, is not so, but is blood
deprived of its colour by the fraud of demons to deceive men; and
straightway the milky colour was turned into its own proper quality,
that is, into blood.' And it is added that 'The bull also, which for the
space of one hour was at death's door, wasting and worn by a horrible
emaciation, in being sprinkled with water blessed by the Saint, was
cured with wonderful rapidity.' <span id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_190)

And to-day, as in the times of Patrick and Columba, exorcism is
practised in Ireland and in the Western Hebrides of Scotland by the
clergy of the Roman Church against fairies, demons, or evil spirits,
when a person is possessed by them--that is to say, 'fairy-struck,' or
when they have entered into some house or place; and on the Scotch
mainland individual Protestants have been known to practise it. A
haunted house at Balechan, Perthshire, in which certain members of the
Psychical Research Society had taken up summer quarters to
'investigate', was exorcized

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

by the late Archbishop of Edinburgh, assisted by a priest from the Outer
Isles. <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_191)

Among the nine orders of the Irish ecclesiastical organization of
Patrick's time, one was composed of exorcists. <span
id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_192) The official ceremony for the ordination
of an exorcist in the Latin Church was established by the Fourth Council
of Carthage, and is indicated in nearly all the ancient rituals. It
consists in the bishop giving to the candidate the book of exorcisms and
saying as he does so:--'Receive and understand this book, and have the
power of laying hands upon demoniacs, whether they be baptized, or
whether they be catechumens.' <span id="fr_212"></span>[3](#fn_193) By a
decree of the Church Council of Orange, making men possessed of a demon
ineligible to enter the priesthood, it would seem that the number of
demoniacs must have been very great. <span
id="fr_213"></span>[3](#fn_193) As to the efficacy of exorcisms, the
church Fathers during the first four centuries, when the Platonic
philosophy was most influential in Christianity, are agreed. <span
id="fr_214"></span>[3](#fn_193)

In estimating the shaping influences, designated by us as fundamental,
which undoubtedly were exerted upon the Fairy-Faith through the practice
of exorcism, it is necessary to realize that this animistic practice
holds a very important position in the Christian religion which for
centuries the Celtic peoples have professed. One of the two chief
sacraments of Christianity, that of Baptism, is preceded by a definitely
recognized exorcism, as shown in the Roman Ritual, where we can best
study it. In the Exhortation preceding the rite the infant is called a
slave of the demon, and by baptism is to be set free. The salt which is
placed in the mouth of the infant by the priest during the ceremony has
first been exorcized by special rites. Then there follows before the
entrance to the baptismal font a regular exorcism pronounced over the
child: the priest taking some of his own saliva on the thumb of his
right hand, touches the child's

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

ears and nostrils, and commands the demon to depart out of the child.
After this part of the ceremony is finished, the priest makes on the
child's forehead a sign of the cross with holy oil. Finally, in due
order, comes the actual baptism. <span id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_194)
And even after baptismal rites have expelled all possessing demons,
precautions are necessary against a repossession: St. Augustine has said
that exorcisms of precaution ought to be performed over every Christian
daily; and it appears that faithful Roman Catholics who each day employ
holy water in making the sign of the cross, and all Protestants who pray
'lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil', are employing
such exorcisms: <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_195) St. Gregory of
Nazianzus writes, 'Arm yourself with the sign of the cross which the
demons fear, and before which they take their flight ' <span
id="fr_217"></span>[3](#fn_196); and by the same sign, said St.
Athanasius, 'All the illusions of the demon are dissipated and all his
snares destroyed.' <span id="fr_218"></span>[4](#fn_197) An eminent
Catholic theologian asserts that saints who, since the time of Jesus
Christ, have been endowed with the power of working miracles, have
always made use of the sign of the cross in driving out demons, in
curing maladies, and in raising the dead. In the *Instruction sur le
Rituel*, <span id="fr_219"></span>[5](#fn_198) it is said that water
which has been blessed is particularly designed to be used against
demons; in the *Apostolic Constitutions*, formulated near the end of the
fourth century, holy water is designated as a means of purification from
sin and of putting the demon to flight. <span
id="fr_220"></span>[6](#fn_199) And nowadays when the priest passes
through his congregation casting over them holy water, it is as an
exorcism of precaution; or when as in France each mourner

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

at a grave casts holy water over the corpse, it is undoubtedly--whether
done consciously as such or not--to protect the soul of the deceased
from demons who are held to have as great power over the dead as over
the living. Other forms of exorcism, too, are employed. For example, in
the *Lebar Brecc*, it is said of the Holy Scripture that By it the
snares of devils and vices are expelled from every faithful one in the
Church'. <span id="fr_221"></span>[1](#fn_200) And from all this direct
testimony it seems to be clear that many of the chief practices of
Christians are exorcisms, so that, like the religion of Zoroaster, the
religion founded by Jesus has come to rest, at least in part, upon the
basic recognition of an eternal warfare between good and bad spirits for
the control of Man.

The curing of diseases through Christian exorcism is by no means rare
now, and it was common a few centuries ago. Thus in the eighteenth
century, beginning with 1752 and till his death, Gassner, a Roman priest
of Closterle, diocese of Coire, Switzerland, devoted his life to curing
people of possessions, declaring that one third of all maladies are so
caused, and fixed his head-quarters at Elwangen, and later at Ratisbon.
His fame spread over many countries of Europe, and he is said to have
made ten thousand cures solely by exorcism. <span
id="fr_222"></span>[2](#fn_201) And not only are human ills overcome by
exorcism, but also the maladies of beasts: at Carnac, on September 13,
there continues to be celebrated an annual fete in honour of St. Comely,
the patron saint of the country and the saint who (as his name seems to
suggest) presides over domestic *horned* animals; and if there is a cow,
or even a sheep suffering from some ailment which will not yield to
medicine, its owner leads it to the church door beneath the saint's
statue, and the priest blesses it, and, as he does so, casts over it the
exorcizing holy water. The Church Ritual designates two forms of
Benediction for such animals, one form for those who are ordinarily
diseased, and another for those suffering from some contagious malady.
In each ceremony there comes first the sprinkling of the animal with
holy

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

water as it stands before the priest at the church door; and then there
follows in Latin a direct invocation to God to bless the animal, 'to
extinguish in it all diabolical powers,' to defend its life, and to
restore it to health. <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_202)

In 1868, according to Dr. Evans, an old cow-house in North Wales was
torn down, and in its walls was found a tin box containing an exorcist's
formula. The box and its enclosed manuscript had been hidden there some
years previously to ward off all evil spirits and witchcraft, for
evidently the cattle had been dying of some strange malady which no
doctors could cure, Because of its unique nature, and as an illustration
of what Welsh exorcisms must have been like, we quote the contents of
the manuscripts both as to spelling and punctuation as checked by Sir
John Rhy^s with the original, except the undecipherable symbols which
come after the archangels' names:--

✠ Lignum sanctae crisis defendat me a malis presentibus preateritus &
futuris; interioribus & exterioribus ✠✠ Daniel Evans ✠✠ Omnes spiritus
laudet Dominum: Mosen habent & prophetas. Exergat Deus & disipenture
inimiciessus ✠ **·** ✠ O Lord Jesus Christ I beseech thee to preserve me
Daniel Evans; and all that I possess from the power of all evil men,
women; spirits, or wizards, or hardness of heart, and this I will trust
thou will do by the same power as thou didst cause the blind to see the
lame to walk and they that were possesed with unclean spirits to be in
their own minds Amen Amen ✠✠✠✠ pater pater pater Noster Noster Noster
aia aia aia Jesus ✠ Christus ✠ Messyas ✠ Emmanuel ✠ Soter ✠ Sabaoth ✠
Elohim ✠ on ✠ Adonay ✠ Tetragrammaton ✠ Ag **:** **:** ✠ Panthon ✠ ...
reaton ✠ Agios ✠ Jasper ✠ Melchor ✠ Balthasar Amen ✠✠✠ <span
id="img_27200"></span> ![](img/27200.jpg) ✠✠ And by the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ and His Hevenly Angels

<table data-align="LEFT" width="20%" data-cellpadding="8">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Gabriel [   <em>symbols</em>   ]<br />
Michail [   <em>symbols</em>   ]</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

being our Redeemer and Saviour from all witchcraft and from assaults of
the Devil Amen ✠ O Lord Jesus Christ I beseech thee to preserve me and
all that I possess from

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

the power of all evil men; women; spirits; or wizards past. present, or
to come inward and outward Amen ✠✠.' <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_203)

From India Mr. W. Crooke reports similar exorcisms and charms to cure
and to protect cattle. <span id="fr_225"></span>[2](#fn_204) Thus there
is employed in Northern India the *Ajaypâl jantra*, i. e. 'the charm of
the Invincible Protector,' one of 'Vishnu's titles, in his character as
the earth-god Bhûmiya--in Scotland it would be the charm of the
Invincible Fairy who presides over the flocks and to whom libations are
poured--in order to exorcize diseased cattle or else to prevent cattle
from becoming diseased. This *Ajaypâl* *jantra* is a rope of twisted
straw, in which chips of wood are inserted. 'In the centre of the rope
is suspended an earthen platter, inside which an incantation is
inscribed with charcoal, and beside it is hung a bag containing seven
kinds of grain.' The rope is stretched between two poles at the entrance
of a village, and under it the cattle pass to and fro from pasture. The
following is the incantation found on one of the earthen saucers:--'O
Lord of the Earth on which this cattle-pen stands, protect the cattle
from death and disease! I know of none, save thee, who can deliver
them.' In the Morbihan, Lower Brittany, we seem to see the same
folk-custom, somewhat changed to be sure; for on St. John's Day, the
christianized pagan sun-festival in honour of the summer solstice, in
which fairies and spirits play so prominent a part in all Celtic
countries, just outside a country village a great fire is lit in the
centre of the main road and covered over with green branches, in order
to produce plenty of smoke, and then on either side of this fire and
through the exorcizing smoke are made to pass all the domestic animals
in the district as a protection against disease and evil spirits, to
secure their fruitful increase, and, in the case of cows, abundant milk
supply. Mr. Milne, while making excavations in the Carnac country,
discovered the image of a small bronze cow, now in the Carnac Museum,
and this would seem to indicate that before Christian times there was in
the Morbihan a cult of cattle,

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

preserved even until now, no doubt, in the Christian fete of St.
Cornely, just as in St. Cornely's Fountain there is preserved a pagan
holy well.

It ought now to be clear that both pre-Christian and Christian exorcisms
among Celts have shaped the Fairy-Faith in a very fundamental manner.
And anthropologically the whole subject of exorcism falls in line with
the Psychological Theory of the nature and origin of the belief in
fairies in Celtic countries.

### TABOOS

We find that taboos, or prohibitions of a religious and social
character, are as common in the living Fairy-Faith as exorcisms. The
chief one is the taboo against naming the fairies, which inevitably
results in the use of euphemisms, such as 'good people', 'gentry',
'people of peace', *Tylwyth Teg* ('Fair Folk'), or *bonnes dames* ('good
ladies'). A like sort of taboo, with its accompanying use of euphemisms,
existed among the Ancients, e.g. among the Egyptians and Babylonians,
and early Celts as well, in a highly developed form; and it exists now
among the native peoples of Australia, Polynesia, Central Africa,
America, in Indian systems of Yoga, among modern Greeks, and, in fact,
almost everywhere where there are vestiges of a primitive culture. <span
id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_205) And almost always such a taboo is bound
up with animistic and magical elements, which seem to form its
background, just as it is in our own evidence.

To discuss name taboo in all its aspects would lead us more deeply into
magic and comparative folk-lore than we have yet gone, and such
discussion is unnecessary here. We may therefore briefly state that the
root of the matter would seem to be that the name and the dread power
named are so closely associated in the very concrete thought of the
primitive culture that the one virtually is the other: just as one
inevitably calls up the other for the modern thinker,

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

so it is that, in the world of objective fact, for the primitive
philosopher the one is equivalent to the other. The primitive man, in
short, has projected his subjective associations into reality. As
regards euphemisms, the process of development possibly is that first
you employ any substitute name, and that secondly you go on to employ
such a substitute name as will at the same time be conciliatory. In the
latter case, a certain anthropomorphosing of the power behind the taboo
would seem to be involved. <span id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_206)

Next in prominence comes the food taboo; and to this, also, there are
non-Celtic parallels all the world over, now and in ancient times. We
may take notice of three very striking modern parallels:--A woman
visited her dead brother in Panoi, the Polynesian Otherworld, and 'he
cautioned her to eat nothing there, and she returned.' <span
id="fr_228"></span>[2](#fn_207) A Red Man, Ahaktah, after an apparent
death of two days' duration, revived, and declared that he had been to a
beautiful land of tall trees and singing-birds, where he met the spirits
of his forefathers and uncle. While there, he felt hunger, and seeing in
a bark dish some wild rice, wished to eat of it, but his uncle would
allow him none. In telling about this psychical adventure, Ahaktah
said:--'Had I eaten of the food of spirits, I never should have returned
to earth.' <span id="fr_229"></span>[3](#fn_208) Also a New Zealand
woman visited the Otherworld in a trance, and her dead father whom she
met there ordered her to eat no food in that land, so that she could
return to this world to take care of her child. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[4](#fn_209)

All such parallels, like their equivalents in Celtic belief, seem to
rest on this psychological and physiological conception in the
folk-mind. Human food is what keeps life going in a human body; fairy
food is what keeps life going in a fairy body; and since what a man eats
makes him what he is physically, so eating the food of Fairyland or of
the land of the dead will make the eater partake of the bodily

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

nature of the beings it nourishes. Hence when a man or woman has once
entered into such relation or communion with the Otherworld of the dead,
or of fairies, by eating their food, his or her physical body <span
id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_210) by a subtle transformation adjusts
itself to the new kind of nourishment, and becomes spiritual like a
spirit's or fairy's body, so that the eater cannot re-enter the world of
the living. A study of food taboos confirms this conclusion. <span
id="fr_232"></span>[2](#fn_211)

A third prominent taboo, the iron taboo, has been explained by exponents
of the Pygmy Theory as pointing to a prehistoric race in Celtic lands
who did not know iron familiarly, and hence venerated it so that in time
it came to be religiously regarded as very efficacious against spirits
and fairies. Undoubtedly there may be much reason in this explanation,
which gives some ethnological support to the Pygmy Theory. Apparently,
however, it is only a partial explanation of iron taboo in general,
because, in many cases, iron in ancient religious rites certainly had
magical properties attributed to it, which to us are quite unexplainable
from this ethnological point of view; <span
id="fr_233"></span>[3](#fn_212) and in Melanesia and in Africa, where
iron is venerated now, the same explanation through ethnology seems
far-fetched. But at present there seem to be no available data to
explain adequately this iron taboo, though we have strong reasons for
thinking that the philosophy underlying it is based on mystical
conceptions of virtues attributed--reasonably or unreasonably--to
various metals and precious stones, and that a careful examination of
alchemical sciences would probably arrive at an explanation wholly
psychological.

Besides many other miscellaneous taboos noticeable in

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

the evidence, there is a place taboo which is prominent. Thus, if an
Irishman cuts a thorn tree growing on a spot sacred to the fairies, or
if he violates a fairy preserve of any sort, such as a fairy path, or by
accident interferes with a fairy procession, illness and possibly death
will come to his cattle or even to himself. In the same way, in
Melanesia, violations of sacred spots bring like penalties: 'A man
planted in the bush near Olevuga some coco-nut and almond trees, and not
long after died,' the place being a spirit preserve; <span
id="fr_234"></span>[1](#fn_213) and a man in the Lepers' Island lost his
senses, because, as the natives believed, he had unwittingly trodden on
ground sacred to Tagaro, and 'the ghost of the man who lately sacrificed
there was angry with him'. <span id="fr_235"></span>[1](#fn_213) In this
case the wizards were called in and cured the man by exorcisms,' as
Irishmen, or their cows, are cured by the exorcisms of 'fairy-doctors'
when 'fairy-struck' for some similar violation. The animistic background
of place taboos in the Fairy-Faith is in these cases apparent.

Among Ancient Celts

In the evidence soon to be examined from the recorded Fairy-Faith, we
shall find taboos of various kinds often more prominent than in the
living Fairy-Faith. <span id="fr_236"></span>[2](#fn_214) So essential
are they to the character of much of the literary and mythological
matter with which we shall have to deal in the following chapters, that
at this point some suggestions ought to be made concerning their correct
anthropological interpretation.

Almost every ancient Irish taboo is connected with a king or with a
great hero like Cuchulainn; and, in Ireland especially, all such kings
and heroes were considered of divine origin, and as direct incarnations,
or reincarnations of the Tuatha De Danann, the true Fairies, originally
inhabitants of the Otherworld. (See our chapter vii.) As Dr. Frazer
points out to have been the case among non-Celts, with whom the same
theory of incarnated divinities has prevailed, royal taboos are to
isolate the king from all

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

sources of danger, especially from all magic and witchcraft, and they
act in many cases 'so to say, as electrical insulators' to preserve him
or heroes who are equally divine. <span id="fr_237"></span>[1](#fn_215)

The early Celts recognized an intimate relationship between man and
nature: unperceived by man, unseen forces--not dissimilar to what
Melanesians call *Mana*--(looked on as animate and intelligent and
frequently individual entities) guided every act of human life. It was
the special duty of Druids to act as intermediaries between the world of
men and the world of the Tuatha De Danann; and, as old Irish literature
indicates clearly, it was through the exercise of powers of divination
on the part of Druids that these declared what was taboo or what was
unfavourable, and also what it was favourable for the divine king or
hero to perform. As long as man kept himself in harmony with this unseen
fairy-world in the background of nature, all was well; but as soon as a
taboo was broken, disharmony in the relationship--which was focused in a
king or hero--was set up; and when, as in the case of Cuchulainn, many
taboos were violated, death was inevitable and not even the Tuatha De
Danann could intercede.

Breaking of a royal or hero taboo not only affects the violator, but his
subjects or followers as well: in some cases the king seems to suffer
vicariously for his people. Almost every great Gaelic hero--a god or
Great Fairy Being incarnate--is overshadowed with an impending fate,
which only the strictest observance of taboo can avoid. <span
id="fr_238"></span>[2](#fn_216)

Irish taboo, and inferentially all Celtic taboo, dates back to an
unknown pagan antiquity. It is imposed at or before birth, or again
during life, usually at some critical period, and when broken brings
disaster and death to the breaker. Its whole background appears to rest
on a supernatural relationship between divine men and the Otherworld of
the Tuatha De Danann; and it is very certain that this ancient
relationship survives in the living Fairy-Faith as one between

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

ordinary men and the fairy-world. Therefore, almost all taboos surviving
among Celts ought to be interpreted psychologically or even psychically,
and not as ordinary social regulations.

### FOOD-SACRIFICE

Food-sacrifice plays a very important role in the modern Fairy-Faith,
being still practised, as our evidence shows, in each one of the Celtic
countries. Without any doubt it is a survival from pagan times, when, as
we shall observe later (in chapter iv. [291](ffcc240.htm#page_291), and
elsewhere), propitiatory offerings were regularly made to the Tuatha De
Danann as gods of the earth, and, apparently, to other orders of
spiritual beings. The anthropological significance of such
food-sacrifice is unmistakable.

With the same propitiatory ends in view as modern Celts now have in
offering food to fairies, ancient peoples, e.g. the Greeks and Romans,
maintained a state ritual of sacrifices to the gods, genii, daemons, and
to the dead. And such sacrifices, so essential a part of most ancient
religions, were based on the belief, as stated by Porphyry in his
*Treatise Concerning Abstinence*, that all the various orders of gods,
genii or daemons, enjoy as nourishment the odour of burnt offerings. And
like the Fairy-Folk, the daemons of the air live not on the gross
substance of food, but on its finer invisible essences, conveyed to them
most easily on the altar-fire. <span id="fr_239"></span>[1](#fn_217)
Socrates, Plato, Xenophon, and other leading Greeks, as well as the
Romans of a like metaphysical school; unite in declaring the fundamental
importance to the welfare of the State of regular sacrifices to the gods
and to the daemons who control all natural phenomena, since they caused,
if not neglected, abundant harvests and national prosperity. For unto
the gods is due by right a part of all things which they give to man for
his happiness.

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

The relation which the worship of ancestors held to that of the gods
above, who are the Olympian Gods, the great Gods, and to the Gods below,
who are the Gods of the Dead, and also to the daemons, and heroes or
divine ancestors, is thus set forth by Plato in his *Laws*:--'In the
first place, we affirm that next after the Olympian Gods, and the Gods
of the State, honour should be given to the Gods below.

Next to these Gods, a wise man will do service to the daemons or
spirits, and then to the heroes, and after them will follow the sacred
places of private and ancestral Gods, having their ritual according to
law. Next comes the honour of living parents.' <span
id="fr_240"></span>[1](#fn_218)

It is evident from this direct testimony that the same sort of
philosophy underlies food-sacrifice among the Celts and other peoples as
we discovered underlying human-sacrifice, in our study of the Changeling
Belief; and that the Tuatha De Danann in their true mythological nature,
and fairies, their modern counterpart, correspond in all essentials to
Greek and Roman gods, genii, and daemons, and are often confused with
the dead.

### THE CELTIC LEGEND OF THE DEAD

The animistic character of the Celtic Legend of the Dead is apparent;
and the striking likenesses constantly appearing in our evidence between
the ordinary apparitional fairies and the ghosts of the dead show that
there is often no essential and sometimes no distinguishable difference
between these two orders of beings, nor between the world of the dead
and fairyland. We reserve for our chapter on *Science and Fairies* the
scientific consideration of the psychology of this relationship, and of
the probability that fairies as souls of the dead and as ghosts of the
dead actually exist and influence the living.

### GENERAL CONCLUSION

The chief anthropological problems connected with the modern
Fairy-Faith, as our evidence presents it, have now

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

been examined, at sufficient length, we trust, to explain their
essential significance; and problems, to some extent parallel, connected
with the ancient Fairy-Faith have likewise been examined. There remain,
however, very many minor anthropological problems not yet touched upon;
but several of the most important of these, e. g. various cults of gods,
spirits, fairies, and the dead, and folk-festivals thereto related (see
Section III); the circular fairy-dance (see pp.
[405](ffcc308.htm#page_405)-6); or the fairy world as the Otherworld
(see chap. vi), or as Purgatory (see chap. x), will receive
consideration in following chapters, and so will certain very definite
psychological problems connected with dreams, and trance-like states,
with supernormal lapse of time, and with seership. We may now sum up the
results so far attained.

Whether we examine the Fairy-Faith as a whole or whether we examine
specialized parts of it like those relating to the smallness of fairies,
to changelings, to witchcraft and magic, to exorcisms, to taboos, and to
food-sacrifice, in all cases comparative folk-lore shows that the
beliefs composing it find their parallels the world over, and that
fairy-like beings are objects of belief now not only in Celtic
countries, but in Central Australia, throughout Polynesia, in Africa,
among American Red Men, in Asia generally, in Southern, Western, and
Northern Europe, and, in fact, wherever civilized and primitive men hold
religious beliefs. From a rationalist point of view anthropologists
would be inclined to regard the bulk of this widespread belief in
spiritual beings as being purely mythical, but for us to do so and stop
there would lead to no satisfactory solution: the origin of myth itself
needs to be explained, and one of the chief objects of our study
throughout the remainder of this book is to make an attempt at such an
explanation, especially of Celtic myth.

Again, if we examine all fairy-like beings from a certain superficial
point of view, or even from the mythological point of view, it is easy
to discern that they are universally credited with precisely the same
characters, attributes, actions, or powers as the particular peoples
possess who have faith in

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

them; and then the further fact emerges that this anthropomorphosing is
due directly to the more immediate social environment: we see merely an
anthropomorphically coloured picture of the whole of an age-long social
evolution of the tribe, race, or nation who have fostered the particular
aspect of this one world-wide folk-religion. But if we look still
deeper, we discover as background to the myths and the social psychology
a profound animism. This animism appears in its own environment in the
shading away of the different fairy-like beings into spirits and ghosts
of the departed. Going deeper yet, we find that such animistic beliefs
as concern themselves exclusively with the realm of the dead are in many
cases apparently so well founded on definite provable psychical
experiences on the part of living men and women that the aid of science
itself must be called in to explain them, and this will be done in our
chapter entitled *Science and Fairies*.

So far it ought to be clear that already our evidence points to a very
respectable residue in the experiences of percipients, which cannot be
explained away--as can the larger mass of the evidence--as due to
ethnological, anthropomorphic, naturalistic, or sociological influences
on the Celtic mind; and for the present this must be designated as the
*x* or unknown quantity in the Fairy-Faith. In chapter xi this *x*
quantity, augmented by whatever else is to be elicited from further
evidence, will be specifically discussed.

These points of view derived from our anthropological examination of the
chief parts of the evidence presented by the living Fairy-Faith will be
kept constantly before us as we proceed further; and what has been
demonstrated anthropologically in this chapter will serve to interpret
what is to follow until chapter xi is reached. With this tentative
position we pass to Section II of this study, and shall there begin to
examine, as we have just done with their modern Fairy-Faith, the ancient
Fairy-Faith of the Celts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[227:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_128) B. Spencer and F.
T. Gillen, *Nat. Tribes of Cent. Aust*. (London, 1899), chapters xi, xv.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[228:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_129) R. H. Codrington,
*Journ. Anthrop. Inst*. x. 261*; The Melanesians* (Oxford, 1891), pp.
123, 151, &c.; also cf. F. W. Christian, *The Caroline Islands* (London,
1899), pp. 281 *ff.*, &c.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[228:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_130) H. Callaway, *The
Religious System of the Amazulu* (London, 1868), pp. 226-7.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[228:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_131) C. G. Leland,
*Memoirs* (London, 1893), i. 34.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[228:4](ffcc130.htm#fr_132) R. C. Temple,
*Legends of the Panjab*, in *Folk-Lore*, x. 395.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[228:5](ffcc130.htm#fr_133) W. W. Skeat, *Malay
Magic* (London, 1900), *passim*.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[229:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_134) Hardouin,
*Traditions et superstitions siamoises*, in *Rev. Trad. Pop.*, v.
257-67.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[229:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_135) Ella G. Sykes,
*Persian Folklore*, in *Folk-Lore*, xii. 263.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[229:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_136) I am directly
indebted for this information to a friend who is a member of Lincoln
College, Oxford, Mr. Mohammed Said Loutfy, of Barkein, Lower Egypt. Mr.
Loutfy has come into frequent and very intimate contact with these
animistic beliefs in his country, and he tells me that they are common
to all classes of almost all races in modern Egypt. The common Egyptian
spellings are *afreet*, in the singular, and *afaareet* in the <span
id="page_230">p. 230</span> plural, for spiritual beings, who are
usually described by percipients as of pygmy stature, but as being able
to assume various sizes and shapes. The *djinns*, on the contrary, are
described as tall spiritual beings possessing great power.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[230:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_137) J. C. Lawson,
*Modern Greek Folk-Lore* (Cambridge, 1910), pp. 131-7, 139-46, 163.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[231:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_138) L. Sainéan, *Les
Fées méchantes d'apris les croyances du peuple roumain*, in *Mélusine*,
x. 217-26, 243-54.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[231:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_139) Cf. C. G. Leland,
*Etruscan Roman Remains in Pop. Trad.* (London, 1892), pp. 162, 165,
223*,* &c.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[231:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_140) H. C. Coote, *The
Neo-Latin Fay*, in *Folk-Lore Record*, ii. 1-18.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[234:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_141) We cannot here
attempt to present, even in outline, all the complex ethnological
arguments for and against the existence in prehistoric times of European
pygmy races. Attention ought, however, to be called to the remarkable
finds recently made in the *Grotte des Enfants*, at Mentone, France. A
certain number of well-preserved skeletons of probably the earliest men
who dwelt on the present land surface of Europe, which were found there,
suggest that different racial stocks, possibly in succession, have
preceded the Aryan stock. The first race, as indicated by two small
negroid-looking skeletons of a woman, 1,580 mm. (62.21 inches), and of a
boy 1,540 mm. (60.63 inches) in height, found in the lowest part of the
*Grotte*, was probably Ethiopian. The succeeding race was probably
Mongolian, judging from other remains found in another part of the same
*Grotte*, and especially from the Chancelade skeleton with its
distinctly Eskimo appearance, only 1,500 mm. (59.06 inches) high,
discovered near Perigneux, France. The race succeeding this one was
possibly the one out of which our own Aryan race evolved. In relation to
the Pygmy Theory these recent finds are of the utmost significance. They
confirm Dr. Windle's earlier conclusion, that, contrary to the argument
advanced to support the Pygmy Theory, the neolithic races of Central
Europe were not true pygmies--a people whose average stature does not
exceed four feet nine inches (cf. B. C. A. Windle, *Tyson's Pygmies of
the Ancients*, London, 1894, Introduction). And, furthermore, these
finds show, as far as any available ethnological data can, that there
are no good reasons for believing that European and, therefore, Celtic
lands were once dominated by pygmies even in epochs so remote that we
can only calculate them in tens of thousands of years. Nevertheless, it
is very highly probable that a folk-memory of Lappish, Pictish, or other
small but not true pygmy races, has superficially coloured the modern
fairy traditions of Northern Scotland, of the Western Hebrides (where
what may prove to have been Lapps' or Picts' houses undoubtedly remain),
of Northern Ireland, of the Isle of Man, and slightly, if indeed at all,
the fairy traditions of other parts of the Celtic world (cf. David
MacRitchie, *The Testimony of Tradition*, London, 1890; and his
criticism of our own Psychological Theory, in the *Celtic Review*,
October 1909 and January 1910, entitled respectively, *A New Solution of
the Fairy Problem*, and *Druids and Mound-Dwellers*).

Again, the very small flint implements frequently found in Celtic lands
and elsewhere have perhaps very reasonably been attributed to a
long-forgotten pygmy race; though we must bear in mind in this connexion
that it would be very unwise to conclude definitely that no race save a
small-statured race could have made and used such implements American
Red Men were, when discovered by Europeans, and still axe, making and
using the tiniest of arrow-heads, precisely the same in size and design
as those found in Celtic lands and attributed to pygmies. The use of
small flint implements for special purposes, e.g. arrows for shooting
small game <span id="page_235">p. 235</span> like birds, for spearing
fish, and for use in warfare as poisoned arrows, seems to have been
common to most primitive peoples of normal stature. Contemporary pygmy
races, far removed from Celtic lands, are also using them, and no doubt
their prehistoric ancestors used them likewise.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[235:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_142) J. G. Campbell,
*The Fians* (London, 1891), p. 239. An Irish dwarf <span
id="page_236">p. 236</span> is minutely described in *Silva Gadelica*
(ii. 116), O'Grady's translation. Again, in Malory's *Morte D'Arthur*
(B. XII. cc. i-ii) a dwarf is mentioned.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[236:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_143) Campbell, *The*
*Fians,* p. 265.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[236:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_144) S. H. O'Grady,
*Silva Gadelica* (London, 1892), ii, 199.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[236:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_145) Commentary on the
*Senchas* *Már*, i. 70-1 Stokes's translation in *Rev. Celt*., i. 256-7.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[237:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_146) Sir John Rhy^s,
*Hibbert Lectures* (London, 1888), p. 592*.* Dwarfs supernatural in
character also appear in the *Mabinogion*, and one of them is an
attendant on King Arthur. In Béroul's *Tristan*, Frocin, a dwarf, is
skilled in astrology and magic, and in the version by Thomas we find a
similar reference.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[237:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_147) Tylor, *Prim.
Cult.*, i. 385.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[237:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_148) Cf. Windle, op.
Cit., Intro., p. 57.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[237:4](ffcc130.htm#fr_150) Hunt, *Anthrop.
Mems.*, ii. 294; cf. Windle, op. cit., Intro., p. 57.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[238:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_151) Smith, *Myths of
the Iroquois*, in *Amer. Bur. Eth.*, ii. 65.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[238:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_152) Skeat, *Malay
Magic*, p. 329.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[238:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_153) Monier-Williams,
*Bra\_hminism and Hindu\_ism* (London, 1887), p. 236.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[238:4](ffcc130.htm#fr_154) Codrington, *The
Melanesians*, p. 152.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[238:5](ffcc130.htm#fr_155) *Dwarfs in the
East*, in *Folk-Lore*, iv. 401-2.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[238:6](ffcc130.htm#fr_156) Lacouperie,
*Babylonian and Oriental Record*, v; cf. Windle, op. cit., Intro., pp.
21-2.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[239:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_157) A. H. S. Landor,
*Alone with the Hairy Ainu* (London, 1893), p. 251*;* also Windle, op.
cit., Intro., pp. 22-4.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[239:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_158) J. *G.* Frazer,
*Golden Bough* (London, I900), i. 248 ff.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[239:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_159) Cf. A. Wiedemann,
*Ancient Egyptian Doctrine Immortality* (London, 1895), p. 12.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[240:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_160) Cf. A. E. Crawley,
*Idea of the Soul* (London, 1909), p. 186.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[240:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_161) Examples are in
Orcagna's fresco of 'The Triumph of Death', in the Campo Santo of Pisa
(cf. A. Wiedemann, *Anc. Egy. Doct. Immort.*, p. 34 ff.); and over the
porch of the Cathedral Church of St. Trophimus, at Aries.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[240:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_162) Cf. Crawley, op.
cit., p. 187.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[241:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_163) General references:
Eliphas Levi, *Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie* (Paris); Paracelsus;
A. E. Waite, *The Occult Sciences* (London, 1891).

<span id="fn_147"></span>[242:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_165) W. B. Yeats, *Irish
Fairy and Folk-Tales* (London), p. 2.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[242:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_166) W. B. Yeats, *The
Celtic Twilight* (London, 1902), p. 92 n.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[243:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_167) In this connexion
should be read Mr. Jenner's Introduction, pp. 167 ff.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[245:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_168) Cf. Cririe,
*Scottish Scenery* (London, 1803), pp. 347-8; P. Graham, *Sketches
Descriptive of Picturesque Scenery on the Southern Confines of
Perthshire* (Edinburgh, 1812), pp. 248-50, 253; Mahé, *Essai sur les
Antiquités du Départ du Morbihan* (Vannes, 1825); Maury, *Les Fées du
Moyen-Age* (Paris, 1843).

<span id="fn_151"></span>[245:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_169) David MacRitchie,
*Druids and Mound Dwellers*, in *Celtic Review* (January 1910); and his
*Testimony of Tradition*.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[246:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_170) K. Meyer and A.
Nutt, *Voyage of Bran* (London, 1895-7), ii. 231-2.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[246:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_171) Cf. Tylor, *Prim.
Cult*.,<sup>4</sup> ii. 61.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[246:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_172) Lawson, *Modern
Greek Folklore*, pp. 356, 359.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[247:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_173) Rhy^s, *Hib. Lea.*,
p. *201*; Jubainville, *Cyc. Myth. Irl*, pp. 106-8.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[247:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_174) E. O. Curry,
*Manners and Customs* (Dublin, 1873*),* I. cccxx; from *Book of
Ballymote*, fol. 145, b. b.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[248:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_175) Codrington, *The
Melanesians,* p. 286.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[248:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_176) Ib., p. 275

<span id="fn_159"></span>[248:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_177) Ib., pp. 226,
208-9.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[248:4](ffcc130.htm#fr_178) Crawley, *Idea of
the Soul,* p. 114.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[248:5](ffcc130.htm#fr_179) Codrington, *The
Melanesians,* p. 289.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[248:6](ffcc130.htm#fr_180) Ib., p. 194.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[248:7](ffcc130.htm#fr_181) Cf. Crawley, *Idea
of the Soul,* chap. iv.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[249:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_182) For a thorough and
scientific discussion of this matter, see J. L. Nevius, *Demon
Possession* (London, 1897).

<span id="fn_165"></span>[250:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_183) N. G.
Mitchell-Innes, *Birth, Marriage, and Death Rites of the Chinese*, in
*Folk-Lore Journ.*, v. 225. Very curiously, the pagan Chinese mother
uses the sign of the cross against the demon as Celtic mothers use it
against fairies; and no exorcism by Catholic or Protestant to cure a
fairy changeling or to drive out possessing demons is ever performed
without this world-wide and pre-Christian sign of the cross (see pp.
270-1).

<span id="fn_166"></span>[254:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_185) R. R. Marett, *The
Threshold of Religion* (London, 1909), p. 58, &c.; p. 67.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[254:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_186) W. James,
*Confidences of a 'Psychical Researcher*', in *American Magazine*
(October 1909).

<span id="fn_168"></span>[254:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_187) Frazer, *The Golden
Bough* <sup>3</sup> (London, 1911), i. 220.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[255:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_188) Frazer, *The Golden
Bough*, <sup>3</sup> i. 221-2.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[255:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_189) Ib., chap. iv.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[255:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_190) See Apuleius, *De
Deo Socratis*; Cicero, *De Natura Deorum* (lib. i); Iamblichus, *De
Mysteriis Aegypt., Chaldaeor., Assyrior.*; Plato, *Timaeus*, <span
id="page_256">p. 256</span> *Symposium*, *Politicus*, *Republic*, ii.
iii. x; Plutarch, *De Defectu Oraculorum*, *The Daemon of Socrates*,
*Isis and Osiris*; Proclus, *Commentarius in Platonis Alcibiadem*.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[256:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_191) Pliny, *Natural
History,* xxx. 14

<span id="fn_173"></span>[257:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_192) Cf. G. Dottin, *La
Religion des Celtes* (Paris, 1904), p. 44.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[257:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_193) The neo-platonists
generally, including Porphyry, Julian, Iamblichus, <span
id="page_258">p. 258</span> and Maximus, being persuaded of man's power
to call up and control spirits, called white magic *theurgy*, or the
invoking *of* good spirits, and the reverse *goëty*, or the calling up
and controlling of evil spirits for criminal purposes. Cf. F. Lélut, *Du
Démon de Socrate* (Paris, 1836).

If white magic be correlated with religion as religion is popularly
conceived, namely the cult of supernatural powers friendly to man, and
black magic be correlated with magic as magic tends to be popularly
conceived, namely witchcraft and devil-worship, we have a satisfactory
historical and logical basis for making a distinction between religion
and magic; religion (including white magic) is a social good, magic
(black magic) is a social evil. Such a distinction as Dr. Frazer makes
is untenable within the field of true magic.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[259:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_194) Cf. B. Jowett,
*Dialogues of Plato* (Oxford, 1892), i. 573.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[259:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_195) Cf. Meyer and Nutt,
*Voyage of Bran* (London, 1895-7), i. 146.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[259:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_196) Campbell, *The
Fians*, p. 195.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[259:4](ffcc130.htm#fr_197) Cf. Stokes's trans.
in *Rev. Celt.*, i. 261.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[260:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_198) Cf. Stokes's trans.
in *Rev. Celt.*, xv. 307.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[260:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_199) From the
*Conception of Mongan*, cf. Meyer, *Voyage of Bran*, i. 77.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[262:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_200) Quoted and
summarized from *Projectors of 'Malicious Animal Magnetism'*, in
*Literary Digest*, xxxix. No. 17, pp. 676--7 (New York and London,
October 23, 1909).

<span id="fn_182"></span>[263:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_201) Cf. Nevius, *Demon
Possession*, pp. 300-1.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[263:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_202) For a fuller
discussion of the history of witchcraft see *The Superstitions of
Witchcraft*, by Howard Williams, London, 1865.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[264:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_203) Cf. J. Quicherat,
*Procès* (Paris, 1845), *passim*.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[264:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_204) Ib., i. 178.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[265:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_205) Codrington, *The
Melanesians*, pp. 127, 200, 202-3 ff.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[266:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_206) Bergier, *Dict. de
Théol.* (Paris, 1848), ii. 541-2, &c.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[267:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_207) W. Stokes,
*Tripartite Life* (London, 1887), pp. 13, 115.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[267:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_208) I am personally
indebted to Dr. W. J. Watson, of Edinburgh, for having directed my
attention to this curious passage, and for having pointed out its
probable significance in relation to druidical practices.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[268:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_209) Adamnan, *Life of
S. Columba*, B. II, cc. xvi, xvii.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[269:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_210) For this fact I am
personally indebted to Mrs. W. J. Watson, of Edinburgh.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[269:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_211) Stokes, *Tripartite
Life*, pp. clxxx, 303, 305; from *Book of Armagh*, fo. 9, A 2, and fo.
9, B 2.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[269:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_214) Bergier, *Dict. de
Théol.*, ii. 545, 431, 233.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[270:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_215) See *Instruction
sur le Rituel*, par l'Eveque de Toulon, iii. 1-16. 'In the Greek rite
(of baptism), the priest breathes thrice on the catechumen's mouth,
forehead, and breast, praying that every unclean spirit may be
expelled.'--W. Bright, *Canons of First Four General Councils* (Oxford,
1892), p. 122.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[270:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_216) Cf. Godescard,
*Vies des Saints* (Paris, 1835), xiii. 254-66.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[270:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_217) *De Incarnatione
Verbi* (ed. Ben.), i. 88; cf. Godescard, op. cit., xiii. 254-66.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[270:4](ffcc130.htm#fr_218) Godescard, *Vies
des Saints*, xiii. 263-4.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[270:5](ffcc130.htm#fr_219) Par Joly de Choin,
Évêque de Toulon, i. 639.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[270:6](ffcc130.htm#fr_220) Bergier, *Dict. de
Théol.*, ii. 335.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[271:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_221) Stokes, *Tripartite
Life*, Intro., p. 262.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[271:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_222) J. E. Mirville,
*Des Esprits* (Paris, 1853), i. 475.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[272:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_223) *Instructions sur
le Rituel*, par Joly de Choin, iii. 276-7.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[273:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_224) G. Evans, *Exorcism
in Wales*, in *Folk-Lore*, iii. 274-7.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[273:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_225) W. Crook; in
*Folk-Lore*, xiii. 189-90.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[274:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_226) For ancient usages
see F. Lenormant, *Chaldean Magic* (London, 1877), pp. 103--4;
Iamblichus and other Neo-Platonists; and for modern usages see Marett.
*Threshold of Religion*, chap. iii.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[275:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_227) Cf. Marett, *Is
Taboo a Negative Magic*? in *The Threshold of Religion*, pp. 85-114.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[275:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_228) Codrington, *The
Melanesians*, p. 277.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[275:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_229) Eastman, *Dacotah*,
p. 177; cf. Tylor, *Prim. Cult.*,<sup>4</sup> ii. 52 n.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[275:4](ffcc130.htm#fr_230) Shortland, *Trad.
of New Zeal.*, p. 150; cf. Tylor, op. cit., ii. 51-2.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[276:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_231) Precisely like
Celtic peasants, primitive peoples often fail to take into account the
fact that the physical body is in reality left behind upon entering the
trance state of consciousness known to them as the world of the departed
and of fairies, because there they seem still to have a body, the ghost
body, which to their minds, in such a state, is undistinguishable from
the physical body. Therefore they ordinarily believe that the body and
soul both are taken.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[276:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_232) Frazer, *Golden
Bough*,<sup>2</sup> *passim*.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[276:3](ffcc130.htm#fr_233) Cf. Ib., i. 344
ff., 348; iii. 390.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[277:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_235) Codrington, *The
Melanesians*, pp. 177, 218-9.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[277:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_236) Cf. Eleanor Hull,
*Old Irish Tabus or Geasa*, in *Folk-Lore*, xii. 41 ff.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[278:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_237) Cf. Fraser, *Golden
Bough*,<sup>2</sup> i. 233 ff., 343.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[278:2](ffcc130.htm#fr_238) Cf. E. J. Gwynn,
*On the Idea of Fate in Irish Literature*, in *Journ. Ivernian Society*
(Cork), April 1910.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[279:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_239) Cf. our evidence,
pp. [38](ffcc121.htm#page_38), [44](ffcc121.htm#page_44); also Kirk's
*Secret Commonwealth* (c. i), where it is said of the 'good peoples or
fairies that their bodies are so 'plyable thorough the Subtilty of the
Spirits that agitate them, that they can make them appear or disappear
att Pleasure. Some have Bodies or Vehicles so spungious, thin, and
delecat, that they are fed by only sucking into some fine spirituous
Liquors, that pierce lyke pure Air and Oyl'.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[280:1](ffcc130.htm#fr_240) *Laws*, iv; cf.
Jowett, *Dialogues of Plato*, v. 282-90.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. People of the Goddess Dana](ffcc240)
