[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ffcc125)  [Next](ffcc130.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VII. IN BRITTANY

Introduction by ANATOLE LE BRAZ, Professor of French Literature,
University of Rennes, Brittany; author of *La Légende de la Mort*, *Au
Pays des Pardons*, &c. (*Note*: Translation in this footnote: <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_75) --John Bruno Hare.md)

MON CHER MONSIEUR WENTZ,

Il me souvient que, lors de votre soutenance de thèse devant la Faculté
des Lettres de l'Université de Rennes, un de mes collègues, mon ami, le
professeur Dottin, vous demanda:

'Vous croyez, dites-vous, à l'existence des fées? En avez-vous vu?'

Vous répondîtes, avec autant de phlegme que de sincérité:

'Non. J'ai tout fait pour en voir, et je n'en ai jamais vu. Mais il y a
beaucoup de choses que vous n'avez pas vues, monsieur le professeur, et
dont vous ne songeriez cependant pas à nier l'existence. Ainsi fais-je à
l'égard des fees.'

Je suis comme vous, mon cher monsieur Wentz: je n'ai

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

jamais vu de fées. J'ai bien une amie très chère que nous avons baptisée
de ce nom, mais, malgré tous ses beaux dons magiques, elle n'est qu'une
humble mortelle. En revanche, j 'ai vécu, tout enfant, parmi des
personnes qui avaient avec les fées véritables un commerce quasi
journalier.

C'était dans une petite bourgade de Basse-Bretagne, peuplée de paysans à
moitié marins, et de marins à moitié paysans. Il y avait, non loin du
village, une ancienne gentilhommière que ses propriétaires avaient
depuis longtemps abandonnée pour on ne savait au juste quel motif. On
continuait de l'appeler le 'château' de Lanascol, quoi-qu'elle ne fût
plus guère qu'une ruine. Il est vrai que les avenues par lesquelles on y
accédait avaient conserve leur aspect seigneurial, avec leurs quadruples
rangées de vieux hêtres dont les vastes frondaisons se miraient dans de
magnifiques étangs. Les gens d'alentour se risquaient peu, le soir, dans
ces avenues. Elles passaient pour être, à partir du coucher du soleil,
le lieu de promenade favori d'une 'dame' que l'on désignait sous le nom
de *Groac'h Lanascol*,--la 'Fée de Lanascol'.

Beaucoup disaient l'avoir rencontrée, et la dépeignaient sous les
couleurs, du reste, les plus diverses. Ceux-ci faisaient d'elle une
vieille femme, marchant toute courbée, les

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

deux mains appuyées sur un tronçon de béquille avec lequel, de temps en
temps, elle remuait, à l'automne, les feuilles mortes. Les feuilles
mortes qu'elle retournait ainsi devenaient soudain brillantes comme de
l'or et s'entrechoquaient avec un bruit clair de métal. Selon d'autres,
c'était une jeune princesse, merveilleusement parée, sur les pas de qui
s'empressaient d'étranges petits hommes noirs et silencieux. Elle
s'avançait d'une majestueuse allure de reine. Parfois elle s'arrêtait
devant un arbre, et l'arbre aussitôt s'inclinait comme pour recevoir ses
ordres. On bien, elle jetait un regard sur l'eau d'un étang, et l'étang
frissonnait jusqu'en ses profondeurs, comme agité d'un mouvement de
crainte sons la puissance de son regard.

On racontait sur elle cette curieuse histoire:--

Les propriétaires de Lanascol ayant voulu se défaire d'un domaine qu'ils
n'habitaient plus, le manoir et les terres qui en dépendaient furent mis
en adjudication chez un notaire de Plouaret. Au jour fixé pour les
enchères nombre d'acheteurs accoururent. Les prix étaient déjà montés
très haut, et le domaine allait être adjugé, quand, à un dernier appel
du crieur, une voix féminine, très douce et très impérieuse tout
ensemble, s'éleva et dit:

'Mille francs de plus!'

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

Il y eut grande rumeur dans la salle. Tout le monde chercha des yeux la
personne qui avait lancé cette surenchère, et qui ne pouvait être qu'une
femme. Mais il ne se trouva pas une seule femme dans l'assistance. Le
notaire demanda:

'Qui a parlé?'

De nouveau, la même voix se fit entendre.

'Groac'h Lanascol!' répondit-elle.

Ce fut une débandade génerale. Depuis lors, il ne c'était jamais
présenté d'acquéreur, et voilà pourquoi, répétait-on couramment,
Lanascol était toujours à vendre.

Si je vous ai entretenu à plaisir de la Fée de Lanascol, mon cher
monsieur Wentz, c'est qu'elle est la première qui ait fait impression
sur moi, dans mon enfance. Combien d'autres n'en ai-je pas connu, par la
suite, à travers les récits de mes compatriotes des grèves, des champs
ou des bois! La Bretagne est restée un royaume de féerie. On n'y pent
voyager l'espace d'une lieue sans côtoyer la demeure de quelque fée mâle
ou femelle. Ces jours derniers, comme j'accomplissais un pèlerinage
d'automne à l'hallucinante forêt de Paimpont, toute hantée encore des
grands souvenirs de la légende celtique, je croisai, sous les opulents
ombrages

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

du Pas-du-Houx, une ramasseuse de bois mort, avec qui je ne manquai pas,
vous pensez bien, de lier conversation. Un des premiers noms que je
prononçai fut naturellement celui de Viviane.

'Viviane!' se récria la vieille pauvresse. 'Ah! bénie soit-elle, la
bonne Dame! car elle est aussi bonne que belle... Sans sa protection,
mon homme, qui travaille dans les coupes, serait tombé, comme un loup,
sous les fusils des gardes...' Et elle se mit à me conter comme quoi son
mari, un tantinet braconnier comme tous les bûcherons de ces parages,
s'étant porté, une nuit, a l'affût du chevreuil, dans les environs de la
Butte-aux-Plaintes, avait été surpris en flagrant délit par une tournée
de gardes. Il voulut fuir: les gardes tirèrent. Une balle l'atteignit à
la cuisse: il tomba, et il s'apprêtait à se faire tuer sur place, plutôt
que de se rendre, lorsque, entre ses agresseurs et lui, s'interposa
subitement une espèce de brouillard très dense qui voila tout,--le sol,
les arbres, les gardes et le blessé lui-même. Et il entendit une voix
sortie du brouillard, une voix légère comme un bruit de feuilies,
murmurer a son oreille: 'Sauvetoi, mon fils: l'esprit de Viviane
veillera sur toi jusqu'à ce que tu aies rampé hors de la forêt.'

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

'Telles furent les propres paroles de la fée,' conclut la ramasseuse de
bois mort.

Et, dévotement, elle se signa, car la religieuse Bretagne--vous le
savez--vénère les fées a l'égal des saintes.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

J'ignore s'il faut rattacher les lutins an monde des fées, mais, ce qui
est sûr, c'est que cette charmante et malicieuse engeance a toujours
pullulé dans notre pays. Je me suis laissé dire qu'autrefois chaque
maison avait le sien. C'était quelque chose comme le petit dieu pénate.
Tantôt visible, tantôt invisible, il présidait à tous les actes de la
vie domestique. Mieux encore: il y participait, et de la façon la plus
efficace. A l'intérieur du logis, il aidait les servantes, soufflait le
feu dans l'âtre, surveillait la cuisson de la nourriture pour les hommes
on pour les bêtes, apaisait les cris de l'enfant couché dans le bas de
l'armoire, empêchait les vers de se mettre dans les pièces de lard
suspendues aux solives. Il avait pareillement dans son lot le
gouvernement des étables et des écuries: grâce à lui, les vaches
donnaient un lait abondant en beurre, et les chevaux avaient la croupe
ronde, le poll luisant. Il était, en un mot, le bon génie de la famille,
mais c'était à la condition que chacun eût pour lui les égards auxquels
il avait droit. Si pen qu'on lui

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

manquât, sa bonté se changeait en malice et il n'était point de mauvais
tours dont il ne fût capable envers les gens qui l'avaient offensé,
comme de renverser le contenu des marmites sur le foyer, d'embrouiller
la laine autour des quenouilles, de rendre infumable le tabac des pipes,
d'emmêler inextricablement les crins des chevaux, de dessécher le pis
des vaches ou de faire peler le dos des brebis. Aussi s'efforçait-on de
ne le point mécontenter. On respectait soigneusement toutes ses
habitudes, toutes ses manies. C'est ainsi que, chez mes parents, notre
vieille bonne Filie n'enlevait jamais le trépied du feu sans avoir la
précaution de l'asperger d'eau pour le refroidir, avant de le ranger an
coin de l'âtre. Si vous lui demandiez pourquoi ce rite, elle vous
répondait:

'Pour que le lutin ne s'y brûle pas, si, tout à l'heure, il s'asseyait
dessus.'

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Il appartient encore, je suppose, à la catégorie des hommes-fées, ce
*Bugul-Noz*, ce mystérieux 'Berger de la nuit' dont les Bretons des
campagnes voient se dresser, au crépuscule, la haute et troublante
silhouette, si, d'aventure, il leur arrive de rentrer tard du labour. On
n'a jamais pu me renseigner exactement sur le genre de troupeau qu'il
faisait paître, ni sur ce que présageait sa rencontre. Le plus souvent,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

on la redoute. Mais, comme l'observait avec raison une de mes conteuses,
Lise Bellec, s'il est préférable d'éviter le *Bugul-Noz*, il ne s'ensuit
pas, pour cela, que ce soit un méchant Esprit. D'après elle, il
remplirait plutôt une fonction salutaire, en signifiant aux humains, par
sa venue, que la nuit n'est pas faite pour s'attarder aux champs ou sur
les chemins, mais pour s'enfermer derrière les portes closes et pour
dormir. Ce berger des ombres serait donc, somme toute, une manière de
bon pasteur. C'est pour assurer notre repos et notre sécurité, c'est
pour nous soustraire aux excès du travail et aux embûches de la nuit
qu'il nous force, brebis imprudentes, à regagner promptement le bercail.

Sans doute est-ce un rôle tutélaire à peu près semblable qui, dans la
croyance populaire, est dévolu à un autre homme-fée, plus spécialement
affecté au nivage de la mer, comme l'indique son nom de *Yann-An-Ôd*. Il
n'y a pas, sur tout le littoral maritime de la Bretagne ou, comme on
dit, dans tout *l'armor*, une seule région où l'existence de ce 'Jean
des Grèves' ne soit tenue pour un fait certain, dûment constaté,
indéniable. On lui prête des formes variables et des aspects différents.
C'est tantôt un géant, tantôt un nain. Il porte tantôt un 'suroit' de
toile huilée, tantôt un large chapeau de feutre noir. Parfois, il
s'appuie sun une

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

rame et fait penser au personnage énigmatique, armé du même attribut,
qu'Ulysse doit suivre, dans *l'Odyssée*. Mais, toujours, c'est un héros
marin dont la mission est de parcourir les plages, en poussant par
intervalles de longs cris stridents, propres à effrayer les pêcheurs qui
se seraient laissé surprendre dehors par les ténèbres de la nuit. Il ne
fait de mal qu'à ceux qui récalcitrent; encore ne les frappet-il que
dans leur intérêt, pour les contraindre à se mettre a l'abri. Il est,
avant tout, un 'avertisseur'. Ses cris ne rappellent pas seulement au
logis les gens attardés sur les grèves; ils signalent aussi le dangereux
voisinage de la côte aux marins qui sont en mer et, par là, suppléent à
l'insuffisance du mugissement des sirènes ou de la lumière des phares.

Remarquons, à ce propos, qu'on relève un trait analogue dans la légende
des vieux saints armonicains, pour la plupart émigrés d'Irlande. Un de
leurs exercices coutumiers consistait à déambuler de nuit le long des
côtes où ils avaient établi leurs oratoires, en agitant des clochettes
de fer battu dont les tintements étaient destinés, comme les cris de
*Yann-An-Ôd*, à prévenir les navigateurs que la terre était proche.

Je suis persuadé que le culte des saints, qui est la première et la plus
fervente des dévotions bretonnes, conserve bien des traits d'une
religion plus ancienne où la croyance

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

aux fées jouait le principal rôle. Et il en va de même, j'en suis
convaincu, pour ces mythes funéraires que j 'ai recueillis sous le titre
de *La Légende de la Mort* chez les Bretons armoricains. A vrai dire,
dans la conception bretonne, les morts ne sont pas morts; ils vivent
d'une vie mystérieuse en marge de la vie réelle, mais leur monde reste,
en définitive, tout mêlé au nôtre et, sitôt que la nuit tombe, sitôt que
les vivants proprement dits s'abandonnent a la mort momentanée du
sommeil, les soi-disant morts redeviennent les habitants de la terre
qu'ils n'ont jamais quittée. Ils reprennent leur place à leur foyer
d'autrefois, ils vaquent à leurs anciens travaux, ils s'intéressent au
logis, aux champs, à la barque; ils se comportent, en un mot, comme ce
peuple des hommes et des femmes-fées qui formait jadis une espèce
d'humanité plus fine et plus délicate au milieu de la veritable
humanité.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

J'aurais encore, mon cher monsieur Wentz, bien d'autres types à évoquer,
dans cet intermonde de la féerie bretonne qui, chez mes compatriotes, ne
se confond ni avec ce mondeci, ni avec l'autre, mais participe à la fois
de tous les deux, par un singulier mélange de naturel et de surnaturel.
Je n'ai voulu, en ces lignes rapides, que montrer la nichesse de la
matière à laquelle vous avez, avec tant de conscience et

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

de ferveur, appliqué votre effort. Et maintenant, que les fées vous
soient douces, mon cher ami! Elles ne seront que justes en favorisant de
toute leur tendresse le jeune et brillant écrivain qui vient de
restaurer leur culte en rénovant leur gloire.

RENNES,  
ce 1<sup>er</sup> *novembre* 1910.

BRETON FAIRIES OR

FÉES

In Lower Brittany, which is the genuinely Celtic part of Armorica,
instead of finding a widespread folk-belief in fairies of the kind
existing in Wales, Ireland, and Scotland, we find a widespread
folk-belief in the existence of the dead, and to a less extent in that
of the *corrigan* tribes. For our Psychological Theory this is very
significant. It seems to indicate that among the Bretons--who are one of
the most conservative Celtic peoples--the Fairy-Faith finds its chief
expression in a belief that men live after death in an invisible world,
just as in Ireland the dead and fairies live in Fairyland. This opinion
was first suggested to me by Professor Anatole Le Braz, author of *La
Légende de la Mort*, and by Professor Georges Dottin, both of the
University of Rennes. But before evidence to sustain and to illustrate
this opinion is offered, it will be well to consider the less important
Breton *fées* or beings like them, and then *corrigans* and *nains*
(dwarfs).

The 'Grac'hed Coz'.--F. M. Luzel, who collected so many of the popular
stories in Brittany, found that what few *fées* or fairies there are
almost always appear in folk-lore as little old women, or as the Breton
story-teller usually calls them, *Grac'hed coz*. I have selected and
abridged

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

the following legendary tale from his works to illustrate the nature of
these Breton fairy-folk:--

In ancient times, as we read in *La Princesse Blondine*, a rich nobleman
had three sons; the oldest was called Cado, the second, Méliau, and the
youngest, Yvon. One day, as they were together in a forest with their
bows and arrows, they met a little old woman whom they had never seen
before, and she was carrying on her head a jar of water. 'Are you able,
lads,' Cado asked his two brothers, 'to break with an arrow the jar of
the little old woman without touching her?' 'We do not wish to try it,'
they said, fearing to injure the good woman. 'All right, I'll do it
then, watch me.' And Cado took his bow and let fly an arrow. The arrow
went straight to its mark and split the jar without touching the little
old woman; but the water wet her to the skin, and, in anger, she said to
the skilful archer: 'You have failed, Cado, and I will be revenged on
you for this. From now until you have found the Princess Blondine all
the members of your body will tremble as leaves on a tree tremble when
the north wind blows.' And instantly Cado was seized by a trembling
malady in all his body. The three brothers returned home and told their
father what had happened; and the father, turning to Cado, said: 'Alas,
my unfortunate son, you have failed. It is now necessary for you to
travel until you find the Princess Blondine, as the *fée* said, for that
little old woman was a *fée*, and no doctor in the world can cure the
malady she has put upon you.' <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76.md)

'Fées' of Lower Brittany.--Throughout the Morbihan and Finistère, I
found that stories about *fée*, are much less common than about
*corrigans*, and in some localities extremely rare; but the ones I have
been fortunate enough to collect are much the same in character as those
gathered in the Côtes-du-Nord by Luzel, and elsewhere by other
collectors, Those I here record were told to me at Carnac during the
summer of 1909; the first one by M. Yvonne Daniel,

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

a native of the Île de Croix (off the coast north-west of Carnac); and
the others by M. Goulven Le Scour. <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_77.md)

'The little Île de Croix was especially famous for its old *fées*; and
the following legend is still believed by its oldest inhabitants:--"An
aged man who had suffered long from leprosy was certain to die within a
short time, when a woman bent double with age entered his house. She
asked from what malady he suffered, and on being informed began to say
prayers. Then she breathed upon the sores of the leper, and almost
suddenly disappeared: the *fée* had cured him."'

'It is certain that about fifty years ago the people in Finistère still
believed in *fées*. It was thought that the *fées* were spirits who came
to predict some unexpected event in the family. They came especially to
console orphans who had very unkind step-mothers. In their youth, Tanguy
du Chatel and his sister Eudes were protected by a *fée* against the
misfortune which pursued them; the history of Brittany says so. In Léon
it is said that the *fées* served to guide unfortunate people, consoling
them with the promise of a happy and victorious future. In the
Cornouailles, on the contrary, it is said that the *fées* were very
evilly disposed, that they were demons.

'My grandmother, Marie Le Bras, had related to me that one evening an
old *fée* arrived in my village, Kerouledic (Finistère), and asked for
hospitality. It was about the year 1830. The *fée* was received; and
before going to bed she predicted that the little daughter whom the
mother was dressing in night-clothes would be found dead in the cradle
the next day. This prediction was only laughed at; but in the morning
the little one was dead in her cradle, her eyes raised toward Heaven,
The *fée*, who had slept in the stable, was gone.'

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

In these last three accounts, by M. Le Scour, we observe three quite
different ideas concerning the Breton fairies or *fées*: in Finistère
and in Leon the *fées* are regarded as good protecting spirits, almost
like ancestral spirits, which originally they may have been; in the
Cornouailles they are evil spirits; while in the third account, about
the old *fée*--and in the legend of the leper cured by a *fée*--the
*fées* are rationalized, as in Luzel's tale quoted above, into
sorceresses or *Grac'hed Coz*.

Children Changed by 'Fées'.--M. Goulven Le Scour, at my request, wrote
down in French the following account of actual changelings in
Finistère:--'I remember very well that there was a woman of the village
of Kergoff, in Plouneventer, who was called ------, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) the mother of a family. When she had her
first child, a very strong and very pretty boy, she noticed one morning
that he had been changed during the night; there was no longer the fine
baby she had put to bed in the evening; there was, instead, an infant
hideous to look at, greatly deformed, hunchbacked, and crooked, and of a
black colour. The poor woman knew that a *fée* had entered the house
during the night and had changed her child.

'This changed infant still lives, and to-day he is about seventy years
old. He has all the possible vices; and he has tried many times to kill
his mother. He is a veritable demon; he often predicts the future, and
has a habit of running abroad during the night. They call him the
"Little *Corrigan*", and everybody flees from him. Being poor and infirm
now, he has been obliged to beg, and people give him alms because they
have great fear of him. His nick-name is Olier.

'This woman had a second, then a third child, both of whom were seen by
everybody to have been born with no infirmity; and, in turn, each of
these two was stolen by a *fée* and replaced by a little hunchback. The
second child was a most beautiful daughter. She was *taken* during the

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

night and replaced by a little girl babe, so deformed that it resembled
a ball. If her brother Olier was bad, she was even worse; she was the
terror of the village, and they called her Anniac. The third child met
the same luck, but was not so bad as the first and second.

'The poor mother, greatly worried at seeing what had happened, related
her troubles to another woman. This woman said to her, "If you have
another child, place with it in the cradle a little sprig of box-wood
which has been blessed (by a priest), and the *fée* will no longer have
the power of stealing your children." And when a fourth child was born
to the unfortunate woman it was not stolen, for she placed in the cradle
a sprig of box-wood which had been blessed on Palm Sunday (*Dimanche des
Rameaux*). <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_79.md)

'The first three children I knew very well, and they were certainly
hunchbacked: it is pretended in the country that the *fées* who come at
night to make changelings always leave in exchange hunchbacked infants.
It is equally pretended that a mother who has had her child so changed
need do nothing more than leave the little hunchback out of doors crying
during entire hours, and that the *fée* hearing it will come and put the
true child in its place. Unfortunately, Yvonna ------ did not know what
she should have done in order to have her own children again.'

Transformation Power of 'Fées',--At Kerallan, near Carnac, this is what
Madame Louise Le Rouzic said about the transformation power of
*fées*:--'It is said that the *fées* of the region when insulted
sometimes changed men into beasts or into stones.' <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_80.md)

Other Breton Fairies.--Besides the various types of *fées* already
described, we find in Luzel's collected stories a few

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

other types of fairy-like beings: in *Les Compagnons* (The
Companions), <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) the *fée* is a magpie
in a forest near Rennes--just as in other Celtic lands, fairies likewise
often appear as birds (see our study, pp. 302 ff.); in *La Princesse de
l'Etoile Brillante* (The Princess of the Brilliant Star), <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) a princess under the form of a duck plays
the part of a fairy (cf. how fairy women took the form of water-fowls in
the tale entitled the *Sick Bed of Cuchulainn* (see our study, p. 345);
in *Pipi Menou et les Femmes Volantes* (Pipi Menou and the Flying
Women), <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_81.md) there are fairy women as
swan-maidens; and then there are yet to be mentioned *Les Morgans de
l'ile d'Ouessant* (The *Morgans* of the Isle of Ushant), who live under
the sea in rare palaces where mortals whom they love and marry are able
to exist with them. In some legends of the *Morgans,* like one recorded
by Luzel, the men and women of this water-fairy race, or the *Morgans*
and *Morganezed*, seem like anthropomorphosed survivals of ancient
sea-divinities, such, for example, as the sea-god called *Shony*, to
whom the people of Lewis, Western Hebrides, still pour libations that he
may send in sea-weed, and the sea-god to whom anciently the people of
Iona poured libations. <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_82.md)

The 'Morgan'.--To M. J. Cuillandre (Glanmor), President of the
*Fédération des Etudiants Bretons*, I am indebted for the following
weird legend of the *Morgan*, as it is told among the Breton fisher-folk
on the Île Molène, Finistère:--

'Following a legend which I have collected on the Île Molène, the
*Morgan* is a fairy eternally young, a virgin seductress whose passion,
never satisfied, drives her to despair. Her place of abode is beneath
the sea; there she possesses marvellous palaces where gold and diamonds
glimmer. Accompanied by other fairies, of whom she is in some respects
the queen, she rises to the surface of the waters in the splendour of
her unveiled beauty. By day she slumbers amid the coolness of grottoes,
and woe to him who troubles her sleep. By night she lets herself be
lulled by the waves in the neighbourhood of the rocks. The sea-foam
crystallizes at her

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

touch into precious stones, of whiteness as dazzling as that of her
body. By moonlight she moans as she combs her fair hair with a comb of
fine gold, and she sings in a harmonious voice a plaintive melody whose
charm is irresistible. The sailor who listens to it feels himself drawn
toward her, without power to break the charm which drags him onward to
his destruction; the bark is broken upon the reefs: the man is in the
sea, and the *Morgan* utters a cry of joy. But the arms of the fairy
clasp only a corpse; for at her touch men die, and it is this which
causes the despair of the amorous and inviolate *Morgan.* She being
pagan, it suffices to have been touched by her in order to suffer the
saddest fate which can be reserved to a Christian. The unfortunate one
whom she had clasped is condemned to wander for ever in the trough of
the waters, his eyes wide open, the mark of baptism effaced from his
forehead. Never will his poor remains know the sweetness of reposing in
holy ground, never will be have a tomb where his kindred might come to
pray and to weep.'

Origin of the 'Morgan'.--The following legendary origin is attributed to
the *Morgan* by M. Goulven Le Scour, our Carnac witness:--'Following the
old people and the Breton legends, the *Morgan* (*Mari Morgan* in
Breton) was Dahut, the daughter of King Gradlon, who was ruler of the
city of Is. Legend records that when Dahut had entered at night the
bedchamber of her father and had cut from around his neck the cord which
held the key of the sea-dike flood-gates, and had given this key to the
Black Prince, under whose evil love she had fallen, and who, according
to belief, was no other than the Devil, St. Guenolé soon afterwards
began to cry aloud, "Great King, arise! The flood-gates are open, and
the sea is no longer restrained!" <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)
Suddenly the old King Gradlon arose, and, leaping on his horse, was
fleeing from the city with St. Guenolé, when he encountered his

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

own daughter amid the waves. She piteously begged aid of her father, and
he took her up behind him on the horse; but St. Guenolé, seeing that the
waters were gaining on them, said to the king, "Throw into the sea the
demon you have behind you, and we shall be saved!" Thereupon Gradlon
flung his daughter into the abyss, and he and St. Guenolé were saved.
Since that time, the fishermen declare that they have seen, in times of
rough sea and clear moonlight, Dahut, daughter of King Gradlon, sitting
on the rocks combing her fair hair and singing, in the place where her
father flung her. And to-day there is recognized under the Breton name
*Marie Morgan*, the daughter who sings amid the sea.'

Breton Fairyland Legends.--In a legend concerning Mona and the king of
the *Morgans*, much like the Christabel story of English poets, we have
a picture of a fairyland not under ground, but under sea; and this
legend of Mona and her *Morgan* lover is one of the most beautiful of
all the fairy-tales of Brittany.' Another one of Luzel's legends,
concerning a maiden who married a dead man, shows us Fairyland as a
world of the dead. It is a very strange legend, and one directly bearing
on the Psychological Theory; for this dead man, who is a dead priest,
has a palace in a realm of enchantment, and to enter his country one
must have a white fairy-wand with which to strike 'in the form of a
cross' two blows upon the rock concealing the entrance. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_84.md) M. Paul Sébillot records from Upper
Brittany a tradition that beneath the sea-waves there one can see a
subterranean world containing fields and villages and beautiful castles;
and it is so pleasant a world that mortals going there find years no
longer than days. <span id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_85.md)

Fairies of Upper Brittany. <span id="fr_89"></span>[3](#fn_86.md)
---Principally in Upper Brittany, M. Sébillot found rich folk-lore
concerning *fées*, though

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

some of his material is drawn from peasants and fishermen who are not so
purely Celtic as those in Lower Brittany; and he very concisely
summarizes the various names there given to the fairy-folk as
follows:--'They are generally called *Fées* (Fairies), sometimes *Fêtes*
(Fates), a name nearer than *fées* to the Latin *Fata*; *Fête* (fem.)
and *Fête* (mas.) are both used, and from *Fête* is probably derived
*Faito* or *Faitaud*, which is the name borne by the fathers, the
husbands, or the children of the *fées* (Saint-Cast). Near Saint-Briac
(Ille-et-Vilaine) they are sometimes called *Fions*; this term, which is
applied to both sexes, seems also to designate the mischievous *lutins*
(sprites). Round the Mené, in the cantons of Collinée and of Moncontour,
they are called *Margot la Fée*, or *ma Commère* (my Godmother)
*Margot*, or even the *Bonne Femme* (Good Woman) *Margot*. On the coast
they are often enough called by the name of *Bonnes Dames* (Good
Ladies), or of *nos Bonnes Mères les Fées* (our Good Mothers the
Fairies); usually they are spoken of with a certain respect.' <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_87.md) As the same authority suggests, probably
the most characteristic *Fées* in Upper Brittany are the *Fées des
Houles* (Fairies of the Billows); and traditions say that they lived in
natural caverns or grottoes in the sea-cliffs. They form a distinct
class of sea-fairies unknown elsewhere in France or Europe. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[2](#fn_88.md) M. Sébillot regards them as sea-divinities
greatly rationalized. Associated with them are the *fions*, a race of
dwarfs having swords no bigger than pins. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_88.md) A pretty legend about magic buckwheat
cakes, which in different forms is widespread throughout all Brittany,
is told of these little cave-dwelling fairies:--

Like the larger *fées* the *fions* kept cattle; and one day a black cow
belonging to the *fions* of Pont-aux-Hommes-Nées ate the buckwheat in
the field of a woman of that neighbourhood. The woman went to the fions
to complain, and in reply to her a voice said: 'Hold your tongue; you
will be paid for your buckwheat!' Thereupon the *fions* gave the woman a
cupful of buckwheat, and promised her

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

that it would never diminish so long as none should be given away. That
year buckwheat was very scarce, but no matter how many buckwheat cakes
the woman and her family ate there was never diminution in the amount of
the fairy buckwheat. At last, however, the unfortunate hour came. A
rag-gatherer arrived and asked for food. Thoughtlessly the woman gave
him one of her buckwheat cakes, and suddenly, as though by magic, all
the rest of the buckwheat disappeared for ever.

Along the Rance the inhabitants tell about *fées* who appear during
storms. These storm-fairies are dressed in the colours of the rainbow,
and pass along following a most beautiful *fée* who is mounted in a boat
made from a nautilus of the southern seas. And the boat is drawn by two
sea-crabs. In no other place in Brittany are similar *fées* said to
exist. <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) In Upper Brittany, as in
Lower Brittany, the *fées* generally had their abodes in tumuli, in
dolmens, in forests, in waste lands where there are great rocks, or
about menhirs; and many other kinds of spirits lived in the sea and
troubled sailors and fisher-folk. Like all fairy-folk of Celtic
countries, those of Upper Brittany were given to stealing children. Thus
at Dinard not long ago there was a woman more than thirty years old who
was no bigger than a girl of ten, and it was said she was a fairy
changeling. <span id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_90.md) In Lower Brittany the
*taking* of children was often attributed to dwarfs rather than to
*fees*, though the method of making the changeling speak is the same as
in Upper Brittany, namely, to place in such a manner before an open fire
a number of eggshells filled with water that they appear to the
changeling--who is placed where he can well observe all the
proceedings--like so many small pots of cooking food; whereupon, being
greatly astonished at the unusual sight, he forgets himself and speaks
for the first time, thus betraying his demon nature.

The following midwife story, as told by J. M. Comault, of Gouray, in
1881 is quite a parallel to the one we have recorded (on p. 54) as
coming from Grange, Ireland:--

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> A midwife who
delivered a *Margot la fée* carelessly allowed some of the fairy
ointment to get on one of her own eyes. The eye at once became
clairvoyant, so that she beheld the *fées* in their true nature. And,
quite like a midwife in a similar story about the *fées des houles*,
this midwife happened to see a *fée* in the act of stealing, and spoke
to her. Thereupon the *fée* asked the midwife with which eye she beheld
her, and when the midwife indicated which one it was, the *fée* pulled
it out. <span id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_91.md)

Generally, like their relatives in insular Celtdom, the fairies of Upper
Brittany could assume various forms, and could even transform the human
body; and they were given to playing tricks on mortals, and always to
taking revenge on them if ill-treated. In most ways they were like other
races of fairies, Celtic and non-Celtic, though very much
anthropomorphosed in their nature by the peasant and mariner.

As a rule, the *fées* of Upper Brittany are described in legend as young
and very beautiful. Some, however, appear to be centuries old, with
teeth as long as a human hand, and with backs covered with seaweeds, and
mussels, or other marine growths, as an indication of their great
age. <span id="fr_96"></span>[2](#fn_92.md) At Saint-Cast they are said to
be dressed (like the *corrigans* at Carnac, see [p. 208](#page_208).md) in
*toile*, a kind of heavy linen cloth. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_92.md)

On the sea-coast of Upper Brittany the popular opinion is that the
*fées* are a fallen race condemned to an earthly exile for a certain
period. In the region of the Mené, canton of Collinée, the old folk say
that, after the angels revolted, those left in paradise were divided
into two parts: those who fought on the side of God and those who
remained neutral. These last, already half-fallen, were sent to the
earth for a time, and became the *fées*. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[2](#fn_92.md)

The general belief in the interior of Brittany is that the *fees* once
existed, but that they disappeared as their country was changed by
modern conditions. In the region of the Mené and of Ercé
(Ille-et-Vilaine) it is said that for more than a century there have
been no *fées*; and on the sea-coast,

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

where it is still firmly believed that the *fées* used to live in the
billows or amid certain grottoes in the cliffs against which the billows
broke, the opinion is that they disappeared at the beginning of the last
century. The oldest Bretons say that their parents or grandparents often
spoke about having seen *fées*, but very rarely do they say that they
themselves have seen *fées*. M. Sébillot found only two who had. One was
an old needle-woman of Saint-Cast, who had such fear of *fées* that if
she was on her way to do some sewing in the country, and it was night,
she always took a long circuitous route to avoid passing near a field
known as the *Couvent des Fées*. The other was Marie Chéhu, a woman
eighty-eight years old. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_93.md)

### THE *CORRIGAN* RACE <span id="fr_100"></span>[2](#fn_94.md)

It is the *corrigan* race, however, which, more than *fées* or fairies,
forms a large part of the invisible inhabitants of Brittany; and this
race of *corrigans* and *nains* (dwarfs) may be made to include many
kinds of *lutins*, or as they are often called by the peasant, *follets*
or *esprits follets* (playful elves). Though the peasants both in Upper
and in Lower Brittany may have no strong faith in *fées*, most of them
say that *corrigans*, or *nains*, and mischievous house-haunting spirits
still exist. But in a few localities, as M. Sébillot discovered, there
is an opinion that the *lutins* departed with the *fées*, and with them
will return in this century, because during each century with an odd
number like 1900, the fairy tribes of all kinds are said to be visible
or to reappear among men, and to become invisible or to disappear during
each century with an even number like 1800. So this is the visible
century.

Corrigans and *follets* only show themselves at night, or in the
twilight. No one knows where they pass the day-time.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Some *lutins* or
*follets*, after the manner of Scotch kelpies, live solitary lives in
lakes or ponds (whereas *corrigans* are socially united in groups or
families), and amuse themselves by playing tricks on travellers passing
by after dark. Souvestre records a story showing how the *lutins* can
assume any animal form, but that their natural form is that of a little
man dressed in green; and that the *corrigans* have declared war on them
for being too friendly to men. <span id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_95.md) From
what follows about *lutins*, by M. Goulven Le Scour, they show affinity
with Pucks and such shape-shifting hobgoblins as are found in
Wales:--'The *lutins* were little dwarfs who generally appeared at
cross-roads to attack belated travellers. And it is related in Breton
legends that these *lutins* sometimes transformed themselves into black
horses or into goats; and whoever then had the misfortune to encounter
them sometimes found his life in danger, and was always seized with
great terror.' But generally, what the Breton peasant tells about
*corrigans* he is apt to tell at another time about *lutins*. And both
tribes of beings, so far as they can be distinguished, are the same as
the elfish peoples--pixies in Cornwall, Robin Good-fellows in England,
goblins in Wales, or brownies in Scotland. Both *corrigans* and *lutins*
are supposed to guard hidden treasure; some trouble horses at night;
some, like their English cousins, may help in the house-work after all
the family are asleep; some cause nightmare; some carry a torch like a
Welsh death-candle; some trouble men and women like obsessing spirits;
and nearly all of them are mischievous. In an article in the *Revue des
Traditions Populaires* (v. 101), M. Sébillot has classified more than
fifty names given to *lutins* and *corrigans* in Lower Brittany,
according to the form under which these spirits appear, their peculiar
traits, dwelling-places, and the country they inhabit.

Like the fairies in Britain and Ireland, the *corrigans* and the Cornish
pixies find their favourite amusement in the circular dance. When the
moon is clear and bright they gather for their frolic near menhirs, and
dolmens, and

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

tumuli, and at cross-roads, or even in the open country; and they never
miss an opportunity of enticing a mortal passing by to join them. If he
happens to be a good-natured man and enters their sport heartily, they
treat him quite as a companion, and may even do him some good turn; but
if he is not agreeable they will make him dance until he falls down
exhausted, and should he commit some act thoroughly displeasing to them
he will meet their certain revenge. According to a story reported from
Lorient (Morbihan) <span id="fr_102"></span>[1](#fn_96.md) it is taboo for
the *corrigans* to make a complete enumeration of the days of the
week:--

The 'Corrigan' Taboo.--'At night, the *corrigans* dance, singing,
"Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday"; they are prohibited from
completing the enumeration of the days of the week. A *corrigan* having
had the misfortune to permit himself to be tempted to add" Saturday ",
immediately became hunchbacked. His comrades, stupefied and distressed,
attempted in vain to knock in his hump with blows of their fists.'

'Corrigans' at Carnac.--How the tradition of the dancing *corrigans* and
their weekday song still lives, appears from the following accounts
which I found at and near Carnac, the first account having been given
during January 1909 by Madame Marie Ezanno, of Carnac, then sixty-six
years old:--'The *corrigans* are little dwarfs who formerly, by
moonlight, used to dance in a circle on the prairies. They sang a song
the couplet of which was not understood, but only the refrain,
translated in Breton: *"Di Lun* (Monday), *Di Merh* (Tuesday), *Di
Merhier* (Wednesday)."

'They whistled in order to assemble. Where they danced mushrooms grew;
and it was necessary to maintain silence so as not to interrupt them in
their dance. They were often very brutal towards a man who fell under
their power, and if they had a grudge against him they would make him
submit to the greatest tortures. The peasants believed strongly in the
*corrigans*, because they thus saw them and heard them. The *corrigans*
dressed in very coarse white

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

linen cloth. They were mischievous spirits (*espirits follets*), who
lived under dolmens.'

One morning, M. Lemort and myself called upon Madame Louise Le Rouzic in
her neat home at Kerallan, a little group of thatched cottages about a
mile from Carnac. As we entered, Madame Le Rouzic herself was sitting on
a long wooden bench by the window knitting, and her daughter was
watching the savoury-smelling dinner as it boiled in great iron pots
hanging from chains over a brilliant fire on the hearth. Large gleaming
brass basins were ranged on a shelf above the broad open chimney-place
wherein the fire burned, and massive bedsteads carved after the Breton
style stood on the stone floor. When many things had been talked about,
our conversation turned to *corrigans*, and then the good woman of the
house told us these tales:--

'Corrigans' at Church.--'In former times a young girl having taken the
keys of the church (presumably at Carnac) and having entered it, found
the *corrigans* about to dance; and the *corrigans* were singing,
"*Lundi, Mardi*" (Monday, Tuesday). On seeing the young girl, they
stopped, surrounded her, and invited her to dance with them. She
accepted, and, in singing, added to their song "*Mercredi*" (Wednesday).
In amazement, the *corrigans* cried joyfully, "She has added something
to our song; what shall we give her as recompense?" And they gave her a
bracelet. A friend of hers meeting her, asked where the fine bracelet
came from; and the young girl told what had happened. The second girl
hurried to the church, and found the *corrigans* still dancing the
*rond*. She joined their dance, and, in singing, added "*Jeudi*"
(Thursday) to their song; but that broke the cadence; and the
*corrigans* in fury, instead of recompensing her wished to punish her.
"What shall we do to her?" one of them cried. "Let the day be as night
to her!" the others replied. And by day, wherever she went, she saw only
the night.'

The 'Corrigans’' Sabbath.--'Where my grandfather lived,' continued
Madame Le Rouzic, 'there was a young girl who went to the sabbath of the
*corrigans*; and when she returned

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

and was asked where she had been, said, "I have travelled over water,
wood, and hedges." And she related all she had seen and heard. Then one
night, afterwards, the *corrigans* came into the house, beat her, and
dragged her from bed. Upon hearing the uproar, my grandfather arose and
found the girl lying flat on the stone floor. "Never question me again,"
she said to him, "or they will kill me."' <span
id="fr_103"></span>[1](#fn_97.md)

'Corrigans' as Fairies.--Some Breton legends give *corrigans* the chief
characteristics of fairies in Celtic Britain and Ireland; and
Villemarqué in his *Barzaz Breiz* (pp. 25--30) makes the Breton word
*corrigan* synonymous with *fée* or fairy, thus:--'*Le Seigneur Nann et
la Fée (Aotrou Nann hag ar Corrigan*).' In this legend the *corrigan*
seems clearly enough to be a water-fairy: 'The *Korrigan* was seated at
the edge of her fountain, and she was combing her long fair hair.' But
unlike most water-fairies, the *Fée* lives in a grotto, which, according
to Villemarqué, is one of those ancient monuments called in Breton
*dolmen*, or *ti ar corrigan*; in French, *Table de pierres*, or *Grotte
aux Fées*--like the famous one near Rennes. The fountain where the *Fée*
was seated seems to be one of those sacred fountains, which, as
Villemarqué says, are often found near a *Grotte aux Fées*, and called
*Fontaine de la Fée*, or in Breton, *Feunteun ar corrigan*. 'In another
of Villemarqué's legends, *L'Enfant Supposé*, after the egg-shell test
has been used and the little *corrigan* changeling is replaced by the
real child, the latter, as though all the while it had been in an
unconscious trance-state--which

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

has a curious bearing on our Psychological Theory--stretches forth its
arms and awakening exclaims, 'Ah! mother, what a long time I have been
asleep.' <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_98.md) And in *Les Nains* we see
the little *Duz* or dwarfs inhabiting a cave and guarding
treasures. <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_98.md)

In his introduction to the *Banzaz Breiz*, Villemarqué describes *les
korrigan*, whom he equates with *les fées*, as very similar to ordinary
fairies. They can foretell the future, they know the art of war--quite
like the Irish 'gentry' or Tuatha De Danann--they can assume any animal
form, and are able to travel from one end of the world to another in the
twinkling of an eye. They love feasting and music--like all Celtic
fairy-folk; and dance in a circle holding hands, but at the least noise
disappear. Their favourite haunts are near fountains and dolmens. They
are little beings not more than two feet high, and beautifully
proportioned, with bodies as aerial and transparent as those of wasps.
And like all fairy, or elvish races, and like the Breton *Morgans* or
water-spirits, they are given to stealing the children of mortals.
Professor J. Loth has called my attention to an unpublished Breton
legend of his collection, in which there are fairy-like beings
comparable to these described by Villemarqué; and he tells me, too, that
throughout Brittany one finds to-day the counterpart of the Welsh
*Tylwyth Teg* or' Fair Family', and that both in Wales and Brittany the
*Tylwyth Teg* are popularly described as little women, or maidens, like
fairies no larger than children.

Fairies and Dwarfs.--Where Villemarqué draws a clear distinction is
between these *korrigan* and *fées* on the one hand, and the *nains* or
dwarfs on the other. These last are what we have found associated or
identified with *corrigans* in the Morbihan. Villemarqué describes the
*nains* as a hideous race of beings with dark or even black hairy
bodies, with voices like old men, and with little sparkling black eyes.
They are fond of playing tricks on mortals who fall into their power;
and are given to singing in a circular dance the weekday song. Very
often *corrigans* regarded as *nains*, equally with all kinds of
*lutins*, are believed to be evil spirits or

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

demons condemned to live here on earth in a penitential state for an
indefinite time; and sometimes they seem not much different from what
Irish Celts, when talking of fairies, call fallen angels. *Le Nain de
Kerhuiton*, translated from Breton by Professor J. Loth, in part
illustrates this:--Upon seeing water boiling in a number of egg-shells
ranged before an open fire, a *polpegan*-changeling is so greatly
astonished that he unwittingly speaks for the first time, and says,
'Here I am almost one hundred years old, and never such a thing have I
yet seen!' 'Ah! son of Satan!' then cries out the mother, as she comes
from her place of hiding and beats the *polpegan*--who thus by means of
the egg-shell test has been tricked into revealing his demon
nature. <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_99.md) In a parallel story,
reported by Villemarqué in his *Barzaz Breiz* (p. 33 n.), a
*nain*-changeling is equally astonished to see a similar row of
egg-shells boiling before an open fire like so many pots of food, and
gives himself away through the following remark;--'I have seen the acorn
before the oak; I have seen the egg before the white chicken: I have
never seen the equal to this.'

Nature of the 'Corrigans'.--As to the general ideas about the
*corrigans*, M. Le Scour says:--'Formerly the *corrigans* were the
terror of the country-folk, especially in Finistère, in the Morbihan,
and throughout the Côtes-du-Nord. They were believed to be souls in
pain, condemned to wander at night in waste lands and marshes. Sometimes
they were seen as dwarfs; and often they were not seen at all, but were
heard in houses making an infernal noise. Unlike the *lavandières de
nuits* (phantom washerwomen of the night), they were heard only in
summer, never in winter.'

### THE BRETON LEGEND OF THE DEAD

We come now to the Breton Legend of the Dead, common generally to all
parts of Armorica, though probably even more widespread in Lower
Brittany than in Upper Brittany; and this we call the Armorican
Fairy-Faith. Even where the peasants have no faith in *fées* or fairies,
and where their

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

faith in *corrigans* is weak or almost gone, there is a strong
conviction among them that the souls of the dead can show themselves to
the living, a vigorous belief in apparitions, phantom-funerals, and
various death-warnings. As Professor Anatole Le Braz has so well said in
his introduction to *La Légende de la Mort*, 'the whole conscience of
these people is fundamentally directed toward that which concerns death.
And the ideas which they form of it, in spite of the strong Christian
imprint which they have received, do not seem much different from those
which we have pointed out among their pagan ancestors. For them, as for
the primitive Celts, death is less a change of condition than a journey,
a departure for another world.' And thus it seems that this most popular
of the Breton folk-beliefs is genuinely Celtic and extremely ancient. As
Renan has said, the Celtic people are 'a race mysterious, having
knowledge of the future and the secret of death'. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_100.md) And whereas in Ireland unusual
happenings or strange accidents and death are attributed to fairy
interference, in Brittany they are attributed to the influence of the
dead.

The Breton Celt makes no distinction between the living and the dead.
All alike inhabit this world, the one being visible, the other
invisible. Though seers can at all times behold the dead, on November
Eve (*La Toussaint*) and on Christmas Eve they are most numerous and
most easily seen; and no peasant would think of questioning their
existence. In Ireland and Scotland the country-folk fear to speak of
fairies save through an euphemism, and the Bretons speak of the dead
indirectly, and even then with fear and trembling.

The following legend, which I found at Carnac, will serve to illustrate
both the profundity of the belief in the power of the dead over the
living in Lower Brittany, and how deeply the people can be stirred by
the predictions of one who can see the dead; and the legend is quite
typical of those so common in Armorica:--

Fortelling Deaths.--'Formerly there was a woman whom

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

spirits impelled to rise from her bed, it made no difference at what
hour of the night, in order to behold funerals in the future. She
predicted who should die, who should carry the corpse, who the cross,
and who should follow the *cortège*. Her predictions frightened every
one, and made her such a terror to the country that the mayor had
threatened to take legal proceedings against her if she continued her
practice; but she was compelled to tell the things which the spirits
showed her. It is about ten years since this woman died in the hospital
at Auray.'

Testimony of a Breton Seeress.--There lives in the little hamlet of
Kerlois, less than a mile from Carnac, a Breton seeress, a woman who
since eight years of age has been privileged to behold the world
invisible and its inhabitants, quite like the woman who died at Auray.
She is Madame Eugénie Le Port, now forty-two years old, and what she
tells of things seen in this invisible world which surrounds her, might
easily be taken for Irish legends about fairies. Knowing very little
French, because she is thoroughly Breton, Madame Le Port described her
visions in her own native tongue, and her eldest daughter acted as
interpreter. I had known the good woman since the previous winter, and
so we were able to converse familiarly; and as I sat in her own little
cottage, in company with her husband and daughters, and with M. Lemort,
who acted as recording secretary, this is what she said in her clear
earnest manner in answer to my questions:--

'We believe that the spirits of our ancestors surround us and live with
us. One day on a road from Carnac I encountered a woman of Kergoellec
who had been dead eight days. I asked her to move to one side so that I
could pass, and she vanished. This was eleven o'clock in the morning. I
saw her at another time in the Marsh of Breno; I spoke, but she did not
reply. On the route from Plouharnel (near Carnac) I saw in the day-time
the funeral of a woman who did not die until fifteen days afterwards. I
recognized perfectly all the people who took part in it; but the person
with me saw nothing. Another time, near three o'clock in

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

the afternoon, and eight days before her death, I saw upon the same
route the funeral of a woman who was drowned. And I have seen a phantom
horse going to the sabbath, and as if forced along against its will, for
it reared and pawed the earth. When Pierre Rouzic of Kerlois died, I saw
a light of all colours between heaven and earth, the very night of his
death. I have seen a woman asleep whose spirit must have been free, for
I saw it hovering outside her body. She was not awakened \[at the time\]
for fear that the spirit would not find its body again.' In answer to my
question as to how long these various visions usually lasted, Madame Le
Port said:--'They lasted about a quarter of an hour, or less, and all of
them disappeared instantaneously.' As Madame Le Port now seemed unable
to recall more of her visions, I finally asked her what she thought
about *corrigans*, and she replied:--'I believe they exist as some
special kind of spirits, though I have never seen any.'

Proof that the Dead Exist.--This is what M. Jean Couton, an old Breton,
told me at Carnac:--'I am only an old peasant, without instruction,
without any education, but let me tell you what I think concerning the
dead. Following my own idea, I believe that after death the soul always
exists and travels among us. I repeat to you that I have belief that the
dead are seen; I am now going to prove this to you in the following
story:--

'One winter evening I was returning home from a funeral. I had as
companion a kinswoman of the man just buried. We took the train and soon
alighted in the station of Plouharnel. We still had three kilometres to
go before reaching home, and as it was winter, and at that epoch there
was no stage-coach, we were obliged to travel afoot. As we were going
along, suddenly there appeared to my companion her dead relative whom we
had buried that day. She asked me if I saw anything, and since I replied
to her negatively she said to me, "Touch me, and you will see without
doubt." I touched her, and I saw the same as she did, the person just
dead, whom I clearly recognized.' <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_101.md)

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

Phantom Washerwomen.--Concerning a very popular Breton belief in phantom
washerwomen (*les lavandières de nuits*; or in Breton, *cannered noz*),
M. Goulven Le Scour offers the following summary:--'The *lavandières de
nuits* were heard less often than the *corrigans*, but were much more
feared. It was usually towards midnight that they were heard beating
their linen in front of different washing-places, always some way from
the villages. According to the old folk of the past generation, when the
phantom washerwomen would ask a certain passer-by to help them to wring
sheets, he could not refuse, under pain of being stopped and wrung like
a sheet himself. And it was necessary for those who aided in wringing
the sheets to turn in the same direction as the washerwomen; for if by
misfortune the assistant turned in an opposite direction, he had his
arms wrung in an instant. It is believed that these phantom washerwomen
are women condemned to wash their mortuary sheets during whole
centuries; but that when they find some mortal to wring in an opposite
direction, they are delivered.' <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_102.md)

Breton Animistic Beliefs.--M*.* Z. Le Rouzic, a Breton Celt who has
spent most of his life studying the archaeology and folk-lore of the
Morbihan, and who is at present Keeper of the Miln Museum at Carnac,
summarizes for us the state of popular beliefs as he finds them existing
in the Carnac country now:--'There are few traditions concerning the
*fées* in the region of Carnac; but the belief in spirits, good and
bad--which seems to me to be the same as the belief in *fées*--is
general and profound, as well as the belief in the incarnation of
spirits. And I am convinced that these beliefs are the reminiscences of
ancient Celtic beliefs held by the Druids and conserved by
Christianity.'

In Finistère, as purely Breton as the Morbihan, I found the Legend of
the Dead just as widespread, and the belief

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

in spirits and the apparitional return of the dead quite as profound;
but nothing worth recording concerning fairies. The stories which follow
were told to me by M. Pierre Vichon, a pure Breton Celt, born at
Lescoff, near the Pointe du Raz, Finistère, in 1842. Peter is a genuine
old 'sea-dog', having made the tour of the globe, and yet he has not
lost the innate faith of his ancient ancestors in a world invisible; for
though he says he cannot believe all that the people in his part of
Finistère tell about spirits and ghosts, he must have a belief that the
dead as spirits exist and influence the living, because of his own
personal experience--one of the most remarkable of its kind. Peter
speaks Breton, French, and English fluently, and since he had an
opportunity for the first time in seventeen months of using English, he
told me the stories in my own native language:--

Pierre Vichon's Strange Experience.--'Some forty years ago a strange
thing happened in my life. A relative of mine had taken service in the
Austrian army, for by profession he was a soldier, though at first he
had begun to study for the priesthood. During the progress of the war I
had no news from him; and, then one day while I was on the deck of a
Norwegian ship just off Dover (England), my fellow sailors heard a noise
as though of a gun being discharged, and the whirr of a shot. At the
same moment I fell down on the deck as though mortally wounded, and lay
in an unconscious state for two hours. When the news came, it was
ascertained that at the very moment I fell and the gun-report was heard,
my relative in Austria had been shot in the head and fell down dead. And
he had been seen to throw his hands up to his head to grasp it just as I
did.'

An Apparition of the Dead.--'I had another relative who died in a
hospital near Christiania, Norway; and on the day he died a sister of
mine, then a little girl, saw his spirit appear here in Lescoff, and she
easily recognized it; but none of her girl companions with her at the
time saw the spirit. After a few days we had the news of the death, and
the time of it and the time of my sister's seeing the spirit coincided
exactly.'

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

In all the peninsula of which the famous and dangerous Pointe du Raz is
the terminus, similar stories are current. And among the fisher-folk
with whom I lived on the strange and historic Île de Sein, the Legend of
the Dead is even more common.

The Dead and Fairies Compared.--Without setting down here in detail
numerous other death-legends which we have collected, we may now note
how much the same are the powers and nature of the dead and spirits in
Brittany, and the power and nature of the fairy races in Celtic Britain
and Ireland. Thus the Breton dead strike down the living just as fairies
are said to do; the *Ankou* <span id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_103.md) who is
a king of the dead, and his subjects, like a fairy king and fairies,
have their own particular paths or roads over which they travel in great
sacred processions; <span id="fr_111"></span>[2](#fn_104.md) and exactly as
fairies, the hosts of the dead are in possession of the earth on
November Eve, and the living are expected to prepare a feast and
entertainment for them of curded-milk, hot pancakes, and cider, served
on the family table covered with a fresh white table-cloth, and to
supply music. The Breton dead come to enjoy this hospitality of their
friends; and as they take their places at the table the stools are heard
to move, and sometimes the plates; and the musicians who help to
entertain them think that at times they feel the cold breath of the
invisible visitors. Concerning this same feast of the dead (*La
Toussaint*) Villemarqué in his *Barzaz Breiz* (p. 507) records that in
many parts of Brittany libations of milk

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

are poured over or near ancestral tombs--just as in Ireland and Scotland
libations of milk are poured to fairies. And the people of Armorica at
other times than November Eve remember the dead very appropriately, as
in Ireland the Irish remember fairies. The Breton peasant thinks of the
dead as frequently as the Irishman thinks of fairies. One day while I
was walking toward Carnac there was told to me in the most ordinary
manner a story about a dead man who used to be seen going along the very
road I was on. He quite often went to the church in Carnac seeking
prayers for his soul. And almost every man or woman one meets in rural
Lower Brittany can tell many similar stories. If a mortal should happen
to meet one of the dead in Brittany and be induced to eat food which the
dead sometimes offer, he will never be able to return among the
living, <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) for the effect would be
the same as eating fairy-food. Like ghosts and fairies in Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales, in Brittany the dead guard hidden treasure. It is
after sunset that the dead have most power to strike down the
living, <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) and to *take* them just as
fairies do. A natural phenomenon, a malady, a death, or a tempest may be
the work of a spirit in Brittany, <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_105.md)
and in Ireland the work of a fairy. The Breton dead, like the Scotch
fairies described in Kirk's *Secret Commonwealth*, are capable of making
themselves visible or invisible to mortals, at will. <span
id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) Their bodies--for they have bodies--are
material, <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) being composed of matter
in a state unknown to us; and the bodies of daemons as described by the
Ancients are made of congealed air. The dead in Brittany have forms more
slender and smaller in stature than those of the living; <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) and herein we find one of the factors
which supporters of the Pygmy Theory would emphasize, but it is
thoroughly psychical. Old Breton farmers after death return to their
farms, as though come from Fairyland; and sometimes they even take a
turn at the ploughing. <span id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) As in
Ireland, so in Brittany, the day belongs to the living, and the night,
when a mortal is safer indoors than out, to spirits and the dead. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_105.md) The Bretons

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

take great care not to counterfeit the dead nor to speak slightingly of
them, <span id="fr_120"></span>[1](#fn_106.md) for, like fairies, they know
all that is done by mortals, and can hear all that is said about them,
and can take revenge. Just as in the case of all fairies and goblins,
the dead disappear at first cock-crow. <span
id="fr_121"></span>[2](#fn_107.md) The world of the dead, like the land of
Faerie or the Otherworld, may be underground, in the air, in a hill or
mountain like a fairy palace, under a river or sea, and even on an
island out amid the ocean. <span id="fr_122"></span>[2](#fn_107.md) As
other Celts do against evil spirits and fairies, the Breton peasants use
magic against evil souls of the dead, <span
id="fr_123"></span>[3](#fn_108.md) and the priests use exorcisms. The
Breton realm of the dead equally with the Irish Fairyland is an
invisible world peopled by other kinds of spirits besides disembodied
mortals and fairies. <span id="fr_124"></span>[4](#fn_109.md) The dead
haunt houses just as Robin Good-fellows and brownies, or pixies and
goblins, generally do. The dead are fond of frequenting cross-roads, and
so are all sorts of fairies. In Brittany one must always guard against
the evil dead, in Cornwall against pixies, in other Celtic lands against
different kinds of fairies. In Ireland and Scotland there is the
banshee, in Wales the death-candle, in Brittany the *Ankou* or king of
the dead, to foretell a death. And as the banshee wails before the
ancestral mansion, so the *Ankou* sounds its doleful cry before the door
of the one it calls. <span id="fr_125"></span>[4](#fn_109.md)There seems
not to be a family in the Carnac region of the Morbihan without some
tradition of a warning coming before the death of one of its members. In
Ireland only certain families have a banshee, but in Brittany all
families. Professor Le Braz has devoted a large part of his work on *La
Légende de la Mort* to these Breton death-warnings or *intersignes*.
They may be shades of the dead under many aspects--ghostly hands, or
ghosts of inanimate objects. They may come by the fall of objects
without known cause; by a magpie resting on a roof--just as in Ireland;
by the crowing of cocks, and the howling of

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

dogs at night. They may be death-candles or torches, dreams, peculiar
bodily sensations, images in water, phantom funerals, and death-chariots
or death-coaches as in Wales.

The Bretons may be said to have a Death-Faith, whereas the other Celts
have a Fairy-Faith, and both are a real folk-religion innate in the
Celtic nature, and thus quite as influential as Christianity. Should
Christianity in some way suddenly be swept away from the Celt he would
still be religious, for it is his nature to be so. And as Professor Le
Braz has suggested to me, Carnac with its strange monuments of an
unknown people and time, and wrapped in its air of mystery and silence,
is a veritable Land of the Dead. I, too, have felt that there are
strange, vague, indefinable influences at work at Carnac at all times of
the day and night, very similar to those which I have felt in the most
fairy-haunted regions of Ireland. We might say that all of Brittany is a
Land of the Dead, and ancient Carnac its Centre, just as Ireland is
Fairyland, with its Centre at ancient Tara.

### CONCLUSION

We can very appropriately conclude our inquiry about Brittany with a
very beautiful description of a *Veillée* in Lower Brittany, written
down in French, for our special use by the Breton poet, M. Le Scour, of
Carnac, and here translated. M. Le Scour draws the whole picture from
life, and from his own intimate experience. It will serve to give us
some insight into the natural literary ability of the Breton Celts, to
illustrate their love of tales dealing with the marvellous and the
supernormal, and is especially valuable for showing the social
environment amidst which the Fairy-Faith of Lower Brittany lives and
flourishes, Isolated from foreign interference:--

A 'Veillée' <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_110.md) *in Lower
Brittany*.--'The wind was blowing

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

from the east, and in the intermittent moonlight the roof of the
thatched cottage already gleamed with a thin covering of snow which had
fallen since sunset. Each corner reached on the run the comfortable
bakehouse, wherein Alain Corre was at work kneading his batch of barley
bread; and the father Le Scour was never the last to arrive, because he
liked to get the best seat in front of the bake-oven.

'Victor had promised us for that night a pretty story which no person
had ever heard before. I was not more than fourteen years old then, but
like all the neighbours I hurried to get a place in order to hear
Victor. My mother was already there, making her distaff whirr between
her two fingers as she sat in the light of a rosin candle, and my
brother Yvon was finishing a wooden butter-spoon. Every few minutes I
and my little cousin went out to see if it was still snowing, and if
Victor had arrived.

'At last Victor entered, and everybody applauded, the young girls
lengthening out their distaffs to do him reverence. Then when silence
was restored, after some of the older men had several times shouted out,
"Let us commence; hold your tongues," Victor began his story as
follows:--

'"Formerly, in the village of Kastel-Laer, Plouneventer (Finistère),
there were two neighbours; the one was Paol al Ludu and the other Yon
Rustik. Paol al Ludu was a good-for-nothing sort of fellow; he gained
his living easily, by cheating everybody and by robbing his neighbours;
and being always well dressed he was much envied by his poorer
acquaintances. Yon Rustik, on the contrary, was a poor, infirm, and
honest man, always seeking to do good, but not being able to work, had
to beg.

'"One evening our two men were disputing. Paol al Ludu treated Yon
shamefully, telling him that it would be absurd to think an old lame man
such as he was could ever get to Paris; 'But I,' added Paol, 'am going
to see the capital and amuse myself like a rich *bourgeois*. At this,
Yon offered

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

to bet with Paol that in spite of infirmities he would also go to Paris;
and being an honest man he placed his trust in God. The wager was
mutually agreed to, and our two men set out for Paris by different
routes.

'"Paol al Ludu, who had no infirmities, arrived at Paris within three
weeks. He followed the career of a thief, and deceived everybody; and as
he was well dressed, people had confidence in him. The poor Yon Rustik,
on the contrary, did not travel rapidly. He was obliged to beg his way,
and being meanly dressed was compelled to sleep outdoors when he could
not find a stable. At the end of a month he arrived in a big forest in
the region of Versailles, and having no other shelter for the night
chose a great oak tree which was hollowed by the centuries and lined
with fungi within. In front of this ancient oak there was a fountain
which must have been miraculous, for it flowed from east to west, and
Yon had closely observed it.

'"Towards midnight Yon was awakened by a terrible uproar; there were a
hundred *corrigans* dancing round the fountain. He overheard one of them
say to the others: 'I have news to report to you; I have cast an evil
spell upon the daughter of the King, and no mortal will ever be able to
cure her, and yet in order to cure her nothing more would be needed than
a drop of water from this fountain.' The *corrigan* who thus spoke was
upon two sticks <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_111) (crippled.md), and
commanded all the others. The beggar having understood the conversation,
awaited impatiently the departure of the *corrigans*. When they were
gone, he took a little water from the fountain in a bottle, and hurried
on to Paris, where he arrived one fine morning.

In the house where Yon stopped to eat his crust of dry bread he heard it
reported that the daughter of the King was very ill, and that the wisest
doctors in France had been sent for. Three days later, Yon Rustik
presented himself at the palace, and asked audience with the King, but
as he was so shabbily dressed the attendants did not wish to let him

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

enter. When he strongly insisted, they finally prevailed upon the King
to receive him; and then Yon told the King that he had come to cure the
princess. Thereupon the King caused Yon to be fittingly dressed and
presented before the sick-bed; and Yon drew forth his bottle of water,
and, at his request, the princess drank it to the last drop. Suddenly
she began to laugh with joy, and throwing her arms about the neck of the
beggar thanked him: she was radically cured. At once the King gave
orders that his golden coach of state be made ready; and placing the
princess and the beggar on one seat, made a tour throughout all the most
beautiful streets of Paris. Never before were such crowds seen in Paris,
for the proclamation had gone forth that the one who had made the
miraculous cure was a beggar.

'"Paol al Ludu, who was still in Paris, pressed forward to see the royal
coach pass, and when he saw who sat next to the princess he was beside
himself with rage. But before the day was over he discovered Yon in the
great hotel of the city, and asked him how it was that he had been able
to effect the cure; and Yon replied to his old rival that it was with
the water of a miraculous fountain, and relating everything which had
passed, explained to him in what place the hollow oak and the fountain
were to be found.

'"Paol did not wait even that night, but set off at once to find the
miraculous fountain. When he finally found it the hour was almost
midnight, and so he hid himself in the hollow of the oak, hoping to
overhear some mysterious revelation. Midnight had hardly come when a
frightful uproar commenced: this time the crippled *corrigan* chief was
swearing like a demon, and he cried to the others, 'The daughter of the
King has been cured by a beggar! He must have overheard us by hiding in
the hollow of that d----d old oak. Quick! let fire be put in it, for it
has brought us misfortune.'

'"In less than a minute, the trunk of the oak was in flames; and there
were heard the cries of anguish of Paol al Ludu and the gnashing of his
teeth, as he fought against death. Thus the evil and dishonest man ended
his life

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

while Yon Rustik received a pension of twenty thousand francs, and was
able to live happy for many years, and to give alms to the poor."'

Here M. Le Scour ends his narrative, leaving the reader to imagine the
enthusiastic applause and fond embraces bestowed upon Victor for this
most marvellous story, by the happy gathering of country-folk in that
cosy warm bakehouse in Lower Brittany, while without the cold east wind
of winter was whirling into every nook and corner the falling flakes of
snow.

 

The evidence from Ireland, Scotland, Isle of Man, Wales, Cornwall, and
Brittany, which the living Celtic Fairy-Faith offers, has now been
heard; and, as was stated at the beginning of the inquiry, apparently
most of it can only be interpreted as belonging to a world-wide doctrine
of souls. But before this decision can be arrived at safely, all the
evidence should be carefully estimated according to anthropological and
psychological methods; and this we shall proceed to do in the following
chapter, before passing to Section II of our study.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[185:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_76.md)

My dear Mr. Wentz,

I recollect that, at the time of your examination on your thesis before
the Faculty of Letters of the University of Rennes, one of my
colleagues, my friend Professor Dottin, put to you this question:--

'You believe, you assert, in the existence of fairies? Have you seen
any?'

You answered, with equal coolness and candour:

'No. I have made every effort to do so, and I have never seen any. But
there are many things which you, sir, have not seen, and of which,
nevertheless, you would not think of denying the existence. That is my
attitude toward fairies.'

'I am like you, my dear Mr. Wentz: I have never seen fairies. it is true
<span id="page_186">p. 186</span> that I have a very dear lady friend
whom we have christened by that name \[fairy\], but, in spite of all her
fair supernatural gifts, she is only a humble mortal. On the other hand,
I lived, when a mere child, among people who had almost daily
intercourse with real fairies.

That was in a little township in Lower Brittany, inhabited by peasants
who were half sailors, and by sailors who were half peasants. There was,
not far from the village, an ancient manor-house long abandoned by its
owners, for what reason was not known exactly. It continued to be called
the 'Chateau' of Lanascol, though it was hardly more than a ruin. It is
true that the avenues by which one approached it had retained their
feudal aspect, with their fourfold rows of ancient beeches whose huge
masses of foliage were reflected in splendid pools. The people of the
neighbourhood seldom ventured into these avenues in the evening. They
were supposed to be, from sunset onwards, the favourite walking-ground
of a 'lady' who went by the name of *Groac'h Lanascol*, the 'Fairy of
Lanascol'.

Many claimed to have met her, and described her in colours which were,
however, the most varied. Some represented her as an old woman <span
id="page_187">p. 187</span> who walked all bent, her two hands leaning
on a stump of a crutch with which, in autumn, from time to time she
stirred the dead leaves. The dead leaves which she thus stirred became
suddenly shining like gold, and clinked against one another with the
clear sound of metal. According to others, it was a young princess,
marvellously adorned, after whom there hurried curious little black
silent men. She advanced with a majestic and queenly bearing. Sometimes
she stopped in front of a tree, and the tree at once bent down as if to
receive her commands. Or again, she would cast a look on the water of a
pool, and the pool trembled to its very depths, as though stirred by an
access of fear beneath the potency of her look. The following strange
story was told about her:--

The owners of Lanascol having desired to get rid of an estate which they
no longer occupied, the manor and lands attached to it were put up to
auction by a notary of Plouaret. On the day fixed for the bidding a
number of purchasers presented themselves. The price had already reached
a large sum, and the estate was on the point of being knocked down,
when, on a last appeal from the auctioneer, a female voice, very gentle
and at the same time very imperious, was raised and said:

'A thousand francs more!'

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

A great commotion arose in the hall. Every one's eyes sought for the
person who had made this advance, and who could only be a woman. But
there was not a single woman among those present. The notary asked:

'Who spoke?'

Again the same voice made itself heard.

'The Fairy of Lanascol!' it replied.

A general break-up followed. From that time forward no purchaser has
ever appeared, and, as the current report ran, that was the reason why
Lanascol continued to be for sale.

I have designedly quoted to you the story of the Fairy of Lanascol, my
dear Mr. Wentz, because she was the first to make an impression on me in
my childhood. How many others have I come to know later on in the course
of narratives from those who lived with me on the sandy beaches, in the
fields or the woods! Brittany has always been a kingdom of Faerie. One
cannot there travel even a league without brushing past the dwelling of
some male or female fairy. Quite lately, in the course of an autumn
pilgrimage to the hallucinatory forest of Paimpont (or Brocéliande),
still haunted throughout by the great memories of Celtic legend, I
encountered beneath the thick foliage of the Pas-du-Houx, a woman
gathering faggots, <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> with whom I did not
fail, as you may well imagine, to enter into conversation.--One of the
first names I uttered was naturally that of Vivian.

'Vivian!' cried out the poor old woman. 'Ah! a blessing on her, the good
Lady! for she is as good as she is beautiful . . . . Without her
protection my good man, who works at woodcutting, would have fallen,
like a wolf, beneath the keepers' guns. . . .' And she began to narrate
to me 'as how' her husband, something of a poacher like all the
woodcutters of these districts, had one night gone to watch for a
roebuck in the neighbourhood of the Butte-aux-Plaintes, and had been
caught red-handed by a party of keepers. He sought to fly: the keepers
fired. A bullet hit him in the thigh: he fell, and was making ready to
let himself be killed on the spot, rather than surrender, when there
suddenly interposed between him and his assailants a kind of very thick
mist which covered everything--the ground, the trees, the keepers, and
the wounded man himself. And he heard a voice coming out of the mist, a
voice gentle like the rustling of leaves, and murmuring in his ear:
'Save thyself, my son: the spirit of Vivian will watch over thee till
thou hast crawled out of the forest.'

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

'Such were the actual words of the fairy,' concluded the
faggot-gatherer. And she crossed herself devoutly, for pious Brittany,
as you know, reveres fairies as much as saints.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I do not know if *lutins* (mischievous spirits) should be included in
the fairy world, but what is certain is that this charming and roguish
tribe has always abounded in our country. I, have been told that
formerly every house had its own. It (the *lutin*) was something like
the little Roman household god. Now visible, now invisible, it presided
over all the acts of domestic life. Nay more; it shared in them, and in
the most effective manner. Inside the house it helped the servants, blew
up the fire on the hearth, supervised the cooking of the food for men or
beasts, quieted the crying of the babe lying in the bottom of the
cupboard, and prevented worms from settling in the pieces of bacon
hanging from the beams. Similarly there fell within its sphere the
management of the byres and stables: thanks to it the cows gave milk
abounding in butter, and the horses had round croups and shining coats.
It was, in a word, the good genius of the house, but conditionally on
every one paying to it the respect to which it had the right. If
neglected, ever so little, <span id="page_191">p. 191</span> its
kindness changed into spite, and there was no unkind trick of which it
was not capable towards people who had offended it, such as upsetting
the contents of the pots on the hearth, entangling wool round distaffs,
making tobacco unsmokeable, mixing a horse's mane in inextricable
confusion, drying up the adders of cows, or stripping the backs of
sheep. Therefore care was taken not to annoy it. Careful attention was
paid to all its habits and humours. Thus, in my parents' house, our old
maid Filie never lifted the trivet from the fire without taking the
precaution of sprinkling it with water to cool it, before putting it
away at the corner of the hearth. If you asked her the reason for this
ceremony, she would reply to you:

'To prevent the *lutin* burning himself there, if, presently, he sat on
it.'

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Further, I suppose there should be included in the class of male fairies
that *Bugul-Noz*, that mysterious Night Shepherd, whose tall and
alarming outline the rural Bretons see rising in the twilight, if, by
chance, they happen to return late from field-work. I have never been
able to obtain exact information about the kind of herd which he fed,
nor about what was foreboded by the meeting with him. Most often such a
meeting is <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> dreaded. Yet, as one of my
female informants, Lise Bellec, reasonably pointed out, if it is
preferable to avoid the *Bugul-Noz* it does not from that follow that he
is a harmful spirit. According to her, he would rather fulfil a
beneficial office, in warning human beings, by his coming, that night is
not made for lingering in the fields or on the roads, but for shutting
oneself in behind closed doors and going to sleep. This shepherd of the
shades would then be, take it altogether, a kind of good shepherd. It is
to ensure our rest and safety, to withdraw us from excesses of toil and
the snares of night, that he compels us, thoughtless sheep, to return
quickly to the fold.

No doubt it is an almost similar protecting office which, in popular
belief, has fallen to another male fairy, more particularly attached to
the seashore, as his name, *Yann-An-Ôd,* indicates. There is not, along
all the coast of Brittany or, as it is called, in all the *Armor,* a
single district where the existence of this 'John of the Dunes' is not
looked on as a real fact, fully proved and undeniable. Changing forms
and different aspects are attributed to him. Sometimes he is a giant,
sometimes a dwarf. Sometimes he wears a seaman's hat of oiled cloth,
sometimes a broad black felt hat. At times he leans on an oar and
recalls the enigmatic personage, <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>
possessed of the same attribute, whom Ulysses has to follow, in the
*Odyssey*. But he is always a marine hero whose office it is to traverse
the shores, uttering at intervals long piercing cries, calculated to
frighten away fishermen who may have allowed themselves to be surprised
outside by the darkness of night. He only hurts those who resist; and
even then would only strike them in their own interest, to force them to
seek shelter. He is, before all, one who warns. His cries not only call
back home people out late on the sands; they also inform sailors at sea
of the dangerous proximity of the shore, and, thereby, make up for the
insufficiency of the hooting of sirens or of the light of lighthouses.

We may remark, in this connexion, that a parallel feature is observed in
the legend of the old Armorican saints, who were mostly emigrants from
Ireland. One of their usual exercises consisted in parading throughout
the night the coasts where they had set up their oratories, shaking
little bells of wrought iron, the ringing of which, like the cries of
*Yann-An-Ôd*, was intended to warn voyagers that land was near.

I am persuaded that the worship of saints, which is the first and most
fervent of Breton religious observances, preserves many of the features
<span id="page_194">p. 194</span> of a more ancient religion in which a
belief in fairies held the chief place. The same, I feel sure, applies
to those death-myths which I have collected under the name of the Legend
of the Dead among the Armorican Bretons. In truth, in the Breton mind,
the dead are not dead; they live a mysterious life on the edge of real
life, but their world remains fully mingled with ours, and as soon as
night falls, as soon as the living, properly so called, give themselves
up to the temporary sleep of death, the so-called dead again become the
inhabitants of the earth which they have never left. They resume their
place at their former hearth, devote themselves to their old work, take
an interest in the home, the fields, the boat; they behave, in a word,
like the race of male and female fairies which once formed a more
refined and delicate species of humanity in the midst of ordinary
humanity.

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I might, my dear Mr. Wentz, evoke many other types from this
intermediate world of Breton Faerie, which, in my countrymen's mind, is
not identical with this world nor with the other, but shares at once in
both, through a curious mixture of the natural and supernatural. I have
only intended in these hasty lines to show the wealth of material to
which you have <span id="page_195">p. 195</span> with so much
conscientiousness and ardour devoted your efforts. And now may the
fairies be propitious to you, my dear friend! They will do nothing but
justice in favouring with all their goodwill the young and brilliant
writer who has but now revived their cult by renewing their glory.

RENNES  
November, 1, 1910.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[196:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_77.md) Cf. F. M. Luzel,
*Contes populaires de Basse-Bretagne* (Paris, 1887), i. 177-97;
following the account of Ann Drann, a servant at Coat-Fual,
Plouguernevel (Côtes-du-Nord), November 1855.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[197:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_78.md) My Breton friend, M.
Goulven Le Scour, was born November 20, 1851, at Kerouledic in
Plouneventer, Finistère. He is an antiquarian, a poet, and, as we shall
see, a folk-lorist of no mean ability. In 1902, at the *Congrès d'Auray*
of Breton poets and singers, he won two prizes for poetry, and, in 1901,
a prize at the *Congrès de Quimperlé* or *Concours Recueils poétiques*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[198:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_79.md) This story concerns
persons still living, and, at M. Le Scour's suggestion, I have omitted
their names.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[199:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_80.md) By a Carnac family I
was afterwards given a sprig of such blessed box-wood, and was assured
that its exorcizing power is still recognized by all old Breton
families, most of whom seem to possess branches of it.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[199:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_81.md) This idea seems
related to the one in the popular Morbihan legend of how St. Cornely,
the patron saint of the country and the saint who presides over the
Alignements and domestic horned animals, changed into upright stones the
pagan forces opposing him when he arrived near Carnac; and these stones
are now the famous Alignements of Carnac.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[200:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_84.md) Luzel, op. cit., iii.
226--311; i. 128--218; ii. 349--54.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[200:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_85.md) Ib., ii. 269*;* cf.
our study, [p. 93](ffcc122.htm#page_93.md).

<span id="fn_83"></span>[201:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_86.md) According to the
annotations to a legend recorded by Villemarqué, in his *Barzaz Breiz,*
pp. 39-44, and entitled the *Submersion de la Vile d'Is*, St. Guenolé
was traditionally the founder of the first monastery raised in Armorica;
and Dahut the princess stole the key from her sleeping father in order
fittingly to crown a banquet and midnight debaucheries which were being
held in honour of her lover, the Black Prince.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[202:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_87.md) Luzel, op. cit., ii.
257-68; i. 3-13.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[202:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_88.md) P. Sébillot,
*Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne* (Paris, 1882), i.
100.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[202:3](ffcc126.htm#fr_89.md) General references:
Sébillot, Ib.; and his *Folk-Lore de France* (Paris, 1905).

<span id="fn_87"></span>[203:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_90.md) Sébillot, *Traditions
et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne*, i. 73-4.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[203:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_92.md) Ib., i. 102, 103-4.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[204:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_93.md) Sébillot, *Traditions
of superstitions de in Haute-Bretagne,* i. 83.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[204:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_94.md) Ib., i. 90-1.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[205:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_95.md) Cf. ib., i. 109.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[205:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_98.md) Cf. ib., 74-5, &c.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[206:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_99.md) Cf. Sébillot,
*Traditions et superstitions de La Haute-Bretagne*, i ,74-5, &c.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[206:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_100.md) In Lower Brittany
the *corrigan* tribes collectively are commonly called *Corrikêt*,
masculine plural of *Corrik*, diminutive of *Corr*, meaning 'Dwarf'; or
*Corriganed*, feminine plural of *Corrigan*, meaning 'Little Dwarf'.
Many other forms are in use. (Cf. R. F. Le Men, *Trad. et supers. de la
Basse-Bretagne*, in *Rev. Celt.*, i. 226-7.)

<span id="fn_95"></span>[207:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_101.md) Cf. *Foyer Breton*,
i. 199

<span id="fn_96"></span>[208:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_102.md) By 'E. R.', in
*Mélusine* (Paris), i. 114

<span id="fn_97"></span>[210:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_103.md) This account about
*corrigans*, more rational than any preceding it, may possibly refer to
a dream or trance-like state of mind on the part of the young girl; and
if it does, we can then compare the presence of a mortal at this
*corrigan* sabbath, or even at the ordinary witches' sabbath, to the
presence of a mortal in Fairyland. And according to popular Breton
belief, as reliable peasants assure me, during dreams, trance, or
ecstasy, the soul is supposed to depart from the body and actually see
spirits of all kinds in another world, and to be then under their
influence. While many details in the more conventional *corrigan*
stories appear to reflect a folk-memory of religious dances and songs,
and racial, social, and traditional usages of the ancient Bretons, the
animistic background of them could conceivably have originated from
psychical experiences such as this girl is supposed to have had.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[211:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_105.md) Villemarqué, *Barzas
Breiz* (Paris, 1867), pp. 33, 35.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[212:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_106.md) J. Loth, in *Annales
de Bretagne* (Rennes), x. 78-81

<span id="fn_100"></span>[213:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_107.md) E. Renan, *Essais
de morale et de critique* (Paris, 1859), p. 451

<span id="fn_101"></span>[215:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_108.md) In Ireland it is
commonly held that a seer beholding a fairy can make <span
id="page_216">p. 216</span> a non-seer see it also by coming into bodily
*rapport* with the non-seer (cf. [p. 152](ffcc124.htm#page_152).md).

<span id="fn_102"></span>[216:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_109.md) It is sometimes
believed that phantom washerwomen are undergoing penance for having
wilfully brought on an abortion by their work, or else for having
strangled their babe.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[218:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_110.md) Every parish in the
uncorrupted parts of Brittany has its own *Ankou*, who is the last man
to die in the parish during the year. Each King of the Dead, therefore,
never holds office for more than twelve months, since during that period
he is certain to have a successor. Sometimes the *Ankou* is Death itself
personified. In the Morbihan, the *Ankou* occasionally may be seen as an
apparition entering a house where a death is about to occur; though more
commonly he is never seen, his knocking only is heard, which is the rule
in Finistère. In Welsh mythology, Gwynn ab Nudd, king of the world of
the dead, is represented as playing a role parallel to that of the
Breton *Ankou*, when he goes forth with his fierce hades-hounds hunting
the souls of the dying. (Cf. Rhy^s, *Arth. Leg*., p. 155).

<span id="fn_104"></span>[218:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_111.md) Cf. A. Le Bras, *La
Légende de is Mort*; Introduction by L. Marillier (Paris, 1893), pp. 31,
40.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[219:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_119.md) Cf. Le Braz, *La
Légende de la Mort;* Introduction by Marillier, pp. 47, 46, 7-8, 40, 45,
46.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[220:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_120.md) Cf. Le Bras, *La
Légende de la Mort*; Introduction by Marillier, p. 43.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[220:2](ffcc126.htm#fr_122.md) Ib.; Notes by G.
Dottin (Paris, 1902), p. 44.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[220:3](ffcc126.htm#fr_123.md) Ib.; Introduction
by Marillier, pp. 19, 23, 68.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[220:4](ffcc126.htm#fr_125.md) Cf. Ib.;
Introduction by Marillier.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[221:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_126.md) A Breton night's
entertainment held in a peasant's cottage, stable, or other warm
outhouse. In parts of the Morbihan and of Finistère where the old Celtic
life has escaped modern influences. almost every winter the Breton Celts
like their cousins in very secluded parts of Wales, <span
id="page_222">p. 222</span> Ireland and in the Western Hebrides, find
their chief enjoyment in story-telling festivals, some of which I have
been privileged to attend.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[223:1](ffcc126.htm#fr_127.md) The word in the
manuscript is *boiteux*, and in relation to a devil or demon this seems
to be a proper rendering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Anthropological Examination of the
Evidence](ffcc130.md)
