[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ffcc308)  [Next](ffcc310) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026FCI5W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries*, by W.Y. Evans-Wentz, \[1911\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

# SECTION III

## THE CULT OF GODS, SPIRITS FAIRIES, AND THE DEAD

## CHAPTER IX

### THE TESTIMONY OF PAGANISM

'The cult of forests, of fountains, and of stones is to be explained by
that primitive naturalism which all the Church Councils held in Brittany
united to proscribe.'--ERNEST RENAN.

Edicts against pagan cults--Cult of Sacred Waters and its absorption by
Christianity--Celtic Water Divinities--Druidic Influence on
Fairy-Faith--Cult of Sacred Trees--Cult of Fairies, Spirits, and the
Dead--Feasts of the Dead--Conclusion.

THE evidence of paganism in support of our Psychological Theory
concerning the Fairy-Faith is so vast that we cannot do more than point
to portions of it--especially such portions as are most Celtic in their
nature. Perhaps most of us will think first of all about the ancient
cults rendered to fountains, rivers, lakes, trees, and, as we have seen
(pp. [399](ffcc308.htm#page_399) ff.), to stones. There can be no
reasonable doubt that these cults were very flourishing when
Christianity came to Europe, for kings, popes, and church councils
issued edict after edict condemning them. <span
id="fr_553"></span>[1](#fn_507) The second Council of Aries, held about
452, issued the following canon:--'If in the territory of a bishop,
infidels light torches, or venerate trees, fountains, or stones, and he
neglects to abolish this usage, he must know that he is guilty of
sacrilege. If the director of the act itself, on being admonished,
refuses to correct it, he is to be excluded from communion.' <span
id="fr_554"></span>[1](#fn_507) The Council of Tours, in 567, thus
expressed itself:--'We implore the pastors to expel from the Church all
those whom they may see performing before. certain stones things which
have no relation with

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

the ceremonies of the Church, and also those who observe the customs of
the Gentiles.' <span id="fr_555"></span>[1](#fn_508) King Canute in
England and Charlemagne in Europe conducted a most vigorous campaign
against all these pagan worships. This is Charlemagne's edict:--'With
respect to trees, stones, and fountains, where certain foolish people
light torches or practise other superstitions, we earnestly ordain that
that most evil custom detestable to God, wherever it be found, should be
removed and destroyed.' <span id="fr_556"></span>[2](#fn_509)

The result of these edicts was a curious one. It was too much to expect
the eradication of the old cults after their age-long existence, and so
one by one they were absorbed by the new religion. In a sacred tree or
grove, over a holy well or fountain, on the shore of a lake or river,
there was placed an image of the Virgin or of some saint, and
unconsciously the transformation was made, as the simple-hearted
country-folk beheld in the brilliant images new and more glorious
dwelling-places for the spirits they and their fathers had so long
venerated.

### THE CULT OF SACRED WATERS

In Brittany, perhaps better than in other Celtic countries to-day, one
can readily discern this evolution from paganism to Christianity. Thus,
for example, in the Morbihan there is the fountain of St. Anne d'Auray,
round which centres Brittany's most important Pardon; a fountain near
Vannes is dedicated to St. Peter; at Carnac there is the far-famed
fountain of St. Comely with its niche containing an image of Carnac's
patron saint, and not far from it, on the roadside leading to Carnac
Plage, an enclosed well dedicated to the Holy Virgin, and, less than a
mile away, the beautiful fountain of St. Columba. Near Ploermel, Canton
of Ploermel (Morbihan), there is the fountain of Recourrance or St.
Laurent, in which sailors perform divinations to know the

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

future state of the weather by casting on its waters a morsel of bread.
If the bread floats, it is a sure sign of fair weather, but if it sinks,
of weather so bad that no one should take risks by going out in the
fishing-boats. In some wells, pins are dropped by lovers. If the pins
float, the water-spirits show favourable auspices, but if the pins sink,
the maiden is unhappy, and will hesitate in accepting the proposal of
marriage. Long after their conversion, the inhabitants of Concoret
(Arrondissement de Ploermel, Morbihan) paid divine honours to the
fountain of Baranton in the druidical forest of Brocéliande, so famous
in the Breton legends of Arthur and Merlin:--'For a long time the
inhabitants of Concoret … in place of addressing themselves to God or to
his Saints in their maladies, sought the remedy in the fountain of
Baranton, either by praying to it, after the manner of the Gauls, or by
drinking of its waters.' <span id="fr_557"></span>[1](#fn_510) In the
month of August 1835, when there was an unusual drought in the land, all
the inhabitants of Concoret formed in a great procession with banners
and crucifix at their head, and with chants and ringing of church bells
marched to this same fountain of Baranton and prayed for rain. <span
id="fr_558"></span>[2](#fn_511) This curious bit of history was also
reported to me in July 1909 by a peasant who lives near the fountain,
and who heard it from his parents; and he added that the foot of the
crucifix was planted in the water to aid the rain-making. We have here
an interesting combination of paganism and Christianity.

Gregory of Tours says that the country-folk of Gévaudan rendered divine
honours to a certain lake, and as offerings cast on its waters linen,
wool, cheese, bees'-wax, bread, and other things; <span
id="fr_559"></span>[3](#fn_512) and Mahé adds that gold was sometimes
offered,  <span id="fr_560"></span>[3](#fn_512) quite after the manner
of the ancient Peruvians, who cast gold and silver of great value into
the waters of sacred Lake Titicaca, high up in the Andes. To absorb into
Christianity the worship paid to the lake near Gévaudan, the bishop
ordered a church to be built on its shore, and to the people he
said:--'My children, there is nothing divine in

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

this lake: defile not your souls by these vain ceremonies; but recognize
rather the true God.' <span id="fr_561"></span>[1](#fn_513) The
offerings to the lake-spirits then ceased, and were made instead on the
altar of the church. As Canon Mahé so consistently sets forth, other
similar means were used to absorb the pagan cults of sacred
waters:--'Other pastors employed a similar device to absorb the cult of
fountains into Christianity; they I consecrated them to God under the
invocation of certain saints; giving the saints' names to them and
placing in them the saints' images, so that the weak and simple-hearted
Christians who might come to them, struck by these names and by these
images, should grow accustomed to addressing their prayers to God and to
his saints, in place of honouring the fountains themselves, as they had
been accustomed to do. This is the reason why there are seen in the
stonework of so many fountains, niches and little statues of saints who
have given their names to these springs.' <span
id="fr_562"></span>[2](#fn_514)

Procopius reports that the Franks, even after having accepted
Christianity, remained attached to their ancient cults, sacrificing to
the River Po women and children of the Goths, and casting the bodies
into its waters to the spirits of the waters. <span
id="fr_563"></span>[2](#fn_514) Well-worship in the Isle of Man, not yet
quite extinct, was no doubt once very general. As A. W. Moore has shown,
the sacred wells in the Isle of Man were visited and offerings made to
them to secure immunity from witches and fairies, to cure maladies, to
raise a wind, and for various kinds of divination. <span
id="fr_564"></span>[3](#fn_515) And no doubt the offerings of rags on
bushes over sacred wells, and the casting of pins, coins, buttons,
pebbles, and other small objects into their waters, a common practice
yet in Ireland and Wales, as in non-Celtic countries, are to be referred
to as survivals of a time when regular sacrifices were offered in
divination, or in seeking cures from maladies, and equally from
obsessing demons who were thought to cause the maladies. In the prologue
to Chrétien's *Conte du* 

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Graal* there is
an account, seemingly very ancient, of how dishonour to the divinities
of wells and springs brought destruction on the rich land of Logres. The
damsels who abode in these watery places fed travellers with nourishing
food until King Amangons wronged one of them by carrying off her golden
cup. His men followed his evil example, so that the springs dried up,
the grass withered, and the land became waste. <span
id="fr_565"></span>[1](#fn_516)

According to Mr. Borlase, 'it was by passing under the waters of a well
that the *Sídh,* that is, the abode of the spirits called *Sídhe,* in
the tumulus or natural hill, as the case might be, was reached.' <span
id="fr_566"></span>[2](#fn_517) And it is evident from this that the
well spirits were even identified in Ireland with the Tuatha De Danann
or Fairy-Folk. I am reminded of a walk I was privileged to take with Mr.
William B. Yeats on Lady Gregory's estate at Coole Park, near Gort
(County Galway); for Mr. Yeats led me to the haunts of the water-spirits
of the region, along a strange river which flows underground for some
distance and then comes out to the light again in its weird course, and
to a dark, deep pool hidden in the forest. According to tradition, the
river is the abode of water-fairies; and in the shaded forest-pool,
whose depth is very great, live a spirit-race like the Greek nymphs.
More than one mortal while looking into this pool has felt a sudden and
powerful impulse to plunge in, for the fairies were then casting their
magic spell over him that they might take him to live in their
under-water palace for ever.

One of the most beautiful passages in *The Tripartite Life of Patrick*
describes the holy man at the holy well called Cliabach:--'Thereafter
Patrick went at sunrise to the well, namely Cliabach on the sides of
Cruachan. The clerics sat down by the well. Two daughters of Loegaire
son of Niall went early to the well to wash their hands, as was a custom
of theirs, namely, Ethne the Fair, and Fedelm the Ruddy. The maidens
found beside the well the assembly of the clerics in white garments,
with their books before them. And they

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

wondered at the shape of the clerics, and thought that they were men of
the elves or apparitions. They asked tidings of Patrick: "Whence are ye,
and whence have ye come? Are ye of the elves or of the gods?" And
Patrick said to them: "It were better for you to believe in God than to
inquire about our race." Said the girl who was elder: "Who is your god?
and where is he? Is he in heaven, or in earth, or under earth, or on
earth? Is he in seas or in streams, or in mountains or in glens? Hath he
sons and daughters? Is there gold and silver, is there abundance of
every good thing in his kingdom? Tell us about him, how he is seen, how
he is loved, how he is found? if he is in youth, or if he is in age? if
he is ever-living; if he is beautiful? if many have fostered his son? if
his daughters are dear and beautiful to the men of the world?"' <span
id="fr_567"></span>[1](#fn_518)

And in another place it is recorded that 'Patrick went to the well of
Findmag. Slán is its name. They told Patrick that the heathen honoured
the well as if it were a god.'  <span id="fr_568"></span>[2](#fn_519)
And of the same well it is said, 'that the magi, i. e. wizards or
Druids, used to reverence the well Slán and "offer gifts to it as if it
were a god"' <span id="fr_569"></span>[2](#fn_519) As Whitley Stokes
pointed out, this is the only passage connecting the Druids with
well-worship; and it is very important, because it establishes the
relation between the Druids as magicians and their control of spirits
like fairies. <span id="fr_570"></span>[2](#fn_519) As shown here, and
as seems evident in Columba's relation with Druids and exorcism in
Adamnan's *Life of St. Columba*, <span id="fr_571"></span>[3](#fn_520)
the early Celtic peoples undoubtedly drew many of their fairy-traditions
from a memory of druidic rites of divination. Perhaps the most beautiful
description of a holy well and a description illustrative of such
divination is that of Ireland's most mystical well, Connla's
Well:--'Sinend, daughter of Lodan Luchargian, son of Ler, out of Tír
Tairngire ("Land of Promise, Fairyland"), went to Connla's Well which is
under sea, to behold it. That is a well at which are the hazels and
inspirations (?) of wisdom,

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

that is, the hazels of the science of poetry, and in the same hour their
fruit, and their blossom and their foliage break forth, and these fall
on the well in the same shower, which raises on the water a royal surge
of purple. Then the (sacred\] salmon chew the fruit, and the juice of
the nuts is apparent on their purple bellies. And seven streams of
wisdom spring forth and turn there again.' <span
id="fr_572"></span>[1](#fn_521)

To these cults of sacred waters numerous non-Celtic parallels could
easily be offered, but they seem unnecessary with Celtic evidence so
clear. And this evidence which is already set forth shows that the
origin of worship paid to sacred wells, fountains, lakes, or rivers, is
to be found in the religious practices of the Celts before they became
christianized. They believed that certain orders of spirits, often
called fairies, and to be identified with them, inhabited, or as was the
case with Sinend, who came from the Other-world, visited these places,
and must be appeased or approached through sacrifice by mortals seeking
their favours. Canon Mahé puts the matter thus:--'The Celts recognized a
supreme God, the principle of all things; but they rendered religious
worship to the genii or secondary deities who, according to them, united
themselves to different objects in nature and made them divine by such
union. Among the objects were rivers, the sea, lakes and
fountains.' <span id="fr_573"></span>[2](#fn_522)

### THE CULT OF SACRED TREES

The things said of sacred waters can also be said of sacred trees among
the Celts; and, in the case of sacred trees, more may be added about the
Druids and their relation to the Fairy-Faith, for it is well known that
the Druids held the oak and its mistletoe in great religious veneration,
and it is generally thought that most of the famous Druid schools were
in the midst of sacred oak-groves or forests. Pliny has recorded that
'the Druids, for so they call their magicians, have nothing which they
hold more sacred than the mistletoe <span
id="fr_574"></span>[3](#fn_523)

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

and the tree on which it grows, provided only it be an oak (*robur*).
But apart from that, they select groves of oak, and they perform no
sacred rite without leaves from that tree, so that the Druids may be
regarded as even deriving-from it their name interpreted as Greek <span
id="fr_575"></span>[1](#fn_524) (a disputed point among modern
philologists). Likewise of the Druids, Maximus Tyrius states that the
image of their chief god, considered by him to correspond to Zeus, was a
lofty oak tree; <span id="fr_576"></span>[2](#fn_525) and Strabo says
that the principal place of assembly for the Galatians, a Celtic people
of Asia Minor, was the Sacred Oak-grove. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[3](#fn_526)

Just as the cult of fountains was absorbed by Christianity, so was the
cult of trees. Concerning this, Canon Mahé writes:--'One sees sometimes,
in the country and in gardens, trees wherein, by trimming and bending
together the branches, have been formed niches of verdure, in which have
been placed crosses or images of certain saints. This usage is not
confined to the Morbihan. Our Lady of the Oak, in Anjou, and Our Lady of
the Oak, near Orthe, in Maine, are places famous for pilgrimage. In this
last province, says a historian, "One sees at various cross-roads the
most beautiful rustic oaks decorated with figures of saints. There are
seen there, in five or six villages, chapels of oaks, with whole trunks
of that tree enshrined in the wall, beside the altar. Such among others
is that famous chapel

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

of Our Lady of the Oak, near the forge of Orthe, whose celebrity
attracts daily, from five to six leagues about, a very great gathering
of people."' <span id="fr_578"></span>[1](#fn_527)

Saint Martin, according to Canon Mahé, tried to destroy sacred pine-tree
in the diocese of Tours by telling the people there was nothing divine
in it. The people agreed to let it cut down on condition that the saint
should receive its great trunk on his head as it fell; and the tree was
not cut own. <span id="fr_579"></span>[1](#fn_527) Saint Germain caused
a great scandal at Auxerre hanging from the limbs of a sacred tree the
heads of wild animals which he had killed while hunting. <span
id="fr_580"></span>[1](#fn_527) Saint Gregory the Great wrote to
Brunehaut exhorting him to abolish among his subjects the offering of
animals' heads to certain trees.  <span id="fr_581"></span>[2](#fn_528)

In Ireland fairy trees are common yet; though throughout Celtdom sacred
trees, naturally of short duration, are almost forgotten. In Brittany,
the Forest of Brocéliande still enjoys something of the old veneration,
but more out of sentiment than by actual worship. A curious survival of
an ancient Celtic tree-cult exists in Carmarthen, Wales, where there is
still carefully preserved and held upright in a firm casing of cement
the decaying trunk of an old oak-tree called Merlin's Oak; and local
prophecy declares on Merlin's authority that when the tree falls
Carmarthen will fall with it. Perhaps through an unconscious desire on
the part of some patriotic citizens of averting the calamity by inducing
the tree-spirit to transfer its abode, or else by otherwise hoodwinking
the tree-spirit into forgetting that Merlin's Oak is dead, a vigorous
and now flourishing young oak has been planted so directly beside it
that its foliage embraces it. And in many parts of modern England, the
Jack-in-the-Green, a man entirely hidden in a covering of green foliage
who dances through the streets on May Day, may be another example of a
very ancient tree (or else agricultural) cult of Celtic origin.

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

### THE CULT OF FAIRIES, SPIRITS, AND THE DEAD

There was also, as we already know, more or less of direct worship
offered to fairies like the Tuatha De Danann; and sacrifice was made to
them even as now, when the Irish or Scotch peasant pours a libation of
milk to the 'good people' or to the fairy queen who presides over the
flocks. In *Fíacc's Hymn*  <span id="fr_582"></span>[1](#fn_529) it is
said, 'On Ireland's folk lay darkness: the tribes worshipped elves: They
believed not the true godhead of the true Trinity.' And there is a
reliable legend concerning Columbkille which shows that this old cult of
elves was not forgotten among the early Irish Christians, though they
changed the original good reputation of these invisible beings to one of
evil. It is said that Columbkille's first attempts to erect a church or
monastery on Iona were rendered vain by the influence of some evil
spirit or else of demons; for as fast as a wall was raised it fell down.
Then it was revealed to the saint that the walls could not stand until a
human victim should be buried alive under the foundations. And the lot
fell on Oran, Columbkille's companion, who accordingly became a
sacrifice to appease the evil spirit, fairies, or demons of the place
where the building was to be raised. <span
id="fr_583"></span>[2](#fn_530)

As an illustration of what the ancient practice of such sacrifice to
place-spirits, or to gods, must have been like in Wales, we offer the
following curious legend concerning the conception of Myrddin (Merlin),
as told by our witness from Pontrhydfendigaid, Mr. John Jones (see [p.
147](ffcc124.htm#page_147)):--'When building the Castle of Gwrtheyrn,
near Carmarthen, as much as was built by day fell down at night. So a
council of the *Dynion Hysbys* or "Wise Men" was called, and they
decided that the blood of a fatherless boy had to be used in mixing the
mortar if the wall was to stand. Search was thereupon made for a
fatherless boy (cf. [p. 351](ffcc260.htm#page_351)), and throughout all
the kingdom no such boy could be found. But one day two boys were
quarrelling, and one of them in defying

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

the other wanted to know what a fatherless boy like him had to say to
him. An officer of the king, overhearing the quarrel, seized the boy
thus tauntingly addressed as the one so long looked for. The
circumstances were made known to the king, and the boy was taken to him.
"Who is your father?" asked the king. "My mother never told me," the boy
replied. Then the boy's mother was sent for, and the king asked her who
the father of the boy was, and she replied: "I do not know; for I have
never known a man. Yet, one night, it seemed to me that a man noble and
majestic in appearance slept with me, and I awoke to find that I had
been in a dream. But when I grew pregnant afterwards, and this wonderful
boy whom you now see was delivered, I considered that a divine being or
an angel had visited me in that dream, and therefore I called his child
Myrddin the Magician, for such I believe my son to be." When the mother
had thus spoken, the king announced to the court and wise men, "Here is
the fatherless boy. Take his blood and use it in mixing the mortar. The
walling will not hold without it." At this, Myrddin taunted the king and
wise men, and said they were no better than a pack of idiots. "The
reason the walling falls down," Myrddin went on to say, "is because you
have tried to raise it on a rock which covers two large sea-serpents.
Whenever the wall is raised over them its weight presses on their backs
and makes them uneasy. Then during the night they up-heave their backs
to relieve themselves of the pressure, and thus shake the walling to a
fall."' The story ends here, but presumably Merlin's statements were
found to be true; and Merlin was not sacrificed, for, as we know, he
became the great magician of Arthur's court.

There are two hills in the Highlands of Aberdeenshire where travellers
had to propitiate the banshee by placing barley-meal cakes near a well
on each hill; and if the traveller neglected the offering, death or some
dire calamity was sure to follow. <span id="fr_584"></span>[1](#fn_531)
It is quite certain that the banshee is almost always thought of as the
spirit of a dead ancestor presiding

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

over a family, though here it appears more like the tutelary deity of
the hills. But sacrifice being thus made, according to the folk-belief,
to a banshee, shows, like so many other examples where there is a
confusion between divinities or fairies and the souls of the dead, that
ancestral worship must be held to play a very important part in the
complex Fairy-Faith as a whole. A few non-Celtic parallels determine
this at once. Thus, exactly as to fairies here, milk is offered to the
souls of saints in the Panjab, India, as a means of propitiating
them. <span id="fr_585"></span>[1](#fn_532) M. A. Lefèvre shows that the
Roman Lares, so frequently compared to house-haunting fairies, are in
reality quite like the Gaelic banshee; that originally they were nothing
more than the unattached souls of the dead, akin to Manes; that time and
custom made distinctions between them; that in the common language Lares
and Manes had synonymous dwellings; and that, finally, the idea of death
was little by little divorced from the worship of the Lares, so that
they became guardians of the family and protectors of life. <span
id="fr_586"></span>[2](#fn_533) On all the tombs of their dead the
Romans inscribed these names: *Manes*, *inferi*, *silentes*, <span
id="fr_587"></span>[3](#fn_534) the last of which, meaning *the silent
ones*, is equivalent to the term 'People of Peace' given to the
fairy-folk of Scotland. <span id="fr_588"></span>[4](#fn_535) Nor were
the Roman Lares always thought of as inhabiting dwellings. Many were
supposed to live in the fields, in the streets of cities, at
cross-roads, quite like certain orders of fairies and demons; and in
each place these ancestral spirits had their chapels and received
offerings of fruit, flowers, and of foliage. If neglected they became
spiteful, and were then known as Lemures.

All these examples tend to show what the reviewer of Curtin's *Tales of
the Fairies and of the Ghost World* states, that 'The attributes of a
ghost--that is to say, the spirit of a dead man--are indistinguishable
from those of a fairy. And it is well known how world-wide is the
worship of the dead and the offering of food to them, among uncivilized

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

tribes like those of Africa, Australia, and America, as well as among
such great nations as China, Corea, India, and Japan; and in ancient
times it was universal among the masses of the people in Egypt, Greece,
and Rome.

### CELTIC AND NON-CELTIC FEASTS OF THE DEAD

Samain, as we already know, was the great Celtic feast of the dead when
offerings or sacrifice of various kinds were made to ancestral spirits,
and to the Tuatha De Danann and the spirit-hosts under their control;
and *Beltene*, or the first of May, was another day anciently dedicated
to fetes in honour of the dead and fairies. Chapter ii has shown us how
November Eve, the modern *Samain*, and like it, All Saints Eve or *La
Toussaint*, are regarded among the Celtic peoples now; and the history
of *La Toussaint* seems to indicate that Christianity, as in the case of
the cult of trees and fountains, absorbed certain Celtic cults of the
dead which centred around the pagan *Samain* feast of the dead, and even
adopted the date of *Samain* (see [p. 453](ffcc310.htm#page_453)).

Among the ancient Egyptians, so much like the ancient Celts in their
innate spirituality and clear conceptions of the invisible world, we
find a parallel feast which fell on the seventeenth *Athyr* of the year.
This day was directly dependent upon the progress of the sun; and, as we
have throughout emphasized, the ancient symbolism connected with the
yearly movements of the Great God of Light and Life cannot be divorced
from the ancient doctrines of life and death. To the pre-Christian
Celts, the First of November, or the Festival of *Samain*, which marked
the end of summer and the commencement of winter, was symbolical of
death. <span id="fr_589"></span>[1](#fn_536) *Samain* thus corresponds
with the Egyptian fête of the dead, for the seventeenth *Athyr* of the
year marks the day on which Sitou (the god of darkness) killed in the
midst of a banquet his brother Osiris (the god of light, the sun), and
which was therefore thought of as the season when the old sun was dying
of his wounds. It was a time when the power of good was on the decline,
so that all nature, turning

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

against man, was abandoned to the divinities of darkness, the
inhabitants of the Realms of the Dead. On this anniversary of the death
of Osiris, an Egyptian would undertake no new enterprise: should he go
down to the Nile, a crocodile would attack him as the crocodile sent by
Sitou had attacked Osiris, and even as the Darkness was attacking the
Light to devour it; <span id="fr_590"></span>[1](#fn_537) should he set
out on a journey, he would part from his home and family never to
return. His only course was to remain locked in his house, and there
await in fear and inaction the passing of the night, until Osiris,
returning from death, and reborn to a new existence, should rise
triumphant over the forces of Darkness and Evil. <span
id="fr_591"></span>[2](#fn_538) It is clear that this last part of the
Egyptian belief is quite like the Celtic conception of *Samain* as we
have seen Ailill and Medb celebrating that festival in their palace at
Cruachan.

There is a great resemblance between the christianized Feast of
*Samain*, when the dead return to visit their friends and to be
entertained, for example as in Brittany, and the beautiful festivals
formerly held in the Sînto temples of Japan. Thus at Nikko thousands of
lanterns were lighted, 'each one representing the spirit of an
ancestor,' and there was masquerading and revelry for the entertainment
of the visiting spirits. <span id="fr_592"></span>[3](#fn_539) It shows
how much religions are alike.

Each year the Roman peoples dedicated two days (February 21-2*)* to the
honouring of the Dead. On the first day, called the *Feralia*, all
Romans were supposed to remain within their own homes. The sanctuaries
of all the

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

gods were closed and all ceremony suspended. The only sacrifices made at
such a time were to the dead, and to the gods of the dead in the
underworld; and all manes were appeased by food-offerings of meats and
cakes. The second day was called *Cara Cognatio* and was a time of
family reunions and feasting. Of it Ovid has said (*Fasti*, ii. 619),
'After the visit to the tombs and to the ancestors who are no longer
\[among us\], it is pleasant to turn towards the living; after the loss
of so many, it is pleasant to behold those who remain of our blood and
to reckon up the generations of our descendants.' And the Greeks also
had their feasts for the dead. <span id="fr_593"></span>[1](#fn_540)

### CONCLUSION

The fact of ancient Celtic cults of stones, waters, trees, and fairies
still existing under cover of Christianity directly sustains the
Psychological Theory; and the persistence of the ancient Celtic cult of
the dead, as illustrated in the survival of *Samain* in its modern
forms, and perhaps best seen now among the Bretons, goes far to sustain
the opinion of Ernest Renan, who declared in his admirable *Essais* that
of all peoples the Celts, as the Romans also recorded, have most precise
ideas about death. Thus it is that the Celts at this moment are the most
spiritually conscious of western nations. To think of them as
materialists is impossible. Since the time of Patrick and Columba the
Gaels have been the missionaries of Europe; and, as Caesar asserts, the
Druids were the ancient teachers of the Gauls, no less than of all
Britain. And the mysteries of life and death are the key-note of all
things really Celtic, even of the great literature of Arthur,
Cuchulainn, and Finn, now stirring the intellectual world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_507"></span>[427:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_554) Cf. Bruns, *Canones
apostolurum et conciliorum saeculorum*, ii. 133.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[428:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_555) Cf. F. Maassen,
*Concilia aevi merovingici*, p. 133.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[428:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_556) Cf. Boretius,
*Capitularia region Francorum*, i. 59 for each of the above references
cf. Jubainville, *Le culte des menhirs dans le monde celtique*, in
*Rev*. *Celt.*, xxvii. 317.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[429:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_557) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*,
p. 427.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[429:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_558) See Villemarqué
*sur Bretagne*.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[429:3](ffcc309.htm#fr_560) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*,
p. 326; quoted from *De Glor. Conf.*, c. 2.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[430:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_561) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*,
p. 326; quoted from *De Glor. Conf.*, c. 2.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[430:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_563) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*,
p. 326; quoted from *Goth.*, lib. ii.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[430:3](ffcc309.htm#fr_564) A. W. Moore, in
*Folk-Lore*, v. 212-29.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[431:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_565) Cf. Rhy^s,
*Arthurian Legend*, p. 247.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[431:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_566) Borlase, *Dolmens
of Ireland*, iii. 729.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[432:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_567) Stokes, *Tripartite
Life of Patrick,* pp. 99-101.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[432:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_570) Ib., text, pp. 123,
323, and Intro., p. 159.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[432:3](ffcc309.htm#fr_571) Book II, 69-70; see
our study, [p. 267](ffcc130.htm#page_267).

<span id="fn_521"></span>[433:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_572) Rennes
*Dinnshenchas*, Stokes's trans. in *Rev. Celt.*, xv. 457.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[433:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_573) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*,
p. 323.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[433:3](ffcc309.htm#fr_574) The Celts may have
viewed the mistletoe on the sacred oak as the seat <span
id="page_434">p. 434</span> of the tree's life, because in the winter
sleep of the leafless oak the mistletoe still maintains its own foliage
and fruit, and like the heart of a sleeper continues pulsing with
vitality. The mistletoe thus being regarded as the heart-centre of the
divine spirit in the oak-tree was cut with a golden sickle by the
arch-druid clad in pure white robes, amid great religious solemnity, and
became a vicarious sacrifice or atonement for the worshippers of the
tree god. (Cf. Frazer, *G. B.*,<sup>2</sup> iii 346 ff.)

<span id="fn_524"></span>[434:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_575) Pliny, *Nat.
Hist.*, xvi. 95; cf. Rhy^s, *Hib. Lect.*, p. 218.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[434:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_576) *Dissert.*, viii;
cf. Rhy^s, ib., p. 219.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[434:3](ffcc309.htm#fr_577) Meineke's ed., xii.
5, 1; cf. Rhy^s, ib., p. 219. The oak-tree is pre-eminently the holy
tree of Europe. Not only Celts, but Slays, worshipped amid its groves.
To the Germans it was their chief god; the ancient Italians honoured it
above all other trees; the original image of Jupiter on the Capitol at
Rome seems to have been a natural oak-tree. So at Dodona, Zeus was
worshipped as immanent in a sacred oak. Cf. Fraser, *G. B.*<sup>2</sup>
iii. 346 ff.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[435:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_580) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*,
pp. 333-4; quotation from *Hist. du Maine*, i. 17.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[435:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_581) Cf. Mahé, *Essai*,
p. 334; quoted from *Lib.* VII, *indict.* i, *epist.* 5.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[436:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_582) Stokes, *Tripartite
Life*, p. 409.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[436:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_583) Cf. Wood-Martin,
*Traces of the Older Faiths in Ireland*, i. 305.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[437:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_584) W. Gregor, *Notes
on Beltene Cakes*, in *Folk-Lore*, vi. 5.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[438:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_585) Temple, *Legends of
the Panjab, in Folk-Lore*, x. 406.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[438:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_586) Lefèvre, *Le Culte
des Morts chez les Latins*, in *Rev. Trad. Pop.*, ix. 195-209.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[438:3](ffcc309.htm#fr_587) See *Folk-Lore*,
vi. 192

<span id="fn_535"></span>[438:4](ffcc309.htm#fr_588) The term 'People of
Peace' seems, however, to have originated from confounding *síd*, 'fairy
abode,' and *síd*, 'peace.'

<span id="fn_536"></span>[439:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_589) Cf. *Le Cycle Myth.
Irl*., p. 102.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[440:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_590) The crocodile as
the mystic symbol of Sitou provides one key to unlock the mysteries of
what eminent Egyptologists have erroneously called animal worship,
erroneously because they have interpreted literally what can only be
interpreted symbolically. The crocodile is called the 'son of Sitou' in
the *Papyrus magique*, Harris, pl. vi, II. 8-9 (cf. Maspero, *Les Contes
populaires de l'Égypte Ancienne*, <sup>3</sup> Intro., p. 56); and as
the waters seem to swallow the sun as it sinks below the horizon, so the
crocodile, as Sitou representing the waters, swallows the Children of
Osiris, as the Egyptians called themselves. On the other band, Osiris is
typified by the white bull, in many nations the sun emblem, white being
the emblem of purity and light, while the powers of the bull represent
the masculinity of the sun, which impregnates all nature, always thought
of as feminine, with life germs.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[440:2](ffcc309.htm#fr_591) Cf. Maspero, op.
cit., Intro., p. 49.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[440:3](ffcc309.htm#fr_592) Cf. Borlase,
*Dolmens of Ireland*, iii. 854.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[441:1](ffcc309.htm#fr_593) Cf. Lefèvre, *Rev.
Trad. Pop.*, ix. 195-209.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Testimony of Christianity](ffcc310)
